UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making Implicit Assumptions Explicit in Verbal Insight Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9t7920xv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Ahmed, Afia
Patrick, John

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making Implicit Assumptions Explicit in Verbal Insight Problem Solving
Afia Ahmed (Ahmed@cardiff.ac.uk)
John Patrick (PatrickJ@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK
looked where he was going. He did not travel by any
method of transport other than by foot. London was
thronged with people yet not one of them saw him. How?
(Sloane, 1992, p. 11)
People find this problem difficult because the stereotypical
assumption that the man is walking above ground constrains
the solution path. Consistent with Ohlsson’s (1992)
definition, the initial representation of the man walking
above ground constrains the problem solver from thinking
of the solution that the man is walking underground.
However most of the research on insight problem solving
has investigated visuo-spatial rather than verbal problems.
Therefore the aims of this paper are to investigate the role of
implicit assumptions underlying verbal insight or lateral
thinking problems and how problem solving performance
can be facilitated through training that makes implicit
assumptions explicit.
The comprehension of text requires the reader to elaborate
the information provided by making inferences or
assumptions (Lea, 1995). During lateral thinking, the
problem solver makes an inappropriate assumption or
inference from words and sentences using their past
knowledge and experience although this inference may be
both automatic and implicit. In any situation, a person
brings to bear their own knowledge and experience. In
cognitively underspecified situations, as in lateral thinking,
there is a bias to select the most frequent response (Reason,
1990). William James (1890) was the first to recognize the
negative effect that habit could have on performance. This
bias is also consistent with the availability heuristic
(Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). Ohlsson’s (1992)
Representational Change Theory proposes that past
experience triggers an incorrect initial representation, which
results in an impasse, a mental state in which problem
solving activity ceases. Insight occurs when an impasse is
broken by changing that representation. Representations
concerning the goal state are changed via a mechanism
called ‘constraint relaxation’ (Ohlsson, 1992).
The earliest study to attempt to ameliorate the role of
assumptions in insight problem solving was reported by
Wicker, Weinstein, Yelich, and Brooks (1978). They
provided generic training to facilitate performance on verbal
insight problems involving different assumptions. As part of
training, participants were informed that unnecessary
assumptions affect how problems are viewed and they were
given practice in using a reformulation strategy to avoid
them. This strategy encouraged participants to continuously
re-interpret a problem after assessing their assumptions
about the problem. Participants were given feedback during

Abstract
Stereotypical assumptions made during insight problem
solving can trigger an initial representation that constrains
problem solving (Ohlsson, 1992). Two experiments were
conducted to investigate the effect of such assumptions on
solution rates and hypothesis generation using verbal insight
problems, which have received little attention in the literature.
Concurrent verbal protocols were collected in both
experiments. In Experiment 1, twelve participants attempted
two verbal insight problems: the Unseen Walker and Bombs
Away. Solution rates for both problems were poor.
Qualitative analysis of verbalizations revealed that
participants generated incorrect hypotheses on the basis of an
incorrect stereotypical assumption. Experiment 2 aimed to
improve performance on the same verbal insight problems
through generic training to identify inconsistencies between
the problem solver’s representation and the problem
specification. After training, twelve participants completed
the test problems (T condition) and another twelve were
permitted to use an aide memoire in order to reduce cognitive
load (TA condition: Pfeiffer, 2004). Experiment 1 served as a
no training (NT) control condition. Training improved
solution rates although the pattern of results varied between
problems, such that the aide memoire was more beneficial for
the Bombs Away problem. Results supported the notion that
stereotypical assumptions can inhibit solution of verbal
insight problems and that fine-grained training involving
inconsistency checking between the problem statement and a
person’s interpretation of it has some benefit at overcoming
these barriers.

Introduction
There are different theoretical explanations concerning
how insight is achieved (Ohlsson, 1992; Knoblich, Ohlsson,
& Raney, 2001; MacGregor, Ormerod, & Chronicle, 2001).
According to Ohlsson (1992), insight problems trigger an
initial representation that reduces the likelihood of
generating the relevant knowledge required to solve a given
problem. Insight problems can be categorized as visuospatial problems (e.g., matchstick arithmetic, Knoblich et
al., 2001; and nine-dot problem, MacGregor et al., 2001) or
verbal problems (e.g., pound coins problem, and reading in
the dark problem, Dominowski, 1994). Lateral thinking
problems (DeBono, 1967) are a type of verbal insight
problem that has received little attention within the problem
solving literature. An example of a lateral thinking problem
is the Unseen Walker problem:
On a busy Friday afternoon, a man walked several miles
across London from Westminster to Knightsbridge
without seeing anybody or being seen by anybody. The
day was clear and bright. He had perfect eyesight and he
955

font type on white A4 paper. The problems were taken with
permission, from Sloane (1992). Participants’ verbalizations
during problem solving were recorded using a cassette
player, and a stopwatch was utilized to time their responses.

training in terms of the problem solution and then were
tested on eleven problems. (A list of the problems was not
provided by Wicker et al., 1978). Solution rate was raised to
63% (Experiment 2). A possible reason why the solution
rate was not higher is that participants were not actually
trained in the process of how to identify assumptions in
problem solving. Furthermore, as verbal protocol was not
collected, it was not known to what extent participants had
applied the reformulation strategy to solve test problems.
To date, studies by Ansburg and Dominowski (2000) and
Dow and Mayer (2004) have also investigated the effects of
training on verbal insight problems. The training used by
Ansburg and Dominowski (2000, Experiment 1)
emphasized changing the representation of a problem in a
similar manner to Wicker et al. (1978). However, Dow and
Mayer (2004) trained participants in different types of
insight problems including verbal ones. Training on verbal
insight problems entailed instructing participants to look for
a ‘play on words’ in problems and then to define and
analyze what the word meant in terms of the problem
context. Only solutions to spatial problems were improved.
In an attempt to understand further the cognitive
processes used during lateral thinking problems, verbal
protocol methodology was employed in the following two
experiments. The use of verbal protocols has been the
subject of much discussion. Schooler, Ohlsson, and Brooks
(1993) argued that verbalizations adversely affect insight
problem solving, which they termed verbal overshadowing.
However, Ericsson and Simon (1993) carefully specified the
conditions in which such protocols are valid, and suggested
the need for adequate instructions and practice in thinking
aloud, which were criticisms of Schooler et al.’s study made
by Fleck and Weisberg (2004). Following Erricson and
Simon’s (1993) suggestions, Fleck and Weisberg (2004)
found no evidence of verbal overshadowing on insight
problem solving when results were compared to a silent
control group.

Test problems Each test problem was selected because it
was hypothesized to involve a constraint that could block
participants from reaching the correct answer.
Problem 1: UNSEEN WALKER
On a busy Friday afternoon, a man walked several miles
across London from Westminster to Knightsbridge
without seeing anybody or being seen by anybody. The
day was clear and bright. He had perfect eyesight and he
looked where he was going. He did not travel by any
method of transport other than by foot. London was
thronged with people yet not one of them saw him. How?
(Sloane, 1992, p. 11)
Hypothesized constraint: The man was walking above
ground along the streets.
Correct answer: The man was walking underground through
the sewers.
Problem 2: BOMBS AWAY
One night during the Second World War, an allied
bomber was on a mission over Germany. The plane was
in perfect condition and everything on it worked properly.
When it had reached its target, the pilot ordered the bomb
doors to be opened. They opened. He then ordered the
bombs to be released. They were released. But the bombs
did not fall from the plane. Why should this be so?
(Sloane, 1992, p. 8)
Hypothesized constraint: The plane was flying the right way
up.
Correct solution: The plane was flying upside-down.
Design The order of presentation of the two problems was
counterbalanced. The main dependent variables were
whether the participants solved the test problems and
whether the participants broke the constraint in the problems
but did not reach the correct solution.

Experiment 1
The aims of Experiment 1 were to, first, verify the nature of
any stereotypical assumptions that may block problem
solving and, second, to examine their effects on hypothesis
generation. Of particular interest was the role of implicit
assumptions or inferences that people make, which result in
an impasse that constrains subsequent problem solving
(Ohlsson, 1992). Data from this experiment will provide
information regarding the generalizability of such
difficulties. It will also guide the nature of training that is
designed to overcome these difficulties in Experiment 2.

Procedure Participants completed the study individually in
a quiet room. Each participant was given an introduction to
the study and was then requested to ‘think aloud’ during
each problem. To facilitate this, participants were given
practice exercises involving different tasks and contexts as
recommended by Ericsson and Simon (1993). These
involved solving a multiplication problem, calculating the
number of windows in the participant’s house, and naming
twenty animals. After these practice tasks, participants then
completed each of the two test problems. Participants were
able to refer to the problems during attempted solution and
were given a five-minute time limit for each. If participants
were silent for a period of time, the experimenter used two
non-directive prompts to maintain their verbalizations.
These were: ‘What are you thinking?’ and ‘Please keep
talking’. Participants’ responses were recorded continuously

Method
Participants Twelve non-psychology students from Cardiff
University took part in Experiment 1 and their ages ranged
from 18 to 23 years.
Materials All participants attempted to solve two test
problems. All materials were presented in black, size 11/12
956

In total, incomplete hypotheses for the Unseen Walker and
Bombs Away, respectively, represented 60% and 38% of
the total number of incorrect hypotheses for each problem.

for this time. If the participant solved the problem in less
than five minutes then recording ceased and they were
informed that they had reached the correct solution.

Results and Discussion

Table 1: Frequency of different types of incorrect
hypothesis

In general, problem solving was poor. Solution rate was 8%
for the Bombs Away and 42% for the Unseen Walker. The
solution rates corresponded exactly with the frequency of
broken constraints for each problem, indicating that if a
participant broke the constraint, then they successfully
solved the problem.
Verbal protocols were examined in order to shed light on
the strength and effect of the hypothesized constraint for
each problem. In order to accomplish this, the number and
nature of incorrect hypotheses were identified. There was a
considerable number of incorrect (and different in
parentheses) hypotheses generated by the twelve
participants. For the Unseen Walker and Bombs Away,
there were 33 (20) and 42 (27) hypotheses, respectively. A
significant measure of the strength of the problem
constraints is the frequency and percentage of incorrect
hypotheses generated that failed to break the problem
constraints. This was 33 (100%) and 42 (100%) for the
Unseen Walker and Bombs Away, respectively. Some
hypotheses explicitly described the problem constraint. For
example, hypotheses for the Unseen Walker included ‘man
walked along back alleys’ and ‘man walked through a
building’. For Bombs Away, the hypothesis that ‘the plane
is too low’ is consistent with the problem constraint that the
plane is flying the right way up. Given the number and
nature of incorrect hypotheses generated, it is reasonable to
assume that the stereotypical assumptions associated with
each problem were implicit and formed a strong
psychological barrier to problem solution, particularly for
Bombs Away.
To provide further clues on how to develop training,
incorrect hypotheses were categorized as either inconsistent
or incomplete with respect to the problem specification.
Inconsistent hypotheses were so called because they
contradicted some information given in the problem
specification whereas other incorrect hypotheses were
consistent but incomplete because they failed to account for
some detail in this specification. Thus, for example, in
‘Bombs Away’ the hypothesis that ‘no bombs were onboard
the plane’ is inconsistent because it is contradicted by the
fact that ‘they were released’, as given in the problem
specification. Strictly there was no significant difference
between problems in the number of inconsistent hypotheses
generated, F (1, 11) = 4.44, p = 0.06, MSE = 7.04 (Table 1)
although there were approximately twice as many generated
for Bombs Away. In total, the inconsistent hypotheses
proposed for the Unseen Walker and Bombs Away
represented 37% and 62% respectively, of the total number
of incorrect hypotheses for each problem.
There was no significant difference between problems in
the number of consistent but incomplete hypotheses
generated, F (1, 11) = 0.42, p > 0.05., MSE = 1.04 (Table 1).

Hypotheses
Inconsistent with problem
specification
Mean
SD

Problem
Unseen Bombs
Walker
Away

Consistent but incomplete
with problem specification
Mean
SD

1.08
1.44

2.17
1.03

1.75
1.54

1.33
1.07

The technical and unfamiliar nature of the Bombs Away
problem may explain why a high percentage of inconsistent
hypotheses were generated for this problem and not the
Unseen Walker. However, as the context of the Unseen
Walker was more familiar, participants were able to
generate hypotheses that were consistent with the problem
specification yet incomplete explanations of all the details in
the problem.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated that a stereotypical assumption
or inference made during problem solving can have a strong
effect on hypothesis generation. These assumptions produce
strong impasses that often cannot be broken spontaneously.
The aim of Experiment 2 was to provide generic training,
similar to Wicker et al. (1978), to facilitate performance on
a range of novel verbal insight problems.
The first stage of the training entailed alerting trainees to
the role of incorrect stereotypical assumptions and how they
can inhibit problem solving. The second stage provided
training in a strategy designed to overcome such
assumptions. The approach to training adopted in this
experiment was similar to that of Patrick, Grainger, Gregov,
Halliday, Handley, James, and O’Reilly (1999) and focused
on identifying any inconsistencies between a person’s
interpretation of a problem and the problem specification. It
is predicted that this comparison may draw trainees’
attention to their implicit assumptions, and thus facilitate
changes in representation. In order to develop and capitalize
on such a cognitive process, the training literature considers
it essential that practice with feedback is provided (e.g.,
Newell & Rosenbloom, 1981; Anderson, 1983; Goldstein,
1986). Therefore, the training will entail practice in
identifying inconsistencies between assumptions and the
problem specification. However, because this may impose
extra cognitive load on working memory (Pfeiffer, 2004), an
aide memoire is provided in one training condition so that
957

experimenter prompted the participants who were unable to
complete any aspects of this.
Support given during the training was reduced gradually
(Welford, 1968) in order to prepare participants for problem
solving in the test condition. Hence, in the third stage of this
training, participants were required to solve a standard
problem without writing their own interpretation but being
prompted, if necessary, by the experimenter. In the fourth
and final stage, participants attempted to solve a problem
without the experimenter prompting although feedback was
given at the end.

participants are able to write down their interpretations
during problem solving.

Method
Participants Twenty-four non-psychology students from
Cardiff University took part in Experiment 2 and their ages
ranged from 18 to 23 years. They were randomly allocated
to one of two training conditions.
Materials Materials used were the same as in Experiment 1.
However, in one training condition (TA), participants were
also provided with an aide memoire during problem solving
i.e., a pen and paper.

Test problems The same two problems were used as in
Experiment 1.

Training programme All participants took part in a brief
training programme (T) that had the following two main
objectives:1. To make participants’ aware that an incorrect
interpretation (or representation) of a problem may
block the correct solution.
2. To provide practice at identifying and overcoming
inconsistent interpretations.
For the awareness training, participants read through two
examples to illustrate how blocking effects operate. For
example:
‘Why are 1988 pennies worth more than 1983 pennies?’
(Sloane, 1992, p. 28). In this problem people might
assume that the numbers refer to years, which would then
block the correct interpretation that the numbers refer to
quantities of pennies. Therefore, 1998 pennies would be
worth £19.88, which is more than £19.83.’
The second part of the training involved four stages that
focused on overcoming such blocking effects by providing
increasingly independent practice. In the first stage,
participants were presented with two different problems,
each having two written interpretations that were
inconsistent with the problem specification. Participants
were required to identify these inconsistencies and, if they
failed to do so, were prompted by the experimenter. An
example of one problem was:
‘Archie and Ben were professional golfers and keen
rivals. One day during a game, they had each scored 30
when Ben hit a bad shot. Archie immediately added 10 to
his own score. Archie then hit a good shot and he had
won the game. Why? (Sloane, 1992, p. 21)
Possible interpretation: ‘Two friends were playing golf, they
were both on 30 points, then one reached 40 points and
won.’
The interpretation is inconsistent with the problem
specification because it does not state that Archie and Ben
were friends, nor that they were playing golf. The solution
was that they were playing tennis.
The second stage of training involved participants reading
another similar problem, writing their own interpretation,
and then attempting to identify any inconsistencies between
their interpretation and the actual problem specification.
After this participants attempted to solve the problem. The

Design The effects of training (T) and training with an aide
memoire during testing (TA) were evaluated against the
control condition (NT) from Experiment 1. As with
Experiment 1, the presentation order of the problems was
counterbalanced.
Procedure The procedure was similar to that of Experiment
1. After completing the ‘think aloud’ training, both T and
TA conditions completed the training programme, followed
by the test problems whilst thinking aloud. However,
participants in TA were permitted to write down their
interpretations of each test problem during testing.

Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 1, participants in Experiment 2 correctly
solved the problems once they had broken the problem
constraint.
Given the nature of the frequency data, Fisher’s Exact
tests were carried out to test solution rates between the
training conditions for each problem. For the Unseen
Walker, a significant difference was found between NT and
T (p < 0.05) (Figure 1). This suggests that making the
comparison between participants’ interpretations and the
problem specification was feasible and improved solution
rate in the T condition for the Unseen Walker. However the
facility of writing down interpretations in TA did not
produce any added benefit over NT although there is a nonsignificant tendency for a higher solution rate in TA. For
Bombs Away, significant differences were found between
NT and TA, and T and TA (all ps < 0.05). Possibly because
Bombs Away was perceived, inappropriately, as a more
technical problem, participants benefited from writing down
their interpretations in TA as this reduced cognitive load,
which in turn facilitated better performance than in NT and
T (Figure 1). However training without the aide memoire
was unable to improve performance presumably due to
cognitive load imposed by the nature of the problem.
Again, incorrect hypotheses were identified from the
verbal protocols and analysed. One-way analysis of variance
revealed significant differences between training conditions
in the frequency of incorrect hypotheses for Bombs Away, F
(2, 35) = 12.44, p < 0.001, MSE = 22.11 (Table 2). Tukey’s

958

suggesting that an aide memoire facilitated cognitive
processing such that participants were less likely to generate
hypotheses that did not fully explain the problem.

HSD revealed a significant reduction in the frequency of
such hypotheses for TA than NT (p < 0.001) and T (p <
0.01). Hence, the use of the aide memoire to help make
comparison between interpretations and the problem
statement reduced the number of incorrect hypotheses being
generated for this problem. It should be noted that all of
these incorrect hypotheses were consistent with an
inappropriate representation based on the hypothesised
problem constraint. There were no significant differences in
the frequency of incorrect hypotheses for the Unseen
Walker, F (2, 35) = 0.93, p > 0.05, MSE = 6.36), although
the number in the TA condition was less than half the
number in the NT condition. The number of hypotheses
consistent with the problem constraint was the same as the
number of incorrect hypotheses reported for both problems
(Table 2).

Table 3: Frequency of incomplete hypotheses for training
conditions
Training Condition
NT
T
TA

Experiment 1 demonstrated that participants were poor at
solving verbal insight problems. Based on the difficulties
experienced by participants in Experiment 1, training was
developed to overcome these difficulties in Experiment 2.
The difficulties related to the incorrect assumptions that
participants made concerning each problem. In particular, an
incorrect stereotypical assumption resulted in incorrect
interpretations that biased the types of hypotheses
generated. Due to the unfamiliar context of the Bombs
Away problem, participants tended to generate a greater
number of incorrect hypotheses that contradicted the
problem specification in comparison with the Unseen
Walker. In contrast, the context of the Unseen Walker was
familiar, and therefore participants were more successful
with this problem and generated incorrect hypotheses that
were consistent but sometimes incomplete with respect to
the problem specification.
The training in Experiment 2 entailed comparing
interpretations of the problem with the problem
specification in order to try and identify the incorrect
assumption. There were differences in solution rates
between the training conditions for both problems. An
increase over the NT condition in solution rate was found
for the Unseen Walker in T, and in TA for Bombs Away.
Arguably, Bombs Away was perceived by participants as
more of a technical problem, hence the aide memoire in TA
helped to reduce cognitive load and also to facilitate more
solutions. This result for Bombs Away was further
supported by the finding that there was a reduction in the
number of incorrect hypotheses that were consistent with
the problem constraint that the plane was flying the right
way up.
The results support the literature that a bias towards a
high frequent response based on a stereotypical assumption
can limit hypothesis generation (Reason, 1990). However,
consistent with Patrick et al. (1999), the results suggest that
inconsistency checking is a useful process in breaking such
barriers to solve verbal insight problems. In particular, the
training enabled participants to practice the stages of
identifying inconsistencies between their interpretations and
the problem specification, thus implicit assumptions could
sometimes gradually be made explicit and incorrect and
inconsistent hypotheses could be inhibited.

M ean Percent Correct

80
60
40
20
0
Bombs Away
Problems
No Training

Training

Training with aide memoire

Figure 1: Percentage correct solutions for training
conditions and problems
Table 2: The effect of training condition and problem on
incorrect hypotheses
Problem
Unseen Walker
Bombs Away

SD
1.32
1.83
0.56

General Discussion

100

Unseen Walker

Mean
1.54
1.29
0.33

Training Condition
NT
T
TA
33
29
16
42
38
12

Two-way (training x problem) analyses of variance were
conducted to identify any effects on the number of
inconsistent, and consistent but incomplete hypotheses with
the problem statement generated by participants. No
significant effects of training, F (1, 33) = 3.16, p > 0.05,
MSE = 4.35, and problems, F (1, 33) = 2.77, p > 0.05, MSE
= 4.01, were found for inconsistent hypotheses for either
problem. For incomplete hypotheses, training condition was
significant, F (2, 33) = 5.94, p < 0.01, MSE = 5.94, problem
was not significant F (1, 33) = 0.11, p > 0.05, MSE = 0.22,
and there was no interaction between these factors. Using
Tukey’s HSD for multiple comparisons, the TA condition
was better than NT (p < 0.01) and T (p < 0.05) (Table 3).
Fewer incomplete hypotheses were generated in TA,
959

Fleck, J. I., & Weisberg, R. W. (2004). The use of verbal
protocols as data: An analysis of insight in the candle
problem. Memory and Cognition, 32(6), 990-1006.
Goldstein, I. L. (1986). Training in organizations: Needs
assessment, development, and evaluation. Pacific Grove,
CA: Brooks/Cole.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York:
Henry Holt.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment
under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G. E. (2001). An eye
movement study of insight problem solving. Memory and
Cognition, 29(7), 1000-1009.
Lea, R. B. (1995). On-line evidence for elaborative logical
inferences in text. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(6), 1469-1482.
MacGregor, J. N., Ormerod, T. C., & Chronicle, E. P.
(2001). Information processing and insight: a process
model of performance on the nine-dot and related
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27(1), 176-201.
Newell, A., & Rosenbloom, P. S. (1981). Mechanisms of
skill acquisition and the law of practice. In J. R. Anderson
(Ed.), Cognitive skills and their acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information-processing explanations of
insight and related phenomena. In M. T. Keane & K. J.
Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the psychology of thinking
(pp. 1-44). New York; London; Toronto; Sydney; Tokyo;
Singapore: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Patrick, J., Grainger, L., Gregov, A., Halliday, P., Handley,
J., James, N., & O'Reilly, S. (1999). Training to break the
barriers of habit in reasoning about unusual faults.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 5(3), 314335.
Pfeiffer, T. (2004). Problem solving with a simple
transformation problem with and without continuous
external memory support. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 16(4), 555-572.
Reason, J. (1990). Human error. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Schooler, J. W., Ohlsson, S., & Brooks, K. (1993).
Thoughts beyond words: When language overshadows
insight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
122(2), 166-183.
Sloane, P. (1992). Lateral thinking puzzles. New York:
Sterling Publishing Co. Inc.
Welford, A. T. (1968). Fundamentals of skill. London:
Methuen.
Wicker, F. W., Weinstein, C. E., Yelich, C. A., & Brooks, J.
D. (1978). Problem-reformulation training and
visualization training with insight problems. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 70(3), 372-377.

Differences in solution rates and the types of hypotheses
generated were found for both problems, thus suggesting
that participants found the Bombs Away more difficult than
the Unseen Walker. These differences may be due to the
idiosyncratic nature of the problems. Only two problems
were selected for these two experiments due partly to the
lengthy procedure involved in the qualitative analysis of the
data. This is a limitation of the experiments along with the
small sample size of only twelve participants per training
condition.
In summary, hypothesis generation in verbal insight
problem solving has been overlooked (e.g., Wicker et al.,
1978; Ansburg & Dominowski, 2000; Dow & Mayer,
2004). Hence, the think aloud methodology was employed
in the experiments reported in this paper and the verbal
protocol data enabled analysis of the hypotheses generated
for each problem. In particular, it was possible to chart the
powerful influence that stereotypical assumptions had on
hypothesis generation. A novel feature introduced in
Experiment 2 was the development of a fine-grained
training regime that was geared to facilitating identification
of the implicit assumption that is typically associated with
such problem solving through a process of inconsistency
checking between the problem statement and a person’s
interpretation of it. Given the cognitive load that this
process may impose, the utility of an aide memoire during
problem solving was investigated and was found to be
particularly beneficial in solving the Bombs Away problem,
possibly due to its apparently technical nature. However
further research is needed using a range of verbal insight
problems with a larger sample size, in order to draw
conclusions regarding the generalizability of these findings
and to identify the specific cognitive difficulties associated
with different problems that require remediation through
training.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ansburg, P. I., & Dominowski, R. L. (2000). Promoting
insightful problem solving. Journal of Creative Behavior,
34(1), 30-60.
DeBono, E. (1967). New Think: The Use of Lateral
Thinking in the Generation of New Ideas. New York:
Basic Books.
Dominowski, R. (1994). Insight and instructions. Paper
presented at the 11th Annual conference, Cognitive
Psychology Section, British Psychological Society, New
Hall, Cambridge.
Dow, G. T., & Mayer, R. E. (2004). Teaching students to
solve insight problems: Evidence for domain specificity in
creativity training. Creativity Research Journal, 16(4),
389-402.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data (revised edition). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

960

