UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory for Serial Order in Social Cognition: Does Order Matter When We Are Forming
Impressions About Strangers?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0rg613h7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Costa, Rui S.
Garcia-Marques, Leonel

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory for Serial Order in Social Cognition: Does Order
Matter When We Are Forming Impressions About Strangers?
Rui S. Costa (ruisoarescosta@yahoo.com)
Department of Social and Organizational Psychology
ISCTE – Instituto Superior de Ciências do Trabalho e da Empresa
Av. das Forças Armadas, sala 224, 1649-026 Lisboa, Portugal

Leonel Garcia-Marques (garcia_marques@sapo.pt)
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences
University of Lisbon
Alameda da Universidade, 1649-013 Lisboa, Portugal

Abstract

Secondly, according to the Ordinal Theory (Figure 1B),
the elements of a sequence can be represented in a unique
dimension. Order is defined by each element’s relative
strength in that dimension – ordinal representations. An
iteractive process recovers order information selecting the
strongest element and then suppressing it. The Perturbation
Model, presented by Estes (1972), is one of the leading
proposals in the field, especially after recent developments
that extend the original model from short-term to long-term
memory effects (Estes, 1997; Nairne, 1992). Items are
encoded in terms of their perceptual and temporal attributes,
the value of the temporal attribute for any item is given by
its strength relative to the beginning of the list. There is
some probability that the encoding of an item may suffer
some perturbation as consequence of random noise in the
system.

The systematic study of memory for serial order has yet to
find its niche in social cognition. According to the person
memory literature, the organizational process underlying
impression formation results in a network of associative links
between information nodes (behaviors and traits) representing
the target. This representation should facilitate the recall of
source information and impair the recall of order information.
The present study shows that both order and source
information were better recalled under impression formation
conditions, suggesting that the representation of a target
person tends to preserve the relative position of events in a
time sequence.
Keywords: Person memory; memory for serial order;
impression formation; item information; order information.

Memory For Serial Order

A

The study of serial order effects is one of the main topics in
human memory. In fact, much of our cognitive performance
that uses memory involves the compilation of information
pieces whose order of occurrence is determinant. For
example, did Suzanne start avoiding me before, or after, I
confuse a Malévitch’s masterpiece with the museum
background wall? Who did what (to whom) and who did it
first, that is, the order in which the elements of the puzzle
took place. It seems that the position of a given behavior in
a time sequence is not trivial to the perceiver’s emergent
impression.

S

?

L
B
B

S

L

B

S

L

?

C

Theories of Memory For Serial Order
There are three major ways of conceptualizing serial order
effects in the study of human memory (Henson, 1998, 1999;
Lewandowsky & Murdoch, 1989). First, Positional Theory
(Figure 1A) states that order information is stored
associating each element to its position in a sequence, being
retrieved by the use of each position to reach its associated
element – item-position associations. The Start-End Model
(Henson, 1998), a foremost model representing positional
ideas, states that positional information is encoded as a
function of the item’s distance from the start and the end of
a sequence.

S

L

B

L
A

S

L

B

SL

?

?

Figure 1: Storage and retrieval of a sequence SLB:
(A) positional model of Burgess and Hitch (1992),
(B) ordinal model of Page and Norris (1998), and
(C) simple (Ebbinghaus, 1885/1913) and compound
(based on Henson, 1998) chaining models.
1151

Finally, Chaining Theory (Figure 1C) suggests that order
is stored by the formation or strengthening of associations
between successive elements in a list. Order is retrieved
examining through the elements of the sequence – inter-item
associations. Simple versions of these models only assume
associations between pairs of elements in sequential
positions in the list. Compound models, however, represent
remote associations between items in non-successive
positions in a list. This development overcame the key
criticism concerning chaining models – the chain becomes
stronger than its weakest element (Mewhort, Popham &
James, 1994).
The Theory of Distributed Associative Memory (TODAM,
Lewandowsky & Li, 1994; Lewandowsky & Murdoch,
1989; Murdoch, 1993, 1995, 1997) based on the notion of
associative chaining seems to be the most prominent
theoretical proposal in the literature. As the large majority
of models about memory for serial order, TODAM has been
stressing the distinction between item information and order
information. Moreover, TODAM emphasizes the difference
between three types of information: (a) item information
allows the recall or recognition of single objects or events;
(b) associative information underlies the recognition or
recall of pair of objects/items; and (c) serial order
information preserves the temporal order information in a
sequence. This distinction, which seems critical, remains
absent in the social cognition literature.
Another topic that has been enjoying recrudescent
attention from many scholars in the field is the study of
order in the context of autobiographical memories (Burt,
Kemp, Grady & Conway, 2000; Friedman, 2004;
Skowronski, Walker & Betz, 2003). Research on
autobiographical memory has been focusing on the way
individuals recall dates for past events (Kemp & Burt,
1998), the correspondent dating biases (Rubin & Baddeley,
1989) and dating processes (Friedman, 1993). But one thing
is dating errors (events A and B are dated more recently
than they actually occurred), and another thing is the
distortion of the true order of the events (Burt, Kemp, Grady
& Conway, 2000). This possible independence of “knowing
what” and “knowing when” is very important given the
emphasis on the reconstruction of temporal information
from event memory (Friedman, 2004; Skowronski, Walker
& Betz, 2003). Autobiographical memory tends to deal with
complex events leaving out the processing of social
information in impression formation framework. Therefore,
it is more concerned with time than order, whereas the
present research is more interested in memory for serial
order.

Person Memory
In social cognition, specifically in impression formation
literature, the systematic study of memory for serial order
has not been seriously regarded, though many order output
effects are very well known (e.g. primacy and recency
effects, e.g. Asch, 1946).

1152

In this literature there is an overwhelming dominance of
associative network models in comparison to other types of
representations (Garcia-Marques & Hamilton, 1996; GarciaMarques, Hamilton & Maddox, 2002; Hamilton & GarciaMarques, 2003; Hastie, 1980, 1988; Smith, 1998, 2004;
Wyer & Srull, 1989). These models share the same
representational and retrieval assumptions with the chaining
theory – information is represented by the formation of
associative links between items, being retrieved using these
associations to reach the next item to be retrieved.
Therefore, it seems that chaining and associative network
models are compatible.
Hamilton, Katz and Leirer (1980a) describe an impression
as a cognitive representation of a person. According to
associative person memory models the organizational
process underlying impression formation is very dynamic.
During encoding, each element of information will be
integrated with items previously known in the emergent
impression (Hamilton, Katz & Leirer, 1980b). The resultant
cognitive representation, defined as a network of associative
links1 (Sherman & Hamilton, 1994), should facilitate the
recall of item information in impression formation
conditions, but make the recall of order information more
difficult, since this organization disrupts the order of
presentation of the behaviors. As such, a direct comparison
between an impression formation and a memorization goal
condition (without this organizational component) should
highlight the difference in the amount of associative
elaboration that characterizes these two tasks.

Study 1
We generally followed Hamilton, Katz & Leirer (1980a),
but we presented participants with information relative to
multiple targets. Furthermore, we included measures for
both memory for order and source2. We expected that
memory for source should be better recalled under an
impression formation than memory goal due to the intratarget organizational process triggered by impression
formation. Nevertheless, the opposite result was expected
for memory for order of successive items, because this
organizational process that occurs under impression
formation should disrupt the natural sequence of
information in the stimulus list. It was expected then, that
1

Some authors (Klein & Loftus, 1990; Klein, Loftus & Schell,
1994; Sherman & Klein, 1994) contest the associative basis of the
benefits of meaning making activities (as impression formation)
on memory. Differences in processing goals could draw from
different recall strategies or even be the outcome of differential
encoding processes, as forming impressions would favor the
conceptual encoding, whereas memory would favor the perceptual
encoding of information (Sherman, Lee, Bessenhoff & Frost, 1998;
Sherman, Conrey & Groom, 2004; von Hippel, Sekaquaptewa &
Vargas, 1995).
2
A measure of source information (Ehrenberg & Klauer, 2005;
Garcia-Marques & Hamilton, 1996; Johnson, Hashtroudi, &
Lindsay, 1993) was used instead of a measure of item information
to avoid contamination problems that would emerge if we had used
memory for order after memory for item, or vice-versa.

participants for 8 seconds each 3. Afterwards subjects
performed a distracter task. Finally they were asked to (1st)
order the 4 behaviors of each block according to their
position in the stimulus list, and (2nd) to identify the target
that had performed each one of the 32 behaviors. The
behaviors were presented randomly, both for order and
source information.

memory for the order of blocks of behaviors that have been
presented successively would be better in memorization
condition than in impression formation condition. In
contrast we expected impression formation to outperform
memory participants in their memory for order of blocks of
behaviors that have been assigned to the same target
because the intra-target organizational process facilitates the
knowledge of the relative positions of intra-target behaviors.

Dependent Measures The dependent measures were (a)
memory for order, a score between -3 and 3 that reflects the
correction of the ordered behaviors in the blocks, and (b)
source memory, a score that translates the number of critical
items in which the target has been correctly retrieved for
each of the 4 blocks.

Method
Participants 109 undergraduate students from Higher
School for Applied Psychology (ISPA, Lisbon) were invited
to participate in this experiment.
Design Participants were randomly assigned to the cells of a
2 (processing goals: impression formation set vs.
memorization set) X 4 (replications of stimulus list: version
1, version 2, version 3 and version 4) X 2 (succession of
behaviors: successive vs. non-successive) X 2 (nature of the
target: intra-target vs. between-target) factorial mix design
with the last two variables grouped within-subjects in the
four versions of the stimulus list.

Results and Discussion
Source memory The score of source memory was
computed in a factorial mixed measures ANOVA with 2
(processing goals: impression formation set vs.
memorization set) X 4 (replications of stimulus list: version
1, version 2, version 3 and version 4) X 2 (succession of
behaviors: successive vs. non-successive) X 2 (nature of the
targets: intra-target vs. between-target). The data show a
main effect of the processing goal, t (101) = 1,91, p<0,03,
illustrating, as predicted, that the target was better retrieved
under impression formation goal conditions (M = 0,41) than
under memorization goal conditions (M = 0,24). This effect
was not moderated by any of the remaining variables.

Material The material used in the study was developed and
tested by Garrido, Garcia-Marques and Jerónimo (2004) and
Jerónimo, Garcia-Marques and Garrido (2004), consisting in
32 behavioral descriptions of 4 targets (John, Louis,
Anthony and Peter). Each target performed 8 behaviors. 16
of these 32 behavioral descriptions were organized, for the
purpose of the study, in 4 blocks of 4 behaviors each,
according to the combination of the variables succession of
behaviors and nature of the targets. As so, there was (1) a
block of 4 behaviors in successive positions in the stimulus
list performed by the same target (SI); (2) a block of 4
behaviors in successive positions performed by different
targets (SB); (3) a block of 4 behaviors in non-successive
positions performed by the same target (NSI); and (4) a
block of 4 behaviors in non-successive positions performed
by different targets (NSB).

Memory for Order Preliminary analysis showed that the
participants performance in the successive behaviors was
not different from random, F (1,97) = 0,05, p = 0,82 (M =
0,02). Thus, the two blocks of successive behaviors were
omitted in subsequent analysis. The score of memory for
order was computed in a three-way mixed measures
ANOVA with 2 (processing goals: impression formation set
vs. memorization set) X 4 (replications of stimulus list:
version 1, version 2, version 3 and version 4) X 2 (nature of
the targets: intra-target vs. between-target). This analysis
shows the presence of a main effect for processing goal, F
(1,99) = 6,28, p < 0,01, suggesting that participants
performance in ordering behaviors was better under
impression formation goal conditions (M = 0,69) in
comparison to the memorization goal conditions (M = 0,23).
This main effect in qualified by the nature of the targets, t
(99) = 1,92, p < 0,03, which suggests better retrieval of
order information in the intra-target behaviors for
impression formation goal conditions (M = 0,86) if
compared to the memorization goal conditions (M = 0,04), t
(99) = 3,02, p <0,01. In what concerns between-target
behaviors, results suggest no difference between impression
formation (M = 0,52) and memorization goal conditions (M
= 0,41), t (99) = 0,44, p = 0,66.
To summarize, results showed that source information was
better recalled under impression formation conditions,

NSI
SI

SB
NSB

Figure 2: Position of the 4 blocks
(SI, SE, NSI, NSE) in the stimulus list (32 items),
according to the 1st version of the material’s replications
Procedure Participants were informed that they would take
part in a study concerning impression formation (or
memorization). The 32 behaviors were presented to the

3

Participants were not given any specific information concerning
the chronological order of information in the stimulus list.

1153

suggesting that intra-target organization did in fact occur.
Moreover, memory for the order of intra-target behaviors
was better in impression formation than in memory
conditions, again suggesting intra-target organization. We
found, however, no indication of better memory for order of
successive behaviors under memory relative to impression
formation conditions.

replicated across processing goals (we predicted this pattern
for impression formation participants only) suggests that
Memory participants spontaneously encoded the items in a
way that was independent from serial order.
Third, in the case of non-successive behaviors, the results
corroborated our contentions that memory for serial order
would improve under impression formation relative to
memory conditions for behaviors performed by the same
target as a consequence of the integrative processes
underlying impression formation.
Further research is greatly needed since the magnitude of
the obtained effects was stumpy and the questions regarding
the nature of the order cues used in person memory and the
circumstances in which serial order information is preserved
in person memory remains unanswered.

General Discussion
With this experiment we intended to start pursuing the study
of memory for serial order in social cognition context. It
seems that when social perceivers are encoding information
in the social world, particularly, when they are trying to
form an impression of a specific person, the order in which
information is encoded could be a determinant element in
the resulting cognitive representation of that given person.
We expected better performance of source memory under
impression formation goal conditions comparing to the
memorization goal conditions since the organizational
process underlying impression formation should arrange
information by target in memory. We expected the opposite
effect for the memory of order of successive behaviors in
the stimulus list, since the inexistence of the organizational
process that characterizes impression formation, should help
preserve the natural sequence of the information presented,
and therefore, the representation of information in
memorization goal conditions should be more similar to the
sequence of the behaviors in the stimulus list. However, we
expected that impression formation goal conditions would
outperform memorization goal conditions for memory of
order of the behaviors performed by the same target,
because this information should be represented together in
the unified representation of the person, preserving the
information of the relative order of the behaviors in the
sequence.
The main results can be synthesized as following. First,
results show that participants retrieved more easily the
target that had performed the behavior when they were
forming impressions. These data replicate the effects found
by Hamilton et al. (1980) and Garcia-Marques and Hamilton
(1996) with a different measure, namely source memory
instead of free recall. According to the mentioned authors,
these data constitute strong evidence supporting the idea
that forming an impression is organizing information in a
way that attempts to make sense of a person. If that
organized representation results in a pattern of inter-item
associations, when we use the behavior to trigger the person
node, there will be plenty of ways to access it.
Second, the results of memory for order seem to suggest
that participant’s performance is always better when they
are forming impressions (contrarily to what was expected
initially). The main explanation for this pattern of results is
that serial order information was not preserved efficiently
under both processing goals and order judgments, as such
order judgments were based in associated cues. Since
successive items share many of these cues, order judgment
performance was impaired. The fact that this pattern was

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge Tammy GarciaMarques for her helpful contribution to the development of
this investigation. We also would like to acknowledge the
bright insights provided by Pedro Silva, Alexandre
Fernandes and Margarida Garrido.

References
Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personality.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 41, 12301240.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. (1992). Toward a network model of
the articulatory loop. Jounal of Memory and Language,
31, 429-460.
Burt, C. D. B., Kemp, S., Grady, J. M., & Conway, M.
(2000). Ordering autobiographical experiences. Memory,
8, 323-332.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1885/1913). Memory: A Contribution to
Experimental Psychology. New York: Columbia
University, Teachers College.
Ehrenberg, K., & Klauer, K. C. (2005). Flexible use of
source information: Processing components of the
inconsistency effect in person memory. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 41, 369-387.
Estes, W. K. (1972). An associative basis for coding and
organization in memory. In A. W. Melton & E. Martin
(Eds.), Coding processes in human memory (pp. 161-190).
Washington, DC: Winston.
Estes, W. K. (1997). Processes of memory loss, recovery,
and distortion. Psychological Review, 104, 148-169.
Friedman, W. J. (1993). Memory for the time of past events.
Psychological Bulletin, 113, 44-66.
Friedman, W. J. (2004). Time in autobiographical memory.
Social Cognition, 22, 591-605.
Garcia-Marques, L., & Hamilton, D. L. (1996). Resolving
the apparent discrepancy between the incongruency effect
and the expectancy-based illusory correlation effect: The
TRAP Model. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71, 845-860.
Garcia-Marques, L., Hamilton, D. L., & Maddox, K. B.
(2002). Exhaustive and heuristic retrieval processes in
person cognition: Further tests of the TRAP Model.

1154

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 193207.
Garrido, M., Garcia-Marques, L., & Jerónimo, R. (2004).
Aventureiros, religiosos, ecológicos e artísticos: Pré-teste
de descrições comportamentais. Laboratório de
Psicologia, 2, 95-101.
Hamilton, D. L., & Garcia-Marques, L. (2003).
Representation and retrieval in person memory, in G. V.
Bodenhausen & A. J. Lambert (Eds.), Foundations of
Social Cognition: A Festschrift in Honor of Robert S.
Wyer, Jr. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hamilton, D. L., Katz, L. B., & Leirer, V. (1980a).
Organizational processes in impression formation. In R.
Hastie, T. M. Ostrom, E. B. Ebbesen, R. S. Wyer, Jr., D.
L. Hamilton, & D. E. Carlston (Eds.), Person Memory:
The Cognitive Basis of Social Perception (pp. 121-154).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hamilton, D. L., Katz, L. B., & Leirer, V. (1980b).
Cognitive representation of personality impressions:
Organizational processes in first impression formation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 10501063.
Hastie, R. (1980). Memory for behavioral information that
confirms or contradicts a personality impression. In R.
Hastie, T. M. Ostrom, E. B. Ebbesen, R. S. Wyer, Jr., D.
L. Hamilton, & D. E. Carlston (Eds.), Person Memory:
The Cognitive Basis of Social Perception (pp. 155-177).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hastie, R. (1988). A computer simulation model of person
memory. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 24,
423-447.
Hastie, R., Ostrom, T. M., Ebbesen, E. B., Wyer, R. S., Jr.,
Hamilton, D. L., & Carlston, D. E. (Eds.). (1980). Person
memory: The Cognitive Basis of Social Perception.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Henson, R. N. A. (1998). Short-term memory for serial
order: The start-end model. Cognitive Psychology, 36, 73137.
Henson, R. N. A. (1999). Coding position in short-term
memory. International Journal of Psychology, 34, 403409.
Jerónimo, R., Garcia-Marques, L., & Garrido, M. (2004).
Comportamentos e traços de personalidade: Traços
gerados para comportamentos de duas dimensões de
personalidade. Laboratório de Psicologia, 2 , 33-47.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993).
Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3-28.
Kemp, S., & Burt, C. D. B. (1998). Th force of events:
Cross-modality matching the recency of news events.
Memory, 6, 297-306.
Klein, S. B., & Loftus, J. (1990). Rethinking the role of
organization in person memory. An independent trace
storage model. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59, 400-410.
Klein, S. B., Loftus, J., & Schell, T. (1994). Repeated
testing: A technique for assessing the roles of elaborative
and organizational processing in the representation of
social knowledge. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 66, 830-839.

Lewandowski, S., & Li, S. C. (1994). Memory for serial
order revisited. Psychological Review, 101, 539-543.
Lewandowski, S., & Murdoch, B. B. (1989). Memory for
serial order. Psychological Review, 96, 25-57.
Mewhort, D. J. K., Popham, D., & James, G. (1994). On
serial recall: A critique of chaining theory of distributed
associative memory. Psychological Review, 101, 534-538.
Murdoch, B. B. (1993). TODAM 2: A model for the storage
and retrieval of item, associative, and serial-order
information. Psychological Review, 100, 183-203.
Murdoch, B. B. (1995). Developing TODAM: Three models
for serial-order information. Memory & Cognition, 23,
631-645.
Murdoch, B. B. (1997). Context and mediators in a theory of
distributed
associative
memory
(TODAM
2).
Psychological Review, 104, 839-862.
Nairne, J. S. (1992). The loss of positional certainty in longterm memory.Psychological Science, 3, 199-202.
Page, M. P. A., & Norris, N. G. (1998). The primacy model:
A new model of immediate serial recall. Psychological
Review, 105 (4), 761-781.
Rubin, D. C., & Baddeley, A. D. (1989). Telescoping is not
time compression: A model of the dating of
autobiographical events. Memory & Cognition, 17, 653661.
Sherman, J. W., Conrey, F. R., & Groom, C. J. (2004).
Encoding flexibility revisited: Evidence for enhanced
encoding of stereotype-inconsistent information under
cognitive load. Social Cognition, 22, 214-232.
Sherman, J. W., & Hamilton, D. L. (1994). On the formation
of interitem associative links in person memory. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 30, 203-217.
Sherman, J. W., & Klein, S. B. (1994). Development and
representation of personality impressions. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 972-983.
Sherman, J. W., Lee, A. Y., Bessenhoff, G. R., & Frost, L.
A. (1998). Stereotype efficiency reconsidered: Encoding
flexibility under cognitive load. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 75, 589-606.
Skowronski, J. J., Walker, W. R., & Betz, A. L. (2003).
Ordering our world: An examination of time in
autobiographical memory. Memory, 11, 247-260.
Smith, E. R. (1998). Mental representation and memory. In
D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of
Social Psychology. 4th edn. Vol. 1 (pp, 391-445). New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Smith, E. R., & Queller, S. (2004). Mental representations.
In M. B. Brewer, & M. Hewstone (Eds.), Social Cognition
(pp. 5-27). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
von Hippel., W. Sekaquaptewa, D., & Vargas, P. (1995). On
the role of encoding processes in stereotype maintenance.
Advances in Experimental Psychology, 27, 177-254.
Wyer, R. S., Jr., & Srull, T. K. (1989). Memory and
Cognition in its Social Context. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

1155

