UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mind-wandering with and without Awareness: An fMRI study of spontaneous thought
processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wv0r0qt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Christoff, Kalina
Keramaian, Kamyar
Luus, Brian
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mind-wandering with and without Awareness:
An fMRI study of spontaneous thought processes
Rachelle Smith1 (rachelle@psych.ubc.ca)
Kamyar Keramatian2 (kamyar@psych.ubc.ca)
Jonathan Smallwood1 (jsmallwood@psych.ubc.ca)
Jonathan Schooler1 (jschooler@psych.ubc.ca)
Brian Luus1 (cblm@psych.ubc.ca)
Kalina Christoff,1,2 (kchristoff@psych.ubc.ca)
1

Department of Psychology, 2136 West Mall,
Vancouver, V6T 1Z4 Canada
2
Neuroscience Program, 2136 West Mall,
Vancouver, V6T 1Z4 Canada

research on human thought processes has focused on goaldirected thinking and problem solving, equating these
processes with executive functions and thinking in general.
Nonetheless, strong evidence is beginning to accumulate
suggesting that spontaneously occurring thought processes
share executive and cognitive mechanisms with goaldirected thought (Christoff, Ream & Gabrieli, 2004;
Smallwood & Schooler, in press). Such evidence has been
provided by a number of behavioral studies (Antrobus,
1968; Giambra, 1977,1979,1995; Klinger & Cox, 1987;
Teasdale, Proctor, Lloyd, & Baddeley, 1993; Teasdale,
Dritschel, Taylor, Proctor, Lloyd, Nimmo-Smith, et al.,
1995; for review, see Christoff et al., 2004). Given these
shared mechanisms, it is not surprising that the generation
of spontaneous thought interferes with executive tasks. A
prime example of this interference is the decreased degree
of randomness in a random number generation task
associated with periods of task-unrelated thoughts (Teasdale
et al., 1995). A further line of evidence linking spontaneous
thoughts with executive mechanisms is the parallel decline
of spontaneous thoughts and executive resources with age
(Giambra, 1989). This effect of decreasing spontaneous
thought with increasing age has been reported across five
different vigilance tasks (Giambra, 1989).
In addition, there is evidence at the neural level that
spontaneous thought processes share executive mechanisms
with goal-directed thought. Thus, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies investigating the
spontaneous cognitions present during rest are consistent
with conclusions drawn on the basis of behavioural studies.
These studies have found consistent rest-related activations
in brain structures that support higher order cognitive
functions such as long-term memory and executive
processes (Binder, Frost, Hammeke, Bellgowan, Rao &
Cox, 1999; Stark & Squire, 2001). These findings suggest
that conceptual processes such as semantic retrieval,
representation, information manipulation (Binder et al.,
1999) and long term memory processes (Stark & Squire,

Abstract
Much of our daily mental life is occupied by
spontaneous thought processes. Evidence is accumulating
that such spontaneous thought processes, which are often
experienced as mind-wandering, share the same cognitive and
neural resources that subserve goal-directed thought. While a
distinction between mind-wandering with and without
awareness has been made at a cognitive level, the
mechanisms underlying this distinction at a neural level
remain unknown. The present study employs a novel
paradigm that was designed to examine this question by
directly investigating instances of mind-wandering, using
fMRI. A continuously engaging background task was
employed, combined with a thought sampling approach that
determined whether subjects were mind-wandering at a given
moment of time, and whether they were aware of where their
thought processes were focused. A clear distinction between
spontaneous thought processes that occurred with and without
awareness emerged. Temporal lobe structures were activated
during mind-wandering in the absence of awareness, while
prefrontal cortex was activated when subjects were aware of
their own thoughts. These findings complement recent
cognitive theories of spontaneous thought, by providing
evidence for neural distinction between these two kinds of
mind-wandering in addition to the previously proposed
cognitive distinction. As well, the results suggest that an
important aspect of human thought processes, which has been
largely ignored thus far, may be the spontaneous generation
of thoughts in the absence of awareness or explicit conscious
goals. The implications for cognitive theories of human
thought are discussed.

Introduction
Much of our daily mental life is occupied by spontaneous
thought processes. These thoughts, also referred to as mindwandering, are often unrelated to the task at hand and may
occur with or without our awareness.
Despite the
prevalence of these types of thought processes in everyday
life (Klinger & Cox, 1987), their cognitive mechanisms
remain largely unknown. Instead, the vast majority of

804

2001), which typically occur during complex tasks, can also
occur spontaneously, in the absence of task. The specific
network of brain regions that are associated with
spontaneous thought processes in the absence of tasks
include the angular gyrus, posterior cingulate, rostrolateral
and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, ventral and medial
temporal lobe (Binder et al., 1999; Christoff et al., 2004;
Stark & Squire, 2001).
Direct empirical evidence for such overlapping neural
mechanisms was provided in a recent study examining the
network of brain regions involved in spontaneous thought
processes occurring during rest (Christoff et al., 2004). In
comparing rest to a simple arrows task, the areas showing
activation, specifically the temporal lobe and rostrolateral
prefrontal cortex, have been previously indicated in higher
cognitive functions.
While these results support the
hypothesis that the executive systems of the prefrontal
cortex play a role in spontaneous thought processes as
suggested by the behavioural literature, they also implicate a
primary role for long-term memory mechanisms involving
the temporal lobe structures. While previous studies have
highlighted the brain areas involved with spontaneous
cognitions, they are limited in that they do not allow
discrimination between spontaneous thought processes that
occur with versus without awareness.
The present study aims to expand on the findings of
Christoff et al (2004) by examining the cognitive
mechanisms involved in spontaneous thought processes that
occur with and without awareness. The Sustained Attention
to Response Task (SART) which has been used previously
to examine mind wandering and awareness behaviourally
(Smallwood, Davies, Heim, Finnigan, Sudberry, O'Connor,
et al., 2004) was utilized. This task is conducive to mind
wandering as it is cognitively undemanding, but is
continuously engaging. Based on previous research
regarding the role of the temporal lobe and prefrontal cortex
in thought processes, we expected that spontaneous thought
processes occurring without awareness would be associated
with temporal lobe recruitment, while prefrontal cortex
recruitment would be observed for those thoughts occurring
with awareness.

Yiend, 1997) (Fig. 1) was used. The SART is a continuous
go-no-go task, which requires participants to respond to all
non-targets (the numbers 0 – 9) quickly and accurately
while inhibiting responses to targets (the number 3). It has
been used extensively to study mind-wandering
behaviourally (Robertson et al., 1997; Smallwood et al.,
2004).

Figure 1: SART Paradigm
Mind-wandering measure. A thought sampling approach
was used (Teasdale et al., 1995) to query participants about
the focus of their attention during performance of the
SART. Thought probes occurred pseudorandomly, at a rate
of approximately one per minute. Each thought probe
consisted of two consecutively displayed questions. The
two questions were as follows:
Q1: Where was your attention focused just before the
probe?
Q2: How aware were you of where your attention was?

Behavioural Procedure
Participants completed 3 practice task sessions on a laptop
prior to entering the scanner room. Once positioned in the
scanner, they were given practice adjusting the thought
probe scale; they then completed 5 sessions of the SART,
each approximately 13 minutes in duration. Each session
consisted of 329 trials and included 16 thought probes, 16
targets and 297 non-targets, resulting in 5% target
frequency. The order of events (targets and thought probes)
was pseudo-counterbalanced so that a variable distance
between events (5 – 15 trials) was uniformly distributed
within each session. Three events appeared 5 trials apart, 3
events appeared 6 trials apart, and so on up to a distance of
15 trials apart.
The number stimuli and thought probes were backprojected onto a screen mounted at the end of the scanner
bore. A mirror attached to the head coil enabled participants
to view the presented stimuli. Participants responded to the
number stimuli by pressing a response box button using
their right index finger.
The thought probes appeared in a pseudo-random order,
temporarily suspending SART performance. Participants
answered each question within the thought probe by using
an adjustable 7-point scale. Participants adjusted the scale
by pressing the left index finger button to move the cursor
towards the right and the left middle finger button to move
it towards the left. The direction of the scale was
counterbalanced between participants, such that “on task”
and “aware” were on the right for 6 of the participants and
“off task” and “unaware” were on the right for the other 4

Methods
Participants
Ten right-handed University of British Columbia (UBC)
students (mean age 24; age range 19 – 29 years; 9 female)
gave their written consent to participate and received
$20/hour as compensation. All participants had normal or
corrected vision and were screened for MRI compatibility.
Procedures were approved by the UBC Clinical Research
Ethics Board and by the UBC High Field Magnetic Imaging
Centre.

Experimental paradigm
Background task. The Sustained Attention to Response
Task (SART) (Robertson, Manly, Andrade, Baddeley &

805

modulation was applied to the regressors modeling the
period prior to targets.
Parametric modulation was
particularly effective in contrasting the periods prior to
thought probes.
Two such parametrically modulated
regressors were formed: one, based on responses to the first
question during the probe, and another one, based on
responses to the second question during the probe. In this
way, an effective contrast between periods of mindwandering versus periods of being on task was constructed,
as well as periods of mind-wandering with versus without
awareness. Here we focus on the results of the latter
contrast, examining the differences between mindwandering with and without awareness.
The contrast images obtained at the individual level of
analysis were entered into a group level analysis, using onesample t-test, thus, effecting a random-effect model across
subjects. The threshold for significance was set at P<0.001
(uncorrected) for all group comparisons, except for the
aware vs. unaware comparisons, in which case it was set at
P<0.005.

participants. Once the cursor was in the desired position on
the scale, participants pressed the left thumb key to register
their response. Participants then continued with the SART
task until the next thought probe appeared.

fMRI Data Acquisition
Data acquisition was performed using a Philips Gyroscan
Intera 3 Tesla MRI scanner. Five functional runs, each
consisting of 800 dynamics, were acquired for each
participant using 1 sec TR; 24 x 13.2 X 24 cm rectangular
FOV; acquisition matrix: 80 x 78 voxels; inplane resolution:
3 mm; 19 axial-oblique slices (AC/PC); 6 mm slice
thickness; 1mm skip. An inplane (2-D) anatomical image
was obtained prior to the functional runs.

fMRI Data Analysis
All fMRI data preprocessing and analysis was performed
using SPM2 (Statistical Parametric Mapping; Wellcome
department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). Prior to
analysis, all images were preprocessed.
Slice-timing
correction to equate for the different sampling times of the
slices consisted of interpolating the voxel time series using
sinc interpolation and resampling with the middle slice as a
reference point. Next, motion correction was accomplished
by realignment of the T2*-weighted volumes using the first
slice in the time series. The structural T1-weighted volumes
were normalized to the MNI template using affine spatial
transformation, by first deriving the transformation
parameters derived from normalizing each subject’s
anatomical image to the MNI template and second, applying
these transformation parameters to the subject’s EPI image.
In order to account for any residual between-subject
variation and allow application of Gaussian random field
theory to provide for corrected statistical inference, the T2*weighted volumes were then smoothed using a Gaussian
kernel with 8 mm full-width at half-maximum (FWHM)
(Friston, Worsley, Frackowiak, Mazziotta, & Evans, 1994).

Results
Behavioural
Results regarding accuracy are presented in Table 1.
Average response time for non-targets was 389.35 ms with a
standard deviation of 69.42 ms.
Table 1: Accuracy on the SART task
(targets and non-targets).
Stimulus
Type
Target
Non-target

Mean
Accuracy
(%)
59.18
98.27

StDev
(across
subject)
0.1586
0.0271

Range
(Min-Max)
(%)
32.94-88.24
91.37-99.93

The thought sampling procedure did not increase the
likelihood that subjects would be more on-task or aware of
their thoughts. Rather, throughout the experiment, subjects
became more likely to report “off task” and “unaware”
experiences. Figure 2 shows this trend across sessions.

Modeling of events and periods prior to events.
Statistical results were assessed using a voxel-based
approach, by constructing regressor functions based on
event-types and estimating regression coefficients to
estimate the regionally specific effects. The hemodynamic
response function (HRF) was used to model events and
periods prior to events (a single HRF or a set of 5 HRFs,
respectively). Single events that were modeled included
targets (occurrences of the number “3”) and thought probes.
In addition, the period of 10 seconds (5 non-target
responses) prior to targets and probes was modeled in
separate regressors.

fMRI
The first comparison of interest examined the effects of
errors during target responses. This comparison aimed to
replicate previous findings concerning error-related
processing. When incorrect targets were compared to
correct targets, we observed prominent activations in the
anterior cingulate cortex (Fig. 3 & Table 2). In addition,
activation in posterior cingulate cortex was observed. These
results replicate previous findings of error-related
processing (Carter et al., 1999) and its relation to anterior
cingulate recruitment, thus, demonstrating the validity of the
experimental manipulation employed here and its
consistency with prior results.

Using parametric modulation to construct contrasts.
The regressors were modulated parametrically in order to
construct specific contrasts of interest. Thus, a parametric
modulation according to accuracy of response to targets
resulted in new regressors that effectively compared
incorrect versus correct responses to targets. A similar
806

Figure 2: Distribution of Probe Responses Across Sessions
Smallwood et al., 2004)) has demonstrated that people are
much more likely to be mind-wandering just prior to an
error. The contrast of periods prior to incorrect targets
versus periods prior to correct targets yielded robust
activations in lateral prefrontal and temporal regions (Fig 4
and Table 3).

Figure 4: Period prior to target Incorrect versus correct response
Figure 3: Incorrect versus correct response to targets

Table 3: Activation areas for period prior to target Incorrect versus correct response

Table 2: Activation areas for
incorrect versus correct response to targets
Activation Areas
Anterior Cingulate

BA
24
32

Z-Score
4.63
3.94

Voxels
441

Posterior Cingulate
Precuneus

31
7

4.08
3.53

479

R Cerebellum
5.17
3300
L Cerebellum
4.63
Note: BA = Brodmann area, L/R = Left/Right hemisphere

Activation Areas

BA

Z-Score

Voxels

L Anterior Prefrontal
Cortex

10

3.58

35

L Ventrolateral
Prefrontal Cortex

47

3.43

9

L Temporal Cortex

21

3.19

37

R Temporal Cortex

21

3.75

164

Precuneus

18

3.57
186
3.16
Note: BA = Brodmann area, L/R = Left/Right hemisphere

Of interest to our investigation of spontaneous thought,
however, was the question of what happens in terms of
neural processes just prior to errors. The behavioral
literature using the SART task (Robertson et al., 1997;

807

previously proposed distinction at the cognitive level
(Schooler, 2002). Activation in the lateral prefrontal cortex
characterized thoughts that occurred with the subjects’
awareness while activation in the lateral temporal cortex
was associated with thoughts that occurred without the
subjects’ awareness. The observed activation of the
temporal cortex for thoughts lacking awareness provide
direct empirical evidence that long-term memory processes
play a key role in the generation of spontaneous thought
processes, consistent with previous theoretical ideas (Binder
et al., 1999; Christoff et al., 2004). That this thought flow
occurs without awareness underscores the unsuitability of
rest as a baseline for fMRI studies (Binder et al., 1999;
Christoff et al., 2004; Stark & Squire, 2001). Even though
the participants themselves may believe that they are at rest
or conversely that they are focused on the task at hand, it
may be that they are cognitively very active with their
attention focused elsewhere. Thus, if rest is used as a
baseline for tasks that also activate these areas, misleading,
non-significant results may be obtained.
Finally, the distinct difference between the observed
mind-wandering activations and activations usually
observed during “default” state processes (Raichle et al.,
2001) clearly indicate that mind-wandering is not part of
default mechanisms, but rather part of an executive system
(see Teadsdale et al., 1995 for a similar argument based on
behavioral findings).
In this paper, we have presented a method that can
successfully be used for directly investigating the neural
basis of spontaneous thought processes. This method can
also be used to investigate the crucial distinction between
mind-wandering with and without awareness. Consistent
with the literature on executive function and long-term
memory mechanisms, our results indicate separate
components of the experience of mind-wandering, and
suggest a separation between the spontaneous generation of
spontaneous thoughts, on the one hand, and the conscious
experience of these thoughts, on the other. This distinction
has been outlined at the behavioral level by Schooler (2002)
in terms of thought processes that can be referred to as
“tuning out” (mind-wandering with awareness) and “zoning
out” (mind-wandering without awareness). Here we present
results suggesting that this distinction holds validity at the
neural level as well. Thought processes that occur without
our awareness appear to be associated with temporal lobes
structures, while awareness elicits prefrontal recruitment.
In conclusion, spontaneous mental cognitions are not only
ubiquitous, but also crucially important in understanding the
full scope of thought phenomena. Although these types of
cognitions have been relatively neglected in the past,
methods for their scientific investigation are now beginning
to appear.
The evidence for overlap between such
spontaneous thought mechanisms and mechanisms of goaldirected thought is overwhelming and present at both the
behavioral and neural level. It is now incumbent upon
researchers interested in thought processes to further
elucidate the flip side of thought – the spontaneously

Finally, a distinction was observed between neural
recruitment when subjects were aware of their mindwandering versus when they were unaware. (Fig 5a and
Table 4). Thus, the contrast between periods prior to a
probe on which subjects were aware of where their attention
was, compared to periods prior to probes where subjects
were unaware, resulted in activation of the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex. On the other hand, the contrast of
unaware versus aware periods prior to a probe resulted in
activation in the anterior temporal and lateral mid-temporal
regions (Fig 5b and Table 4).

a)

b)

Figure 5: Period prior to thought probe
(a) aware versus unaware (b) unaware versus aware
Table 4: Activation areas for awareness contrasts
Condition
Aware >
Unaware

Unaware >
Aware

Activation
Areas
L Dorsolateral
Prefrontal
Cortex

BA

Z-score

Voxels

46

3.07

56

R Visual
Cortex

18/
19

2.67

36

R Anterior
Temporal

38

2.93

40

21
22
21

2.78
2.68
2.56

87

39
39

2.92
2.88

72

R MidTemporal

21
2.95
48
21
2.84
21
2.81
Note: BA = Brodmann area, L/R = Left/Right hemisphere

Discussion
The present findings provide further support for the
hypothesis that the prefrontal and temporal cortices play
differential roles in spontaneous thought (Christoff et al.,
2004). The observed pattern of activation suggests a
dissociation between conscious and unconscious mindwandering at the neural level – a dissociation that parallels a
808

Giambra, L. M. (1995). A laboratory method for
investigating influences on switching attention to taskunrelated imagery and thought. Consciousness and
Cognition, 4(1), 1-21.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought
flow in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition and
Personality, 7(2), 105-128.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W.
J., Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). Inaugural
article: A default mode of brain function. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 98(2), 676-682.
Robertson, I. H., Manly, T., Andrade, J., Baddeley, B. T., &
Yiend, J. (1997). 'oops!' Performance correlates of
everyday attentional failures in traumatic brain injured
and normal subjects. Neuropsychologia, 35(6), 747-758.
Schooler, J. W. (2002). Re-representing consciousness:
Dissociations
between
experience
and
metaconsciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(8), 339344.
Smallwood and Schooler (in press) The restless mind.
Psychological Bulletin.
Smallwood, J., Davies, J. B., Heim, D., Finnigan, F.,
Sudberry, M., O'Connor, R., et al. (2004). Subjective
experience and the attentional lapse: Task engagement
and disengagement during sustained attention.
Consciousness & Cognition, 13(4), 657-690.
Stark, C. E., & Squire, L. R. (2001). When zero is not zero:
The problem of ambiguous baseline conditions in fmri.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 98(22), 12760-12766.
Teasdale, J. D., Dritschel, B. H., Taylor, M. J., Proctor, L.,
Lloyd, C. A., Nimmo-Smith, I., et al. (1995). Stimulusindependent thought depends on central executive
resources. Memory and Cognition, 23(5), 551-559.
Teasdale, J. D., Proctor, L., Lloyd, C. A., & Baddeley, A. D.
(1993). Working memory and stimulus-independent
thought: Effects of memory load and presentation rate.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 5(4), 417433.

occurring cognitions that may occur without apparent
purpose or relation to the task at hand, which, despite their
underprivileged status in current research, may turn out to
hold the key to a fuller understanding of the infinite
complexities of human cognition.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Tula Foundation Young
Scientist Award and a Canadian Foundation for Innovation
grant to K.C. We would like to thank Alex MacKay and
Burkhard Maedler for help with scanning protocol
optimization, and Trudy Harris, Jennifer McCord, Sylvia
Renneberg and Linda Chandler for their patience and
assistance with data collection.

References
Antrobus, J. S. (1968). Information theory and stimulusindependent thought. British Journal of Psychology, 59,
423-430.
Binder, J. R., Frost, J. A., Hammeke, T. A., Bellgowan, P.
S., Rao, S. M., & Cox, R. W. (1999). Conceptual
processing during the conscious resting state. A
functional mri study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
11(1), 80-95.
Carter, C. S., Botvinick, M. M., & Cohen, J. D. (1999). The
contribution of the anterior cingulate cortex to executive
processes in cognition. Rev Neurosci, 10(1), 49-57.
Christoff, K., Ream, J. M., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2004). Neural
basis of spontaneous thought processes. Cortex, 40(4-5),
623-630.
Friston, K. J., Worsley, K. J., Frackowiak, R. S. J.,
Mazziotta, J. C., & Evans, A. C. (1994). Assessing the
significance of focal activations using their spatial extent.
Human Brain Mapping, 1, 210–220.
Giambra, L. M. (1977). Daydreaming about the past. The
time setting of spontaneous thought intrusions.
Gerontologist, 17(1), 35-38.
Giambra, L. M. (1979). Sex differences in daydreaming and
related mental activity from the late teens to the early
nineties. International Journal of Aging and Human
Development, 10(1), 1-34.
Giambra, L. M. (1989). Task-unrelated thought frequency as
a function of age: A laboratory study. Psychology and
Aging, 4(2), 136-143.

809

