UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling the Scheduling of Eye Movements and Manual Responses in Performing a
Sequence of Discrete Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4wh3757b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Lewis, Richard
Wu, Shu-Chieh
Remington, Roger W.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling the Scheduling of Eye Movements and Manual Responses
in Performing A Sequence of Discrete Tasks
Shu-Chieh Wu (scwu@mail.arc.nasa.gov)
San Jose State University / NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 262-4
Moffett Field, CA 94035 USA

Roger W. Remington (roger.remington@jhuapl.edu)
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
Laurel, MD 20723-6099 USA

Richard Lewis (rickl@umich.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1043 USA
optimization. It is an empirical as well as practical question
in human performance modeling whether models of singletask performance, described at the level of elementary
mental operations, are sufficient to characterize behavior in
extended, continuous sequences with emergent features.
In a series of papers we have investigated one particular
aspect of continuous behavior, the coordination between eye
movements and manual responses (Wu & Remington, 2004;
Wu et al., 2004). In human interactions with technologies,
sequences of discrete actions are executed by hands through
keyboards, mice, touch pads, or joysticks based on
information taken in from the eyes with decisions made
centrally. How are eye movements coordinated with the
release of manual responses in sequences of discrete actions
that involve decisions? In this paper, we present the results
of one extended task experiment that examined the
characteristics of eye movements in performing sequences
of discrete actions (previously reported in Wu, Remington,
& Pashler, 2004) and a computational model to account for
the results.

Abstract
Common tasks in daily life are often accomplished by a
sequence of actions that interleave information acquisition
through the eyes and action execution by the hands. How are
eye movements coordinated with the release of manual
responses and how may their coordination be represented at
the level of component mental operations? We have
previously presented data from a typing-like task following
Pashler (1994) requiring separate choice responses to a series
of five stimuli (Wu & Remington, 2004; Wu, Remington, &
Pashler, 2004). We found a consistent pattern of results in
both motor and ocular timing, and hypothesized possible
relationships among underlying components. Here we report a
model of that task, which demonstrates how the observed
timing of eye movements to successive stimuli could be
accounted for by assuming two systems: an open-loop system
generating saccades at a periodic rate, and a closed-loop
system commanding a saccade based on stimulus processing.
We relate this model to models of reading and discuss the
motivation for dual control.
Keywords: eye-hand coordination; eye movement control;
perception and action; computational modeling.

Eye Movements in Extended Tasks
Eye movements occur naturally in almost all daily activities.
Efforts to characterize patterns of eye movements have
focused on activities with a well-defined script, such as golf
putting (Vickers, 1992), driving (Land & Lee, 1994), to tea
making (Land & Hayhoe, 2001), and block-copying (Pelz et
al., 2001). A common finding in such observations is that
the eyes move in anticipation of upcoming actions during
activities that involve scripted behavior.
These anticipatory eye movements characterize the
proactive nature of eye movement control in extended tasks.
It seems intuitive that the eyes could move away prior to the
response as soon as information acquisition is completed.
But, what is the control structure underlying such
anticipatory behavior? That is, when can the eyes move and
what determines it? Answers to these questions are critical
to understanding the coordination between eye movements
and other mental operations. Typical fixation durations
generally range from 200 to 400 ms, exceeding the time
needed for perceptual registration, which can be estimated at

Introduction
Human performance modeling entails reconstructing human
behavior through composition of elementary cognitive and
motor operations. The common assumption derives from
traditional theories of cognition, which decompose human
performance into a succession of stages representing a
limited number of component mental operations, such as
perceptual, cognitive, and motor processes. This approach
has achieved success in modeling highly practiced,
perceptual-motor behaviors, such as behaviors of telephone
operators or ATM users (e.g., Gray et al., 1993; John et al.,
2002; Vera et al., 2005). However, these models rely on
component estimates derived from discrete actions that
often last less than a second. Real life tasks, such as typing
or driving a car, generally require the performance of a
series of actions integrated into a fluid behavior sequence.
Features not observed in discrete performances emerge,
such as planning, scheduling, coordination, and
900

manual responses on eye movement patterns. Perceptual
difficulty was manipulated by having two stimulus
luminance conditions (Bright and Dim). Response selection
difficulty was manipulated by having two response mapping
conditions, one natural (Easy) and one arbitrary (Difficult).
In addition to RT and IRIs, we computed three eye
movement related measures: 1) eye-hand spans (EH-Span),
which represent the elapsed time between the initial fixation
on a particular stimulus to the moment when the
corresponding manual response is generated; 2) dwell time,
which represents the duration for which fixation is
maintained on a particular stimulus; and 3) release-hand
spans (RH-Span), which represent the elapsed time between
the end of fixation on a particular stimulus to the moment
when the manual response is generated. Dwell times and
release-hand spans make up eye-hand spans.
In both experiments we obtained patterns of manual RT
results that resembled what Pashler (1994) found in
conditions with preview (Wu & Remington, 2004);
specifically, the elevation of RT1 and constantly short IRIs
of subsequent responses. The effect of perceptual difficulty
was minimal on RT1/IRIs and appeared to be restricted to
S1. Dwell time was lengthened in the Dim condition,
though the amount of increase was small. Response
selection difficulty had a strong effect on manual as well as
oculomotor responses. Difficult response mapping resulted
in increases in IRIs as well as dwell times. Results from
these two experiments suggest that fixations include
perceptual as well as at least part of response selection
related processes.
In a follow-up study we examined the effects of response
selection difficulty within a trial on extended task
performance using a Go/No-Go procedure (Wu et al., 2004).
On each trial, only 2 or 3 positions contained target
characters mapped with a key response. The rest were filled
with dummy characters and participants were asked to skip
them. We compared dwell time on Go and No-Go stimuli,
and RT1 and IRIs on Go stimuli that were preceded and/or
followed by No-Go stimuli to evaluate the impact of central
difficulty. Our goal of using a Go/No-Go procedure was
twofold. First, real-world tasks do not require actions to
each and every stimulus, yet for those stimuli with no motor
response requirements some amount of processing still takes
place. By intermixing No-Go stimuli with Go ones we were
able to more closely imitate real-world conditions. Second,
in our previous research (Wu & Remington, 2004) with all
Go stimuli we found substantial RT1 elevation in sequences
of responses. With the inclusion of No-Go stimuli we could
test whether RT1 elevation was due to delayed early
responses in order to be coordinated with subsequent ones.
In the following we recap the empirical results and access
the validity of our underlying process assumptions using a
computational model for the results.

around 100 to 150 ms (Salthouse & Ellis, 1980). This
observation suggests either that the initiation of an eye
movement is based on post-perceptual processing, or
alternatively, that the timing of movements is driven by
strategies of information acquisition.
To study when the eyes move we need a task that
incorporate eye movements in a natural fashion while
sensitive to changes in underlying processes. We adopted a
typing-like task developed by Pashler (1994). Participants
viewed a row of five letters sequentially and responded to
each individually in different preview conditions. By
manipulating the amount of preview, whether information
of the next letter is made available prior to the response to
the current letter, Pashler examined how the mental
processing of two or more stimuli were overlapped in time.
He measured the reaction time (RT) to the first stimulus
(RT1) and computed the inter-response intervals (IRIs) for
subsequent responses. With no preview, RT1 and
subsequent IRIs were roughly equivalent and constant
across the stimulus sequence. With preview, RT1 was
elevated, compare to no preview, while IRIs were constantly
low. The same effects were observed regardless of whether
one or all subsequent letters were available for preview.
Pashler interpreted the constant IRIs as an indication of a
bottleneck central processing stage of response selection,
which would only allow the selection of one response at a
time (see Figure 1 for a schematic diagram). The fact that
IRIs reflected the duration of response selection is further
supported by the findings that varying the duration of
stimulus recognition and response production had little to
modest effect on the durations of IRIs.

SE

SE

SE

RS

RS

RS

RE
RT1

RE
IRI

RE
IRI

Figure 1. Pashler’s (1994) model of the preview task
Pashler’s model (1994) provides a clear theoretical
account of how the coordination of three critical mental
components (perception, response selection, and response
production) might produce the emergent effect of IRI in a
sequence of choice responses. In this case, characterization
of a single task was sufficient to account for the IRI results
without further assumptions. The experimental paradigm
represents a good compromise between the simplicity of
typical discrete trial experiments, and real-world behavior.
To incorporate an eye movement component, we adopted
Pashler’s complete preview condition and reduced the size
of stimulus letters and increased the separation between
them (Wu & Remington, 2004). Identification of stimulus
letters thus required successive saccades and fixations. In
two experiments we examined the effects of the level of
difficulty in the perceptual and response selection stages of

Empirical Results
We model data from Wu et al. (2004), which used a Go/NoGo version of Pashler’s (1994) preview task. There were six
experimental conditions, which differed in the number of
required successive responses in a sequence (one, two, and
901

three), and in the stimulus position on which these
sequences occurred (S1 and S2). The six conditions can be
represented as the following: TXXTT, TTXXT, TTTXX,
XTXXT, XTTXX, and XTTTX, with T denoting letter
stimuli that required a key response (Go stimuli) and X
denoting letter stimuli that required no response (No-Go
stimuli). Go stimuli were randomly drawn from the letter set
T, D, and Z, with the constraint that no letter was repeated
in two adjacent positions. This constraint however does not
prevent repetition of responses; the same letter could occur
in two positions interposed by Xs. Each participants
received either 40 or 60 trials of each condition.
Each trial began with the presentation of a white fixation
cross (0.3˚) in the center of the display. After the participant
had maintained fixation within a 6˚ radius around the
fixation for 500 ms, the fixation was erased and a small
filled square (0.34˚) appeared at the leftmost stimulus
position. Participants were instructed to move their eyes to
fixate the small square when it appeared and maintain
fixation at that location. The small square remained for 1
sec, followed by a blank interval of 500 ms. The five
stimulus characters then appeared simultaneously, the
leftmost appearing where the subject had been fixating.
Subjects fixated and responded to each in turn from left to
right. The characters were erased after the participant had
responded to the rightmost character. The next trial began
following an inter-trial-interval of 250 ms.
Eye movements were monitored and recorded using an
infrared video-based eye tracking system (ISCAN), which
outputs data at a temporal resolution of 120 Hz and a spatial
resolution of approximately 0.5º visual angle. Fourteen
undergraduate students recruited from local colleges near
NASA Ames Research Center participated in the
experiment for course credit.
Figure 2 (left panel) presents mean manual RTs as a
function of stimulus. Cases where RT1 occurred to S1 (S1RT1) are plotted separately from cases where RT1 occurred
to S2 (S2-RT1). The general pattern of elevated RT1
followed by rapid, flat IRIs is apparent in conditions with a
contiguous sequence of responses (TTTXX and XTTTX).
More importantly, RTs of the Go responses followed by NoGo sequences (conditions TXXTT, TTXXT, XTXXT, and
XTTXX) were closely aligned with the Go responses
followed by Go sequences. The only significant effect of the
arrangement of stimulus was that RT1 was significantly
slower when made to S1 (S1-RT1) than to S2 (S2-RT1).
The general elevation of RT1 for both S1-RT1 and S2-RT1
suggests that cost is incurred for the first response in a
sequence, not just to the first possible stimulus position.
These similarities in patterns and magnitudes strongly
suggest that the RT1/IRIs patterns are related closely to the
production of sequences of responses.
As in previous experiments, fixation durations remained
relatively constant across stimuli. Not surprisingly, fixation
durations on target (Go) stimuli were always longer than
No-Go stimuli. More interesting comparisons arise when
one regards fixation durations as a consequence of the
previous stimulus (Figure 3). Here the dwell times suggest
that the attempt to interleave the mental operations for
successive stimuli pushes cost on to the subsequent

Observed RT1/IRIs
TXXTT
TTXXT
TTTXX
XTXXT
XTTXX
XTTTX

1200
1000

Time (ms)

Simulated RT1/IRIs

800
600
400
200
S1 S2 S3 S4

S1 S2 S3 S4

Figure 2. Left: RT1/IRIs and eye-hand span results
from Wu et al. (2004); Right: Simulated results
stimulus. When the fixated stimulus is a target (a Go
stimulus) dwell times were shorter by ~60 ms for targets
that were preceded by dummy stimuli (i.e., XT) than by
target stimuli (i.e., TT). When the fixated stimulus was a
dummy stimulus this difference (TX compared to XX) was
~30 ms.

Model
Previously we modeled a version of the preview task that
consisted of trials with all Go stimuli (Remington, Lewis, &
Wu, 2005). The model was developed under three key
assumptions. First, it assumed that central processes are rate
limiting (central bottleneck assumption). Second, an eye
movement to the next stimulus in sequence can be initiated
only after the completion of perceptual processing on the
current stimulus. Third, the timing of the eye movement is
strategically chosen so that perceptual processing of the next
stimulus is completed at the same time as central processing
on the current stimulus is completed. We refer to this as the
“just-in-time” assumption, since it attempts to minimize
wait states in central processing by assuring that perceptual
processing is complete as close as possible to when it is
needed – when the central processor becomes free. In the
present paper we modeled the Go/No-Go results based on
the same three key assumptions. In the following sections
we describe the structure of the model (see Figure 4 for a
schematic diagram) and detail assumptions specific to the
Condition
TXXTT
TTXXT
TTTXX
XTXXT
XTTXX
XTTTX
TXXXX

s1
450.4
467.6
460.6
339.9
332.7
336.6
534.3

s2
c
a
a
b
b
b

324.6
478.8
484.8
394.4
409.5
395.7
451.9

s3
d
c
a
c
a
a

300.1
315.1
443.1
344.0
445.5
433.3
362.5

b
d
c
d
c
a

s4

s5

415.9
307.9
349.5
329.9
370.5
473.3
334.3

838.6
768.9
439.5
776.8
527.7
581.8
425.6

T preceded by
T or X
a TT
b XT
X preceded by
T or X
c TX
d XX

Figure 3. Dwell times for S1-S5 in all conditions
from Wu et al. (2004)
902

present model. The model was implemented in the statistical
package R.

6.

Assumptions
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

Parameters

Following Pashler (1994) manual responses consist
of three basic stages: stimulus encoding (SE),
response selection (RS), and response execution
(RE). Here we postulate that RS consists of two substages, stimulus classification (RS.SC) and response
preparation (RS.RP) to represent the differential
processing need for Go and No-Go stimuli. RE is
further broken down to two sequential components,
an Init operator (IM) followed by a Motor Execution
operator (M).
We hypothesize that manual and oculomotor
processes underlie each fixation. Specifically, each
fixation begins with SE and ends with an Init
component for the saccade (IS). For fixations on NoGo stimuli, they include only the response
clarification component (RS.SC). For fixations on
Go stimuli, we introduce a variable called Saccade
Lag that produces the constant delay required to
achieve the just-in-time scheduling.
RS (including RS.SC and RS.RP) is the bottleneck
process, occurring in strict sequence for all stimuli.
Hence the task is rate-limited by RS, not SE or RE.
We assume that participants adopt an eye movement
strategy that assures SE is completed just when RS is
free to process the perceptual information. However
with variability in processing times RS on a previous
stimulus can be completed before or after SE.
Stochastic durations in the model allow us to
simulate both outcomes.
The model does not have an explicit account of the
RT1 elevation that would allow us to compute it
from first principles. Our conjecture is that the RT1
elevation results in part from preparation for the
sequence of events to ensue. We insert an operation,
Prep, into the sequence of RT1 after SE and prior to
RS, and assume it is executed in series.

Though the model assumptions determine the order in
which operations will be scheduled, durations must be
assigned or computed. Parameters were estimated in two
ways: 1) architectural conventions; and 2) calculated from
the data based on model assumptions.
Architectural Conventions Numerical parameter estimates
for several necessary parameters were assigned values
consistent with existing literature (e.g., Vera et al., 2005).
Stimulus Encoding (SE) was set to 100 ms, both manual and
saccade Init (IM and IS) operators were set to 50 ms, and
Response Execution (RE) was set to 150 ms. Saccade
movement time (S) was set to 30 ms.
Calculated from Data Although it would be desirable to
set all parameters in advance, we have as yet no theoretical
basis for assigning durations to some internal, unobservable
states.
RT1 elevation. To account for the elevated RT1 (on S1
and S2) we assume a response-related preparation stage
(Prep) is added to the normal model of a Go response. We
estimate the duration of this stage (Prep.S1) by summing the
mean values of the hypothesized components of RT1 then
subtracting this from the observed RT1 as indicated here:
Prep.S1 = RT1 – (SE + RS + I + RE)
We estimated Prep.S2 by subtracting the observed
difference in RT1 delay for S1 & S2. Thus,
Prep.S2 = Prep.S1 - 96
RS durations. The model assumptions dictate that for a
sequence of Go trials, IRI duration should ideally be a direct
measure of RS duration. Thus, mean observed IRI duration
(416 ms) was used as the estimate. According to the model,
No-Go trials have a shorter RS stage associated with
Stimulus Classification (RS.SC). The RS.SC stage was
estimated by constructing a model of final response time for
the XTTTX sequence. This allowed RS.SC to be estimated
from the data using the total response time and the delay of
RT1 when it occurred on S2. Specifically,

Eye-Hand Span

Dwell

Dwell

SP

D

SP

Lag IS

Lag IS

S1

S2

Response
Preparation (RP)

SP

IS

S3

IM M
Stimulus
Classification
RT1 Delay
(SC)

SP

IM M

There is noise associated with the timing of all of
these processes. In the model we assume that the
noise patterns follow normal distributions.

RS.SC = Total.RT.XTTTX - SE*2 - IS - S – Prep.S2 –
RS*3 - IM - M

IS

S4

S5

Saccade measures. Following Remington et al. (2006) the
model assumes that eye movements are delayed on Go trials
in order to time the end of RS for the current stimulus with
the end of SE on the subsequent stimulus. The delay
parameter, Saccade Lag (Lag) is derived by first
constructing a total dwell time on a sequence of n
successive Go trials starting from S1, represented as:

IM M

IRI

No-Go Central Processing = Stimulus classification

Figure 4. A model of TTXXT and TXXTT conditions

903

Time (ms)

Total.Dwell = SE1 + Prep + RS*n - (SEn+1 + S)
The last term subtracts off that portion of the final RS
where the eyes have moved to Sn+1. Here we use the
TTTXX condition with n = 3. Because the model is
stochastic we cannot be certain which elements will emerge
on the critical path every run. For this estimate we assumed
that in the majority of cases the critical path would be
determined by the completion of RS stages (though it is
possible the an SE stage will be delayed putting it on the
critical path). Therefore the total time fixated would be
equal to the total time minus the eye movement to the last
stimulus. Because fixation duration is relatively constant
across items, dwell times could be estimated by dividing the
total fixation time by 3. We can compute the average Lag
required to complete SE(n+1) at approximately the same
time as RS(n) by

Observed EH-Span

Simulated EH-Span

S1 S2 S3 S4

S1 S2 S3 S4

1000
900
800
700
600

Time (ms)

Time (ms)

Observed Dwell Time

Saccade Lag = Total.Dwell / 3 – IS – SE.

Simulation Results
Each model parameter was assigned a Gaussian standard
deviation roughly equal to 25% of the mean. In simulations
the model drew random durations from a Gaussian
distribution with the indicated mean and standard deviation.
Comparison of model predictions with observed data are
shown in Figures 2 and 5. Model means are based on Monte
Carlo simulations of 1000 trials.
The qualitative fits of the model are moderately good,
accurately reflecting the main trends in the RT/IRI data, the
decreasing trends in the EH-span and RH-span data, but
failing to capture variances in dwell times. Although the
model did yield different dwell times for Go and No-Go
stimuli (465 ms versus 335 ms), it did not produce the
pushback effects (not shown). To assess how well the model
quantitatively follows the pattern of the data we ran
correlations between simulated and observed values for
RT/IRI, EHS, Dwell, and RHS. To assess overall precision,
Root Mean Square Error was computed. For these analyses,
mean times for all conditions were pooled for each
dependent measure. For RT/IRI, R = 0.95, RMSE = 93 ms;
for EHS, R = 0.74, RMSE = 68 ms; for Dwell, R= 0.36,
RMSE = 36 ms; for RHS, R = 0.89, RMSE = 61 ms.

Simulated Dwell Time

600
500
400
300
200
S1 S2 S3 S4

S1 S2 S3 S4

Observed RH-Span

Simulated RH-Span

S1 S2 S3 S4

S1 S2 S3 S4

500
400
300
200
100

Figure 5. Observed and simulated eye-hand spans, dwell
times, and release-hand spans data of Wu et al. (2004)
difficulty. Here we extended that model to fit existing data
where stimuli were of unequal difficulty. Specifically, data
represented different response selection demands that arose
from the presence of dummy, or No-Go characters within a
sequence of 5 characters to which participants did not
respond. The model for heterogeneous trials retains the core
logic of the homogenous case. Participants are assumed to
establish a program that generates saccades at regular
intervals. On No-Go trials an override is issued to the
saccade execution system, which commands a saccade at
that time. Thus, the model assumes the just-in-time goal
remains in effect but can only be achieved on Go trials.
Moderately good qualitative fits to observed response
time and oculomotor data were obtained. The model
required four statistics from the empirical data to compute
parameter estimates: RT1 for S1, RT1 for S2, IRI, and total
response time for XTTTX trials. Thus, the model fits rather
than predicts the data. Nonetheless, the success of such a
simple model shows that in principle it is possible to
construct the extended sequence from assumptions about the
scheduling of underlying component operations, at least for
regular, ordered sequences such as text. The model also
suggests a dual-control approach where a succession of
saccades is made by means of an open-loop pathway that
generates saccades at a periodic rate and a close-loop
pathway that intervenes to command a saccade on the basis
of processed information.
This construction is similar to the SWIFT model that
Engbert et al. (2005) developed to account for eye
movements in reading. There too the data are well fit by a
dual-control assumption in which regular saccade execution

General Discussion
We have previously presented a stochastic model that
described how manual and ocular responses are generated in
performing a sequence of linearly arrayed choice response
time tasks (Remington et al., 2006). That model assumed
that participants were trying to maintain a steady rate of eye
movements (minimize eye fixation variability) and achieve
an efficient task completion rate (minimize waiting between
central stages) by scheduling eye movements so that
stimulus information would be available at the same time
central processing resources became available. This just-intime assumption produced good approximations to data
from trials where stimuli were of approximately equal
904

can be preempted by higher cognitive control. SWIFT
differs from the present model in the explicit
characterization of the commanded inhibitory signal, meant
to delay the saccade for difficult words. They also derive
movement parameters from assumptions about the
underlying activation of words over space. Such a derivation
has the desirable feature of providing a rigorous state
representation from which decisions to move can be
computed from a well-defined policy, such as speedaccuracy criteria. Yet, it is unclear whether this formulation
provides any significant constraint on the outcomes
possible.
What is the motivation for a dual-control model for
saccade execution? An alternative would be to link saccade
execution directly to the completion of some processing
stage. However, the pattern of relatively constant IRI and
Dwell along with a decreasing RHS suggest that saccade
execution is decoupled to an extent from other underlying
operators. Simply linking saccades to stage completion
tends to prevent this decoupling leading to predicted RHSs
which are flat. Matessa (2004) developed a model of the
homogeneous difficulty version that was also modeled by
Remington et al. (2006). Matessa’s model required an
extension of the ACT-RPM architecture to include an
additional preparation stage. The addition of this stage
provided the needed degrees of freedom to decouple
saccade execution from cognitive and motor operators. It
produced qualitative fits to the data. It is unclear whether
either the homogeneous or heterogeneous difficulty cases
can be modeled in ACT-RPM without ancillary
assumptions.
The use of central bottleneck theory provides a set of
constraints that directly determine the scheduling and
coordination of resources. However, unlike Engbert et al.
(2005) we have yet to develop a representation of the
underlying state of information processing that would allow
us to generate a policy for optimal scheduling of eye
movements. That is, we do not have a treatment that deals
with factors that would affect tradeoffs between accuracy
and duration of central processing, or allow us to estimate
how information accrues or how accrual affects eye
movement times. This is a direction for future work.

Airspace Systems Program, and in part from APL IR&D
funding.

References
Engbert, R., Nuthmann, E. M., Richter, M., & Kliegl, R.
(2005). SWIFT: A Dynamical model of saccade
generation during reading. Psychological Review, 112,
777-813.
Gray, W. D., John, B. E., & Atwood, M. E. (1993). Project
Ernestine: Validating a GOMS analysis for predicting and
explaining real-world task performance. HumanComputer Interaction, 8, 237-309.
John, B., Vera, A., Matessa, M., Freed, M., & Remington,
R.W. 2002. Automating CPM-GOMS. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCHI 2002 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing System: Changing Our World, Changing
Ourselves (pp.147-154). New York: ACM.
Land, M. F., & Hayhoe, M. 2001. In what ways do eye
movements contribute to everyday activities? Vision
Research, 41, 3559-3565.
Land, M. F., & Lee, D. N. 1994. Where we look when we
steer. Nature, 369, 742-744.
Matessa, M. (2004). Anticipatory eye movements in
interleaving templates of human behavior. In M. Lovett,
C. D. Schunn, C. Lebiere, & P. Munro (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Pashler, H. (1994). Overlapping mental operations in serial
performance with preview. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology Section A-Human Experimental
Psychology, 47, 161-191.
Pelz, J., Hayhoe, M., & Loeber, R. 2001. The coordination
of eye, head, and hand movements in natural task.
Experimental Brain Research, 139, 266-277.
Salthouse, T. A., & Ellis, C. L. 1980. Determinants of eyefixation duration. American Journal of Psychology, 93,
207-234.
Vickers, J. N. 1992. Gaze control in putting. Perception, 21,
117-132.
Remington, R. W., Lewis, R., & Wu, S.-C. (2006).
Scheduling mental operations in a multiple-response
sequence: Modeling the effects of a strategy to minimize
variance in the timing of saccades. In D. Fum, F. del
Missier, & A. Stocco (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Cognitive Modeling.
Vera, A., John, B. E., Remington, R. W., Matessa, M.,
Freed, M. A. (2005). Automating human-performance
modeling at the millisecond level. Human-Computer
Interaction, 20, 225-265.
Wu, S.-C., & Remington, R. W. (2004). Coordination of
component mental operations in a multiple-response task.
In S.N. Spencer (Ed.), Proceedings of the Eye Tracking
Research and Applications Symposium 2004. New York:
ACM SIGGRAPH.
Wu, S.-C., Remington, R. W., & Pashler, H. (2004).
Coordination of component mental operations in
sequences of discrete responses. In K. Forbus, D.
Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1476-1481). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Conclusions
We have demonstrated that the patterns of manual responses
and eye movements observed in a linear sequence of choice
RTs can be modeled using a small set of assumptions
derived from central bottleneck theory. While manual
response emerged directly from bottleneck theory, the
pattern of eye movements was accounted for by assuming
two systems: an open-loop system generating saccades at a
periodic rate, and a closed-loop system commanding a
saccade based on stimulus processing. Future work will
focus on testing the generality of this approach across a
wide range of scanning conditions.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by funding from the
Airspace Operations Systems (AOS) Project of NASA's
905

