UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Mate-Choice using Computational Temperature and Dynamically Evolving
Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4cr4k7v5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
French, Robert M.
Kus, Elif T.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Mate-Choice using Computational Temperature
and Dynamically Evolving Representations
Elif T. Kus (elifkus@gmail.com)

Robert M. French (robert.french@u-bourgogne.fr)

Cognitive Science, Bogaziçi University
Istanbul, Turkey

LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, Dijon, France and
Psychology Dept., U. of Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium

generate realistic (i.e. similar to those found in the empirical
literature) population-level behavior (Simao & Todd, 2003;
Todd, Billari & Simao, 2005). We develop a model of matechoice that differs with respect to current mate-choice models
in four major respects — namely:
i) it incorporates context-dependent computational
temperature as a measure (actually, the inverse) of matechoosiness (Jennions & Petrie 1997);
ii) it uses a multi-dimensional vector of values associated
with a number of characteristics, instead of a single
mate-value describing each individual;
iii) it employs a fluid representational structure for potential
mates, allowing the representation of an individual to
evolve over time as new information about that person
becomes available;
iv) it uses subjective mate-values, since mate-value is
largely, although not completely, subjective (“beauty is
in the eye of the beholder”) incorporating empirical
findings on male-female preference profiles for various
characteristics found in their mates (Buss & Barnes,
1986).

Abstract
We present a model of mate-choice (KAMA) that is
based on a gradual, stochastic process of representationbuilding leading to marriage. KAMA reproduces
empirically verifiable population-level mate-selection
behavior
using
individual-level
mate-choice
mechanisms. Individuals have character profiles, which
describe a number of their characteristics (physical
beauty, potential earning power, etc.), as well as
preference profiles, that specify their degree of
preference for those characteristics in members of the
opposite sex. A process of encounters and dating serves
to exchange information and allows accurate
representations of potential mates to be gradually built
up over time. Finally, individuals each have a
“temperature”, which is the extent to which they are
willing to continue exploring mate-space. “Temperature”
(the inverse of mate “choosiness”) drives individual
decision-making in this model. We show that the
individual-level mechanisms implemented in the model
produce population-level data that qualitatively matches
empirical data.

This model qualitatively reproduces empirical data on firstmarriage hazard rates at various ages, male/female marriageage shifts (women initially marry earlier than men), and
changes in marriage-rate curves when pressure to marry early
is decreased. We will, in addition, briefly compare the
performance of KAMA to a family of models developed by
Todd and colleagues (Todd, Billari & Simão, 2005).

Introduction
We present a preliminary model of mate-choice that is based
on a gradual, stochastic process of representation-building
leading to marriage. Our model, KAMA, attempts to
reproduce empirical population-level mate-selection behavior
based on mate-choice mechanisms implemented at the level
of individuals in the population. Our model involves the
interplay of a number of simple, competing pressures and
constraints. Specifically, given a host of physical constraints,
individuals must attempt,:
i) to find as good a mate as possible, given a host of
physical constraints,
ii) in a limited amount of time
iii) with only partial knowledge of the individuals in the
pool of potential candidates
The process of encounters and dating allows individuals to
gradually build up more accurate representations of other
individuals in that population. Since there is insufficient time
to go through the whole mate pool and gather complete
information of the characteristics of all potential mates, matechoice decisions are necessarily based on partial information
(e.g., Miller & Todd, 1998).
We hope to show that a limited number of relatively
simple mechanisms at the individual level are sufficient to
enable individuals to match up appropriately and, in so doing,

Mate-value: Preference-weighted
character profiles

1323

The standard means of quantifying attractiveness in the
context of mate-choice is by a single mate-value. The higher
an individual’s mate-value, the more likely he or she is to
have reproductive success (Ellis, 1992). We have chosen to
model mate-value somewhat differently. First, in contrast to
previous models — in particular, Simão and Todd (2001,
2002, 2003) — we assume a multi-dimensional
characterization of each individual in the population. There
are 13 distinct attributes (plus age) that characterize each
individual in the population and each of these attributes has a
value. We call this set of 13 values, the individual’s character
profile.
In addition, each individual has a preference profile that
specifies how much weight he or she attaches to each
attribute in the character-profile of a mate of the opposite sex
(Buss and Barnes, 1986). Individuals having different

preference-profiles means that perceived mate-value is not the
same across all individuals in the population.
A weighted linear model is assumed for integrating the
characteristics into the mate-value. The mate-value then of a
potential mate, Y, for an individual, X, is computed by
averaging the inner product of X’s preference profile and Y’s
character profile.
Buss and Barnes (1986) studied mate-preferences in
males and females. Their findings showed that, in spite of
significant individual differences, there were certain trends in
the characteristics that males and females valued. In a further
study, Buss also claimed that preferences for at least 60% of
these characteristics were universal (Buss, 1989). We
translated Buss and Barnes’s table of preference rankings into
preference weights. (We made the assumption of a normal
distribution about each mean, from which we draw values
when creating individuals.)
This leads to asymmetric preferences in the men and
women modeled in our simulation. For example, Buss &
Barnes (1986) found that men put considerably more
emphasis on “physical attractiveness” than women, whereas
women place more emphasis on “having a college education”
and “having a good earning capacity.”
A final departure from other models of mate-choice is that
the true mate-value of potential mates is revealed only
gradually, corresponding to the notion that it takes time to get
to know a potential mate. (Until the value of a particular
attribute is known through encounters with the potential mate,
a default value is used.)
To reiterate, all individuals maintain a memory of their
recent dating experience with other individuals in the
population. Mate information (i.e., an individual’s
representations of other potential mates in the population)
improves gradually over time as a function of the number of
contacts between two individuals. Gradual representationbuilding — as opposed to static mate-values which are
displayed for all to see, as in previous mate-choice models —
plays a crucial role in the present model. The current model’s
reliance on a multi-dimensional mate value for each
individual, on observer-dependent (i.e., subjective) matevalues, and gradual representation-building are unique to the
current model.

simulated annealing of Kirkpatrick et al. (1983) in that there
is no pre-set annealing schedule.) Temperature — the inverse
of “mate-choosiness” (Jennions & Petrie, 1997) — is a
measure that depends both on an individual’s recent dating
history and his/her age. The higher the temperature, the more
willing an individual is to explore the space of potential
mates; the lower the temperature, the less willing – generally
meaning that he/she is concentrating on one particular
relationship, largely to the exclusion of others. When both
individuals in a dating relationship have low enough
temperatures, “marriage” occurs and they drop out of the
mate pool.
The model is also stochastic, meaning that essentially all
choices are made probabilistically. So, for example, if one
potential mate has an overall mate-value of 8, and another a
mate-value of 5, the first will not automatically be chosen.
The latter will also have a chance – under some
circumstances, even essentially equal to that of the first
individual – of being chosen.

Males ask, females choose
Darwin (1859, 1871) observed that, in general, in nature the
female makes the final mating decision. Males display
themselves ostentatiously before a female in order to be
chosen as her mate. We assume a similar mate-choice
asymmetry in our model. The male selects someone to ask
out among a number of alternatives; the female then accepts
or declines his invitation immediately upon receiving it. This
necessarily implies that her strategy for accepting or refusing
a date proposition is different from the male’s “parallel”
strategy for deciding whom to ask out among a number of
alternatives.

A run of the program

Search strategies

A run of the simulation starts with 600 individuals (300
males, 300 females) whose ages vary randomly between 18
and 48. Unmarried individual who turn 49 are removed from
the population and replaced with an 18 year-old of the same
sex with default characteristic values. In addition, a number
of individuals amounting to 5% of the total population are
added to the population each “year.” Each year has 52
“weeks” and the program stops after running for 60 years.
At the beginning of each week, 60% of the males
encounter between 1 and 3 randomly chosen females
(depending on the male’s “temperature” – see below) and
exchange a limited amount of information with the
individuals they encounter. Each male maintains a list of all
previously encountered females. If he encounters a female
already on his list, he updates his representation of her. If a
recently encountered female has a particularly good mate
value, she will be put on his list of 5 “potentially datable”
females. He then considers which of the potentially datable
females to ask out for a date. This probabilistic decision (see
below) is based on the temperature-biased (subjective) matevalue of each of the females on his list of potentially datable
females list. If the female he asks out immediately either
accepts or refuses his offer. The female makes her decision
based on her (temperature-biased) evaluation of the proposing
male’s mate-value, relative to that of other males she has
recently dated (see below).

Individuals in the present model explore the mate pool by
means of a parallel exploration strategy – the so-called
parallel terraced scan (Hofstadter, 1984) – that gradually
becomes more and more focused on those individuals of the
opposite sex with the highest mate values who are willing to
go out with them. The willingness of an individual to proceed
with this search depends on an internal parameter called
temperature. (Hofstadter, 1984, Hofstadter et al., 1995,
proposed the related notions of a parallel terraced scan and
context-dependent computational temperature in the context
of the modeling of analogy-making. Further development of
these notions can be found in Mitchell, 1993 and French,
1995. N.B.: This differs from the notion of temperature in the
1324

After acceptance or refusal of a date, the temperature of the
individuals involved is updated. If the temperature of both the
man and woman on a date is below a (pre-set) threshold
value, they marry and leave the population. All unmarried
individuals repeat the encounter-dating-marriage cycle until
60 years have passed.

Date proposal and date acceptance/refusal
Males ask females out and females accept or decline their
offers. The details of these two distinct strategies are as
follows.
Asking for a date (males)
The male’s decision to ask a particular female out is
based on his subjective perception of her mate-value (i.e.,
based on his own preference profile) biased by his current
temperature (the inverse of choosiness). Individual females
with higher subjective mate-values have, in general, a higher
probability of being chosen (unless the male’s temperature is
very high – i.e., choosiness very low – in which case, the
choice is essentially a uniform random one). The level of
choosiness makes the process of choosing a female more or
less discriminating. Assuming that the subset of females to
pick from is the last R females either encountered or dated
(i.e, contacts), the probability that Malei will ask out Femalej
is calculated as follows:

Pij =

( MV j )Chi
R

∑ ( MV
n =1

jn

)Chi

where:
Pij is the probability of Malei asking Femalej out
MVj is the mate-value of Female j
R is the total number of recent contacts by Malei
jn are the indices of the R potentially datable females,
Chi is the choosiness of Male i. (i.e., Chi = 1/Ti).
Note that when Chi is 1 (the normal default level of
choosiness), then the probability of selecting of a potential
mate is her mate-value divided by the sum of the mate-values
of the 5 females on the male’s list of potentially datable
females. However, if the choosiness value becomes very low
(i.e., temperature very high: “I don’t
20
1
=
= 0 . 33
2 0 + 3 00 + 5 0
3
3
1
Pr( F 2 ) = 0
=
= 0 . 33
2 + 300 + 5 0
3
5
1
Pr( F 3 ) = 0
=
= 0 . 33
2 + 30 + 50
3
Pr( F1 ) =

Not choosy
at all

21
2
=
= 0 .2
2 1 + 31 + 51
10
31
3
Pr( F 2 ) = 1
=
= 0 .3
2 + 31 + 51
10
51
5
Pr( F 3 ) = 1
=
= 0 .5
2 + 31 + 51
10
Pr( F 1 ) =

Accepting/rejecting an offer (females)
A male has asked a particular female out. She must now
decide whether or not to accept his offer. She cannot postpone
her reply and choose among many offers. She must say yes or
no to the current offer immediately. This requires a different
decision-making procedure than the “parallel” (i.e., choice
among many) procedure used by the male to decide whom to
ask out. Her stochastic decision mechanism is as follows:
Each female has a record of the mate-values of her
previous dates. The mean and variance of these mate-values
are used to calculate a normal distribution, which provides
her with a rough estimate of the distribution of mate-values of
the kind of males likely to ask her out. It also allows her to
situate her potential suitor with respect to other males she has
gone out with in the past. Thus, where her new suitor’s matevalue falls on this normal curve will determine her probability
of accepting a date with him (Figure 2).
The proposing male has an unadjusted subjective matevalue that must now be adjusted based on the female’s level
of choosiness. If she is very choosy (she is already seeing a
great guy regularly and only a real superstar will interest her),
she will adjust his MV to fall to the left of where it normally
would fall, thus decreasing her probability of accepting his
offer. If, on the other hand, she is not particularly choosy (she
just wants to have a date on Friday night), she will adjust her
suitor’s mate-value upwards, thereby increasing the
probability of her accepting his offer.
The temperature-adjusted mate-value of her suitor is
calculated as follows:

MV 'i = MVi + k log(T j )
where: MVi ′ is the adjusted mate-value of her suitor, Malei

MVi is the unadjusted mate-value of her suitor, Malei
T j is the Temperature of Femalej who was asked out

25
32
=
= 0 . 01
2 + 35 + 55
3400
35
243
Pr( F 2 ) = 5
=
= 0 . 07
3400
2 + 35 + 55
55
3125
Pr( F 3 ) = 5
=
≈ 0 . 92
2 + 35 + 55
3400
Pr( F 1 ) =

Very
choosy

Average
choosiness

care who I ask out, as long as I ask someone for a date.”),
then selection is essentially independent of mate-value: any
candidate is equally likely to be chosen. If, on the other hand,
choosiness, Chi, is high (i.e., temperature low: “I want to be
sure to ask out only the woman with the highest mate-value”),
then the temperature equation will ensure that the highest
mate-value will completely dominate the other values and the
female with this value will be chosen with an extremely high
probability, i.e., essentially deterministically.
Figure 1 gives a simple example of how the temperature
mechanism works. Assume there are three potential
candidates to pick from, having raw mate-values of 2, 3, of 5.
So, even though the raw mate-value of F3 remains unchanged,
the probability of selection of F3 goes from 1/3 (high
temperature, i.e., not choosy at all) to 0.92 (low temperature;
i.e., very choosy).

5

k is a constant

Figure 1. From random selection to quasi-deterministic
selection of F3 depending on temperature.
1325

Prob. of
accepting
the date

MVadjusted = 3.5

(Dunson, Colombo & Baird, 2002), and, as a consequence, it
is reasonable to assume that a less selective mate-choice
strategy would be adopted by females from age 30 onwards.
It is known (Pawlowski & Dunbar, 1999), for example, that
women make increased efforts (that include age-deception) to
meet men after age 35. Consequently, females in our model
are most willing to commit quickly to marriage at around age
30, more so than at, say, 20 or in their menopausal and postmenopausal years (i.e., 45 and over). For men, with no
biological clock to worry about, there is no peak fall-off at
around 30. The Temperature graph in Figure 3 shows how
these two variables combine for males. (For females, the
decrease in Temperature due to the Number of Dates is
steepest at around age 30.)

Downward shift of
perceived matevalue because of
low temperature
(high choosiness).

MVraw = 4.0

Figure 2. The female adjusts mate-value as a function of
temperature.
T starts high

The idea is that when the female’s choosiness is high (i.e.,
low temperature, T<1), the perceived mate-value of a
potential suitor shifts downward, making it less likely for her
to accept a date offer by him. Adding klog(T) to the original
mate-value when T < 1 decreases the original mate-value and
makes it less likely for her to accept a date proposition; when
T >1, adding this factor increases the original mate-value,
making it more likely for her to accept his proposition.

T falls fastest around
35 with the number of
dates with the same
person

Choosiness – Computational Temperature
Each individual has a context-dependent computational
temperature. As we have seen, temperature corresponds
exactly to the inverse of an choosiness in mate-search and
mate-selection. The lower the temperature, the higher the
individual’s choosiness and vice-versa. Temperature is
affected by two factors — namely:
• Age of the individual
• Length of current relationship (i.e., number of dates
with the same individual)
The underlying assumption of the age factor of
temperature is that, initially, in one’s late teens and early 20’s,
there is a considerable expenditure in time and energy to meet
members of the opposite sex (a fact that hardly needs
documentation!). This then falls as one becomes involved in
other pursuits, principally career pursuits, and then gradually
rises again as one gets older and is still without a permanent
mate.
For the second factor, the length of one’s current
relationship, we assume that one’s willingness to commit
(i.e., settle on one individual — i.e., marry — and no longer
explore mate space for a potential mate) after a certain
number of dates with the same individual is not the same at
20-25 as it is at a later age. Further, we assume that there is a
difference in this regard between men and women, because of
the problem for women’s “ticking biological clock” that
prevents them from conceiving children after a certain age.
Women’s fertility begins to drop in her late 20’s, and by 40,
the chance of getting pregnant is less than 10 percent

Figure 3. Female’s Temperature as a function of Age and
Number of Dates with the same male. Successively lines
indicate number of dates. The Male temperature function is
similar without the rise in temperature at 35.

Results
The goal of the present model is to explain how populationlevel empirical data can arise from a series of simple,
psychologically plausible, stochastic choice mechanisms,
coupled with evolving representations. To test KAMA, we
drew on empirical data from Todd, et al. (2005), which they
derived from data from the Eurostat, New Cronos database.
We have followed Todd et al. (2005) in using a statistic called
the hazard-rate to measure marriage rates for each age for
during a given year. Marriage hazard-rate is calculated as
follows. For a particular year, the marriage hazard-rate for a
given age is the proportion of people of that age who married
that year.

Overall first-marriage hazard-rates

1326

We plotted a combined male-female hazard-rate functions for
Norwegians in 1978. We created this curve by averaging the
curves for Norwegian men and women from 1978. Figure 4
compares KAMA’s results (averaged over 20 runs of the
program) to this data. Clearly, the output of the simulation is a
close match to the empirical data.
We compared the above empirical data to data produced
by three parameter settings of a recent model by Todd et al.

(2005) that made it most closely resemble our own model.
The results are shown in Figure 4b (all graphs drawn to the
same scale, which was not the case in Todd et al., 2005). The
dotted curve once again represents the empirical data from
Norway 1978.

Females

0. 18
0. 16
0. 14

Males

0. 12
0. 1
0. 08

0.16

0. 06

KAMA Data
Norway 1978 yyyyyy

0.14
0.12

0. 04
0. 02
0

0.1

18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48

0.08

Figure 6a. Marriage hazard-rate curves for men and women
produced by KAMA. Males marry on average 1.3 years later
than females in the model.

0.06
0.04
0.02
0
18

23

28

33

38

43

The Effect of the Males-Ask/Females Decide
Strategy on First-Marriage Hazard-Rates

48

Figure 4a. Overall marriage hazard rates for Norway in 1978
and KAMA’s output.

Somewhat surprisingly, the model indicated that, even if the
temperature curves for males and females were identical and,
in addition, the preference-profiles for men and women were
also identical, the strategy of Males-Ask/Females-Decide
will, alone, engender a male-female hazard-rate shift, with
males marrying later (Fig. 6b).

0.16
0.14

Norway 1978
Data

0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06

0.25

Females

0.04

0.2

0.02

0.15

0
18

23

28

33

38

43

48

0.1

Figure 4b Marriage hazard rate comparison for Norway data
(dotted red curve) and three different settings of Todd et al.’s
model (2005, Figs. 4b, 5b, & 6).

0.05

Males

0

Male-female marriage hazard-rate shift
Figure 6b. Marriage hazard-rate curves for males and
females with no difference in preference profiles or
temperature curves.. The difference in average marrying age
is approximately 0.5 years.

We also analyzed these marriage hazard-rate data for 1978
separately by sex. A male-female shift can be seen in the
empirical data. This is because between the ages of 18 and 28
significantly more women marry than men.

This is due to the fact that as each new 18-year-old women
enters the population, she can be asked out by men whose
ages range from ages 18 to 48. Among these men, there is a
relatively high probability that she will find a compatible
mate quickly and, if this happens, that mate will, more than
likely, be older than she is.

Effect of Decreased Pressure to Marry
Figure 5. Initial leftward shift of the hazard-rate curve for
women as a result of an approximately 2 year difference in
age with their husbands.

The social acceptability of the cohabitation of unmarried
couples has grown since around the middle of the 1970’s. As
a consequence, living together without being married became
a considerably more common practice, meaning an overall
decrease in the marriage-threshold temperature. Individuals
living together are still in the mating pool, leading to a
flattening of the hazard-rate curve (Figure 7).

KAMA achieved the same leftward and upward shift of the
hazard-rate curve for women that is observed in the empirical
data (Figure 6a).

1327

more sophisticated versions that will allow it to explore a
much wider range of questions, including those involving
changing selection strategies, as well as geographical and
sociological constraints on the pool of potential mates.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded in part by Framework 6 European
Commission Grant NEST 516542 to the first author.
Figure 7. The increased social acceptability of unmarried
cohabitation flattens of the marriage hazard-rate curve.
Decreasing the marriage-threshold temperature in our model
does, indeed, produce the expected flattening of the firstmarriage hazard-rate curve.
0.18

Thresh. temp: 1.5

0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06

Thresh. temp: 1

0.04
0.02
0
18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

40

42

44

46

48

Figure 8. By modifying the marriage-threshold temperature,
KAMA qualitatively matches the Norway 1978-1998 shift in
marriage hazard-rates.

Conclusions
In this paper we have presented a mate choice model that
incorporates a number of novel representational features and
stochastic, temperature-driven individual decision-making
mechanisms. We have replaced the notion that each
individual has an intrinsic single mate-value with a “beauty in
the eye of the beholder” principle. This means each individual
has a set of preference weights corresponding to the
descriptive characteristics of members of the opposite sex. In
this way, the same individual will have a different mate-value
depending on who is observing him or her. Further,
individuals do not gain access to information about potential
mates all at once, as in other models, but, rather, gradually,
over the course of numerous contacts of various duration.
Crucially, we have incorporated “computational temperature”,
inversely related to the variable called “mate choosiness” in
the literature, that controls the focus of decision-making. High
temperatures give decision-making a more random character;
low temperatures produce more focused, deterministic
decision-making.
The modest and preliminary results presented in this paper
seem to show that a model constructed with individual-level
mechanisms similar to those described here is capable of
accurately reproducing empirical population-level marriagerate data. We believe that the underlying structure of this
model will allow relatively straightforward development of

References
Buss, D. M. (1989). Sex differences in human mate selection:
Evolutionary hypotheses tested in 37 cultures. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 12(1), 1-49.
Buss, M. D., Barnes, M. (1986). Preferences in Human Mate
Selection, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
50(3), 559-570.
Dunson, D., Colombo, B., & Baird, D. (2002). Changes with age
in the level and duration of fertility in the menstrual cycle.
Human Reproduction, 17(5). 1399-1403.
Ellis, B. J. (1992). The evolution of sexual attraction: evaluative
mechanisms in women. In Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby
(Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the
generation of culture. New York: Oxford University Press.
French, R. M. (1995) . The Subtlety of Sameness. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1984). The Copycat project: An experiment in
nondeterminism and creative analogies. AI Memo No. 755,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Hofstadter, D. R. et al. (1995). Fluid Concepts and Creative
Analogies. New York: Basic Books.
Jennions M.D., Petrie M. (1997). Variation in mate choice and
mating preferences: a review of causes and consequences.
Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society,
72, 283-327.
Kirkpatrick, S, Gelatt, C, Vecchi, M. (1983). Optimization by
Simulated Annealing. Science 220, 671.
Miller, G. F., Todd, P. M. (1998). Mate choice turns cognitive.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 190-198.
Mitchell, M. (1993). Analogy-making as Perception. Cambridge:
The MIT Press.
Pawlowski, B. & Dunbar, R., (1999). Withholding age as
putative deception in mate search tactics. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 20, 53–69.
Simão, J., Todd, P. M. (2001). A Model of Human Mate Choice
with Courtship that Predicts Population Patterns, in
“Advances in Artificial Life, 6th. European Conference,
ECAL 2001.J. Kelemen, P. Sosík (Eds.), Springer, Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence 2159.
Simão, J., Todd, P. M. (2002). Modeling Mate Choice in
Monogamous Mating Systems with Courtship, Journal of
Adaptive Behavior, 10(2).
Simão, J., Todd, P. M. (2003). Emergent Patterns of Mate
Choice in Human Populations, special issue of Journal of
Artificial Life, 9(4).
Todd, P.M., Billari, F.C., and Simão, J. (2005). Aggregate ageat-marriage patterns from individual mate-search heuristics.
Demography, 42(3), 559-574.

1328

