UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Emotion: Arousal's Impact on Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5rg324h1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Chown, Eric
Cochran, Robert E.
Lee, Frank J.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Emotion: Arousal’s Impact on Memory
Robert E. Cochran (rec38@drexel.edu)
Drexel University, Department of Computer Science
3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Frank J. Lee (fjl@cs.drexel.edu)
Drexel University, Department of Computer Science
3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Eric Chown (echown@bowdoin.edu)
Bowdoin College,
Brunswick, Maine 04011 USA

of the interaction of arousal and memory, and this work is
described in the sections that follow.

Abstract
It is generally accepted that an integrated cognitive
architecture is required to fully explain complex functions of
the brain such as learning and behavior. However, typical
architectures do not include a theory of emotion. This article
proposes a framework of emotion suitable for inclusion in an
integrated architecture and examines the impact of arousal on
memory and how a particular architecture that does not
account for emotion fails to accurately model a classic
psychological experiment. Simulations and memory models
are also presented that account for arousal’s impact on
memory.

Modeling Emotion
Emotions are often tied to appraisals. Fear, for example,
can be seen as a reaction to a prediction of danger. The
emotional model we are pursuing is in line with this point
of view except that the “appraisals” are not cognitive, but
are instead mechanistic. Pain, for example, is a simple
“appraisal” mechanism that is crucial to emotions. This
model, put forth by Chown and others (Chown, 2006;
Kaplan, 1991), posits that emotions are a fast, automatic
assessment system consisting of three core parts or
mechanisms: m1: an arousal system that provides a
measure of importance, m2: a pleasure/pain system that
assesses valence, and m3: a clarity/confusion system that
provides a measure of competence. All of these
components are automatic (one does not decide to be
confused for example), but can be affected by cognition.
These mechanisms are chosen due to their ability to model
a broad range of the emotional spectrum and can be used as
a foundation for looking at how cognition and emotion
interact. Typical emotional tags (angry, sad, happy) can be
generated through a mapping of these mechanisms: (f: m1 x
m2 x m3 ö tag).

Introduction
The breadth and complexity of our emotions are critical to
our human experience. In many ways, the sensation or
feeling of these emotions is what makes life worth living.
These emotions also provide adaptive advantages important
for our well being and survival. They facilitate a
compacting of our experience that can result in a fast and
desirable decision without requiring a substantial amount of
time for deliberation. This effect can be critical when a
quick decision is necessary but all the relevant information
is either not available or the time required to process would
be too great.
It is our belief that emotion should be included as an
integral component of any integrated cognitive architecture
that strives to provide a rich and accurate explanation and
framework for the emulation of human cognition. Such a
model would have many applications in either an analysis
or synthesis mode, including behavioral finance, interactive
entertainment, automotive telematics, and computer
assisted education.

The figure below illustrates how these mechanisms can be
viewed in a 3-state space and how the model may drive
these states over time in response to various stimuli.

Therefore, development is underway of a comprehensive
computational model of emotion that is targeted at
integration with cognition. This model is being formulated
in terms of general mechanisms of the emotional system
that interact with cognition and provide a mapping to
typical emotional states, such as anger and happiness. An
early step in this development is an analysis and simulation

Figure 1: Representation of Emotion

1133

The inter-relationship of these mechanisms are shown in the
figure below. The pleasure/pain and clarity/confusion
mechanisms are separated in the figure to depict their
inhibitory relationships (e.g., a highly pleasurable stimulus
may effectively negate minor pain stimuli). Each
mechanism processes its own set of stimuli, which may
include the state of another mechanism. For example, the
clarity/confusion mechanism provides input to the
pleasure/pain mechanism. Stimuli can be physically
external (e.g., hearing a gun shot), internal (e.g., pain in
stomach), and as a result of cognitive appraisal.

Regardless of their role in the overall emotional
architecture, all of these mechanisms are crucial in driving
human behavior. This article focuses specifically on
arousal, which forms the basis of the emotional model and,
from our point of view, is most significant in its effects to
changes in human behavior and performance.
Future articles will expand this work and explore the other
mechanisms in pursuit of a comprehensive computational
model.

Arousal and Memory
A recent study on the brain and behavior (Garey,
Goodwillie, J. Frohlich, et al, 2003) defined arousal as
being more “responsive to a wide variety of external stimuli
spanning sensory modalities” and being more “motorically
active”. Conforming with this definition, arousal can also
be viewed as a call to action with the other emotional
mechanisms providing direction. For example, pain,
whether physical or cognitive, facilitates an increase in
arousal and impacts behavior and goal setting in such a way
to bring about a change in behavior to alleviate the pain.
A familiar effect of arousal is the inverted ‘U’ performance
curve, which was first documented by Yerkes and Dodson
(1908). As the following figure shows, there is an optimal
level of arousal related to performance. This optimal level
is a mid range of arousal in contrast to too little arousal,
which facilitates a lethargic condition that can inhibit
motivation, and too much arousal, which facilitates a
hyperactive condition that can inhibit concentration.
Performance in this sense is applicable to both memory and
learning (Sherwood, 1965) as well as task execution. When
arousal is high, tasks that require a relatively high cognitive
workload (complexity) or are less well-learned are less
likely to be pursued. However, high levels of arousal can
increase the likelihood that physically demanding tasks
(e.g. running) will be pursued.

Figure 2: Emotional Mechanisms

Performance

Another way to view these mechanisms is in terms of their
evolutionary development. Borrowing from Damasio’s tree
metaphor (2003), the figure below depicts the evolutionary
levels of our model with the trunk (arousal) being the most
basic level. In contrast to Damasio’s view, we do not
include basic bodily functions, such as metabolic regulation
and immune responses, in our model.

Figure 4: Inverted U Curve
Regarding memory, high arousal during encoding can
facilitate long term retention, but it is also associated with
an inability to retrieve information for a short period of time
(up to about 30 minutes) following the original encoding.
A classic paired associate experiment performed by
Kleinsmith and Kaplan (1963) revealed this impact of
arousal on memory by performing memory tests on subjects
while monitoring arousal levels. The details of the
experiment are summarized below:
Figure 3: Evolutionary Levels of Emotion

1134

•
•

Kleinsmith and Kaplan (1964) later replicated the study
using nonsense syllables instead of emotionally charged
stimulus and documented similar results to the original
study. These effects were also seen by Levonian (1967) in
a study of 83 high school students who were presented
continuous material while being monitored by GSR sensors.
It was found again that high arousal (deflection from
nominal) facilitated short term forgetting and long term
(one week) remembering.
Low arousal showed the
converse effect. Gray, Braver, and Raichle (2001) recently
studied the impact of arousal accompanied by pleasure and
pain and found that an unpleasant, highly aroused
emotional state impaired short term verbal memory. They
also found that a stronger emotional induction led to a
stronger performance effect.

48 subjects were divided into 6 groups of 8.
Each subject participated in a single learning trial of 8
words with a paired association of a number between 2
and 9. The words used were kiss, rape, vomit, exam,
dance, money, love, and swim.
The ordering of the stimulus was unique to each
member in a group.
A stimulus was first presented for 4 seconds followed
by the presentation of the paired number with the
stimulus.
This was repeated eight times and color slides were
presented to the subject in between each test. The
subjects were not told that they would be tested for
paired associate recall.
A galvanic skin response (GSR) recording device was
attached to each subject during the experiment. The
levels were recorded during display of the stimulus.
This level was used to determine which words caused
high arousal during encoding. The three highest arousal
words were grouped into a high arousal category. The
three lowest arousal words were grouped into a low
arousal category. The results of the middle two words
were discarded.
Each group was later tested for recall at different times:
1 week, 1 day, 45 minutes, 20 minutes, and 2 groups at
2 minutes. The order of stimulus presentation during
recall was varied.

•
•
•

•

•

Model
Our goal is to model the results of the Kleinsmith and
Kaplan experiment utilizing a model that can predict both
the low arousal and high arousal results. The simulation
environment utilized is Matlab, and the memory model
utilized is from ACT-R (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998).
It is important to note that there have been other efforts to
add elements of emotion to ACT-R through manipulation of
the parameters within the conflict resolution algorithm1.
Ritter, Avraamides, Councill et al., (2002) have shown that
emotional labels such as threatened and worried can be
modeled by varying parameters as a way to model the level
of motivation and clarity of thought. Belavkin (2001)
provided an explanation of the aforementioned inverted U
curve. Performance was in terms of speed of learning and
arousal was modeled by varying parameters within the
conflict resolution algorithm.

Figure 5 shows the recall performance from the experiment
for the high arousal word group and low arousal word
group. The results for the low arousal word group show a
familiar forgetting / decay curve; however, the results for
the high arousal word group show that recall actually
improved with time. For the first 20 minutes, a blocking
effect can be observed relative to the low arousal group but
then the recall performance improves drastically and
approaches the short duration recall performance of the low
arousal
group.
These
results
demonstrate
the
aforementioned effects of short-term blocking and longterm reminiscence due to high arousal.

Within ACT-R, (declarative) memory is represented by
chunks. Every chunk in ACT-R has associated with it an
activation level. When a retrieval request is made of the
memory system, the chunk with the greatest activation
among those that match a retrieval specification is
retrieved. However, there is a retrieval threshold that
specifies the minimum activation level of a chunk for
retrieval. If the chunk with the highest activation among
those that match the request has an activation level less than
the retrieval threshold, then a failure to retrieve will occur.

0.5
0.45
0.4

Percent Recalled

0.35
high arousal
low arousal

0.3

The equation for the activation Ai of a chunk i is defined
as2:

0.25

Ai = Bi + ε

0.2

Bi: The base-level activation.

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0
10

1

10

2

3

10
10
Time in Minutes

4

10

5

10

1

Conflict resolution is embedded in the procedural module, and
the memory model is embedded in the declarative module.
2
Similarity and Source Activation are ignored

Figure 5: Results of Experimental Study

1135

є: Noise. The noise is composed of two components: a
permanent noise associated with each chunk and an
instantaneous noise computed at the time of retrieval.
The equation for base-level activation for chunk i is:

As Figure 6 shows, the current ACT-R memory model is
not adequate for predicting the recall results of the high
arousal word grouping. In order to do so, a memory model
that increases activation with time is needed. This can be
accomplished by replacing the decay parameter with a
growth parameter (negative decay rate) and implementing a
ceiling for activation after 45 minutes. This ceiling
represents that the memory no longer continues to increase
or decrease (at least at the same rate) once it is deeply
encoded and the short term blocking effect has dissipated.
The growth parameter generates an increase in memory
activation as time proceeds between encoding and
attempted recall. Figure 7 shows a simulation of memory
encoding and recall using the modified activation equation
with the growth parameter (-d) set to 0.04. 500 memory
encoding and recall cycles were simulated using a noise
variance of 0.15. Also, a base level constant (BLC) of -4.5
was added in the activation equation.

n

Bi = ln(∑ t −j d )
j =1

n: Number of presentations for chunk i.
tj: Time since presentation j.
d: Decay parameter
This equation describes a process in which each time an
item is presented there is an increase in its base-level
activation, which decays away as a power function of the
time since that presentation3.
Note that arousal is not a parameter to the activation
equation; therefore, it is somewhat intuitive that this
existing formula will not be adequate for modeling both the
low arousal and high arousal performance curves. Figure 6
compares the ACT-R activation curve from a single
encoding (presentation) with the Kleinsmith and Kaplan
results4. The ACT-R decay parameter (d) is set to 0.05 for
the simulation.

0.45
simulated
experimental results

0.4

Percent Recalled

0.35

As might be expected, the ACT-R activation slope closely
follows the low arousal group curve, which might be as
expected for a decay based model. The high arousal recall
performance is shown to be drastically different. The high
arousal words were poorly recalled at 2 minutes and 20
minutes (short term) but were recalled at a much higher
percentage at 45 minutes, 1 day, and 1 week (long term).

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
10

1

10

2

3

10
10
Time in Minutes

4

10

5

10

Figure 7: Simulation Results
0.5

It is interesting to note that this function utilizing a growth
parameter (negative decay) closely follows the
experimental results and that the growth parameter (0.04) is
very close to the negative of the decay (0.05) that was used
previously to follow the low arousal group curve.

0.45
0.4

Percent Recalled

0.35
0.3

high arousal
low arousal
act-r activation

0.25

Discussion

0.2

Additional data on specific arousal levels (relative to a
baseline) during encoding and retrieval are needed for the
specification of a robust general memory model. However,
we sketch a model proposal using the previous results and
the findings from Gray, Braver, and Raichle (2002) that
show that a stronger affect facilitates a more pronounced
behavioral effect. It is important to note that one of the
goals of this general model is that it will simplify to the
original ACT-R equation when arousal is set to its nominal
level.

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0
10

1

10

2

3

10
10
Time in Minutes

4

10

5

10

Figure 6: Experimental Results vs. ACT-R

3

There are three types of events that are considered a presentation
of a chunk: creation, merging, and retrieval.
4
0.5 is added to the ACT-R activation for display purposes

5

A normal distribution is utilized instead of a logistic distribution
(as utilized in ACT-R).

1136

We first propose that the base level activation decay
parameter (d) should be some function of arousal at time of
encoding. The decay rate should increase for lower arousal
levels and turn into a growth parameter (g = -d) for higher
arousal levels.
n

Bi = ln(∑ t
j =1

Figure 9 depicts one hundred simulations with arousal
normally distributed about 0.5 utilizing a standard deviation
of 0.2.
-0.2

−d ( a )
j

arousal is distributed about 0.5

)
-0.25

Activation

Next, we propose a definition of d(a) as a linear function of
arousal (a), a high arousal threshold (ah), and a scale
parameter (s):
n

Bi = ln(∑ t −j d s (1−a / ah ) ) − (a − an )
j =1

ds: scaled decay (growth) parameter: s * d
a: arousal at the time of encoding; 0 § a § 1
an: nominal arousal
ah: high arousal threshold

-0.45

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
Time in Minutes

70

80

90

100

Figure 9: General Model
As stated previously, the modeling of arousal is an early
step in an effort to develop a comprehensive computational
model of emotion integrated within a theory of cognition.
Arousal is one way in which the emotional system provides
automatic direction of behavior. Arousal can be seen as a
kind of importance gage, which is discussed more
thoroughly in a companion paper (Chown, 2006).

For example, we set the parameters as follows: ds = 3*d;
an = 0.5; ah = 0.75, which gives us the following equation:

Important events should be remembered, and different
behavioral strategies should be employed based upon the
level of importance. The next steps will be to expand and
refine the work on arousal and examine computationally the
impact of pleasure and pain.

n

Bi = ln(∑ t −j 3*d (1− a / 0.75) ) − (a − 0.5)
j =1

Figure 8 depicts a simulation of this general activation
function over time for three levels of a using a decay rate of
0.05. This model provides considerable blocking for high
arousal in the first few minutes and relatively strong
activation after 20 minutes. A ceiling function was not
utilized in this simulation but could be easily added.

Pleasure and pain provide an organism with a measure of
valence – pleasurable outcomes are preferred over painful
results. This suggests that organisms will work to stop
feeling pain and avoid future pain while trying to continue
to feel pleasure and seeking to get pleasure in the future.
Of the three parts of the emotional system proposed in our
model the pleasure/pain system is the most highly studied
both within cognitive science and also mathematically
(most machine learning systems can be cast in terms of
pleasure and pain, and reinforcement learning is directly
inspired by the relationship of pleasure and pain to
behavior).

-0.1

-0.2

Activation

-0.35

-0.4

Arousal (a) can vary between 0 (e.g., sleep) and 1 (full
arousal). The exponent to tj becomes a growth parameter
when arousal is high (a > ah), and the decay accelerates
when arousal is low (a < ah). The equation defaults to the
ACT-R activation equation when arousal is set to its
nominal level and decay is scaled to the inverse of the (1a/ah) term. The term outside the log function (a – an)
provides initial blocking for high arousal levels.

arousal = 0.5 (nominal)
arousal = 0.1
arousal = 0.9

-0.3

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

The final part of our emotional model is the least well
understood in terms of mechanism. Clarity and confusion
are important to decision making agents because they
provide a rough measure of competence (Kaplan, 1991).
When the world and one’s model of the world are in sync
then one’s model is likely to provide the basis of sound
decisions. It is relatively simple to see how such a
mechanism would work at the neural level – focused neural

-0.6

-0.7

-0.8

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
Time in Minutes

70

80

90

100

Figure 8: General Model, Three Levels of Arousal

1137

Chown, E. (2006). Emotions as Adaptive Behavior.
Submitted to Cognitive Science ‘06

activity that results from the confluence of internal and
external input should correspond to clarity. On the other
hand, when internal and external signals are at odds neural
activity should be more diffuse. It is relatively more
difficult to cast this in symbolic terms because it requires
constantly and explicitly monitoring the state of the agents
knowledge structures as measured against what the agent is
perceiving.

Damasio, A. (2003). Looking for Spinoza, Joy, Sorrow, and
the Feeling Brain. Orlando FL: Harcourt Books.
Gray, J. R., Braver, T. S., & Raichle, M. E. (2002).
Integration of emotion and cognition in the lateral
prefrontal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA, 99, 4115 - 4120.

Summary
Emotion is a critical element to being human, and it impacts
cognitive functions like performance, memory, and
behavior. Computer systems that emulate intelligence as
well as cognitive models typically lack this important
element and therefore have difficulty modeling and
predicting human behavior when real-life emotions are at
work outside a laboratory setting.

Kaplan, S. (1991). Beyond rationality: Clarity based
decision-making. In Garling, T. and Evans, G.W., (Eds.)
Environment, Cognition and Action: An Integrated
Approach, pages 171-190. Oxford University Press, New
York
Kleinsmith, L. J. & Kaplan, S. (1963). Paired-associate
learning as a function of arousal and interpolated interval.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65, 190-193.

This paper reviewed a classic experimental psychology
study on arousal and memory, compared its results to what
would be predicted by a memory model typically found in a
cognitive architecture, and then modified the model to
provide a better match against the data. A general memory
model that accounts for arousal was also proposed.

Kleinsmith, L. J. & Kaplan, S. (1964). The interaction of
arousal and recall interval in nonsense syllable paired
associate learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
67, 124-126.
Levonian, E. (1967). Retention of Information in Relation
to Arousal During Continuously-Presented Material.
American Educational Research Journal, 4, 103-116

Acknowledgments
This material is partially based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-0426674
to Dario Salvucci and Frank Lee and Grant No. 0092605 to
Eric Chown. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation (NSF).

Ritter, F. E., Avraamides, M. N., Councill, I. G., Karen S.
Quigley, K. S., and Klein, L. C. (2002) Modeling the
Effects of Two Behavior Moderators in ACT-R.
Workshop on ACT-R Models of Human-System
Interaction.

References

Sherwood, J. J. (1965). A Relation Between Arousal And
Performance. The American Journal of Psychology, 78,
461-465

Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The Atomic
Components of Thought. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Yerkes, R. M. & Dodson, J. D. (1908), The relation of
strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit formation,
Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology, 18,
459–482.

Belavkin, R. V. (2001). Modelling the inverted-U effect with
ACT-R. Proceedings of ICCM, 4.

1138

