UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Non-random Human Performance under Conditions of Lacking Information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0q63t47t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Abdikeev, Niyaz M.
Inui, Toshio
Tarasenko, Sergey S.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Non-random Human Performance under Conditions of Lacking Information
Sergey S. Tarasenko (sergey@cog.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Toshio Inui (inui@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology, Graduate School of Informatics,
Kyoto University, Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan

Niyaz M. Abdikeev (nabd@rea.ru)
Faculty of Informatics, Plekhanov Russian Academy of Economics,
Stremyanny pereulok, 36, Moscow 115998, Russia

processing. Cohen, Ivry and Keele (1990) investigated
attention and structure in SL and control of automatic
processes.
Others have addressed their investigations to the
understanding of mapping between cognitive abilities
involved in SL and neural mechanisms (Cleeremans &
McClelland, 1991; Sun & Peterson, 1998).
An important question relates to whether the implicit and
explicit aspects can be separated one from another. This
question has been answered in the positive, for example, by
Lewicki, Czyzewska and Hoffman (1987) and Willingham
(1998), but nevertheless, situations in which only one aspect
occurs are very rare and demand special conditions (Sun,
Merril & Peterson, 2001).
Most recently, interaction between implicit and explicit
aspects and a connectionist neural network which is able to
model both aspects independently as well as their mutual
interaction were proposed by Sun, Slusarz and Terry (2005).

Abstract
Many researchers have investigated implicit and explicit
aspects in human behaviors. The Sequence Learning (SL)
paradigm is one of the approaches used to investigate these
aspects. The learning performance in SL tasks has been
broadly studied. However, the guessing phenomenon has not
yet been investigated, although it plays important part in a
variety of human behaviors. The SL paradigm was adapted
for the purpose of the guessing phenomenon research and
used as basis for experimental design. The results show that
human performance is non-random under conditions of
lacking information, and both implicit and explicit aspects are
found under these conditions. It further appears that under
these conditions implicit knowledge is related not only to
sequence learning itself, but also is assumed to indicate
pre-knowledge of some kind playing crucial role.
Keywords: sequence prediction; non-random performance;
guessing; sample dynamics.

Introduction

Prediction and Guessing

Over the last few decades, the attention of cognitive
scientists has been attracted to investigation of the concept
of implicit learning in human behavior. Numerous
definitions of implicit learning have been offered and are
listed in a review article by Frensch (1998). As suitable in
the context of the present study we wish to employ here the
following definition: implicit learning implies that
information is acquired without intension and the resulting
knowledge is difficult to express (Dienes & Berry, 1993).
The concept of implicit learning has been investigated
together with another supplementary concept, that of
explicit learning. In contrast to implicit learning explicit
learning implies intentional learning and the resulting
knowledge is easy to express.
Since the terms ‘implicit’ and ‘explicit’ refer both to the
learning process and its resultant knowledge, we will use the
term ‘aspect’ together with these terms to reflect mentioned
duality when speaking in general.
In this context we will refer to the Sequence Learning
(SL) paradigm as one of the approaches proposed to
research implicit and explicit aspects. This paradigm was
first described by Nissen and Bullemer (1987). The main
idea of the SL paradigm is the learning of sequence rules
during a stimulus sequence presentation.
Some researchers have conducted psychological
experiments in frames of the SL paradigm. Lewicki, Hill
and Bizot (1988) investigated non-conscious information

The purpose of all studies cited above was to investigate
knowledge acquisition during the learning process. The
learning process was organized as a stimulus sequence
(event) presentation where elements of stimuli are presented
before a participant or a neural network responds. Thus,
information about the sequence was presented first and the
responses were feedbacks based on sequential information.
In addition, training often preceded an experimental task.
Thus, participants acquired some knowledge before
experimental tasks.
In contrast a reciprocal situation takes place when no
training is provided and information on the stimulus
sequences is presented only after the action of a participant.
The SL performance was investigated under these
conditions in the present study.
The principal difference of this approach from the usual
SL paradigm is that the participants are first required to
produce estimation of a stimulus sequence element, rather
than they are first presented a stimulus sequence element.
Thus, information on a stimulus sequence is presented for
the first time only after a participant’s estimation. This fact
and absence of training guarantee that during the first trial
participants have no information about a stimulus sequence.
In this context we introduce the terms ‘prediction’ and
‘guessing’, while the term ‘estimation’ is employed as
general indication of participants’ actions.

2228

In mathematical sense, prediction is understood as the
extrapolation of some event’s dynamics based on the
previously collected data about the event.
Prediction plays important part in a variety of human
social behaviors. Besides, prediction also has a great part in
routine human functioning, especially, motor control. The
importance of prediction in routine human actions, such as
grasping, was formulated by Inui (1998) with regard to
motor sequence prediction learning hypothesis.
It is often necessary to estimate the future values of some
event’s dynamics in the lack of adequate information about
the event. In this case, under our terminology, the term
‘prediction’ is replaced by the term ‘guessing’.
Thus, in a situation when all the rules underlying a
stimulus sequence have been presented to a participant at
least once, we use the term ‘prediction’ to describe the
conditions under which a participant is performing
estimations, whereas the term ‘guessing’ is used when not
all the underlying rules of the sequence have been made
available to a participant. These terms refer to the level of
information that has been presented to a participant, but not
to that actually acquired by a participant.
Guessing implies acting on incomplete information, and it
is important to understand how human beings produce
behavior in such situations.

Pre-knowledge and Basic Processing
Algorithms
The approach described above allows to investigate
existence of some pre-knowledge which is possibly used to
make estimations when no information about an event is
given.
It is assumed that “the brain does not invent a special
processing mechanism for each cognitive function, but
adapts a similar mechanism for a particular type of
processing” (Borisyuk, Denham, Hoppensteadt, Kazanovich,
& Vinogradova, 2001). Thus, human information
processing mechanism is expected to contain some set of
Basic Processing Algorithms (BPAs).

Numerical Sequence Decomposition
Any numerical sequence (NS) can be presented as a
sequence of runs (directions) and a corresponding sequence
of absolute values of the first order adjacent differences.
The sequence of runs characterizes relative allocation of any
two adjacent elements of a given NS.
In general, the dynamics of any NS can be presented
using two domains – quality and quantity. The quality
domain is realized in the form of runs dynamics, while the
quantity domain is represented by a sequence of
corresponding adjacent differences values.
Runs dynamics illustrates two mutually exclusive types of
NS behavior: direction change and stability. To allow
definition of either, at least two consecutive adjacent
differences are required. Stability is identified when any two
consecutive adjacent differences equal zero, or when they
are of the same sign. Direction change is identified when
two consecutive adjacent differences are of different signs,
or when only one of them equals zero.

A series consisting only of direction changes caused by
signs mismatch of consecutive adjacent differences is called
an Oscillatory dynamics or an Oscillation. A series
containing no direction changes is called a Stable dynamics.
Response series which can not be classified either as
Oscillation or as Stable is called a Mixed dynamics.
Because the runs dynamics provides only two types of NS
behavior, it is possible to devise a stimulus sequence
consisting of consecutive binary choices with the same
probability of selection. This sequence is a simplified model
of a NS in which absolute value of an adjacent difference
can be only either 0 or 1.
It is possible to reformulate the purpose of present study
in terms of runs dynamics, that is, to examine runs dynamics
of various shapes (sample dynamics) that occur in
participants’ responses under conditions of guessing.

The Present Study
The purpose of this study was to investigate the manner in
which estimations of the next element in a stimulus
sequence are produced under conditions of incomplete
information and the role played by pre-knowledge.
Estimations could be the realization of the above-mentioned
BPAs at the behavioral level.
We have begun with a brief description of general
framework of the study and basic definitions. This is
followed by a description of the experiments and results.
The evidence for sample dynamics during the guessing is
laid out in the discussion of experimental results. Then we
discuss sample dynamics and implicit and explicit aspects.
The final section presents our conclusions.

Figure 1:

5-by-1 BP used in Experiment 2.

Two experiments were conducted. In both, Block Patterns
(BPs) (Phillips, 1974; Inui, 1988) were used to generate
stimulus sequences. The dimensions of a BP are presented
as (height-by-width). Each column of a BP consists of cells,
representing choices. Each cell (choice) is called a state. The
enumeration of states is performed upwards starting from
state 1 (s1). A sample enumeration is shown in Figure 1. No
enumeration was provided to the participants during
experiments.

Basic Definitions
In accordance with above definitions of guessing and
prediction, entire response series could be divided into two
phases: a guessing phase and a prediction phase.
The determination of ordinal number of the trial (step)
during a stimulus sequence presentation when the
participant acquired complete information about a stimulus
sequence in general is a difficult question and requires
independent research. However, it is possible to determine

2229

the step when from the point of view of the sequence
structure all the underlying rules have been presented for the
first time. This step is used to define the end of the guessing
phase of the participants’ responses. Nevertheless, in case
when it is easy to identify the particular step of the entire
information acquisition by the participant, we took this step
as the end limit of the guessing phase.
We employed BP-based sequences with a structure that
included two underlying rules which are a BP structure and
BP repetitions. The sequence was presented to the
participants element-by-element. Thus the guessing phase of
the experimental task takes place at least during the first
(n+1) steps of the sequence presentation, where n is the
width of the underlying BP. During the first n steps a BP
structure is first presented entirely, then during the (n+1)th
step the information regarding repetitions is first presented.
Since during the first step participants do not have any
information about stimuli and selection of any state has the
same probability, the first step is called ‘the blind choice
step’. Learning process of underlying sequence rules starts
from the second step, when actual element of a stimulus
sequence is first presented.

Figure 2: Examples of the inertia effect
We also introduce the term ‘inertia effect’. The inertia
effect describes situation when a series of correct
participant’s responses is followed by a wrong one.
However, the entire response dynamics including incorrect
response reflects an obvious general dynamics. Appearance
of the last incorrect response characterizes the inertia effect.
The examples of the inertia effect are presented in Figure 2.

Experiment 1
Objectives
The first goal of this experiment was to look for sample
dynamics in the participants’ guessing under conditions of
stimulus sequences consisting of binary choices with equal
probability of selection. The second goal was to examine
existence of implicit and explicit aspects and relationship of
these aspects with the response dynamics.

was composed using 5 repetitions of an underlying 2-by-3
BP. BPs shown in Figure 3 were used as underlying BPs.

Figure 3: 2-by-3 BPs used in Experiment 1.
Participants were tested individually and were seated
approximately 45 cm from the computer screen. To present
stimulus sequences a 17-inch color computer monitor was
used. Screen resolution was set to (1024 width x 768 height)
pixels. Participants used a mouse to input responses.
The visual angle of separate cell is (1.23° wide × 1.23°
high). The visual angle of a 2-state column is (1.23° wide ×
2.55° high).
Procedure Participants were distributed among different
conditions with statistically non-different frequencies. Each
participant performed only one sequential task. Before
starting an experimental task all participants read written
instructions. No practice was provided for any of the
participants. BP-based stimulus sequences were presented to
participants on computer screen.
Stimulus sequences were presented using the Identity
Width Temporal Window Condition. Under this condition
only one element (column) of a BP-based sequence was
presented at a time. Each column appeared in a stable
position: the center of the state column matched with the
center of the screen.
Before starting the experiment participants performed
fixation of the mouse cursor at the center of the screen. For
this purpose participants were instructed to click black circle
in the center of the screen and not to move the mouse cursor
before the experimental task began. The visual angle of the
fixation circle is (0.89° wide x 0.89° high).
Participants were instructed to choose one of the empty
cells of the column on each step during the stimulus
sequence presentation. After selection of a particular cell the
participants were shown the actual element of the stimulus
sequence in the same column. Thus, feedback was provided
to the participants.
The experimental task continued in the same manner until
the end of the stimulus sequence. The end of the stimulus
sequence is indicated by message “Sequence is finished”.
Sample trial during a stimulus sequence presentation is
shown in Figure 4.

Method
Participants A sample consisted of 169 students of three
universities. There were 94 males and 75 females and the
average age was 21 year (SD = 2.87). All participants had
normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials Six 2-state BP-based sequences (conditions) were
used as stimuli in the experiment. Each BP-based sequence

2230

Figure 4: Sample trial of the experiment

Selection was indicated by a blue (black in Figure 4)
square inside the chosen cell. Feedback was provided as a
red (grey in Figure 4) circle inside the cell. In case of correct
selection participants were shown a red circle on a blue
square background inside the cell.
Inter-Stimulus Interval (I.S.I.) was not determined in
advance, and varied with the participant’s self-paced
response time. In other words, the participant’s choice time
was not forced, and I.S.I. was taken as the sum of choice
time and a one second delay.

Results
An analysis of the frequencies of different responses during
the blind choice step showed a statistically significant
difference between the frequencies of the response choices
and chance, at the 0.5 level (p = 0.014).
Occurrence frequencies of various sample dynamics
during the first two, three and four steps (consecutive
sub-series) of the guessing phase are found to be non-random
(χ2(3,169) = 11.426, p = 0.010; χ2(7,169) = 16.325, p =
0.022; χ2(15,169) = 39.917, p = 0.001, respectively).
Further, frequencies of dynamics during the first two
steps were analyzed. The frequencies of opposite (1-2; 2-1)
and same (1-1; 2-2) two consecutive states are 0.59 and 0.41,
respectively. These frequencies were found significantly
different (p = 0.031).
Next, the frequencies of dynamics containing the inertia
effect were analyzed. The occurrence frequencies of
dynamics containing the inertia effect of lengths 3 and 4
were found to be 0.08 and 0.12, respectively. The
corresponding chance levels are 0.125 and 0.063,
respectively. The Binomial test revealed significant
difference between the frequencies and their corresponding
chance levels (p = 0.032 and p = 0.005, respectively).

Discussion
This analysis indicates non-random nature for responses
during the blind choice step. That is, even when no
information about the stimulus sequence was provided,
participants responded in a manner different from the
chance. This appears to be evidence for implicit knowledge,
but this knowledge is no way extracted from information
about the specific sequence task.
The frequencies of various response dynamics during the
first two steps were found non-random as well as during the
blind choice step. Two opposite consecutive (1-2, 2-1) states
dominated over two same consecutive states (1-1, 2-2).
Thus, participants tend to choose adjacent elements of
different states during the first two steps.
Furthermore, the frequencies of dynamics during all
consecutive sub-series also found to be non-random.
The non-random appearance of consecutive sub-series
(the longest sub-series is 4 steps) indicates existence of
some knowledge throughout the entire guessing phase. In
accordance to this and conditions of incomplete information
provided to the participants, we imply that this knowledge is
more likely to be implicit.
Non-random nature of the inertia effect also illustrates
existence of some knowledge. However, the inertia effect is

characterized by a series of correct responses which follow
some obvious general dynamics together with last incorrect
response. Existence of an obvious general dynamics may
characterize that participants performed the last incorrect
response according to the dynamics presented by previous
correct responses. Thus, knowledge reflected by the inertia
effect is more likely to be explicit.
Both types of knowledge during the first two steps and
during the inertia effect are suspected to be of different
characters – implicit and explicit, respectively. Thus, we
imply that there should be the period of implicit and explicit
aspects interaction during the guessing. The end of this
period is characterized by conversion of implicit knowledge
into explicit one. However, acquired explicit knowledge
does not obligatorily contain the complete and correct
information about the stimulus sequence.

Experiment 2
Objectives
This experiment aimed to verify existence of sample
dynamics and implicit and explicit aspects under conditions
of enhanced number of choices (5 states) when the correct
response has the same allocation throughout the sequential
task.

Method
Participants A total of 209 students of three universities
took part in the experiment. There were 119 females and 90
males. And the average age was 21 years (SD=2.31). All
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials The same materials as in Experiment 1 were used
except for the stimulus sequence. In this experiment only
one BP of 5-by-1 dimensions was used. This BP was
repeated 15 times. Thus, the stimulus sequence is present as
continuous horizontal line in the middle of the state-column
(state 3). The change of BP size caused a change in visual
angle as well. Visual angle of a 5-state column is (1.23°
wide × 5.34° high).
Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1.

Results
All the response dynamics produced during experimental
task converged to the middle line. The convergence
indicates that from a particular step (a step of convergence)
onwards a participant produced only correct responses.
With this sequence characteristic, it was possible to define
the step when participants acquired the entire information
about stimulus sequence and produced correct responses.
The obtained data was analyzed from the point of view of
response dynamics before convergence.
Responses during the blind choice step were analyzed as
instances of three response variants: above the middle line,
below the middle line, and in the middle line. The
Chi-square categorical test revealed significant differences
between the frequencies of occurrence of each response
variant (χ2(2,209) = 57.71, p = 0.000).

2231

statistical difference between the ALDCs for each group of
dynamics. Thus, each type of dynamics implied a particular
speed of convergence.
According to the data analysis the results of Experiment 2
confirm results of Experiment 1.

General discussion

Figure 5: Examples of the dynamics of groups
Next, sub-sequences with the beginning at step 1 and the
end at trail which is one step before the step of convergence
were extracted from the entire response sequences. These
sub-sequences were analyzed as instances of the three
groups of dynamics: the Oscillation, the Stable and the
Mixed. Sample dynamics for each group are presented in
Figure 5 a), b) and c), respectively. The Chi-square
categorical test revealed significant difference in the
frequencies with which dynamics of different groups
occurred (χ2(2,209) = 43.53, p = 0.000). The obtained
frequencies for the Oscillation, the Stable and the Mixed
groups are 0.27, 0.19 and 0.54, respectively.
The Average Length of Dynamics (number of steps)
before Convergence (ALDC) for each group of dynamics
and its corresponding standard deviation (SD) are presented
in Table 1.
Table 1: ALDC and SD for groups of dynamics.
Groups
Oscillation
Stable
Mixed

Convergence
ALDC
SD
2.67
0.65
2.00
0.60
3.47
0.72

Differences between the ALDCs for the three groups were
examined using the ANOVA. This test revealed significant
difference between the means of the three groups of
dynamics (F(2,209) = 51,82, p = 0.000). The homogeneity
of variance test failed to reveal homogeneity of data
variance (p = 0.277), but Tamhane’s test confirmed
significance of differences between the ALDCs for the
different groups.

Discussion
An analysis of responses during the blind choice step
showed non-random distribution of different responses’
frequencies. This fact confirms the similar findings in the
Experiment 1.
An analysis of frequencies of the three dynamics groups
before convergence showed non-random distribution of
frequencies of each group. The ANOVA test revealed

The experiments described above illuminated the
characteristics of the guessing phenomenon from different
angles.
In Experiment 1 evidence for non-randomness of
participants’ responses during the blind choice step was
found. In Experiment 2 the non-random nature was
confirmed under conditions of more possible choices.
From the point of view of the implicit aspect, non-random
distributions of frequencies during the blind choice step
provides evidence for the existence of some implicit
knowledge when no information is given about stimuli.
Thus, this knowledge was not extracted from information on
stimulus sequences.
The analysis of the entire guessing phase showed the
non-random nature of the produced dynamics frequencies
during each consecutive sub-series.
The dynamics containing the inertia effect of different
length were found to take place with frequencies
significantly different from the corresponding chance levels.
The inertia effect is assumed to be a support for existence of
explicit aspect and its interaction with implicit one during
the guessing phase. However, more detailed research of this
phenomenon should be held.
Experiment 2 is performed under conditions in which it is
easy to distinguish step when the participant becomes able
to use complete information about the stimulus sequence.
The results of the second experiment provide not only
qualitative description of dynamics during the guessing
phase, but also define some quantitative characteristics of
sample dynamics. Each group of dynamics is characterized
by a corresponding convergence speed (ALDC) which
significantly different from other groups. Thus, we can
conclude that there are different mechanisms of human
behavior responsible for production of each group of
dynamics.
In early studies the implicit aspect “assumed existence of
some potentially mysterious processes of passive, automatic
and unconscious acquisition of abstract and tacit
knowledge” (Cleeremans, Destrebecqz & Boyer, 1998). The
appearance of sample dynamics and non-random nature of
responses during the blind choice step provide support for
existence of some pre-knowledge and thus retain this
statement.
However, from the point of view of the guessing, implicit
aspect seems to refer not only to the sequence processing,
but also to the processing of stimulus sequence presentation
area.
Besides, the results of the present study show that the
oscillatory phenomenon is found under different conditions
and its frequencies of occurrence are found to be different
from chance level in all discussed cases.
Statistically significant differences of response dynamics’
frequencies from the chance level points to the non-random

2232

nature of produced responses even under conditions of
lacking information. Together with the mentioned above
assumption of implicit aspect this fact retains idea about
existence of a set of BPAs.
Non-random occurrence of oscillations under different
conditions shows that oscillations can be part of BPAs that
enables modeling of the guessing mechanism with
oscillatory neural networks (ONN). Recently, oscillators
have been applied to model different cognitive functions
such as novelty detection (Borisyuk, 2001) and attention
and memory (Kryukov, 2002). ONNs represent the
non-connectionist approach. However, the possibility of its
application for cognitive function modeling is supported by
Sun at al. (2005).

Conclusion
In this study, we indicated the sample dynamics in the
human guessing during the sequence learning tasks. The
results of the conducted experiments retain existence of
BPAs. Besides, implicit and explicit aspects were also found.
According to the experimental data, the implicit aspect takes
place when incomplete information about stimulus sequence
is available, while explicit aspect is suspected to develop
under the same conditions reinforced by a series of correct
responses. Also the inertia effect is assumed to illustrate the
interaction of implicit and explicit aspects during the
guessing phase. However, more precise research of implicit
and explicit aspects under presented conditions should be
performed.

Acknowledgement
We would like to thank associated professor Koji Sakai,
Kyoto Koka Women’s University, for valuable comments
and experimental assistance.

References
Berry, D.C., & Dienes, S. (1993). Implicit learning:
Theoretical and Empirical aspects, Erlbaum.
Borisyuk, R., Denham, M., Hoppensteadt, F., Kazanovich,
Y., Vinogradova, O. (2001). Oscillatory model of novelty
detection. Network: Computational Neural Systems, 12,
1-20.
Cohen, A., Ivry, R.I., & Keele, S.W. (1990). Attention and
structure in sequence learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 16, 17-30.

Cleeremans, A., Destrebecqz, A., & Boyer, B. (1998).
Implicit learning: news from the front. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 2, 10, 406-416.
Frensh, P.A. (1998). One concept, multiple meaning: on
how to define the concept of implicit learning. In M.A.
Standler, & P.A. Frensch (Eds.) Handbook of Implicit
Learning (pp. 47-104), Sage Pulications.
Inui, T. (1988). Properties of Human Visual Memory for
Block Patterns. Biological Cybernetics, 59, 179-187.
Inui, T. (1998) Motor sequence prediction learning
hypothesis, Japanese Journal of Neuropsychological, 14,
144-149.
Kryukov, V.I. (2002). Attention and Memory Model Based
on the Principle of Dominanta and Comparator Function
of Hippocampus, Journal of Higher Nervous Activity, 10,
10-29.
Lewicki, P., Czyzewska, M., & Hoffman, H. (1987)
Unconscious acquisition of complex procedural
knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 523-530.
Lewicki, P., Hill, T, & Bizot, E. (1988) Acquisition of
procedural knowledge about a pattern of stimuli that
cannot be articulated. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 24-37.
Nissen, M.J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional
requirement of learning: evidence form performance
measure. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Shanks, D.R., & St Jonh, M.R. (1994). Characteristics of
dissociable human learning system, Behavioural Brain
Science, 17, 367 – 447.
Phillips, W. A. (1974). On the distinction between sensory
storage and short-time visual memory. Perception and
Psychology, 16, 283-290.
Sun, R., & Peterson, T. (1998). Autonomous learning of
sequential tasks: Experiments and analyses. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks, 9, 1217–1234.
Sun, R., Merril, E., & Peterson, T. (2001). From implicit
skill to explicit knowledge: a bottom-up model of skill
learning, Cognitive Science, 25, 203-244.
Sun, R., Slusarz, P., & Terry, C. (2005). The interaction of
the Explicit and Implicit in Skill Learning: A
Dual-Process approach, Psychological Review, 112, 1,
159-192.
Willingham, D. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of
motor skill learning. Psychological Review, 105, 558-584.

2233

