UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Non-Native Language Processing Engages Mental Imagery

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/59r7r8zt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Wheeler, Kathryn B.
Stojanovic, Diana

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Non-Native Language Processing Engages Mental Imagery
Kathryn B. Wheeler (katrev21@aol.com)
Diana Stojanovic (stojanov@hawaii.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 569 Moore Hall, 1890 East West Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

activity as well, showing that actions need not be overt to
induce effector-specific localized neural activation.
Complementing a burgeoning theory of meaning that
relies on the embodiment of language, Pulvermuller et al.
(2001) have shown that motor structures are selectively
active when understanding and producing verbs describing
actions performed with specific effectors.
Further,
Tettamanti et al. (ms.) found that even passive listening to
sentences describing motion by three main effectors -mouth, hand, leg -- activated different motor regions. In
other words, in processing action language, an understander
relies upon the same cognitive structures involved in
performing actions, in effect running a mental simulation of
what it would be like to perform the action.
This idea of mental simulation also supports a view of
understanding as embodied, where the world is perceived
and interpreted based on the way the body interacts with it
(Zwaan, 1999; Feldman & Narayanan, 2003). It is intuitive
to think the systems underlying tangible (perceptual, motor)
experiences, being our most immediate and concrete
connection to the world, would serve to facilitate other
kinds of cognitive behaviors, like language comprehension
and memory. Behavioral evidence of visual and motor
imagery during language processing shows that
understanders rely on mental imagery to interpret language
about visual scenes (Kosslyn et al., 2001; Zwaan et al.,
2002) or actions (Glenberg & Kashak 2000). In other
words, running an internal re -creation of the scene or event
facilitates understanding and responding to linguistic input.
In order to address the degree of specificity involved in
the mental simulation of action language, Bergen et al.
(2003) used a forced-choice matching task to see whether
subjects would show greater response latency when a
picture and verb depicted different actions using the same
effector (mouth, hand, or leg) than when they depicted
different actions using different effectors. As predicted,
subjects indeed responded more quickly to mismatches
when the implied effectors were different, which indicated
that there was additional processing load when the same
cognitive structure was required to process two competing
inputs. This result was reinforced by a follow-up study by
Narayan et al. (2004), which replicated this experiment with
a lexical matching task.
While the connection between language and motor
simulation has been established, there remains an important
dimension that has yet to be explored. Thus far studies have
been conducted almost exclusively on subjects in their
native languages, yet the majority of the world is
multilingual making it important to address the issue of
second language processing. This study seeks to answer

Abstract
The theory of simulation semantics (Bergen & Chang 2005)
posits that understanding language, in part, requires activation
of mental imagery. This allows understanders to mentally recreate the scene or event to facilitate understanding and
prepare for situated action (Glenberg & Kashak 2002). The
idea that understanding action language relies on neural
circuitry involved in action execution is supported by a crossmodal matching method introduced by Bergen et al. (2003),
which demonstrated that specific effectors (hand, mouth, foot)
are critical to the motor imagery involved in language
understanding. Previous studies, however, have focused
exclusively on adult native speakers, which leaves open the
question of how language-driven imagery develops during
language acquisition. The current study investigates whether
non-native English speakers engage in mental simulation
during language processing. We used an image-verb forcedchoice matching task, where an image and verb depict
different actions using either the same effector (e.g. grab and
push) or different effectors (e.g. grab and lick). As in
previous work with native speakers, response times were
significantly longer when the two actions used the same
effector. Moreover, subjects showed a correlation between
stimulus comprehension accuracy and the size of the
simulation effect. This suggests that non-native speakers not
only perform mental imagery like native speakers but do so
increasingly as their linguistic competency improves.
Keywords: Motor imagery, simulation semantics, motor
representation, L2 acquisition

Introduction
A theory of cognition based on mental simulation has
increasingly received both neurophysiological and
behavioral support from a wide range of sources –
psychology, neuroscience, artificial intelligence, and
linguistics. Beginning with the breakthrough discovery of
“mirror neurons” that become active in the motor cortex of
rhesus monkeys during both action execution and action
observation (Gallese et al., 1996; Rizzolatti et al., 1996),
research has exploded exploring similar overlapping
structures in humans that are involved in comprehension,
interpretation, and memory of perceptual and motor
information (Lotze et al. 1999; Porro et al., 1996; Gallese et
al., 1996; Nyberg et al., 2001; Wheeler et al., 2000).
It has been previously shown that the motor cortex is
somatotopically arranged such that sections are devoted to
specific effectors, such as mouth, arm, or leg (Buccino et al.,
2001). Ehrsson et al. (2003) give evidence that this
somatotopic division holds true during exclusively imagined

882

two key questions related to non-native simulation. The
first is simply whether non-native speakers are performing
mental
imagery
(simulation)
during
language
comprehension. Non-native speakers develop native-like
competence over time and we explain this development of
L2 processing from a controlled to an automatic process by
way of McLaughlin’s (1987) information processing
theory. Automatic processes do not restrict attention and
can be done in parallel, implying a faster performance. We
predict that simulation is a key element to "native-like"
processing, and that L2 learners gradually change their
processing strategy from “translation of L1 into L2”, which
is a controlled, attention-demanding process, to
“simulation”, a fast, attention-free, automatic process used
by native speakers. We argue that simulation is a key
element to "native-like" processing, as it is computationally
more efficient than an approach based on language
understanding by "translation from L1".
Non-native
simulation in language learners can be secondarily
informative by offering insights into L1 acquisition since it
can rely on comparisons between adult speakers and
learners to shed light on the developmental aspects of
simulation.
The second question of non-native simulation we address
is whether learning a second language involves not only
acquiring proficiency in the formal structures of the
language (syntax, phonology, semantic relations), but also
gaining the ability to process linguistic meaning like native
speakers do. Specifically, when learning a non-native
language, we want to know if speakers increasingly engage
tools like mental simulation when understanding, just like a
native speaker.
The basis for the interference effect hypothesized in this
task is mutual inhibition. In order to maximize functionality,
similar neural structures at given levels need to mutually
inhibit each other, which means that the more similar the
information they encode, the greater the mutual competition.
In other words, when one neural region is required to
simultaneously evaluate two competing pieces of
information, processing time is increased for both inputs. In
terms of the experiment, subjects presented with two
different actions should be slower to distinguish them when
the two actions involve the same effector than when they
use different effectors. This interference indicates that
subjects are not simply observing general properties of the
image and the verb, but actually performing a mental
simulation of the actions and what they entail.
Simulation is built on experience with the world and is,
therefore, a tool that must necessarily develop and improve
along with increased experience.
As language skills
improve in connection with simulation, proficiency could be
directly related to the degree of mental simulation being
performed by an understander. In order to look at this
potential relationship, a vocabulary test – a measure
frequently used to determine proficiency – was conducted
after the main experiment. We predicted that if proficiency
and simulation are related, higher vocabulary scores will
correlate with stronger simulation interaction effects.

Method
The work reported below is, to our knowledge, the first
departure from the existing work on mental simulation to
provide evidence on whether non-native speakers of a
language engage in mental simulation for understanding.
This research, drawing on the method from Bergen et al.
(2003), demonstrates that non-native English speakers show
simulation effects like those of native English speakers.
Subjects performed a forced-choice task, deciding
whether an image and a verb depicted the same action.
Critically, when the actions were different, the body part
involved in the action (mouth, arm, or leg) was either the
same or different. If the non-native speakers are in fact
performing mental imagery in understanding, then when the
actions are different, response times should be longer when
the involved effector is the same than when it is different.
There were two dimensions of variation which were not
directly controlled between subjects in this experiment:
native language and English proficiency. The latter is not
only difficult to control, but also to define. Subjects were
drawn from a variety of native language groups and were
proficient enough to enroll in mainstream classes at the
University of Hawai’i Manoa1 . In order to have an
independent measure of ability across subjects 2 , we included
a vocabulary test at the end of the experiment to determine
whether subjects’ vocabulary – one measure of proficiency
– correlated with their degree of motor simulation.

Subjects
One subject was excluded for performing the task with less
than eighty percent accuracy. The remaining 39 subjects
were analyzed (25 women), ranging in age from 18 to 49
years with a mean age of 26.8. All subjects were righthanded, non-native speakers of English enrolled in
mainstream classes at the University of Hawai’i Manoa who
participated in exchange for either course credit or five
dollars. Subjects self-reported total years of studying
English from 2 to 29 years with a mean length of study
around 14 years.

Materials
The picture-verb stimulus pairs were taken from Bergen et
al. (2003) with a written verb and a stick-figure drawing
depicting an action. Each picture and verb action used one
of three effectors: mouth, hand, or foot. Pairs were in one
of three conditions (Table 1): matching (picture and verb
depict the same action), non-matching, different effector
(picture and verb depict different actions using different
effectors), and non-matching, same effector (picture and
verb depict different actions using the same effector). There
were 48 picture-verb pairs per half (24 matching; 12 non1

This requires a minimum TOEFL composite score of 173
(computer), 61 (internet), or 500 (paper).
2
Exact TOEFL scores were not collected from each subject but
this could be a potentially meaningful correlation for future
studies.

883

matching, same effector; 12 non-matching, different
effector) for a total of 96 stimuli. Subjects saw each picture
in two conditions: once in the matching and once in either
of the non-matching conditions (half same and half different
effector). Subjects were randomly assigned to do one of
two experiment versions with the three conditions and
effectors counter-balanced so that no subject saw the same
item in both of the non-matching conditions.
No verbs from the original study were excluded although
at least two were questionable with regard to the rate of
familiarity among even advanced non-native language
learners. In order to preserve the original design, these
items were included with the assumption that outlying items
would be excluded prior to analysis. Only correct responses
were analyzed.

verb rather than requiring strict specificity. Since the
vocabulary test was intended to gauge subjects’
understanding of the verbs as they might be simulated, we
wanted the decisions to correlate with effector areas
involved in visual or motor imagery. Response accuracy
was measured.

Results
As expected, some vocabulary items were unfamiliar, which
resulted in the exclusion of nine items prior to analysis due
to a mean accuracy rate of less than eighty percent on the
main experiment. Excluded verbs came relatively evenly
from each of the effector groups (three mouth, two hand,
and four foot). For each subject, outlying response times
(RTs) were replaced with the RT 2.5 standard deviations
from that subject’s mean RT.
A main effect of match versus non-match was marginally
significant, F1 (1,39)=3.83; p=.058.

Table 1: Verbs in the three conditions with the image kick .

Table 2: Mean Response Times for the three
conditions
Condition

Matching verb
Non-matching,
same effector
Non-matching,
diff. effector

Matching
Non-match,
Different Effector
Non-match,
Same Effector

Image
‘Kick’
‘Run’

Mean
(msec)
1197.753

Std.Dev.
(msec)
419.391

1215.955

434.2224

1283.625

384.6534

The critical interaction we were interested in was between
the non-matching conditions only. A repeated measures
analysis of variance showed the predicted interaction effect
to be significant: F1 (1,39)=5.502; p<.05. The items analysis
was not significant (F2 (1,39)=.804; p=.376), so we
investigated the items effects by effector. A two-way
analysis with effector and non-match condition as
independent
variables
was
highly
significant:
F1 (1,39)=10.632; p<.001. In two-way analyses with pairs of
effectors, foot and hand verbs did not behave statistically
differently from each other (F1 (1,39)=.054; p=.817), but
mouth verbs were found to act differently from the other
two effectors (Fig 1): mouth and hand, F1 (1,39)=11.075;
p<.005; mouth and foot, F1 (1,39)=17.159; p=.000.

‘Drink’

Procedure
Subjects performed a matching task where they decided if
the depicted action and described action were the same, and
pressed either the “k” key labeled YES or the “d” key
labeled NO to indicate their decision. They were verbally
instructed to keep one finger from each hand over each key
throughout the experiment. A training session preceded the
main experiment.
Each trial went as follows. A fixation cross appeared
center-screen for 1000 ms, followed by the picture for 1000
ms, a visual mask for 450 ms, a 50 ms pause, and finally the
verb appeared center-screen and remained until the subject
pressed either the YES or NO button.
When subjects completed the main experiment, they were
then asked to answer a few easy questions and given the
following instructions: “You will see an action verb.
Please decide what body part the action uses: mouth,
hand/arm, foot/leg. For example, "jump" uses the foot/leg.”
They were asked to respond by pressing buttons labeled
MOUTH, HAND, and FOOT. We included both words for
the hand/arm area and the foot/leg area to ensure subjects
demonstrated a general awareness of the region used for the

Figure 1: Mean subject Response Times (msec)
in non-matching conditions by effector with
means table.

Foot
Hand
Mouth

884

Diff Effector
1198
1198
1249

Same Effector
1337
1347
1155

Discussion of Effector Differences

1400

In the non-matching conditions, subjects were faster to
respond when both the image and verb used the mouth
(same-effector condition). This effect is in direct opposition
to the foot and hand verbs and was not reportedly present in
the results of Bergen et al. (2003).
One possible explanation for this discrepancy between
verbs using the foot or hand and those using the mouth
could be the presence of overt or covert subvocalization by
subjects. The idea of subvocal rehearsal has been linked to
production, auditory working memory (the phonological
loop), prosodic disambiguation (Slowiaczek & Clifton,
1980; Smith et al., 1995; Pich, 2000) and comprehension
(Watkins et al., 2003; Watkins & Paus 2004), making it an
important tool for language processing in both native and
non-native speakers (Matsunaga, 2001). Since this task
involved the comparison of two actions, the latter being
linguistically represented, it would not be surprising if our
non-native subjects relied heavily on subvocal rehearsal to
both recall and compare the actions. If this were the case,
neural structures associated with speech production and the
vocal articulators would be covertly activated during the
presentation of stimuli, and would thus be primed before the
matching decision needed to be made. Contrary to the
interference that occurs in the other effectors due to
concurrent processing as they compare the actions,
subvocalization on this account activates speech production
regions of motor cortex before any additional processing is
necessary. When mouth-specific motor structures are reactivated during imagery generation, priming will yield
faster access to the representations of mouth actions and
language. In other words, when the action depicted by a
picture or described by a verb uses the mouth, the subject is
primed to then simulate a mouth action due to subvocal
activation of those motor structures.

1350
1300
1250

Diff Effector

1200

Same Effector

1150
1100
1050
Foot

Hand

Mouth

Response latency was longer overall as compared to Bergen
et al. (2003) as seen in Table 3.
Table 3: Means table comparing reaction
times (msec) per condition in the current study
and Bergen et al. (2003).

Match
Non-match,
Different Effector
Non-match, Same effector

Bergen et
al. study
740.57

Current
study
1197.753

750.93
798.54

1215.955
1283.625

Turning now to the vocabulary test, speakers performed
well overall (accuracy rate between 0.75 and 1 with a
median score of 0.92). We performed a regression analysis
correlating the vocabulary test results for each subject with
the size of their simulation interaction effect. This latter
statistic was calculated as the difference for each subject
between the mean RT in the non-matching same -effector
condition and the non-matching different-effector condition.
Thus, larger simulation interaction effect sizes, reflecting
greater degrees of interference, were expected to correlate
positively with accuracy on the vocabulary test. The better
the subject's understanding of the target vocabulary, the
more mental simulation they should be performing. As
predicted, the interference effect size correlated positively
with increased language proficiency: β = -9.75, t(39) = 26,
p < .001 (Fig. 2).

Discussion of Results
It was not surprising that the non-native speakers had
overall longer response times than the native speakers
studied by Bergen et al. (2003), and the main effects were
successfully replicated here. In the critical non-matching
conditions, responses were slower when the two different
actions used the same effector (e.g. jump and kick ); an effect
that has been argued to derive from mutual inhibition
between competing neural structures that are active when
the subject must simultaneously process related inputs.
The interesting difference in the results of this study is
that the speakers were all advanced non-native learners and,
although overall reaction times were longer, the same
interference effect proved to be statistically significant.
Since non-native speakers showed native-like simulation
effects, certain conclusions can be drawn about language
learning and imagery. Specifically, the regression analysis
showed that the more vocabulary subjects were familiar
with, the stronger their simulation (interaction) effect was,
which suggests that there is an identifiable correlation
between understanding more fully (which may tie in to
proficiency) and simulation. We can conclude that these

Figure 2: Regression analysis correlating vocabulary test
accuracy with simulation interaction effect over subjects
0.5
Simulation Interference Effect

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

-0.2
-0.3
Vocabulary Score

885

non-native speakers are relying on motor imagery for
understanding in a similar way to native speakers.

This kind of event-semantic correlation suggests a theory
of processing that takes action-related input and, in addition
to modality-specific perceptual structures, activates a subset
of systems that facilitate action execution (premotor cortex,
supramarginal gyrus, anterior intraparietal gyrus; Noppeney
et al., 2005), in effect performing a simulation of what it
would be like to perform the action.
If native language speakers are relying on a simulationbased system when understanding language, non-native
speakers, it would seem, could employ the same tactics
when learning and understanding new linguistic concepts.
In this experiment the response times were longer overall
than among native English speakers (Bergen et al., 2003),
which suggests some additional processing. We argue that
non-native speakers have not quite achieved automatic
(language) processing (McLaughlin, 1987) yet, which slows
access through the comprehension process for linguistic
input. Thus a word like kick might be analyzed as an action
and then a foot action and finally integrate the perceptuomotor details involved in kicking, while a native speaker
would have a direct route to the final step.

Discussion of Vocabulary Test
This interaction tells us that the more experimental verbs the
subject knew, the bigger the interaction effect, which can be
interpreted as an indication that the more knowledgeable
they were on this language task (potentially correlating with
more general proficiency), the more simulation they
performed. This suggests that learners may progressively
develop the ability to recruit neural circuitry to perform
mental simulation when understanding language. In other
words, as non-native speakers become more competent and
approach native-like ability, they increasingly rely upon
simulation in processing linguistic input.
One possible objection to this idea of a correlation
between vocabulary performance and simulation says that if
a subject knows more of the verbs, the simulation
interference effect size would be greater. This was nullified
by the exclusion of all incorrect responses prior to analysis
so they could not influence the effect. Conversely, one
might object that due to a large number of unknown verbs,
the effect size was actually diluted. This could, in fact, be a
valid claim. However, if we assume subjects were guessing
on the unknown verbs (a fifty percent chance of accuracy),
this only accounts for half of the verbs they didn’t know
while the other half they guessed correctly, even though
they didn’t know their meaning or perform any imagery.
This interpretation would lead us to a different but
interesting line of reasoning that suggests second language
learners are able to perform in native-like ways on some
tasks without engaging in the same process of understanding
that native speakers would rely upon, in this case mental
simulation.

Conclusion
The research reported here supports previous evidence that
processing language about actions requires activation of
neural structures devoted to action execution. It goes
beyond other studies to show that non-native English
speakers rely on mental imagery in understanding in the
same way native English speakers do. Further, increased
proficiency (as measured by vocabulary accuracy) is shown
to correlate with a stronger interaction effect indicating
increasing simulation as a function of proficiency. In other
words, the more you simulate, the more you understand; or
conversely, the more you understand, the more you
simulate.

General Discussion

Acknowledgments

As predicted, non-native English-speaking subjects took
longer to respond when an image action and verb action
were different but the effector (mouth, hand, foot) necessary
to perform the action was the same, as compared to different
actions with different effectors. These results agree with
neurophysiological evidence that a subset of the neural
regions critical to action execution becomes active in
response to non-overt representations (pictures, language,
imagery) of an action. The visuo-motor system has been
repeatedly linked to action-related information including
action observation and action images (Kourtzi et al., 2000;
Kable et al., 2002; Culham & Valyear, 2006) by way of
mirror neurons (overlapping neural structures that become
selectively active when both performing and perceiving an
action). The mirror system is involved in mimicking,
understanding, and learning (Buccino et al., 2004; Stefan et
al., 2005) making it an integral part of memory storage and
recall. In addition to action execution, action language also
activates the mirror system (Hurford, 2002; Hamzai et al.,
2003) which indicates that understanding how to do
something and how to talk about doing something are
neurally related.

Many thanks to our advisor Dr. Ben Bergen for invaluable
input and support along the way. Also, to members of the
University of Hawai’i Language and Cognition Laboratory
for ongoing advice and encouragement.

References
Bergen, Benjamin and Nancy Chang. (2005). Embodied
Construction Grammar in Simulation-Based Language
Understanding. In Jan-Ola Östman and Miriam Fried
(Eds.), Construction Grammar(s): Cognitive Grounding
and Theoretical Extensions. Amsterdam: Benjamin: 147190.
Bergen, B., S. Narayan, and J. Feldman. (2003). Embodied
verbal semantics: evidence from an image-verb matching
task.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Buccino, G., F. Binkofski, G. R. Fink, L. Fadiga, L. Fogassi,
V. Gallese, R. J. Seitz, K. Zilles, G. Rozzolatti, and H. J.
Freund. (2001). Action observation activates premotor
and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner: an fMRI

886

study. European Journal of Neuroscience, 13 (2), 400404.
Buccino, G., Vogt, S., Ritzi, A., Fink, G. R., Zilles, K.,
Freund, H.-J., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004). Neural circuits
underlying imitation learning of hand actions: An eventrelated fMRI study. Neuron, 42, 323–334.
Culham, J.C. and K. F. Valyear. (2006). Human parietal
cortex in action. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 16, 18.
Ehrsson, H. H., S. Geyer, and E. Naito. (2003). Imagery of
voluntary movement of fingers, toes, and tongue activates
corresponding body-part specific motor representations.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 90, 3304-3316.
Epstein, S.D., Flynn, S., & Martohardjono, G. (1996).
Second
language
acquisition:
Theoretical
and
experimental issues in contemporary research. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 19 (4), 677-758.
Feldman, J. and S. Narayanan. (2004). Embodiment in a
Neural Theory of Language. Brain and Language, 89,
385-392.
Gallese, V., L. Fadiga, L. Fogassi, & G. Rizzolatti. (1996).
Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain 119,
593-609.
Glenberg, A. and M. Kaschak. (2002). Grounding Language
in Action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3), 558565.
Hamzei, F., M. Rijntjes, C. Dettmers, V. Glauche, C.
Weiller, & C. Buchel, (2003). The human action
recognition system and its relationship to Broca’s area: an
fMRI study. Neuroimage, 19, 637, 644.
Kable, J.W., J. Lease-Spellmeyer, & A. Chatterjee, (2002).
Neural substrates of action event knowledge, Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 795– 805.
Kourtzi, Z. and N. Kanwisher, (2000). Activation in human
MT/MST by static images with implied motion, Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 48–55.
Hurford, J.R. (2002). Language beyond our grasp: What
mirror neurons can, and cannot, do for language
evolution. Kimbrough Oller, D., U. Griebel and K.
Plunkett (eds.) The Evolution of Communication Systems:
A Comparative Approach. The Vienna Series in
Theoretical Biology, MITPress, Cambridge MA.
Kosslyn, S. M., G. Ganis, and W. L. Thompson. (2001).
Neural foundations of imagery. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2:635 -642.
Lotze, M., P. Montoya, M. Erb, E. Hülsmann, H. Flor, U.
Klose, N. Birbaumer, and W. Grodd. (1999). Activation
of cortical and cerebellar motor areas during executed and
imagined hand movements: An fMRI study, Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(5), 491-501
Matsunaga, S. (2001). “Subvocalization in Reading Kanji:
Can Japanese Text Be Comprehended Without It?” In
Advances in Japanese Language Pedagogy, edited by H.
Nara, 30-46. Columbus: National East Asian Languages
Resource Center.
McLaughlin, B. (1987). Theories of second language
learning. London: Edward Arnold.
Narayan, S, Bergen, B., Weinberg, Z. (2004). Embodied
Verbal Semantics: Evidence from a lexical matching
task. Proceedings of Berkeley Linguistics Society 30.

Noppeney, U., O. Josephs, S. Kiebel, K.J. Friston, & C.J.
Price. (2005). Action selectivity in parietal and temporal
cortex. Cognitive Brain Research, 25, 641-649.
Nyberg, L., K. M. Petersson, L. G. Nilsson, J. Sandblom, C.
Åberg, and M. Ingvar. (2001). Reactivation of motor
brain areas during explicit me mory for actions.
NeuroImage, 14, 521-528.
Pich, J. (2000). The Role of Subvocalization in Rehearsal
and Maintenance of Rhythmic Patterns. The Spanish
Journal of Psychology 3 (1): 63-67.
Porro, C. A., M. P. Francescato, V. Cettolo, M. E. Diamond,
P. Baraldi, C. Zuian, M. Bazzocchi, and P. E. di
Prampero. (1996). Primary motor and sensory cortex
activation during motor performance and motor imagery:
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Journal
of Neuroscience 16, 7688– 7698.
Pulvermueller, F., Haerle, M., and Hummel, F. (2001).
Walking or Talking?: Behavioral and Neurophysiological
Correlates of Action Verb Processing Brain and Language
78, 143–168.
Rizzolatti, G., F. Luciano, G. Vittorio, L. Fogassi. (1996).
Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor actions.
Cognitive Brain Research, 3, 131-141.
Slowiaczek, M. L. and C. Clifton, Jr. (1980).
Subvocalization and reading for meaning. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 19, 573-582.
Smith, J.D., Wilson, M., and Riesberg, D.
(1995).
Subvocalization in Auditory Imagery. Neuropsychologia,
33, 11, 1433-1454.
Stefan, K., L.G. Cohen, J. Duque, R. Mazzocchio, P..
Celnik, L. Sawaki, L. Ungerleider, & J. Classen. (2005).
Formation of a Motor Memory by Action Observation.
The Journal of Neuroscience, October 12, 2005,
25(41):9339-9346
Tettamanti, M., Buccino, G., Saccuman, M.C., Gallese, V.,
Danna, M., Perani, D., Cappa, S.F., Fazio, F., &
Rizzolatti, G. (2005). Sentences describing actions
activate visuomotor execution and observation systems.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 17(2), 273-281.
Watkins KE, A.P. Strafella, & T. Paus: (2003). Seeing and
hearing speech excites the motor system involved in
speech production. Neuropsychologia, 41:989-994.
Watkins K & T. Paus. (2004). Modulation of motor
excitability during speech perception: the role of
Broca’s area. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
16:978-987.
Wheeler, M. E., S. E. Petersen, and R. L. Buckner. (2000).
Memory’s echo: Vivid remembering reactivates sensory
specific cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, USA, 97, 11125–11129.
Zwaan, R. A., R. A. Stanfield and R. H. Yaxley. (2002). Do
language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of
objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.
Zwaan, R.A. (1999). Embodied cognition, perceptual
symbols, and situation models. Discourse Processes, 28,
81-88.

887

