UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Now, where was I? Examining the Perceptual Processes while Resuming an Interrupted Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7br305k1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Ratwani, Raj M.
Trafton, J. Gregory

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Now, where was I?
Examining the Perceptual Processes while Resuming an Interrupted Task
Raj M. Ratwani (rratwani@gmu.edu)
George Mason University, Department of Psychology
Fairfax, VA

J. Gregory Trafton (trafton@itd.nrl.navy.mil)
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington, D.C

applied to interruptions (e.g., Long Term Working Memory,
(Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995; Oulasvirta & Sarrlilouma,
2004)), however, these theories do not make clear
predictions about the specific processes used to resume an
interrupted task.
Altmann and Trafton (2002) have put forward an
activation based memory model specific to the resumption
of an interrupted task. This theory, called Memory for
Goals, suggests that an interrupting secondary task results in
a suspension of the current subgoal of the primary task. The
resumption lag is a consequence of the time it takes to
retrieve the suspended subgoal after completing the
interrupting task. The most active goal is the goal that will
be retrieved and the goal that will be selected to drive
behavior. The theory suggests there are two determinants of
goal activation, and consequently, two determinants of what
goal will be retrieved when resuming the primary task. First,
the activation of a goal is based on its history; for example
how frequently the goal has been retrieved and how recently
the goal was retrieved will impact goal activation. In
addition, the activation is based on context and the
environment. The context provides priming of the
suspended goal resulting in a boost in its activation.
Several things should be noted about this description.
First, the theory does not make any specific predictions
about the perceptual processes used or needed to resume the
primary task. Different environmental cues have been
shown to facilitate resumption lag (Trafton, Altmann, &
Brock, 2005), but the interaction between perceptual
processes and environmental cues is currently unspecified.
Second, the memory for goals theory (and others) make the
assumption that resuming a task is, in large part, a matter of
determining what had been done previously. For many
tasks (e.g., computer based interactions), however,
determining where in the task or interface pre-interruption
work had occurred is just as important as determining what
had been done previously.
The purpose of this paper is to examine the specific
perceptual processes involved in resuming the primary task
during the resumption lag. In order to examine the
perceptual processes during the resumption lag a
spreadsheet task was selected that had a flat goal structure.
This flat goal structure allowed us to focus on where the
resumption point should be rather than on what had been

Abstract
Several empirical papers have demonstrated that interruptions
are disruptive and that after being interrupted it takes some
time to resume the primary task. This study examined the
cognitive processes, specifically at the perceptual level, that
were used to resume a task after being interrupted. Eye
movement data showed that participants were able to use
spatial memory to return to the general area where they were
interrupted. This spatial heuristic was used for interruptions
that occurred both early and late in the primary task, however,
participants were more imprecise when returning to the task
after a late interruption.

Introduction
There is a great deal of evidence suggesting that in most
instances interruptions are disruptive. Several empirical
studies have demonstrated how detrimental an interruption
can be to primary task performance (Altmann & Trafton,
2004; Monk, Boehm-Davis, & Trafton, 2004; Trafton,
Altmann, Brock, & Mintz, 2003). Being interrupted can
result in more errors on the primary task, a longer time to
complete the primary task and greater feelings of stress and
anxiety when performing the task (Adamcyzk & Bailey,
2004; Speier, Vessey, & Valacich, 2003).
One dependent measure that has been used to examine
how disruptive an interruption can be is the resumption lag
(Altmann & Trafton, 2004; Trafton et al., 2003). The
resumption lag has been operationally defined as the time
interval between the completion of the secondary
(interrupting) task and the first action back on the primary
task. The resumption lag is essentially the time it takes to
resume the primary task after completing the interrupting
task. For example, while working on a paper (the primary
task) a student may stop by (interrupting task) to talk about
research ideas. Once the student leaves, the time it takes to
focus one’s thoughts back on the paper and actually resume
writing the paper is the resumption lag. How does one go
about resuming the primary task after being interrupted?
Several studies have illustrated a significantly longer
resumption lag after being interrupted as compared to a
control condition (Altmann & Trafton, 2004; Monk et al.,
2004; Trafton et al., 2003). However, most of the research
on interruptions has dealt with reducing or changing the
resumption lag, not on the processes used to resume the
primary task. Several general memory theories have been
679

participants should return to the point where they left off
fairly quickly. However, in the late interruption case it
should take participants longer to reach the point where they
left off due to increased search.
In terms of the eye movements, there should be fewer
fixations during the resumption lag in the early interruption
case as compared to the late interruption case. In the early
interruption case, the point where participants should
resume from is closer to the beginning of the task as
compared to the late interruption case. Thus, if participants
retrace their steps from the beginning, in the early
interruption case, participants should reach the point where
they need to resume in fewer fixations. Finally, if
participants start from the beginning of the task after the
interruption, their initial fixation location during the
resumption lag should be the same. For both early and late
interruptions, the initial fixation during the resumption lag
should be to the beginning of the task.
If participants are using the environmental cue this should
be reflected in the eye movements as well. Participants
should resume the primary task at the location of cue. The
initial fixation back to the column of numbers that is to be
transcribed should be the same as the location of the cue. In
addition, the initial fixation during the resumption lag for
both early and late interruptions should be to different
locations since the cues are in different locations, whereas if
participants were starting the task over these fixations would
be to the same location.
If participants use some kind of spatial heuristic to
facilitate resumption during the resumption lag the initial
fixation location should be different for early and late
interruptions as well. The fixations should be in the general
area where the interruption occurred. More importantly, if
participants use a spatial heuristic, the initial fixation
locations should not be the same as the location of the cues.
The resumption lag times were first examined to
determine how disruptive the early and late interruptions
were. The eye track data were then analyzed to examine
what perceptual processes were used to resume the primary
task.

done previously (though of course both are important in
many computer-based tasks).
How do people determine where they were last working
after being interrupted? After completing the interrupting
task, one possibility is that during the resumption lag, the
user could simply retrace their steps from the beginning of
the task. Essentially, one could restart the task after being
interrupted (Miller, 2002). Some empirical studies have
shown that interruptions that occur early in the primary task
are less disruptive than interruptions that occur in the
middle of the primary task (Czerwinski, Cutrell, &
Horovitz, 2000; Monk, Boehm-Davis, & Trafton, 2002).
This finding can be explained by the retrace hypothesis by
assuming that participants must restart some tasks, so being
interrupted earlier is better because less work will have
occurred.
A second possibility is that participants may use some
type of environmental cue to resume the primary task
(Trafton et al., 2005). In the current task, there was an
environmental cue that could facilitate resumption
(described below); thus at the perceptual level attention
should be directed towards this cue.
A third possibility is that some type of spatial heuristic is
used to recall the general area in the task where one left off,
especially if the interruption is relatively brief. People may
not recall specifically where to resume; however, the
general area in the task where they were interrupted may be
recalled. Thus, people may have some type of spatial
memory for where to resume. Upon returning to the general
area during the resumption lag one may retrace their steps to
get to the specific point where they left off. The ability to
remember general spatial information has also been
observed in several visual search tasks and other computer
tasks (Ehret, 2002).
By using an eye tracker, the study presented here
examined the specific perceptual processes during the
resumption lag. The goal was to determine where in the task
participants resumed and how participants went about
resuming the primary task during the resumption lag.

Experiment

Method

In order to investigate the perceptual processes during the
resumption lag, eye track data were collected as participants
worked on a spreadsheet as the primary task and received
instant messages as interruptions. The primary task required
participants to search a column of numbers and to transcribe
only the odd numbers onto a separate list. In order to
examine whether different processes were used to resume
the task depending on interruption point, interruptions
occurred both early and late in the primary task.
Participants received two interruptions in each interruptions
trial, one in the first half of the primary task and one in the
second half; the instant messages asked participants to take
the sum of five numbers. The accumulating list of
transcribed numbers served as a subtle cue to participants.
If participants retrace their steps from the beginning of the
task after being interrupted, there are several straightforward
predictions. The resumption lag for the early interruption
should be shorter than the resumption lag for the late
interruption. In the case of the early interruption,

Participants. Eleven George Mason University students
participated for course credit. A prerequisite of the
experiment was that participants had to be familiar with the
numeric keypad such that they did not have to look at the
keys when entering numbers.
Materials. Twenty-two excel spreadsheets were created,
each sheet containing twenty-two three digit numbers. The
numbers were randomly generated with the constraint that at
least half the numbers were odd. Each number subtended
approximately 2.5° of visual angle. The twenty-two
numbers were listed in a single column in each spreadsheet
in a random order. This column was labeled as the
“original” column; see Figure 1 for an example.
Twenty-two addition problems were also created, each
containing five randomly generated digits ranging from 1-9.
While participants performed the task eye track data were
680

column participants could look to the original numbers
column and simply retrace there steps from that point.
The first two spreadsheets served as practice trials; one
was a control trial, and one was an interruption trial. After
successfully completing these two trials the participant
began the experiment and completed all twenty trials at
his/her own pace.

collected using the LC Technologies EyeGaze System
operating at 60 Hz (16.7 samples/second).
Design. A within-subjects design was used. Half of the
spreadsheets had no interruptions (control condition), and
half of the spreadsheets had two interruptions each
(interruption conditions). Each spreadsheet served as a trial.
During the interruption trials two interruptions occurred –
one during the first half of the trial and one during the
second half of the trial. Each spreadsheet was randomly
assigned as a control or interruption trial.

Measures. The reaction time data were analyzed by
computing an inter-action interval for the control trials and
the resumption lag for the interruption trials. The interaction interval was the average time between entering odd
numbers into the “odd numbers” column on the spreadsheet.
The resumption lag was the average time from the end of
the interrupting secondary task to the first action back on the
primary task. The first action back on the primary task was
always entering an odd number into the appropriate column.
A resumption lag was calculated for the early interruptions
and for the late interruptions.
The eye track data were analyzed using ProtoMatch, a
software tool for analyzing eye track data (Myers &
Schoelles, 2005). ProtoMatch defines fixations as a
minimum of 6 samples within a default 2°-of-visual-angle
window resolution. Each cell in the “original column” and
“odd numbers” column was defined as an area of interest for
categorizing the location of fixations.

Results and Discussion

Figure 1. Screenshot of the odd numbers search task.

Reaction Time Data

The inter-action interval and the mean resumption lags for
the early and late interruptions were first examined to
determine how disruptive the instant message interruptions
were and whether there was a difference between early and
late interruptions. These mean times, as illustrated in Figure
2, were compared using an analysis of variance (ANOVA).
The omnibus ANOVA test was significant, F (2, 20) = 51.5,
p<.001, MSE = .57. Tukey HSD post-hoc comparisons were
used to determine which means were significantly different
from each other. Both the early interruption point
resumption lag (M = 4.3 sec) and the late interruption point
resumption lag (M = 4.1 sec) were significantly longer than
the inter-action interval (M = 1.4), p<.01. However, the
early and late interruption point resumption lags were not
significantly different from each other.
The significant differences between the resumption lags
and the inter-action intervals demonstrated that the instant
message interruptions were disruptive to performance on the
primary task. However, the point of interruption (early vs.
late) did not result in a significant difference in the
resumption lags. The average location of the early
interruption was approximately cell 6 in the spreadsheet and
average location of the late interruption was approximately
cell 15.
While the reaction time data indicated that the
interruptions were disruptive, these data did not shed light
on what specific processes were used to resume the primary
task. In order to understand how participants resumed the
primary task, we turned to the eye track data.

Procedure. The primary task required participants to type
the odd numbers from the original column in the
spreadsheet into a column labeled “odd numbers.” They
were instructed to begin at the top of the original column in
the first spreadsheet and to type the odd numbers into the
designated column without leaving spaces between the cells,
as illustrated in Figure 1. Once they completed the
spreadsheet they were to move on to the next spreadsheet,
performing the same task until each spreadsheet had been
completed.
The interrupting task was an instant message with an
addition problem asking the subject to take the sum of 5
digits. When the instant message appeared, it completely
occluded the spreadsheet and required immediate attention
from the participant. The participant was instructed to attend
to the instant message immediately and to mentally add the
five digits as quickly and accurately as possible. Once the
participant had the answer, they were instructed to type the
answer in the message window, to send the message and
then to close the instant message window. Once the instant
message was sent, they were to resume the primary task.
The total interruption time was approximately ten seconds.
The interruptions occurred only after an entire 3 digit
number was entered into the “odd numbers” column. An
interruption never occurred while a number was being
entered. After returning to the primary task, the odd
numbers list remained on the spreadsheet. Thus, the odd
numbers list served as a subtle environmental cue to
participants. After looking at the last number entered in this
681

this analysis showed that participants were equally active
during the resumption lags of both early and late
interruptions in terms of the number of fixations.

Figure 2. Mean inter-action interval and resumption lags.

Eye Track Data

Figure 3. Mean fixations during the inter-action interval
and the early and late resumption lags.

In order to examine the specific processes used to resume
the primary task at the perceptual level, three primary
analyses were performed with the eye track data. First, the
mean number of fixations during the inter-action interval
and the early and late point resumption lags were examined.
This analysis served as an indicator of how perceptually
active participants were during the resumption lags as
compared to the inter-action interval.
Second, the location of the first fixation back to the
original column of the primary task during the resumption
lag was compared for both the early and late interruptions. If
participants started the task over again, the location of gazes
should be similar in both cases. However, if participants
used environmental cues or some kind of spatial heuristic,
these locations should be very different. In addition, the
fixation location was compared to the location of the
environmental cues to determine whether a spatial heuristic
was being used.
Third, a measure of where in the original column of the
task the participant resumed as compared to where they left
off prior to the interruption was performed. This analysis
further examined the spatial heuristic view.

While this analysis showed that participants were not
fixating at one location during the resumption lag, the
pattern of fixations was not clear from this analysis alone.
Participants may have retraced their steps from the
beginning of the task, used an environmental cue upon
resuming, or they may have used a spatial heuristic
confining their fixations to one general area. In order to
distinguish between these possibilities we examined the
location of the initial fixation back to the original column
after being interrupted.
Fixation Location. If participants started the task over their
initial fixation back to the original column during the
resumption lags should be to the beginning of the task for
both early and late interruptions. The location of the initial
fixation during the resumption lag was measured in terms of
the cell in the original column that was fixated upon after
returning to the primary task. For example, after the
interruption, if the participant first fixated on the first
number at the top of the original column, this location was
marked as cell one. Thus, if participants started the task
over, for both early and late interruption points, the average
cell number should be around one.
The mean initial fixation location to the odd numbers
column during the resumption lags was compared for both
early and late interruptions using an ANOVA. The early
interruption fixation location (M = 5.7) was significantly
different from the late interruption fixation location (M =
10.6), F (1, 10) = 248.3, p< .001, MSE = .52. Thus,
participants did not fixate back to the same location after the
early and late interruptions. There were a total of 22 cells in
the original column. After the early interruption participants
fixated towards the beginning of the task (i.e. near cell 6)
and after the late interruptions participants fixated much
further into the task (i.e. near cell 11). These data clearly
show that participants did not start the task over after being
interrupted. Figure 1 shows where the early and late
interruptions took place and where participants initially
fixated.

Number of Fixations. An ANOVA comparing the mean
fixations during the inter-action interval and the early and
late interruption point resumption lags was conducted, as
illustrated in Figure 3. The omnibus ANOVA test was
significant, F (2,20) = 57.84, p<.001, MSE = 3.18. Tukey
HSD post-hoc comparisons were used to determine which
means were significantly different from each other. The
number of fixations during the early interruption point
resumption lag (M = 8.6) was significantly greater than the
number of fixations during the inter-action interval (M =
1.43), p<.01, as was the number of fixations during the late
point interruption lag (M = 8.4), p<.01. The number of
fixations during the early and late resumption lags was not
significantly different from each other.
First these results showed that participants were
perceptually active during the resumption lags as compared
to the inter-action interval; there were approximately 8
fixations during the resumption lags as compared to
approximately 2 during the inter-action intervals. In addition
682

further into the task. Further, these locations were different
from the positions of the cues. The early cue was
approximately around cell 3 and the late cue was
approximately around cell 7. Figure 1 shows where on the
spreadsheet the interruptions occurred, where participants
first fixated after resuming and where the early and late cues
were. The arrows represent where participants initially
fixated on the original column after resuming the task. The
top arrow is the early interruption resumption point and the
bottom arrow is the late interruption resumption point. The
blocks at the beginning of the arrows represent the error
bars. Finally, the E.C represents where the early cue cell
was and the L.C represents where the late cue cell was.
This figure shows that participants did not rely on the
environmental cues to resume the task, rather they had some
spatial awareness of where they were and they returned to
this general area. Once participants returned to this general
area how did they go about resuming the primary task? In
order to answer this question we examined fixation distance.

Did participants use environmental cues or did they use
the spatial heuristic to resume the primary task? The
difference in fixation locations for the early and late
interruptions supports both of these views. The fixation
location analysis presented above examined the initial
fixation back to the original column. The very first fixation
back to the primary task after the interruption was to the
number that was just entered in the odd numbers column in
98% of the resumption lags. Thus, participants could have
easily first fixated back to the odd numbers column to
determine the last number they had entered and then they
could have scanned directly across to the original column
and searched or retraced their steps from that point. Thus,
the numbers in the odd numbers column could have served
as a subtle cue. The odd numbers list would be shorter for
the early interruptions and longer for the late interruptions
accounting for the difference in fixation locations.
If this was the case then the average position of the last
number in the odd numbers list when an interruption was
presented should be similar to the location of the initial
fixation to the original list during the resumption lag. For
example, during the early interruptions the analysis above
showed that participant’s initial fixation back to the original
column was around cell 6. If participants were using the
subtle cue then the average position of the last number in
the odd numbers column for early interruptions should also
be around cell 6. This should hold true for late interruptions
as well, the last number in the odd numbers column should
be around 10.
An ANOVA was used to compare the initial fixation
location back to the original column during the resumption
lags to the position of the last odd number that was entered
in the odd numbers column; this was done for both early
and late interruptions. As Figure 4 shows, there was a main
effect of initial fixation location, F (1, 10) = 45.9, p<.001,
MSE = 2.2. There was also a main effect for the location of
the environmental cue, F (1, 10) = 437.9, p<.001, MSE =
.6. The interaction between fixation location and cue
location was not significant.

Fixation Distance. While the initial fixation location
analysis showed that participants used some kind of spatial
heuristic, how close participant’s initial fixation to the
original column after the interruption was relative to where
they fixated prior to the interruption is unknown. In order to
answer this question, the distance between the last fixation
on the primary task before the interruption and the first
fixation back to the task after the interruption was
computed.
The distance measure was computed in cell numbers,
similar to the fixation location data. For this analysis the
absolute value of the difference between the pre-interruption
fixation and the initial post interruption fixation was taken.
For example, if a participant was fixated on cell 8 just
before being interrupted, and then returned to cell 6 after the
interruption, the distance was computed as 2. A comparison
distance was also computed for the control trials. In the
control trials the distance was calculated based on the last
fixation in service of searching for an odd number and the
fixation to the actual odd number that was being entered
into the “odd numbers” column. For example, if a
participant is searching for an odd number and fixates on
cell 6 and then on cell 8 where there is an odd number to be
entered, the distance between these two cells was calculated
as 2. In the control condition this measure is essentially the
average fixation distance between entering odd numbers.
The mean fixation distances for the control trials and the
early and late interruptions were compared using an
ANOVA. The omnibus ANOVA test was significant, F
(2,20) = 92.08, p<.001, MSE = .53. Tukey HSD post-hoc
comparisons were used to determine which means were
significantly different from each other. The mean distance
from the control condition (M = .57) was significantly
different from the early interruption distance (M = 2.2)
p<.01, and the late interruption distance (M = 4.7) p<.01. In
addition, the early and late interruption distances were
significantly different from each other, p<.01.
The mean fixation distances in the interruption conditions
were significantly greater than the mean fixation distance
from the control condition. The greater fixation distance

Figure 4. Initial fixation location and cue locations.
The fixation location analysis suggests that participants
used some kind of spatial heuristic to remember the general
area where they left off. During early interruptions they
fixated back towards the beginning of the task during the
resumption lag, and during late interruptions they fixated
683

subgoal of the primary task decays (Altmann & Trafton,
2002) one’s memory for the spatial location of where to
resume may decay as well. Whether the spatial memory of
where one last was decays just as readily as specific subgoal
information needs further research.

after the interruption shows that participants did not fixate
right back where they left off. In the early interruption case,
they were fixating approximately two cells away, and in the
late fixation case, they fixated approximately six cells away.
Thus, it appears that for the late interruptions, participants
were less precise in returning to where they left off.
After participants initial fixation back to the original
column, did they examine the numbers in a linear sequential
fashion during the resumption lag in order to resume the
primary task? The sequence of fixations during the
resumption lags were examined and categorized as a linear
sequential behavior or as some other type of behavior. This
was done for fixations during the inter-action intervals and
the early and late interruption lags. The number of times
this behavior was exhibited was compared using an
ANOVA. The omnibus ANOVA was significant, F (2, 20) =
10.7, p<.01, MSE = 417.9. Tukey HSD post-hoc
comparisons were performed to examine which means were
significantly different. The linear sequential behavior was
exhibited during the inter-action interval (93% of the time)
significantly more often than during the early interruption
resumption lag (53%) and the late interruption resumption
lag (71%), p<.01. There was no difference between the early
and late resumption lags.
These analyses suggest that during the resumption lag
participants were able to recall the general spatial location
where they resumed. Following fixating in the general area,
during early interruptions, over half of the time they
sequentially fixated down the column of numbers. For late
interruptions they sequentially fixated down the column of
numbers over 70% of the time.
Finally, if there were process differences at the perceptual
level for early and late interruption points, why weren’t
these differences seen in the resumption lag reaction time
data? One explanation is that the duration of the fixations
and saccades are so short that these differences are not
reflected in the reaction time. The process differences at the
perceptual level do not manifest themselves in the reaction
times.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by a grant from the Office
of Naval Research to the second author. We are very
grateful to Chris Myers for his help in preparing the eye
track data with the ProtoMatch software.

References
Adamcyzk, P. D., & Bailey, B. P. (2004). If not now, when?: The
effects of interruption at different moments within task
execution. In Human Factors in Computing Systems:
Proceedings of CHI'04 (pp. 271-278). New York: ACM Press.
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2004). Task interruption:
Resumption lag and the role of cues. In Proceedings of the 26th
annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society: Erlbaum.
Czerwinski, M., Cutrell, E., & Horovitz, E. (2000). Instant
messaging: Effects of relevance and time. In Proceedings of CHI
2000 Conference: ACM.
Ehret, B. (2002). Learning where to look: location learning in
graphical user interfaces. In Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems:
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working
memory. Psychologiclal Review, 211-245.
Miller, S. (2002). Window of opportunity: Using the interruption
lag to manage disruption in complex tasks. In Proceedings of
46th Annual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society (HFES 2002).
Monk, C. A., Boehm-Davis, D. A., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). The
attentional costs of interrupting task performance at various
stages. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society (pp. 1824-1828).
Monk, C. A., Boehm-Davis, D. A., & Trafton, J. G. (2004).
Recovering from interruptions: Implications for driver
distraction research. Human Factors, 46(4), 650-663.
Myers, C. W., & Schoelles, M. J. (2005). ProtoMatch: A tool for
analyzing high-density, sequential eye gaze and cursor
protocols. Behavior Research Methods, 37(2), 256-270.
Oulasvirta, A., & Sarrlilouma, P. (2004). Long-term working
memory and interrupting messages in human-computer
interaction. Behaviour and Information Technology, 23(1), 5364.
Speier, C., Vessey, I., & Valacich, J. S. (2003). The effects of
interruptions, task complexity, and information presentation on
computer-supported decision-making performance. Decision
Sciences, 34(4), 771-797.
Trafton, J. G., Altmann, E. M., & Brock, D. P. (2005). Huh, what
was I doing? How people use environmental cues after an
interruption. In Proceedings of the 49th. Annual Meeting of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Trafton, J. G., Altmann, E. M., Brock, D. P., & Mintz, F. E.
(2003). Preparing to resume an interrupted task: Effects of
prospective goal encoding and retrospective rehearsal.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58, 583-603.

General Discussion
The eye movement data showed that participants were
able to remember the general spatial location of where they
were interrupted and were able to return to this general area
when resuming the primary task. While participants may not
be able to remember the specific location where they left
off, they are able to remember the general spatial area where
the interruption took place and subsequently where one
should resume the task. This memory for spatial location
needs to be included in the memory models of how
interruptions are resumed. This spatial information seems to
be more imprecise for the late interruptions based on the
fixation distance data. This did not result in longer
resumption lags for the late interruptions in this task
possibly because of the nature of the task.
The duration of the interruption is an important feature to
consider. In this task the length of the interruption was
approximately 10 seconds. It is not clear what effects longer
interruption durations would have on people’s ability to
remember where they were spatially. Just as the specific
684

