UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Object Files, Anchoring, Sortals and the Problem of Singular Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8dq4z82x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Bullot, Nicolas J.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Object Files, Anchoring, Sortals and the Problem of Singular Perception
Nicolas J. Bullot (nbullot@interchange.ubc.ca)
Department of philosophy, University of British Columbia, 1866 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1 Canada
essentially, perceptual content has to be defined broadly,
i.e., with respect to external objects. For Dretske (1995) the
perceptual link between the perceiver and the object
depends on the informational function of the sensory
systems. This function consists of representing properties
instantiated in the perceiver’s environment. In this analysis
‘to perceive a physical object x’ is approximately equivalent
to obtaining the descriptive content informing that the
property, or feature, F of x is exemplified in the spatiotemporal region analyzed by some sensory system. There is,
however, a problem nested in the attributive phrase ‘of x’.
How are we to explain that the property F – for instance
GLOWING – is perceived as being ‘that of the unique object
x’ and not that of some other object y or z? Are there
‘singular perceptual states’ which would refer to a unique
object, and which would operate as counterparts of names in
language? These questions relate to what I term ‘the
Problem of Singular2 Perception’ (or PSP), which can be
expressed as follows:
PSP: What are the (non-conceptual or conceptual)
capacities that are to be taken into consideration if one
wants to explain how a perceiver can perform singular
perception, i.e. the perceptual individuation or
identification of an object as the same unique (i.e.,
token-identical, numerically identical) object perceived
at successive moments in time?3
PSP relates to the epistemic, pragmatic and emotional
values of singular perception because singular perception of
object x is necessary (1) for the acquisition of perceptual
knowledge bearing strictly on x, (2) for performing actions
that must be targeted to the ‘one and only’ individual x (e.g.,
a precious artifact, a particular person, a military target),
(3) for having reactions accurately directed at the ‘one and
only’ individual who deserves a particular emotional care
such as your spouse and child. If one wants to resolve PSP,

Abstract
What are the abilities that are to be taken into consideration if
one wants to understand the performance of singular
perception, i.e. the incremental perception and tracking of an
object as the same unique, or distinct and numerically
identical, object? This question formulates what one can term
the Problem of Singular Perception (PSP), which presents
both philosophical and psychological aspects. Section 1
introduces and formulates PSP. Illustrated by the visual
tracking of a flying object which is difficult to identify
sortally, section 2 outlines two distinct strategies which aim to
resolve PSP, and which are often considered as incompatible
approaches. The first strategy appeals to proto- or nonconceptual skills (e.g., visual object files or indexes) whereas
the second concentrates on elaborate conceptual abilities (e.g.,
sortal-based identifications, perceptual inferences). In order to
propose a framework for studying PSP and argue that nonconceptualist and conceptualist strategies are not mutually
exclusive, this article brings together ideas from three fields
that have traditionally been progressing in isolation from each
other: the philosophy of reference; the philosophy of object
perception; and the psychology of attention. Section 3
presents an ‘argument from updating’ that supports the use of
the concept of object file – or, of singular content – to study
PSP in an interdisciplinary framework. In addition, it provides
the basis for a taxonomical classification of distal properties
controlling visual files. While the research on visual object
files seems to support a non-conceptualist approach to PSP
(and thus to refute a generalized sortalist view), section 4
argues that the object-file framework offers both (1) a
minimalist and non-conceptualist and externalist explanation
to PSP based on the perceptual anchoring onto a particular
distal object and (2) a hybrid conceptualist solution based on
perceptual inferences which aim to produce judgments of
demonstrative identification.
Keywords: singular perception; numerical identity; object
file; binding problem; demonstratives; attention; anchoring;
tracking; sortal; perceptual inference.

2

The epithet singular is used in the article to refer to the specific
ability of tracking the target’s uniqueness/distinctness (i.e., its
numerical identity).
3
What is specific to PSP, as opposed to other problems akin to
PSP such as the Parsing Problem (Spelke, Gutheil, & Van de
Walle, 1995: 298-300), the Binding Problem (Treisman, 1996) or
the Many Properties Problem (Clark, 2004: 447-51; Matthen,
2005: 277-82)? The problem refers to the study of the perceiver’s
capacity to track or know the target uniqueness/distinctness
determined by its token-identity or numerical identity (Evans,
1982; Locke, 1975 [1689]: Bk. II, ch. 27; Parfit, 1986: 200-4;
Strawson, 1959: 31-8). This problem is not necessarily dealt with
by works on object recognition, since recognition can be limited to
recognition of type, instead of identification of tokens. PSP might
perhaps be classified as logically subordinate to more general
problems such as the Binding Problem.

1. The Problem of Singular Perception (PSP)
To explain the nature of object perception, Dretske (1995),
Evans (1982), Campbell (2002), Clark (2004), and Matthen
(2005) tend to admit, mutatis mutandis, that object
perception depends on establishing a direct, causal and
informational relation with a set of external physical
objects.1 Such analyses tend to agree with a direct and
externalist theory of object perception upholding that,
1

In this context, the ‘physical object’ refers to a realist concept of
object: that of any unique material body that possesses
hierarchically organized and cohesive parts, (such as the body of a
human agent, an artifact or a building), which exists independently
of internal states of the perceiver and her perceptual systems.
1062

an analysis of sensory perception as description of (general)
property by perceptual representations4 must be
supplemented. This kind of analysis does not provide any
explanation about how perception can latch onto a particular
token, exemplifying a unique series of causal and relational
properties, as well as a unique spatio-temporal path in the
world. Yet there are reasons5 to consider that object
perception is jointly based on (1) an anchoring function
such as the sensory-motor anchoring of the perceiver onto
an individual objects and (2) a descriptive function such as
the description of the properties of the perceived object.

2. Non-conceptualist and conceptualist views
Consider the revision of demonstrative judgments based on
a hypothetical recognition of a visible target. Take the case
of observers who look without the help of instruments at an
object moving slowly in the night sky (cf. Fig. 1 below).
The object seems to emit light but, like all celestial bodies,
it is difficult to identify it without optical instruments.
Suppose this object is subsequently proved to be a plane on
its nocturnal flight. The plane is a luminous body when it
moves at night, since there are lights on its wings and tail. In
the darkness of the night, the observers on the ground
looking at the object cannot be sure that they are reliably
classifying it as member of the correct natural or artifactual
kind. Following a long-standing tradition of studies on
sortal6 concepts, one can regard this puzzling classification
as a problematic case of sortal identification. A sortal
identification of an individual is its categorization as a
member of one particular sort, or kind, of things. One of the
observers can thus state successively the following
judgments based on perceptual demonstratives: ‘This
luminous object [visual tracking of the luminous x] is a
PLANET or a STAR. No… it’s some thing else because it is
moving quickly. It’s a FALLING STAR. No… it’s an
AIRPLANE, because the light is flickering at regular
intervals.’
Prima facie, in this sequence of statements, it seems that
each judgment results from the combination of one
relatively stable mental procedure with another which is
relatively less stable. The procedure which appears unstable
or uncertain is that of obtaining an elaborate sortal
identification of the essential kind of the target object. The
instability is revealed by the asserted or denied connection
between the same tracked object and four different sortal
4

See, e.g., Marr & Nishihara (1978), Dretske (1995).
See, e.g., Pylyshyn (2003), Matthen (2005).
6
After Locke, the idea of a sortal concept was introduced namely
by P. Strawson (1959) as follows: ‘A sortal universal supplies a
principle for distinguishing and counting individual particulars
which it collects. It presupposes no antecedent principle, or
method, of individuating the particulars it collects.’ (Strawson,
1959: 168). Grasping a sortal concept F enables the thinker to trace
an instance x of F because understanding that x is an F supplies a
tentative knowledge of the identity and persistence conditions of
this individual x: the sortal can be used to reply to the question
‘What is it?’; cf., e.g., Hirsch (1997), Wiggins (1997; 2001), Carey
& Xu (2001; Xu, 1997), Campbell (2002: 61-83).
5

concepts. In spite of the problem of an unreliable sortal
classification, the dynamic maintenance of perceptual
reference to the object x does not seem challenged during
the episode. Thus, in absence of the correct sortal and
descriptive classification, some sensory-motor procedure
might be reliable to secure the act of perceptual reference
and to keep record of the fact that this is one single, unique
and, enduring entity. However, how can the perceiver
‘implicitly’ access the ‘perceptible sameness’ of x without
grasping the ‘sortal sameness’ of such x? Why would
‘perceptible sameness’ be strictly indexed on ‘sortal
sameness’? These questions raise PSP.
The possible theoretical moves to analyze such an
example, and to formulate a strategy aiming at resolving
PSP, vary between explanations that emphasize the role of
conceptual abilities and others that insist on the role of nonconceptual skills.
I will regard as a non-conceptualist approach or solution
to PSP any account based on the idea that sensory-motor
capacities or perceptual contents, make it possible for a
perceiver to latch on to, or to track a target x as being the
same (numerically identical) target without the help of
complex conceptual, sortal or descriptive capacities. Such
capacities must be able to perform anchoring of the
perceiver onto the object x and provide perceptual reference
to x, notwithstanding the fact that they fail to match some
usual criteria of conceptuality7. Tracking skills would fail to
match a usual criterion of conceptuality if, for instance, they
could anchor the perceiver on to x without the mediation of
an elaborate understanding of the ‘identity conditions’8 of
this object x – instead of tracing x over time and space on
the basis of the understanding that x is a member of a kind
parsed by a learned sortal concept (e.g., AIRCRAFT or
9
STAR). This type of anchoring might be exemplified by the
visual tracking of an aircraft by the observer who cannot, in
the situation of action, have the mastery of the sortal
concept AIRCRAFT and cannot form the demonstrative belief
that ‘This is an aircraft’ (either because the agent cannot
correctly apply the concept given the characteristics of the
7

Criteria of conceptuality are given for instance by the purported
properties compositionality, cognitive significance or reference
determination; see, e.g., Laurence & Margolis (1999) and Gunther
(2003) for their discussion.
8
The notions of ‘identity/persistence conditions’ of a material
object x refers to the material conditions that determine the identity
or persistence of x. The traditional sortalist view – cf., e.g.,
Wiggins (1997; 2001) and Ayers (1997) for its critical discussion –
holds that an understanding of the identity conditions of x
(provided by the relevant sortal) is required for its determinate
individuation and tracking. In Wiggins’ words, the making of
identity judgments has to be thought of ‘as an extension of our
practical capacity to single out things of a given kind and then, in
the light of an understanding of the behaviour of things of that
kind, to keep track of them’ (Wiggins, 2001: xiii).
9
In other words, sensory-motor tracking skills would be nonconceptual if the sensory-motor anchoring did not hinge on a belief
content that singles out the target exclusively via the descriptive
specification of the target identity and its persistence conditions
(e.g., the belief that is it an AIRCRAFT because it fulfils the
description that it is a flying artifact with wings and a tail, etc.).

1063

situation or because the concept is absent of his/her
conceptual repertoire).
A conceptualist approach or solution to PSP is any
account based on the idea that some conceptual and
classificatory capacities allow perceivers to track the target
of perception as being the same target. One possible
directing idea of a conceptualist solution is that the ability to
track the object of perception requires, typically, an
understanding of the identity conditions (or the nature or
essence) of the object to be parsed or tracked. According to
a strong generalized sortalist solution to PSP, the key
capacity to understand perceptual anchoring is thus
conceptual classificatory abilities.
Although it is worth trying to combine them (see sect. 4),
non-conceptualists explanations of PSP (Clark, 2004;
Kahneman, Treisman, & Gibbs, 1992; Pylyshyn, 2003;
Spelke et al., 1995) have to be distinguished from
conceptualist explanations (Carey & Xu, 2001; Wiggins,
1997, 2001). Non-conceptualist and conceptualist solutions
are often said to be incompatible (but see sect. 4). For
instance, Wiggins (1997; 2001) upholds a generalized
conceptualist/sortalist view, which is incompatible with a
number of non-conceptualist accounts.

Figure 1 : Tracking a non-sortally identified flying object,
the PSP and visual object file (see text for details)

3. Object files, file-controlling properties and
the Argument from Updating
Plausible solutions to PSP can be based on a set of
distinctions introduced by the theories of object files.10 The
general concept of file is used to express the idea that
subjects store, accumulate and update information about
individuals or objects in a ‘mental repertory’ called a ‘file’,
which is a state exhibiting singular content that can be split
(if its referent divides) or fused with another file (if two files
happens to have a single referent). An object file is not only
a mental state which possesses an intentional content, in the
philosophical sense that it is ‘about’ or ‘of’ something else.
In addition, it is specialized for tracing or tracking a unique
10

The notion of file or object file in thought or language has been
employed by, e.g., Bach (1987) and Perry (2001). The concept of
object file in vision has been developed or discussed namely by
Kahneman et al. (1984; 1992), Pylyshyn (2003), Henderson &
Anes (1994), Carey & Xu (2001) and Mitroff, Scholl, & Wynn
(2005). Bullot and Rysiew (2005) suggest extending the use of this
notion in relation with the problem of tracking the uniqueness of
intentional agents.

object – it is a singular mental state such as the
representation of an individual in working or long-term
memory.
Why is the theory of object files relevant for resolving
PSP? The argument I suggest is based on the notion of
updating or reviewing specific to incremental perception.
The main problem to resolve PSP is to determine the nature
of the capabilities that can keep track of a unique physical
object in spite of its property changes. For objects undergo
many different types of changes (such as changes in their
visible surfaces or their spatio-temporal location), which are
especially salient in contexts of discontinuous perceptual
encounters. The notion of an object file is thus relevant here
because it refers to a cognitive system that has the function
to track or trace a changing physical element and perform
the relevant internal updating or reviewing operations. The
concept of object file is thus a placeholder for that of
updating system (or updating state with singular content).11
For this reason, it is not surprising that several accounts of
PSP and other analogous problems concerning tracking
individuals are dealt with the notion of file or object file.
This notion is one of those rare concepts considered to be
explanatorily relevant simultaneously by semantic theorists
of mental and linguistic reference – e.g., to resolve the
problem of empty names (Perry, 2001: 123-72) – and by
psychologists of perception (Kahneman et al., 1992).
In the psychology of vision, several authors have
hypothesized that the visual system uses temporary object
files for tracking and identifying objects.12 Prima facie,
there is a striking similarity between the psychological
hypotheses about visual files and the philosophical notion of
‘file’ used in causal theories of names (Bach, 1987; Perry,
2001). Both accounts (1) are object-centered approaches of
mental reference (Kahneman et al., 1992: 178) and (2) share
conceptual claims about the organization of the
representation of individuals. Nonetheless, the roots of the
psychological tradition (Kahneman & Treisman, 1984;
Kahneman et al., 1992; Treisman, 1992) differ from those of
11

The argument from updating holds for the concept of visual
object file. Visual object files are updating systems that are
responsible for the evolution of incremental singular
representations. According to Kahneman et al. (Kahneman et al.,
1992: 179), a object file allows an observer to gain knowledge
about an individual object because it carries out the three following
updating procedures, constitutive of visual object tracking. (1) A
correspondence operation determines, for each object in the scene,
whether it is ‘new’ or whether it is an object recently perceived,
now at a different location. The system uses spatio-temporal
information to determine whether a given element is (or refers to) a
new object or if it is the same object which moved from a former
location to a new place. (2) A reviewing process retrieves the
characteristics of the initial object, no longer in view. (3) An
impletion process uses simultaneously currently available
information and retrieved information to produce a conscious
percept of a newly appearing object or of the displacement of
previously seen object. Each visual file is maintained active as
long as the target object is visible in the visual field, and could be
destroyed a short time after its disappearance from the visual field.
12
Cf., e.g., Kahneman & Treisman (Kahneman & Treisman, 1984;
Kahneman et al., 1992), Pylyshyn (2003), Yantis (1998).

1064

the philosophical tradition in at least one important respect:
in psychology, the theoretical construct of visual object file
appears as a rather non-conceptualist solution to PSP (and
thus goes against generalized sortalism) because it refers to
a temporary visual representation which can track a
persevering object in the visual field without the use of
sophisticated conceptual or descriptive contents.
D. Kahneman and A. Treisman (Kahneman & Treisman,
1984; Kahneman et al., 1992; Treisman, 1992) have
introduced in psychology the concept of an object file as a
temporary representation, within which successive states of
an object are linked and integrated. They suggest that the
main result of processing visually a particular scene is to
construct a set of separate (visual) object files. An object file
is a mechanism of visual attention whose function is to store
information about an object in the visible scene. It is
responsible for the perceived continuity of the seen object
(Kahneman et al., 1992: 177). In contrast to the causal
theorists of names (Bach, 1987; Perry, 2001) in which
object files are storage mechanism of long-term recognition
networks, Kahneman and Treisman hypothesize that the
construction of object files can be independent of long-term
visual recognition and long-term beliefs.
I will henceforth concentrate on the contribution of the
file theory for the debate between non-conceptualist and
conceptualist/sortalist approaches to PSP. I need first to
sketch a taxonomical classification of the properties that can
exogenously trigger and control a file (cf. Fig. 1). A first
group of properties encompasses the properties governing
the initial anchoring of a file (henceforth abbreviated ‘FA’),
which cause the visual indexing of an object (Pylyshyn,
2003) and the opening of a visual object file (in
Kahneman’s and Treisman’s terminology). This procedure
is exemplified by the exogenous capture of visual attention.
It can be said that an intentional agent A is initially anchored
onto a physical object x if and only if:
File Initial Anchoring: A direct relation occurs between
(1) a set of x’s properties (FA) and (2) the perceiver’s
visual mechanisms of attentional capture and multimodal
anchoring.
The detailed specification of the properties responsible for
the initial visual anchoring of visual attention is an open
empirical question, which relates to the debates about
automaticity and attentional control – cf., e.g., Yantis (1998)
and Folk & Gibson (2001). For instance, it is known that
abrupt visual onsets capture attention. Possible mechanisms
for explaining this phenomenon include a luminance-change
detection system and a mechanism that detects the
appearance of a new perceptual object (Yantis, 1998; Yantis
& Hillstrom, 1994).
In addition, one must distinguish the former group of
properties from the properties of sustained maintenance of
the visual file, which correspond to the continued visual
tracking of the object. These properties play a causal role in
the persistence of a visual object file. An intentional agent A
tracks visually a physical object x in a situation σ if and only
if:

File persistence: There is a relation maintained between
(1) a set of persistent properties (FP) of x and its
surrounding situation σ and (2) the visual processes
ensuring x’s dynamic visual tracking in spite of
disturbances during movements and actions (e.g., the
maintenance of perceived continuity during occlusions or
saccades via trans-saccadic integration).
It is likely that the properties that cause the initial anchoring
on to the object of visual attention (FA-type) are different
from those (FP-type) which make it possible to maintain an
open file for the same object in spite of temporary
occlusion.
A third group includes the properties (henceforth
abbreviated ‘FE’) which are encoded in the visual object file
during the performance of perceptual tracking. They can be
expected to causally determine the content of visual
experience. They are properties or features of the object
about which internal states of the file deliver information to
visual working memory or conscious visual experience.
These internal states of the file are vehicles for an
intentional and descriptive content and serve as descriptions
of the properties which are available for further cognitive
processing. In this analysis, an agent A encodes visually
information about the properties (FE) of a physical object x
if and only if:
Encoding in a file: The internal states of an object file
referring to object x (in perceiver A’s visual system)
accumulate descriptive information (e.g., perceptual
predicates) about features or properties (FE) of x.
This notion of property encoding is helpful for
distinguishing the ‘contents’ of a file. In philosophical
terms, a visual object file has an intentional content; it refers
to, or is about an external individual, which is the broad
content of the file. However, the object file is not identical
with its referent. The content of the visual file is a narrow
(i.e., dependent on an observer and a point of observation)
and presumably descriptive intentional content.

4. Resolving PSP in the object file framework
Even though an active visual object file does not necessary
entail the complete demonstrative identification13 of its
referent, it nonetheless singles out one unique individual via
the initial and sustained anchoring onto its referent. This
means that the file’s capacity to track uniqueness is not
dependent on a conceptual capacity to understand the
identity or persistence conditions of the object. Such
capacity to track uniqueness thus remains ‘implicit’.
However, if an elaborate recognition or identification of the
object happens on the basis of visual information, it must be
on the basis of information contained in the file.
13
‘Demonstrative identification’ is meant in the philosophical
sense – examined namely by Strawson (1959), Evans (1982),
McDowell (1990) or Peacocke (1991) – of an identification
judgment in which the perceiver is able to discriminate the object
of her thought from any other object, including from other objects
of the same kind.

1065

Consequently, it can be said that the properties encoded in
the file correspond to the ‘proto-identification’ of a target,
which is necessary for (but not equivalent to) more elaborate
forms of perceptual recognition and identification.
The distinction between the three groups of properties
(FA-, FP- and FE-types) refines the idea that the visual
content depends on both anchoring routines and descriptive
operations. The anchoring component is based on initial
anchoring and file persistence (controlled by FA- and FPtypes properties), and the descriptive component
corresponds to the internal states which describe the
encoded properties (FE-type). Descriptive information is
based on a temporary intentional content that may lead to
the proto-identification of the object, and then eventually to
its recognition and complete demonstrative identification.
The conditions of initial anchoring onto an object
(depending on the occurring relation to FA-type properties)
and of the file persistence (depending on the relation to FPtype properties) contribute to the object-based perceptual
anchoring. It seems to be necessary for the formation of the
singular content of perception, but it does not imply the
instantiation of a descriptive visual content. 14
Objecting to the claim that non-conceptualist and
conceptualist solutions to PSP are mutually exclusive, I
suggest that at least two solutions to PSP can be outlined in
the file theory. The first such solution comes from the fact
that a visual file (or index) permits the implicit tracking of
an object’s identity. This is a non-conceptualist, externalist
and minimal solution to PSP. According to file theory, the
initial anchoring onto an object x and the persistence of the
file are constitutive of the non-epistemic, or non-doxastic,
tracking of x. This visual tracking is performed via a
mechanism that requires neither the use of encoded
descriptions of x’s encoded properties (FE) nor the
understanding of a sortal concept. This explanation is
possible since initial anchoring and file persistence are
primarily controlled by causal and spatio-temporal
properties of the target object. These spatio-temporal
properties may be, for example, the properties of an object’s
abrupt appearance for the initial anchoring, and the
properties of spatio-temporal continuity/cohesion for the
persistence and maintenance of visual tracking (Fig. 1).

14

This analysis avoids thus the risk of circularity present in the
explanation of the anchoring of a representational content by
means of a representational content. The initial anchoring
determined by the automatic and exogenous capture of attention by
the appearance of a new object in the visual field can depend on
anchoring properties (of FA-type) of which one has no reason to
consider a priori as been identical to the properties which are
encoded in the object file and are constitutive of the narrow
content of the visual experience – and which belong to the FE-type.
As a result, functional anchoring can occur without prior
knowledge of the agent about the situation or the target. Perceiving
completely new objects is not a problem in this account.
(Perceiving a completely new object is a problem for the theories
that claim that perceptual individuation depends on prior
conceptual knowledge because perceivers do not possess
knowledge about completely new objects – cf. Kahneman et al.
(1992), McDowell (1990), Peacocke (1991).)
1066

This explanation can be applied to the example of the
visual tracking of an aircraft previously noted (Fig. 1). The
properties which determine the opening of a visual file and
the initial anchoring of the visual states on to the tracked
aircraft are luminance increments (caused by the lights on
the aircraft). The properties that determine the persistence of
the object file are the spatio-temporal regularities of the
light pulses. The encoded properties give rise to the visual
experience of a moving object in the sky. When the
perceiver speculates on the object’s sortal identity, she relies
on the maintenance of the visual reference guaranteed by the
visual object file. The perceiver ascribes successively, by a
series of predicative acts, different kinds of descriptive
properties to the target object, which may be about the
identity conditions of the tracked object. Yet, in the minimal
case, the visual tracking is performed independently of the
cognitive use of the descriptive information. Indeed, the
basic operations performed on the visual files, such as file
splitting and file fusion are performed on the basis of spatiotemporal constraints and Gestalt principles, independently
of the perceiver’s conceptual understanding of the situation.
In philosophical terms, the spirit of this minimal
explanation is externalist because it explains perceptual
tracking by means of a relation of causal dependence
between the visual states and the object in a manner which
does not depend primarily on the encoding of an internal
representation/description instantiated in this system (such
as the descriptive states about the encoded properties). It
presents a case where the perceiver tracks the same object
dynamically, but only in an implicit way, by exploiting
external spatio-temporal information which depends on the
objective fact that it is actually the same object which
follows a continuous spatio-temporal trajectory.
A second solution to PSP afforded by the notion of
(visual) object files is what might be termed a ‘hybrid’
solution. It refers to the possibility of keeping track of an
object’s identity by means of a cognitive tracking
(accessible to conscious revision), which rests on the
articulation of perceptual anchoring, proto-identification and
memorized information. This is a solution in which the
tracking of identity operates by means of concepts
understood as internal and memorized descriptions. In this
type of case, the perceiver can use the kind of information
associated with an understanding of the sortal identity of the
object to infer whether this thing is the same as that thing.
The perceiver would use (1) the information about encoded
properties in an object file for the perceptual inferences on
which visual attention is anchored functionally and (2) a
comparison carried out between the encoded information in
the visual file and the memorized knowledge needed in
order to recognize it, or to draw the epistemic inference, that
the file is (or is not) about the same individual.
In the example of aircraft-tracking above, one can assume
that the visual tracking of the flying body is carried out
merely via the perceptual anchoring provided by a visual
object file. However, when an observer has demonstrative
thoughts and attempts to reach a sortal identification of the
object, the situation is different since the observer uses the
information about the encoded properties to classify the
tracked object. In addition, when an observer says, ‘It’s an

airplane, because the light is flickering at regular intervals’,
and reaches a correct sortal identification, he or she is using
the file-encoded information about the spatio-temporal
regularity of the light-emitting behavior of the flying body
as a clue to both its sortal and numerical identity. The
agent’s reasoning here might be: only an artifact could
exhibit this kind of spatio-temporal behavior, and this
spatio-temporal behavior matches that of the entities
subsumed under the (sortal) concept AIRPLANE.
Far from being exclusive, the minimal explanation and
the composite explanation seem thus complementary if one
seeks to account for the capacity to keep track of the
individuals in both perception and thought – and to give an
analysis of varieties of attentional strategies to resolve PSP.

Acknowledgements
I thank J. Kemp, D. Lopez, M. Matthen, P. Rysiew and
the CogSci06 anonymous referees for helpful comments on
an earlier version of this article.

References
Ayers, M. (1997). Is 'physical object' a sortal concept? A
reply to Xu. Mind and Language, 12(3/4), 393-405.
Bach, K. (1987). Thought and Reference. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Bullot, N. J., & Rysiew, P. (2005). Tracking objects,
Tracking agents. Interdisciplines, 'Referring to Objects',
http://www.interdisciplines.org/objects/papers/5.
Campbell, J. (2002). Reference and Consciousness. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Carey, S., & Xu, F. (2001). Infant's knowledge of objects:
beyond object files and object tracking. Cognition, 80,
179-213.
Clark, A. (2004). Feature-placing and proto-objects.
Philosophical Psychology, 17(4), 443-469.
Dretske, F. I. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Evans, G. (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Folk, C. L., & Gibson, B. S. (Eds.). (2001). Attraction,
Distraction and Action: Multiples Perspectives on
Attentional Capture. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Gunther, Y. H. (Ed.). (2003). Essays on Nonconceptual
Content. Cambridge: MA: MIT Press.
Henderson, J. M., & Anes, M. D. (1994). Effects of objectfile review and type priming on visual identification
within and across eye fixations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20,
826-839.
Hirsch, E. (1997). Basic objects: A reply to Xu. Mind and
Language, 12(3/4), 406-412.
Kahneman, D., & Treisman, A. (1984). Changing views of
attention and automaticity. In R. Parasuraman & D. R.
Davies (Eds.), Varieties of Attention (pp. 29-62). Orlando:
Academic Press.

1067

Kahneman, D., Treisman, A., & Gibbs, B. J. (1992). The
reviewing of object files: Object-specific integration of
information. Cognitive Psychology, 24(2), 175-219.
Laurence, S., & Margolis, E. (1999). Concept and cognitive
science. In E. Margolis & S. Laurence (Eds.), Concepts
(pp. 3-81). Cambridge: MA: MIT Press.
Locke, J. (1975 [1689]). An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Marr, D., & Nishihara, H. K. (1978). Representation and
recognition of the spatial organization of threedimensional shapes. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, B200, 269-294.
Matthen, M. (2005). Seeing, Doing, and Knowing: A
Philosophical Theory of Sense Perception. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
McDowell, J. (1990). Peacocke and Evans on demonstrative
content. Mind, 99(394), 255-266.
Mitroff, S. R., Scholl, B. J., & Wynn, K. (2005). The
relationship between object files and conscious
perception. Cognition, 96, 67-92.
Parfit, D. (1986). Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Peacocke, C. (1991). Demonstrative content: a reply to John
McDowell. Mind, 100, 123-133.
Perry, J. (2001). Reference and Reflexivity. Stanford: CSLI
Publications.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (2003). Seeing and Visualizing: It's Not
What You Think. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Spelke, E. S., Gutheil, G., & Van de Walle, G. (1995). The
development of object perception. In S. M. Kosslyn & D.
N. Osherson (Eds.), Visual Cognition: An Invitation to
Cognitive Science, Second Edition (pp. 297-330).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strawson, P. F. (1959). Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive
Metaphysics. London: Methuen.
Treisman, A. (1992). Perceiving and re-perceiving objects.
American Psychologist, 47, 862-875.
Treisman, A. (1996). The binding problem. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 6, 171-178.
Wiggins, D. (1997). Sortal concepts: A reply to Xu. Mind
and Language, 12(3/4), 413-421.
Wiggins, D. (2001). Sameness and Substance Renewed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Xu, F. (1997). From Lot's wife to a pillar of salt: Evidence
that 'physical object' is a sortal concept. Mind and
Language, 12(3/4), 365-392.
Yantis, S. (1998). Objects, attention and perceptual
experience. In R. D. Wright (Ed.), Visual Attention (pp.
187-214). New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yantis, S., & Hillstrom, A. P. (1994). Stimulus-driven
attention capture: Evidence from equiluminant visual
objects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 20(1), 95-107.

