UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Object Naming and Later Lexical Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4xv977c5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Ameel, Eef
Malt, Barbara
Storms, Gert

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Object Naming and Later Lexical Development
Eef Ameel (eef.ameel@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Barbara Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Hollander & Goldberg, 1991; Gentner, 1978). In contrast,
common nouns naming familiar, concrete objects have
widely been assumed to be unproblematic for children.
Gentner (1978, 2005) has suggested that acquisition of
common nouns is a faster process than verb acquisition
because common nouns refer to entities easily segregated
from their context, while verbs convey relationships among
entities. This suggestion is compatible with Rosch’s (1975)
proposal that common nouns capture sets of things sharing
many inter-correlated properties, and with the assumption in
the second-language learning literature (De Groot, 1993;
Kroll, 1993) that the meanings of common nouns will tend to
be closely equivalent across languages.
But evidence has begun to accumulate suggesting that the
case of common nouns is more complex than previously
thought. Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi and Wang (1999) found
substantial variability across languages in the sets of objects
picked out by names for common household containers, even
though the perception of similarity by speakers of the
languages was much the same. This result indicates that the
linguistic categories of a language are not strictly formed
around similarity-based clusters (see also Ameel, Storms,
Malt, & Sloman, 2005). Malt and Sloman (2003) found that
second-language learners retained discrepancies from native
speakers in their use of English nouns for common containers
and other housewares even after more than 13 years of
immersion in an English-language environment. These
discrepancies appear to reflect non-equivalences of meaning
between languages and the resultant complexity of the
learning task. Andersen (1975) asked English-speaking
children aged 3, 6, 9 and 12 to name ordinary drinking vessels
and found that it was not until age 12 that children’s use of
terms such as ‘cup’ and ‘glass’ fully converged on adult
usage. Thus learning to use common nouns like an adult
speaker may present challenges not yet fully appreciated.
The questions we address in this paper are: First, is the
learning trajectory for common nouns referring to familiar
objects more extended than generally assumed? Second, what
is the nature of the learning that must take place? And finally,
what pushes the child toward greater convergence with the
adult use after she has established a working grasp of a word?

Abstract
Learning to name objects is no sinecure. Children’s initial word
use often will not correspond to the adult use of the same word.
We suggest that semantic development may continue well past
the early years of language acquisition, even for names for
concrete objects. We studied evolution of the use of common
nouns taking place during later lexical development. Children
aged 5, 8, 10, 12 and 14 years and adults named common
household objects and their naming patterns were compared.
The results showed a gradual convergence to the adult
categories over age. Rather than adding new words to their
vocabulary, children reorganize the existing categories.
Features collected from adults were used to predict the naming
patterns of the different age groups. In line with Mervis (1987),
children gradually learn to attend to the right features and
gradually assign the appropriate weight to these features.
However, the features do not tell the full story. Each language
contains idiosyncratic mappings between objects and words that
must be mastered through experience. Implications for theories
of later lexical development are discussed.

Introduction
Children learning the words of a first language must isolate
word forms, identify potential meanings, and assign these
meanings to the newly isolated words (Clark, 1995). It
appears that children need only minimal exposure to a new
form before assigning some meaning to it. As soon as a
possible meaning is assigned, the word is ready for use. This
phenomenon, called fast mapping, allows children to add
words to their vocabulary at a rapid rate during the first years
of language learning (Carey, 1978). Fast mapping, however,
captures only a fraction of the meaning adults attach to a
word, and many studies have been devoted to understanding
how children refine the meanings of words during the early
years of language learning.
A much smaller literature demonstrates that semantic
development may continue well past the early years of
language acquisition for certain word classes. For example,
the meanings of orientational terms (top, bottom, front and
back) are not fully mastered until the age of 5 (Clark, 1980),
and several studies have shown learning periods for verb
meanings extending to age 8 or 9 (e.g., Gropen, Pinker,

18

with the proportion of objects for which each name was
dominant.
The table shows that considerable semantic development
took place between 5 and 14 years. The naming proportions
for the children gradually converged to the corresponding
proportions for the adults. The set of objects called ‘fles’
started off very broad and gradually narrowed from 5-year-

Two studies were conducted to answer these questions. In
the first, we collected naming data for a large set of common
household containers from children aged 5 to 14 and from
adults. We evaluated whether there was substantial evolution
in the use of the terms for this domain across these ages, well
past the early years of language acquisition. We also
evaluated whether observed changes could be accounted for
by the entry of new words into the vocabulary. In the second
study, we gathered features from adults for the most
important linguistic categories in the naming data and used
them to evaluate several hypotheses about how the
knowledge associated with the words changes over time.

Table 1: Linguistic categories for the different age groups.1

Study 1
Andersen’s (1975) study of children naming drinking
vessels used a relatively small stimulus set and informal
analyses. We collected data for a much larger stimulus set in
order to replicate and extend her finding and allow for more
detailed analyses.

Method
Materials. Seventy-three pictures of household storage
containers, taken from Ameel et al. (2005), were used. The
objects were selected to be likely to receive the name ‘bottle’
or ‘jar’ in American English or else to share one or more
salient properties with bottles and jars. Objects were
photographed in color against a neutral background with a
constant camera distance to preserve relative size.
Participants. A total of 114 native speakers of Dutch of six
different ages in the Leuven, Belgium region performed the
naming task: 19 5-year-olds, 25 8-year-olds, 25 10-year-olds,
25 12-year-olds and 20 14-year-olds. The naming data of 32
adults were taken from Ameel et al. (2005). Participants used
Dutch almost exclusively in their daily lives although some
had some knowledge of another language.
Procedure. The children looked through all the pictures to
familiarize themselves with the variety of objects and then
named each one. Following Malt et al. (1999) and Ameel et
al. (2005), they were asked to give whatever name seemed the
best or most natural and were told that they could give a
single-word name or a name with more than one word. The
instructions emphasized naming the object itself and not what
it contained. Order of presentation was random. The
experiment was conducted in Dutch.

olds to adults. The same pattern was found for ‘pot’ and
‘doos’. For ‘bus’, ‘brik’ and ‘tube’, the opposite pattern
occurred: these names were not used by the youngest
children, but from 8 years onward the category broadened
over age2.
Quantitative evidence for the gradual shift to the adult
naming pattern was found in the name distributions. The
name distribution for an object is a vector of numbers
indicating, for each name produced to the entire stimulus set,
the number of participants who gave the name for that
particular object. For instance, a given object’s vector might
show that 15 participants called it ‘fles,” 4 called it ‘pot,’ and
none called it by any other name. To compare the naming
patterns of the different age groups, we first computed the
similarity of each object’s name distribution to every other
object’s name distribution within each age group by
correlating the vectors for each pair. The resulting correlation
values reflect the extent to which each pair of objects was
named similarly by participants of the same age group. We
then correlated the 2628 name similarity values for one age
group with the corresponding values for another age group.
1

When 2 names were generated equally frequently, both names are
listed, e.g., ‘fles/pot’.
2
Translating the Dutch names into English using dictionary
definitions may not give a very good indication of what these
words mean. However, naming data of American English speakers
may be more informative. In a different study, we gathered naming
data of American English speakers. Objects named ‘fles’ in Dutch
were mostly called ‘bottle’ in English, objects called ‘bus’ mainly
received the name ‘bottle’ or ‘can’ in English, objects called ‘pot’
were mainly ‘container’ or ‘jar’ in English, objects called ‘doos’ or
‘brik’ were ‘box’ in English and the ‘tube’ objects were also ‘tube’
in English.

Results and Discussion
Comparison of naming patterns across ages. We tallied the
frequency of each noun produced for each object separately
by age group. Only the head noun of the response was
considered. Diminutive markers and additional adjectives
were disregarded. The first analysis is restricted to the
dominant name for each object; i.e. its most frequently
produced name. Table 1 contains, for each age group, all
names that emerged as dominant for at least one object, along

19

These correlations indicate in a single value the extent to
which two age groups had similar naming patterns.
The bottom line of Table 2 shows that the correlations with
the adult naming pattern increased gradually from 5-year-olds
to 14-year-olds (Spearman rank correlation ρ = 1, p < .0001).
The correlations between each pair of age groups also show a
gradual increase as ages come closer to each other (e.g., 14year-olds agree better with 12-year-olds than they do with 10year-olds). The only exception is the correlation between 5year-olds and 14-year-olds, which is significantly higher than
the correlation between 5-year-olds and 12-year-olds (p <
.05).

place. Evidence on this issue for early semantic development
has mainly come from descriptive diary studies (e.g., Mervis,
1987; Clark, 1995). In addressing this issue for later
development, we provide a larger-scale experiment that
allows us to compare predictions of different theories
quantitatively.
Several theories of early semantic development have
proposed that the differences between child and adult word
use arise through differences in featural knowledge. The
Semantic Feature Hypothesis (Clark, 1973) suggests that the
meaning of a word is initially identified with only a few
semantic features. By adding more features, the child
gradually learns the full meaning of a word. Consequently,
child linguistic categories will tend to be larger than adult
categories, since only one or two features are used to pick out
referents instead of the whole set of adult features. In line
with the Semantic Feature Hypothesis, Andersen (1975)
found that young children over-extended the word ‘cup’,
while somewhat older children focused on certain perceptual
properties, resulting in more subcategories. The oldest
children combined perceptual and functional properties in
determining the word’s extension.
However, sometimes a child’s categories are narrower than
the corresponding adult’s categories rather than broader For
example, a child’s use of the word ‘chair’ may not include
beanbag chairs (Mervis, 1987). Nelson (1974) proposed that
the child attends to more features than adults do, rather than
fewer, resulting in under-extended categories. Over time,
children gradually give up irrelevant features to end up with a
functional action-based representation of concepts.
A third featural view is that of Mervis (1987) who
suggested it is the nature rather than the number of features
attended to that distinguish child and adult semantic
knowledge. Both over-and under-extension of child lexical
categories may be due to lack of cultural knowledge or
cultural conventions - what objects do or how they are used resulting in lack of awareness of the relevant attributes,
underestimation of the salience of an attribute, or incorrect
attributes. Through experience with objects and their place
within the culture, children learn to attach the right weight to
the right features.
Thus the featural explanations differ in the type of change
in attention to features they claim to be responsible for the
gradual fine-tuning of child toward adult categories: do
children add relevant features (Clark, 1973), do they subtract
irrelevant features (Nelson, 1974), or do they change attention
from child features to (different) adult features and/or attend
to the same features but with different weights (Mervis,
1987)? We evaluated these possibilities with respect to later
semantic development.
A feature-based account may explain much of the evolution
that takes place in later semantic development, but difference
in features alone may not fully explain the differences
between child and adult lexical categories. Malt et al. (1999)
and Ameel et al.(2005) found substantial variability across
languages in naming patterns for common household objects
even though the perception of similarities among them was

Table 2. Correlations between the name distribution
similarities for each pair of age groups.

Does vocabulary growth account for the changes? The
data provide some information about what drives children to
continue to refine their use of these words over a period of 9
or more years. Clark (1995) has suggested that the entry of
new words into a child’s vocabulary triggers refinement in
later lexical development. Table 1 shows, however, that there
was only a small increase in total vocabulary for these objects
across ages. Adults’ main names, ‘fles’, ‘bus’ and ‘pot’, were
used by all the other age groups, except for ‘bus’ by 5-yearolds. The next most common adult names, ‘doos’, ‘brik’ and
‘tube’, with a frequency of 4 each, were also used by the
other age groups with the exception of ‘brik’ and ‘tube’ for
the 5-year-olds.
Four other names that entered the
vocabularies very late (‘vat’ and ‘roller’ at 14, and ‘molen’
and ‘stick,’ first used by adults) were applied to only a total of
4 objects. These additions to vocabulary can at best explain
only part of the refinements in use of the main names. For
instance, 8 year olds used ‘bus’ for only 2 objects whereas
adults used ‘bus’ for 16. A finer partitioning of semantic
space due to a larger vocabulary would not predict this
growth in category size. Rather, there seems to be
reorganization of the existing categories. In this age range,
observing discrepancies from adult usage or explicit negative
feedback from adults may contribute to semantic
development above and beyond the effect of new words
entering the semantic field per se.
In sum, this study demonstrates continued semantic
development well into adolescence for nouns labeling
familiar household objects -- development that can only be
attributed in part to vocabulary growth.

Study 2
Given confirmation that semantic development occurs across
an extended period of time for the common nouns studied, we
now ask what the nature is of the learning that must take

20

different age groups the proportion of variance in the naming
percentages that was explained by the seven most frequently
generated features of each category.

much the same. This dissociation between naming and
similarity suggests that in each language there are
idiosyncratic mappings between objects and words that
contribute to the semantic knowledge attached to a word and
that can not be explained by the presence of particular
features. These must be mastered through growing experience
with the naming of individual objects. We therefore
additionally studied to what extent features can fully explain
naming differences between children and adults. We expected
that the features would not provide a full account of the
semantic development reflected in the naming data because of
the idiosyncrasies in a language.

Method
Materials. The linguistic categories for which features were
generated were extracted from the adult naming data (Ameel
et al., 2005). We selected the 6 names that were dominant for
the largest numbers of objects for the adults: ‘fles’, ‘bus’,
‘pot’, ‘brik’, ‘doos’ and ‘tube’.
Participants. For each category, ten adults generated features
and 18 different adults filled out feature X exemplar matrices
with applicability judgments.
Procedure.
Feature generation task. The names were presented to each
participant in a random order. We followed Hampton’s
(1979) interview procedure that asked questions such as
‘what makes something a typical [or borderline] X?’ to
encourage participants to generate as many different features
as they could.
After feature generation, all legible responses were tallied
for each category name. Synonymous features were counted
as the same, and each feature in responses containing multiple
features (e.g., ‘are made of transparent glass’) was counted
separately. For each name, the seven most frequently
generated features were retained to construct the exemplar X
feature matrices.
Exemplar X feature applicability task. For each name a
matrix was constructed where the columns corresponded to
the 73 pictures and the rows were labeled with the seven most
frequently generated features for the category, derived from
the feature generation task. Participants were asked to fill out
all entries in the matrix with a 1 or a 0 to indicate whether or
not a feature characterizes the exemplar corresponding to the
column of the entry. Completion of an applicability matrix
took half an hour on average. Each of the 6 matrices was
filled out by 3 participants.

Figure 1. Proportion of total variance in the naming
percentages of each category explained by the seven most
frequently generated features of the category for the different
age groups.3
On average, the proportion of variance explained by the seven
most frequently generated features gradually increased from
5-year-olds to adults (ρ = 1, p < .0001). Apparently, children
gradually learn to attend to the set of features used by adults.
However, we found no difference among the age groups in
the number of features that were significant predictors of
naming. Averaged over all categories 2.6, 3.2, 3.2, 3, 3.5 and
3.3 features were significant, respectively, for the 5-, 8-, 10-,
12-, 14-year-olds and adults. This finding contradicts both the
possibility based on Clark’s (1973) Semantic Feature
Hypothesis that children are attending to fewer features than
adults and the possibility based on Nelson’s (1974) view that
children attend to more features than adults. Instead, the
features that were significant for the adults were not always
significant for the children and vice versa, a finding more
consistent with Mervis’ (1987) suggestion that children attend
to different features than adults do. For example, the feature
‘is made of glass’ explained a significant portion of the
variance in the adult naming percentages for ‘fles’, while this
feature was not significant for 5- to 10-year-olds. This feature
was only significant from the age of 12 onward. Conversely,
the feature ‘has a cap’ was significant for the children from 5to 14-year-old, but not for the adults. Similar findings were
obtained for the other categories.
To further explore which features were subject to attention
change from 5-year-olds to adults, we performed simple
regression analyses in which the naming percentages were

Results and Discussion
Featural changes over the course of development. For each
category name, the feature X exemplar matrices were
summed over participants. This resulted in seven vectors of
summed applicability scores, one for each feature associated
with a name. For each age group and for each name, multiple
regression analyses were performed in which the percentage
of children or adults calling each object by the name was
predicted by the vectors of the seven most frequently
generated features for the name. Figure 1 shows for the

3

For the 5-year-old children, the naming percentages of ‘tube’
could not be predicted by the seven most frequently generated
features, because the name ‘tube’ has never been used by the 5year-olds.
21

predicted by one feature at a time for each age group. We
only discuss the results for ‘fles’ and ‘pot’, since these are the
main names used by the 5- to 12-year-old children and are
among the three most used names for the 14-year-olds and
adults. For the other categories, the simple regression
analyses yielded similar results. Figures 2 and 3 show the
proportions of variance in the naming percentages of the
different age groups explained by different features of,
respectively, ‘fles’ and ‘pot’. For each name, we only selected
the features that were significant for at least two of the
different age groups in the multiple regression analyses.

In Figure 3, similar findings are shown for ‘pot’: the four
features displayed in the graph all became more important
over age. Since younger children pay less attention to these
features - to them, it does not matter whether an object
possess these relevant features or not – the category ‘pot’ is
much broader for children than for adults. Unlike for ‘fles’,
the analyses did not reveal features that were more important
for children than for adults.

Figure 3. Proportions of variance in the naming percentages
of the different age groups explained by the significant
features of ‘pot’.
Figure 2. Proportions of variance in the naming percentages
of the different age groups explained by the significant
features of ‘fles’.

Beyond features. Although changes in the features
attended to account for substantial amounts of the shifts in
naming, as we expected, even the naming pattern of adults
could not be fully explained by the features. The total
variance in adult naming explained by the features varied
from 33% for ‘tube’ to 83% for ‘brik’, leaving 67% and 17%
of the variance unexplained, respectively. In light of the
substantial degree of cross-linguistic variability in the
composition of the lexical categories partitioning the domain
studied here (Malt et al., 1999; Ameel et al., 2005) while
similarities among the objects were seen in the same way
across languages, we suggest that the additional knowledge is
likely in the form of language-specific conventions for certain
object-name pairings. These language-specific conventions
may be represented by specific combinations of features or by
specific values on the main features, not captured in the
present feature set.

Figure 2 shows that the proportion of variance explained by
the features ‘has a neck’ and ‘is made of glass’ gradually
increased from 5-year-old children to adults (respectively
from 54% to 68% and from 2% to 22%). For the features
‘holds a liquid’ and ‘has a cap’, the opposite pattern was
found. For the 5-year-old children, these features explained,
respectively, 35% and 25% of the variance in naming, in
contrast to 21% and 20% for the adults. This pattern of results
explains the phenomenon of over-extension for ‘fles’. When
determining whether an object should be called ‘fles’,
younger children make less use of the features ‘has a neck’
and ‘is made of glass’ compared to adults. Therefore, younger
children will also use ‘fles’ for objects without a neck and
objects made of materials other than glass, like ‘bus’ and
‘brik’ objects4. Instead, children pay much more attention to
whether an object holds a liquid or not and has a cap or not in
determining whether ‘fles’ can be applied to it. However, the
features ‘holds a liquid’ and ‘has a cap’ do not discriminate
among the adult ‘fles’, ‘bus,’ and ‘brik’, which makes again
clear why the child use of ‘fles’ also encompasses objects
called ‘bus’ and ‘brik’ by adults.

General Discussion
Our results have important implications for how to
understand lexical development once children have
established a working grasp of the words covering much of a
semantic field. First, Study 1 revealed a substantial evolution
in the use of nouns labeling familiar household objects well
past the first years of language acquisition, even up to at least
the age of 14. The gradual convergence onto the adult naming
pattern involved only a minimal increase in words over age.
Instead, over-extended words (e.g., ‘fles’) narrowed over age
and under-extended words (e.g., ‘bus’) broadened over age.
These results suggest that later lexical development is

4

A multiple regression analysis of the naming percentages of ‘bus’
and ‘brik’ based on the features of ‘fles’ yielded negative
regression weights for ‘has a neck’ and ‘is made of glass’,
indicating that ‘bus’ and ‘brik’ objects usually do not have a neck
and are not made of glass.
22

Carey, S. (1978). The child as word learner. In M. Halle, J.
Bresnan, & G. A. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic theory and
psychological reality (pp. 264-293). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Clark, E. V. (1973). What’s in a word? On the child’s
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of
language (pp. 65-110). New York: Academic Press.
Clark, E. V. (1980). Here’s the “Top”: Nonlinguistic
strategies in the acquisition of orientational terms. Child
Develoment, 51, 329-338.
Clark, E. V. (1995). Later lexical development and word
formation. In P. Fletcher, & B. MacWhinney (Eds.), The
handbook of child language (pp. 393-412). Oxford:
Blackwell.
De Groot, A. M. B. (1993). Word-type effects in bilingual
processing tasks: Support for a mixed-representational
system. In R. Schreuder & B. Weltens (Eds.), The bilingual
lexicon (pp. 27-51). Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Gentner, D. (1978). On relational meaning: The acquisition of
verb meaning. Child Development, 49, 988-998.
Gentner, D. (2005). The development of relational category
knowledge. In L. Gershkoff-Stowe & D. H. Rakison,
(Eds.), Building object categories in developmental time.
(pp. 245-275). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M, & Goldberg, R. (1991).
Syntax and semantics in the acquisition of locative verbs.
Journal of Child Language, 18(1), 115-151.
Hampton, J. A. (1979). Polymorphous concepts in semantic
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
18, 441-461.
Kroll, J. F. (1993). Accessing conceptual representations for
words in a second language. In R. Schreuder & B. Weltens
(Eds.), The bilingual lexicon (pp. 53-82). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y.
(1999). Knowing versus naming: similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Malt, B.C., & Sloman, S.A. (2003). Linguistic diversity and
object naming by non-native speakers of English.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6, 47-67.
Mervis, C. B. (1987). Child-basic object categories and early
lexical development. In U. Neisser (Ed.), Concepts and
conceptual development: ecological and intellectual factors
in categorisation (pp. 201-233). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Nelson, K. (1974). Concept, word, and sentence:
Interrelations
in
acquisition
and
development.
Psychological Review, 81, 267-285.

characterized by reorganization of lexical categories rather
than by (or in addition to) new partitions of semantic space
through addition of new words.
An interesting finding was that some categories started off
broad and narrowed later on, while for other categories the
opposite pattern was found. This difference in development
may be explained by the degree of heterogeneity of the
categories. More heterogeneous categories, containing a wide
range of very different exemplars, such as the ‘bus’ category,
may be more difficult to learn than more homogeneous
categories and therefore start off narrower. This may be due
to the fact that heterogeneous categories are less likely to be
represented by a clear set of (adult) features - as confirmed by
the low proportion of variance in the adult naming
percentages of ‘bus’ explained by the features (38%). Instead,
they may be more likely to be learned through specific
stimulus-word associations which must accumulate over time.
Second, the reorganization of the categorical structure
seems to be driven by gradual attention shifts to the ‘right’ set
of features, as evidenced by the increasing proportion of
variance explained by the adult features over age. Children
gradually learn which features are relevant in assigning
names to objects and they gradually attach the right weights
to them. This finding is in line with Mervis’ (1987)
suggestion that children attend to different features from
adults. If so, the addition of features generated by children as
predictors may capture the naming patterns of children to a
better degree, and the proportion of variance explained by
these child-based features may decrease over age.
Finally, the differences in features alone are not sufficient
to explain the reorganizations in later semantic development,
as even the naming pattern of adults could not be fully
explained by the features. Besides the feature-based account
for later lexical development, a second force that may push
the child toward greater convergence with adult use is
mastery of language-specific idiosyncrasies obtained through
experience with the naming of individual objects. More
research is required to understand the nature of the learning
that underlies mastery of these language-specific conventions.

Acknowledgments
We thank Laura Gonnerman for helpful comments. The
research presented in this paper was partly sponsored by
grants OT/05/27 and IDO/02/004 of the Leuven University
Research Council awarded to Gert Storms.

References
Ameel, E., Storms, G., Malt, B. C., & Sloman, S. A. (2005).
How bilinguals solve the naming problem. Journal of
Memory and Language, 53, 60-80.
Andersen, E. S. (1975). Cups and glasses: learning that
boundaries are vague. Child language, 2, 79-103.

23

