UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Cost and Benefit of Taking it out of Context: Modeling the Inhibition Associated with
Directed Forgetting

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8d899577

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Lehman, Melissa
Malmberg, Kenneth J.
Sahakyan, Lili

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Cost and Benefit of Taking it out of Context:
Modeling the Inhibition Associated with Directed Forgetting
Kenneth J. Malmberg (malmberg@cas.usf.edu)
University of South Florida
Department of Psychology, 4202 East Fowler Ave., PCD 4118G
Tampa, FL 33620 USA

Melissa Lehman (mlehman@mail.usf.edu)
University of South Florida
Department of Psychology, 4202 East Fowler Ave., PCD 4118G
Tampa, FL 33620 USA

Lili Sahakyan (l_sahaky@uncg.edu)
University of North Carolina
Department of Psychology
296 Eberhart Building. PO Box 26170
Greensboro, NC 27402 USA

that the to-be-remembered items are better recalled than the
to-be-forgotten items.
Here we utilize the list method of directed forgetting,
although we will discuss the item method in the General
Discussion. Traditionally, subjects study two lists of items
(L1 and L2). After studying L1, subjects are sometimes told
that their memory for L1 will not be tested. Much to the
chagrin of those in the forget condition, subjects are then
told at test to recall items from both lists. There are two
effects of the “forget” instruction when memory for both
lists is subsequently tested via free recall: L1 items are
remembered worse and L2 items are remembered better in
the forget L1 condition. That is, P(L1 recall – forget) < P(L1
recall – remember) and P(L2 recall – forget) > P(L2 recall –
remember). These effects are referred to as the cost and the
benefit of directed forgetting, respectively (Sahakyan &
Kelley, 2002).

Abstract
Forgetting can occur as the result of unconscious or automatic
memory processes or as the result of conscious control. The
later form of forgetting is often referred to as suppression,
repression, or inhibition, and it is investigated in the
laboratory using the directed forgetting procedure. The
authors describe and empirically test the first formal model of
directed forgetting, implemented within the framework of the
Search of Association Memory Theory (SAM). The critical
assumption is that episodic memory can be suppressed by a
conscious attempt to alter the mental context in which new
memories are encoded. The present model accounts for both
veridical and erroneous free recall performance.
Keywords. Memory; Cognitive Models

Directed Forgetting
Any spouse, partner, graduate student, or even Sigmund
Freud would tell you that the notion that people
intentionally forget prior events is not new. While Freud
posited that the forgetting of negative experiences is a
mechanism for alleviating stress or anxiety, some memory
theorists have posited that forgetting some experiences is
necessary in order to remember other experiences (e.g.,
Bjork, LeBerge, & Legrand, 1968). How, not why, one
intentionally forgets is the subject of this paper.
Intentional forgetting is investigated in the laboratory
using two directed forgetting methods: the item and the list
methods. In the item method, subjects study a list of items,
and for each item they are informed if their memory for that
item will be later tested. Importantly, memory is tested for
all items, regardless of whether they were told during study
that the items were to be remembered or not. For instance,
memory might be tested using a free recall procedure,
whereby subjects are asked to generate as many items from
the list as they can in any order. The common finding is

Modeling Directed Forgetting
There are several traditional explanations of directed
forgetting (MacLeod, 1998 for a review). L1 items might be
rehearsed less often following forget instructions.
Alternatively, some suggest that the cost and benefit of
directed forgetting is due to output interference; L2 items
tend to be recalled before L1 items, and this creates
additional interference when subjects try to recall L1 items
(Geiselman, Bjork, & Fishman, 1983). Presumably, this
tendency increases as a result of forget instructions.
While differential rehearsal of to-be-remembered and tobe-forgotten items might occur for the item method, it is
unlikely to provide a complete explanation of directed
forgetting for the list method for reasons that will be made
clear momentarily. In addition, it is unclear why L2 items
would tend to be output first to a greater degree after forget
instructions than after remember instructions.

549

A different explanation of directed forgetting is that L1
items are suppressed or inhibited as a result of the forget
instruction, but this is only a little more than a description of
the data. The model that we describe can be considered a
model of the mechanisms involved in suppression or
inhibition phenomena.
It is a variant of the setdifferentiation (SD; Bjork, 1972) originally described by
Sahakyan and Kelley (2002), which assumes that the forget
instruction causes items to be encoded in memory in a
manner in which L1 and L2 can be more easily differentiated
during memory testing. A forget instruction reduces the
similarity between the stored L1 and L2 context information,
information that allows for episodic memory of items
encountered thousands of times in everyday life. We will
refer to this as context differentiation (or CD)
This assumption was tested by Sahakyan and Kelley
(2002; also Sahakyan, 2004). In these experiments, some
subjects participated in a traditional directed forgetting
experiment, while other subjects were induced to “change
contexts” between L1 and L2. Prior to L1 subjects might
have been told to, “Imagine that you are on the moon”, and
after L1 subjects were either given the same imagery
instruction or they were told to, “Imagine that you are
invisible”. Sahakyan and Kelley assumed that the change in
mental imagery instructions would decrease the similarity
between the L1 and L2 contexts. If so, and if the SSDS
assumption is correct, then the cost and benefit associated
with forget instructions should also be observed with
instructions to change contexts. Their results supported this
version of the assumption and challenged the rehearsal
accounts of directed forgetting.

model would require assumptions about rehearsal and the
use of different types of retrieval strategies, and we discuss
several possibilities in the General Discussion when we
consider how the present model might be extended to
account for the item method of directed forgetting. For
now, it is sufficient to note that the SAM model of free
recall assumes that retrieval consists of sampling images
from memory and attempting to recover the information that
they contain. The probability of sampling image, I, given Q
as a retrieval cue is:
S ( I , Q) ,
P( I , Q) =
m

∑ S ( J , Q)
J =1

where m images are stored, and S(J,Q) is the strength of
association between the retrieval cue and image, J = 1…m.
We assume that each probe of memory is with a context
cue only. While SAM assumes that both item and context
cues can be used to probe memory, we make the simplifying
assumption that b is the same for all images, and hence item
cues do not differentially affect directed forgetting. Thus,
the present model attempts to account for directed forgetting
using the list method without appeal to a rehearsal account.
Since the list method involves studying more than one
list, we assume that the context changes between them (cf.
Mensink & Raaijmakers, 1989). Call the lists Lx and Ly.
Given that one is trying to recall items from Lx, there will be
an item-to-context association for each Lx image and the
context that is used as the retrieval cue (aLx) and an item-tocontext association for each Ly image and context used to
probe memory (aLy). On these assumptions, the probability
of sampling image I from Lx is:

SAM Model of Free Recall

P ( I Lx , Q) =

To provide a concrete explanation of directed forgetting,
we work within the framework of the Search of Associative
Memory theory (SAM; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980).
According to SAM, episodic traces (i.e., images) consist of
a set of associations between images and contexts, with the
strength of the associations dependent on how long items
were studied and what items were rehearsed together either
recently or in the past. The parameter, a, is the strength of
association between an item and a contextual cue, referred
to as context strength. The parameter, b, is the strength of
association between two items that were recently rehearsed
together when one item is used to cue the image of the other
item (inter-item strength). The parameter, c, is referred to as
self strength, and it is the associative strength between an
item’s image and the same item used as a cue. Lastly, the
parameter, d, is the strength of association between two
items that were not recently rehearsed together, and it is
referred to as residual strength.
The context strength parameter, a, is the key parameter
for implementing the CD assumption (Ratcliff, VanZandt,
& McKoon, 1995; Shiffrin, Ratcliff, & Clark, 1990;
Malmberg & Shiffrin, 2005). In fact, the set of CD
assumptions that we will describe make no reference to b, c,
or d, and hence they can be ignored. A more complex

a Lx
m

∑a

Lx

+

J =1

,

m

∑a

(1)

Ly

J =1

and the probability of mistakenly sampling image I from Ly
is:

P ( I Ly , Q ) =

a Ly
m

∑a
J =1

Lx

+

.

m

∑a

(2)

Ly

J =1

Once an image has been sampled from memory a
recovery of the contents of that image is attempted, which is
successful with following probability:

R ( I n , Q) = 1 − exp(− S ( I n , Q)) = 1 − exp(−a Ln ) , ( 3 )
where n = x or y. Thus, the product of Equations 1 and 3
give the probability of successfully recalling a given item
from the target list. In contrast, the product of Equations 2
and 3 give the probability of recalling a given item from a
non-target list (i.e., an intrusion error).

550

Attempting
to Recall Lx

3. Instructions to forget increase the difference between
aLx and aLy. Specifically, if Lx was studied before Ly, the
instructions to forget Lx will decrease aLx. We assume that
the instructions to forget Lx, however, have no effect on the
strength of the association between the test context used and
the Ly images in memory. Consider Figure 1. Assume that
one is trying to recall Ly. Instructions to forget Lx, that is
increasing aLy/aLx, causes an increase in the probability of
recalling an Ly item. This is the benefit of directed
forgetting. Now assume that one is trying to recall Lx.
Instructions to forget Lx, causes a decrease in the probability
of recalling an Lx item. This is the cost of directed
forgetting.

Attempting
to Recall Ly

P(recall)

Lx item

Correct Recall

Ly item

Predictions
Intrusions

The SAM model makes two novel predictions. First, the
more recent list should be remembered better than the less
recent list because the test context used to probe memory is
assumed to be more similar to the more recent list (cf.
Mensink & Raaijmakers, 1989). This is a critical prediction
of the model. A review of directed forgetting literature
shows, however, the opposite is almost always the case.
We note that the many of experiments in the literature
confound a number of variables. Because the list method
usually makes use of only two lists, L1 and L2, the effect of
L1 versus L2 is confounded with presence of an interfering
prior list. In addition, subjects usually do not perform a
distractor task after L2. Lack of a subsequent distractor task
benefits L1 because the last items on L1 maybe rehearsed
during L2 (Peterson & Peterson, 1959; Rundus, 1971).
Lastly, subjects are typically asked recall both L1 and L2 at
test simultaneously, which makes it somewhat plausible that
output interference explains directed forgetting.
To control for these variables, we used a three-list design
in the present experiment (cf. Sahakyan, 2004). Thus, both
L2 and L3 were preceded by a prior list. (Memory for L1 was
never tested.) With respect to Figure 1, L2 = Lx and L3 = Ly
in the present experiment.
The distractor task is
traditionally used a means for controlling rehearsals
(Peterson & Peterson, 1959). Thus, a distractor task was
performed after each list, and the number of rehearsals for
different lists should be controlled. Lastly, subjects recalled
one list at a time in order to control for output interference;
those subjects asked to recall L2 can do so when not also
attempting to recall L3 items (e.g., Sahakyan & Kelley,
2002). With these controls in place, the simplest versions of
the rehearsal and output interference accounts of direct
forgetting predict no effect of directed forgetting in the
present experiment, whereas the CD account does.
The second prediction concerns intrusion errors.
Intrusion errors are notoriously difficult to investigate
because so few are made. Nevertheless, the assumption that
the test context used to probe memory is more similar to the
L3 context than to the L2 context leads to the prediction that
the number of L3 intrusion errors when trying to recall L2
should be greater than the number of L2 intrusion errors

0.0
0

5

10

15

20

aLy / aLx
Figure 1. The SAM model of directed forgetting. aLy was
set to .5 and aLx was varied from .001 to 1.0

Assumptions
Given the SAM framework, there are several ways to
implement CD. However, we believe that the following
three assumptions implement CD the simplest way:
1. aLx ≠ aLy. Context is assumed to change from list to
list, and a different context cue is used when attempting to
recall Lx versus Ly items. For the sake of simplicity we
assume that context does not change within a given list (cf.
Mensink & Raaijmakers, 1989). Thus, the strength of the
context-to-image association differs between images on Lx
and Ly depending on whether one attempts to recall Lx or Ly.
When successfully recalling items from Lx, aLx > aLy, and
when successfully recalling items from Ly, aLx < aLy. This
assumption allows the model to predict that it is possible to
recall items from a specific list, although this is ultimately
an empirical question.
Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the ratio of
aLy to aLx and recall performance. When one attempts to
recall Lx, the probability of recalling an Lx item increases
and the probability of recalling an Ly item decreases as
aLy/aLx decreases. When one is attempts to recall Ly, the
probability of recalling an Lx item decreases and the
probability of recalling an Ly item increases as aLy/aLx
increases.
2. The more recent the list, the greater the strength of the
context-to-image association is. Thus, more recent lists
should be better recalled than less recent lists. This is
implemented by assuming that aLx < aLy when attempts are
made to recall Lx and Ly, respectively.
551

when trying to recall L3. This difference should increase as
the result of instruction to forget (i.e., increasing aLy/aLx).
Figure 1 shows that instructions to forget Lx produce
fewer Lx intrusions when attempting to recall Ly. That is
increasing aLy/aLx, decreases Lx intrusion errors, which are
shown on the dashed line below the horizontal line in Figure
1. In contrast, instructions to forget Lx produce more Ly
intrusions when one is attempting to recall Lx. Increasing
aLy/aLx, increases the number of Ly intrusion errors.
We also anticipate that some L1 items will be recalled and
output erroneously. The tendency to intrude an L1 item is
predicted to occur more often when trying to recall L2 than
L3 because the context used to probe memory will be more
similar to L1. In addition, the model predicts fewer L1
intrusions after forget instructions because the cue used to
probe memory at test should be less similar to the L1
context, regardless of whether L2 or L3 is to be recalled. In
the next section, we report the results of an experiment
designed to test these predictions.

Table 1. SAM model fit to the intrusion data.
Intrusion List
Remember
List 1
List 2
List 3
Forget
List 1
List 2
List 3

.051

.016
.019

.054
NA

.030

.036

.038

.039
NA

.023

.023

.017
.023
NA

.010
.015

<.010
<.010
NA

attenuated subject booth containing a personal computer.
Each word was presented on the computer monitor and
studied for 8 s. After each study list subjects performed a
30 s. distractor task, which involved mentally adding single
digits.
A 2 (remember versus forget L2) x 2 (recall L2 versus L3 at
test) between subject design was used. Following the L2
distractor task 83 subjects (forget group) were informed that
memory would be tested for L3. The assumption was that
informing subjects that L3 would be tested would cause
subject to attempt to forget L2. Of these, 41 subjects (L2
forget) were then informed after the L3 distractor task that
their memory for L2 would actually be tested and 42 (L3
forget) were informed that their memory L3 would be tested.
Eighty-two subjects (remember group) were not informed
after L2 that there memory for L3 would be tested. Rather,
42 of these subjects were told after the L3 distractor task that
only their memory for L2 (L2 remember) would be tested
and 40 (L3 remember) were told that only their memory for
L3 would be tested. 1 When memory was tested the subjects
had one minute to recall as many words from the to-berecalled list as they could. They were free to enter their
responses in order they chose. Subjects used a computer
keyboard to enter their responses.

of South Florida were randomly assigned to each condition.
Design, Materials, and Procedure. For each subject, 48
nouns were randomly selected from Francis and Kucera
(1982) corpus with frequencies between 20 and 50
occurrences per million and randomly divided into three
study lists. Subjects were test individually in a sound-

0.40
Remember Data
Forget Data
Remember Fit
Forget Fit

0.30
0.25

P(Recall)

Recall List 3
Data
Fit

Note. Let aLnLm. be the strength of association between the
test context and list Ln when memory for Lm is tested. The
parameters used to fit the model were: aL1L3R = .11; aL1L3F =
.005; aL1L2R = .21; aL1L2F = .13; aL3L2R = .17; aL3L2F = .10;
aL2L3R = .13; aL2L3F = .01.

Method
Subjects. 165 undergraduate students from the University

0.35

Recall List 2
Data
Fit

0.20

Results

0.15

An alpha = .05 is adopted as the standard of significance.
Figure 2 shows a reliable interaction between list number
and the forgetting instructions [F(1, 161) = 19.7]. In
addition, there was a reliable recency effect in the remember
condition [F(1,80) = 5.6], which is consistent with the
assumption that the test context is more similar to L3 when
trying recall L3 than it is to L2 when trying to recall L2.
Table 1 lists the mean intrusion rates. Here there were

0.10
0.05
0.00
2

3

List Number to be Recalled
Figure 2. SAM model fits to the correct recall data. The
parameters used to fit the model were: aL3L3R = aL3L3F = .42;
aL2L2R = .35; aL2L2F = .18.

1

A final round of testing occurred, whereby subjects who were
asked initially to recall L2 were asked recall L3 and vice versa. We
defer discussion of these data for later.
552

reliably fewer L1 intrusions for L3 than for L2 [F(1, 161) =
17.8]. None of the other main effects or the interaction
reliably affected intrusion rates.

increasing the strength of association between the test
context to L3 images might allow L3 items to be more
effectively discriminated from the L2 images during this
source evaluation process. At this point, however, we defer
an extension of the model until more data are collected, and
we conclude that the model captures all of the major trends
in the data, and the model should not be rejected.

Model Fitting
To fit the model to the data, we obtained a set of a
parameters that provided a reasonable fit to the correct recall
data (Figure 2). Call aL3L3R the strength of the context-cue
to L3 image strength when attempting to recall L3 items in
the remember condition (R) and aL2L2R the strength of the
context-cue to L2 image strength when attempting to recall
L2 items. Likewise, replace the R with an F in preceding
notation for the forget condition. We assumed that the
forget instruction did not affect the test-context to L3 image
strength. Hence, aL3L3R = aL3L3F.
All the parameter values used in the fit are listed in Figure
2. The model fits the data well and the a values are
consistent with the assumptions that the test context is more
similar to L3 than to L2 and that the forget instruction
produced an increase in aL3/aL2.
We also generated fits for the intrusion errors (Table 1).
In this case, we were not able to make any a priori
assumptions other than the context-to-item strengths should
lower for those lists that are not to be recalled. Thus, this fit
is not necessarily a test of the model, but it does allow us to
interpret the data within the framework of the SAM model.
The pattern of intrusion data suggests that the context
used to probe memory is more similar to L1 when L2 is
tested than when L3 is tested (aL1L2.. > aL1L3.). In other
words, the L1 and L2 context are relatively similar, which
one would expect based on the SDSS assumptions. In
addition, the instructions to forget produced lower context
to L1 strength estimates, which is consistent with the
hypothesis that instructions to forget produce a larger
change in context than when the instruction to forget is not
given. A similar conclusion is drawn based on the L2
intrusions when L3 was to be recalled (i.e., aL2L3R > aL2L3F ).
The present set of CD assumptions comes up short in one
respect, however. We assumed that the context used to
probe memory for L2 items is more similar to L3 after
instructions to forget. If so, the prediction is that the L3
intrusions should be greater following instructions to forget,
but they were not reliably different from the remember
condition. In fact, the model fit suggests that context used
to probe for L2 is less similar to L3 after instructions to
forget, which is inconsistent with CD.
We have two reactions. First, intrusions rates are difficult
to investigate because intrusions are so infrequent, and thus
some would opine that that they are not worth trying to
account for at all. However, some of the patterns of
intrusions rates are reliable and sometimes the intrusion
rates were nearly as large as the rate of correct responses.
Theoretically speaking, the finding that the forget
instruction does not increase the rate of L3 intrusions when
trying to recall L2 suggests that there might be an evaluation
of the source from which an item was sampled and
recovered (cf. Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980), and

General Discussion
In this paper, we have presented the first formal model of
the suppression, repression, or inhibition involved in
directed or intentional forgetting. The critical assumption is
that directed forgetting is a context effect. When one
attempts to forget a recent event, one attempts to “think of
something else” and the result is a greater change in
cognitive context than what one would expect without the
intention to forget (Sahakyan & Kelley, 2002).
The SAM model captures the major trends in the data
without appealing to the rehearsal or output interference
explanations. That, in and of itself, does not necessarily
mean that the rehearsal and output interference accounts are
incorrect. However, the results of the present experiment do
challenge them on empirical grounds.
The present
experiment controlled for rehearsals by imposing a
distractor task after each list, which should have eliminated
the effect of forget instructions according to the rehearsal
account. In addition, output interference was controlled,
which should have eliminated the effect of the forget
instructions according to the output interference account.
It is perhaps interesting or even important to note that in
fact our subjects were not directed in any explicit sense to
forget anything. Rather, subjects were simply informed
after studying two lists that their memory would be tested
for the next list. The result was a large cost associated with
remembering the list that was studied prior to the
instructions and a large benefit associated with the to-beremembered list. Thus, it appears that intentional forgetting
is a part of the metacognitive repertoire of the average
subject, suggesting that intentional forgetting is a more
general strategy for reducing interference for relatively
important events, albeit at the expense of a lower rate of
remembering the immediately preceding events.

Context Differentiation during Rehearsal
While the current SAM model provides an explanation of
directed forgetting based on the assumption that the
intention of forgetting produces a change in cognitive
context, we have not shown how it can account for directing
forgetting using the item-method. As it turns out, it is
straightforward to do so, and it too is assumed to be a
context effect.
Recall that the item method instructs subjects after the
presentation of each item on a list whether memory for that
item will be tested. In this case, we also assume that the
subject attempts to forget those items for which memory
will not be tested by “thinking of something else” or
changing the mental context. There is, however, a critical
553

difference between the study conditions associated with the
list and item methods.
In the list method, it makes sense to not think about any
of the items on prior list because these items are to be
forgotten. Thus, the subject might think about what they are
going to do after the experiment is over, for instance. In the
item method, on the other hand, it makes sense to think
about the items that are to be remembered. Therefore,
subjects might employ a strategy of thinking about or
rehearsing a recent item that is to be remembered following
an instruction to forget the current item (e.g., Bjork &
Geisleman, 1978).
This amounts to covert spaced
repetitions of the to-be-remembered items, which will
increase the amount or strength of context storage
(Malmberg & Shiffrin, 2005).
SAM (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980) assumes that the
context-to-item strength (a) is linearly related to the number
of times (t) an item is rehearsed: at. Malmberg and Shiffrin
(2005) qualified this assumption to apply only to spaced
repetitions. Thus, to-be-remembered items will have a
greater average context-to-item strength than to-be-forgotten
words, whereas the model of the list method assumes that t
is the same for all items. According to Equation 1,
therefore, instructions to forget will increase the
probabilities that a to-be-remembered item will be sampled
and a to-be-forgotten item will not be sampled.
Intuitively speaking, these assumptions are in accord with
the CD assumption that intention to forget produces a
differentiation in memory of items that are to be
remembered from those that are to be forgotten, and thus
provides a parsimonious explanation of the list and item
methods of direct forgetting. A theoretical limitation of the
SAM model in its present form is that it assumes that
context changes between lists more robustly as the result of
intentions to forget, but it does not describe how these
changes take place.
As a member of the SAM family of models, it seems most
parsimonious to adopt a set of assumptions about contextual
fluctuation that were described by Mensink and
Raaijmakers (1989).
Accordingly, context randomly
fluctuates over time, and the similarity between the test
context and the context stored during study decreases
exponentially with increases in time or the number of
intervening lists. The advantage of this model is that it
reduces the number of free parameters because the a
parameters associated with L1, L2, and L3 are systematically
related. No additional assumptions are required to
implement the CD assumption in the Mensink and
Raaijmakers (1989) for the item method; we can assume
that to-be-remembered items have stronger context-to-item
associations because they are preferentially rehearsed. For
the list method, one could assume that instructions to forget
cause a perturbation in the contextual elements active after
the to-be-forgotten list that is larger than would be the case
if instructions to forget were not given. Our aim is to report
such a model in near the future.

References
Bjork, R. A. (1972). Theoretical explanations of directed
forgetting. In A. W. Melton and E. Martin (eds.), Coding
process in human memory, Washington, DC: Winston &
Sons.
Bjork, R. A., LaBerge, D. & Legrand, R. (1968). The
modification of short-term memory through instructions
to forget. Psychonomic Science, 10(2), 55-56.
Bork, R. A. & Geiselman, R. E. (1978). Constituent
processes in the differentiation of items in memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human, Learning,
& Memory, 4(4), 347-361.
Geiselman, R. E., Bjork, R. A., & Fishman, D. L. (1983).
Disrupted retrieval in directed forgetting: A link with
posthypnotic amnesia.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 112(1), 58-72.
MacLeod, C. M. (1998). Directed forgetting. In J. M.
Golding & C. M. MacLeod (Eds.), Intentional Forgetting:
Interdisciplanry approaches (pp. 1-57). Mahwah, NJ:
Earlbaum.
Malmberg, K. J. & Shiffrin, R. M. (2005) The "one-shot"
hypothesis for context storage. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(2),
322-336.
Mensink, G. J. & Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (1988). A model of
interference and forgetting. Psychological Review, 95,
434-455.
Peterson, L. R. & Peterson, M. (1959). Short-term retention
of individual items. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
58, 193-198.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W. & Shiffrin, R. M. (1980). SAM: A
theory of probabilistic search of associative memory. In
G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
motivation: Advances in research and theory. Vol 14, (pp
207-262), New York, Academic Press.
Rundus, D. (1971). An analysis of rehearsal processes in
free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 89, 6377.
Sahakyan, L. (2004). Destructive effects of “forget”
instructions, Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(3), 555559.
Sahakyan, L. & Kelley, C. M. (2002). A contextual change
account of the directed forgetting effect. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28, 1064-1072.
Shiffrin, R. M., Ratcliff, R. & Clark, S. A. (1990). Liststrength Effect II: Theoretical Mechanisms, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16(2), 179-195.

554

