UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
One-Hit Wonders in Classical Music: Evidence and an Explanation for an Early Career Peak

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0v9738tt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Kozbelt, Aaron

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

One-Hit Wonders in Classical Music:
Evidence and an Explanation for an Early Career Peak
Aaron Kozbelt (AaronK@brooklyn.cuny.edu)
Department of Psychology, Brooklyn College
2900 Bedford Ave., Brooklyn, NY 11210-2889 USA
Moreover, Simonton’s (1997, 2003) Darwinian model of
creative productivity predicts that creators are most likely to
achieve a hit when they are most productive overall. Since
peak productivity in classical music occurs around age 40,
composers’ major works should on average be written
around that age. Thus, on average one-hit wonders should
also peak around age 40, or perhaps later, since they likely
start their careers later (cf. Simonton, 1991a).
If one-hit wonders’ average career peak differs from that
of their multi-hit counterparts, this anomaly might serve as
an inroad to understanding the nature of one-hit wonders’
creativity. Indeed, a striking anecdotal observation is that
one-hit wonders often make major contributions when
relatively young (Galenson, 2001, 2004a, 2004b). Maya
Lin, who is famous solely on the basis of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, created at age 21, exemplifies this
phenomenon (Galenson, 2004a).
Galenson (2004a) contrasted the careers of early-peaking
“conceptual innovators” with later-peaking “experimental
innovators” in several domains. By radically changing a
domain’s rules, conceptual innovators can make noteworthy
contributions early in their careers, but because their
contributions tend to strike out in fundamentally novel
directions, the results are inherently rather hit-or-miss. In
contrast, experimental innovators typically produce their
best work late in life, and their outputs are not dominated by
a single contribution. Experimentalists build incrementally
on a foundation of skill and experience and seem able to
maintain a more even quality across their major works.
Several predictions follow from Galenson’s observations.
First, there should be great variation in the extent to which
creators’ reputations are based on one versus many works.
At one extreme of this continuum are “one-hit wonders,”
whose reputation is literally based on a single noteworthy
contribution; at the other, creators whose reputation rests on
an overall body of work of more consistent quality. Second,
there should be an association between peak age and onework dominance. Specifically, creators whose reputation is
dominated by one work should be more likely to have
created the work at a younger age, compared to multi-hit
creators’ age at best work.
Quantitative research on larger samples has yielded
results consistent with these observations. Zickar and
Slaughter (1999) examined careerwise changes in quality
among 73 film directors and found that directors whose first
film was highly acclaimed showed a strong decline in
subsequent works, an instance of regression to the mean of
which one-hit wonders may be the most striking examples.
Simonton (1994, pp. 244-245) illustrated the career

Abstract
Anecdotes suggest one-hit wonders peak early in their
careers, but no quantitative investigation has focused on this
issue in lifespan creativity. Here, recording count criteria
were used to define samples of 89 one-hit and 89 “multi-hit”
classical composers. One-hit composers peaked reliably
earlier than their multi-hit counterparts, and this effect was
stronger between more prototypical one-hit versus multi-hit
composers. Lifespan, historical year, and age at expertise
acquisition onset do not explain the effect. However,
compared to multi-hit composers, one-hit composers favor
easily elaborated, small-scale works like songs, which
intrinsically peak earlier than other genres. The pattern of
career landmarks across five musical genres, using a sample
of 394 composers, supports this interpretation. Finally, onehit composers’ operas are more highlight-dominated than
those of multi-hit composers. Overall, results suggest that
chance factors play larger roles in the success of one-hit
composers than multi-hit composers.
Keywords: lifespan development; expertise; creativity.

Introduction
A curious aspect of creativity is represented by so-called
“one-hit wonders”: individuals who, despite a lifetime of
work, produce only one outstanding contribution, which
dominates their reputation.
Can similar mechanisms
account for the creativity of one-hit wonders and their
multi-hit counterparts? One intuitive explanation is that
one-hit wonders are just lucky; that is, their success might
largely be attributed to chance. While some degree of
chance is an essential component of creativity (Simonton,
1997, 2003), a facile answer of “luck” is not really an
explanation. For example, one might ask if chance plays an
equally strong role in the creative productivity of one-hit
versus multi-hit creators, just as domains differ in the degree
to which they can be characterized by stochastic processes
(Simonton, 2003). In particular, differences might be
evident in how the best-known works of one-hit and multihit composers are distributed over the lifespan.
Much is known about lifespan creative productivity
(Simonton, 1997). In general, creators typically start their
careers some time in their twenties; productivity rapidly
increases, peaks around age 40, and is followed by a
shallower trailing off. Average trajectories differ across
domains: those like theoretical physics, in which creators
can generate and work out ideas more quickly, peak earlier
than domains characterized by intrinsically slower ideation
and elaboration rates, like history (Simonton, 1984).

441

1-to-all and 1-to-2 ratios. The 1-to-all ratio was essentially
normal (skew = 0.2, kurtosis = 0.6). However, since the 1to-2 ratio distribution substantially departed from normality
(skew = 4.7, kurtosis = 28.7), it was ln-transformed; z scores
for each distribution were then calculated, averaged, and
used to sort composers by one-hit prototypicality. The
selection criteria’s validity can be gauged from the inclusion
of numerous composers who are represented on a CD set
entitled “One Hit Wonders” (various artists, 2003).

trajectories of samples of very eminent versus less eminent
composers. The greatest composers wrote their most
acclaimed work around age 42; lesser composers, around
38. While this difference was not statistically significant,
sample sizes were small and the direction of the difference
is consistent with Galenson’s observations. Would a
statistically significant peak age difference be found for
larger, objectively-defined samples of one-hit versus multihit composers?
In sum, previous work suggests one-hit wonders may
peak at a comparatively young age, but this proposition has
not been directly and quantitatively investigated. This
investigation is the first to examine it explicitly, and it has
several goals: 1) to define samples of one-hit and multi-hit
composers by objective, quantitative criteria; 2) to compare
career landmarks in the two samples, especially age at most
popular hit, to determine whether the hypothesized age
effect holds; 3) if it does, to try to explain it.

Multi-hit Composers
To form a comparison sample, selection of multi-hit
composers began with composers with the most total
recordings.
Individuals already classified as one-hit
composers were excluded from consideration, as were living
composers and those whose most recorded work could not
be accurately dated. Excluded composers were replaced
with the next most recorded composer, until the total
reached 89, the sample size of one-hit composers. The
multi-hit composers span three centuries and 18
nationalities. For each composer, 1-to-all and 1-to-2 ratios
were again calculated. Here both distributions deviated
substantially from normality (1-to-all ratio: skew = 1.0,
kurtosis = 0.7; 1-to-2 ratio: skew = 2.0, kurtosis = 4.7), so
both ratios were ln-transformed; z scores for each
distribution were again calculated, averaged, and used to
sort composers by multi-hit prototypicality.
Since no single work dominates the output of each multihit composer, one might wonder if top hits are
representative of each composer’s most popular works.
Thus, each multi-hit composer’s second-most recorded
work was also tabulated and compared to their top hit.

Method
One-hit Composers
Since “one-hit wonder” status is determined largely by
popularity, recording counts were used to select composers
and define their top hits. Counts were made using an online
comprehensive music catalog, http://www.arkivmusic.com.
Several criteria were used to operationally define one-hit
composers. First, they had to be represented on 20 or more
CDs, a threshold based on the average number of CDs for
the 30 “most popular composers” listed on the website for
each letter of the alphabet.
An initial survey yielded 678 composers with at least 20
CDs, consistent with previous estimates of the size of the
canon of classical composers (e.g., Murray, 2003).
Composers were excluded if the age when they wrote their
most popular work could not be ascertained or if they were
still alive. Two more quantitative criteria were used to
operationalize one-hit composers as those whose output is
dominated by one work: 1) “1-to-all” ratio: each composer’s
most recorded work had to have a count of at least half of
the total CDs containing that composer’s music. That is, if a
composer’s total CD count was 100, their most recorded
work needed at least 50 separate recordings to meet the
criterion. (Recording counts for each work included
recordings of the complete original work plus all excerpts
and arrangements, as listed on the Arkiv website.) 2) “1-to2” ratio: each composer’s most recorded work had to have
at least twice as many recordings as their second most
recorded work. This eliminated composers who wrote
several very popular works. (If a composer was literally
represented by only one work, the “second most recorded
work” received a score of .5 recordings for this calculation.)
The joint criteria yielded 89 composers whose outputs are
dominated by one work. They span five centuries and 13
nationalities. While the output of each composer is
dominated by one work, the extent of this varies
considerably. This can be quantitatively assessed using the

Control variables: Lifespan and Hit Year
Examining each composer’s lifespan and hit year is
necessary to ensure comparability of the two samples and
rule out potential confounds. A difference in average
lifespan would create obvious comparison problems. Each
composer’s lifespan equaled death year minus birth year.
Also, trans-historical trends may influence creators’ age at
top hit (Galenson, 2001; Simonton, 1991a). Thus, year of
composition was noted for each hit.

Career Landmarks and Career Duration
Since peak age occurs in the context of a whole career, two
other landmarks, each composer’s first and last
contributions, were estimated using earliest and latest
datable composition listed on the Arkiv website were
tabulated for each composer. Also noted was the difference
between them, a measure of career duration.

Musical Genres
Different kinds of musical compositions may differ in
intrinsic ideation and elaboration rates and explain any age
effect. To examine this possibility, each hit was categorized
in terms of the forces required for performance. Five genre
categories were used: choral works, instrumental works
442

eta2 = .06, M (SD) = 36.0 (8.7) and 42.4 (12.3) years for
one-hit and multi-hit composers, respectively. This is an
age difference of some seven years, a medium effect size.

(including chamber and keyboard works), operas, orchestral
works, and vocal works.

Results

Hits in the Contexts of Composers’ Careers

Preliminary Analyses

How can the age effect be explained? To test the possibility
that one-hit composers peak early because they begin
expertise acquisition early, one-hit and multi-hit composers
were compared on age at first hit, age at last hit, and career
duration, according to recorded works listed on the Arkiv
website. M (SD) for one-hit and multi-hit composers,
respectively, were 27.2 (8.5) and 17.8 (5.2) for first hit, 50.0
(16.2) and 63.0 (14.1) for last hit, and 23.8 (19.8) and 46.1
(13.6) for career duration. Each group comparison was
significant: for first hit, t (176) = 8.92, p < .001, eta2 = .31;
for last hit, t (176) = -7.71, p < .001, eta2 = .25; and for
career duration, t (176) = -10.42, p < .001, eta2 = .38. Thus,
the productive careers of one-hit composers are far shorter
than those of multi-hit composers, with a later start and
earlier finish (cf. Simonton, 1991a). Of particular interest is
the difference in first hit: differences in age at expertise
acquisition onset do not explain the peak age differences;
rather, they only exaggerate the difference found above.

The first preliminary analysis compared multi-hit
composers’ most recorded and second-most recorded works.
Paired t tests compared composer age and composition year
of multi-hit composers’ number one and number two hits.
These did not differ in age, t (88) = 0.43, n.s., or year, t (88)
= 0.27, n.s. For hit age, M (SD) = 40.1 (11.6) and 39.6
(10.4) for number one and number two hits, respectively.
For hit year, M (SD) = 1884.6 (54.0) and 1884.3 (53.4) for
number one and number two hits, respectively. Number one
and number two hits were also categorized by musical
genre. Genre frequencies did not significantly differ, χ2 (4)
= 2.3, n.s, Cramer’s phi = .16. Thus, multi-hit composers’
top hits are not atypical of their most popular works.
Next, one-hit and multi-hit composers were compared on
two control variables, hit year and lifespan. Neither
comparison was significant: for year, t (176) = -0.74, n.s.;
for lifespan, t (176) = 0.43, n.s. For year, M (SD) = 1878.4
(58.0) and 1884.6 (54.0) for one-hit and multi-hit
composers, respectively. For lifespan, M (SD) = 66.3 (15.8)
and 65.3 (15.0) for one-hit and multi-hit composers,
respectively. The 45 most prototypical composers in each
group were also compared, with very similar results.
To statistically control for any impact of lifespan and hit
year, these variables were first used to predict hit age prior
to analyzing group differences in hit age. Across all 178
composers, the multiple regression was significant, F (2,
175) = 6.97, p = .001, R2 = .07. Lifespan was significant, b
= .16, SE(b) = .05, t = 3.03, p = .003; hit year was not, b =
.02, SE(b) = .02, t = 1.15, n.s. Throughout, analyses
controlling for lifespan and hit year invariably yielded
comparable results to those that did not. To clarify the
meaning of the results, descriptive statistics for each
analysis are reported as raw age scores; reported inferential
results emply statistical control for potential confounds.

Other Explanations for the Peak Age Effect
A more promising explanation may be that the two groups
wrote different kinds of music. For instance, one-hit
composers might favor musical forms like songs with
intrinsically faster ideation or elaboration rates, which
would likely have a naturally earlier peak. A significant
association between genre and group might thus help
explain the age effect. This possibility can be tested by
checking the frequency of one-hit and multi-hit composers’
hits in each of the five genres defined earlier (choral,
instrumental, opera, orchestral, and vocal works) and then
examining age trends across genres.
Top hit frequencies in the five musical genres among onehit and multi-hit composers were first compared. The data
are shown in Table 1. A 2 (group) x 5 (genre) χ2 test of
association was performed and was significant, χ2 (4) =
15.4, p < .001, Cramer’s phi = .29. This was followed by
intra-genre comparisons of one-hit versus multi-hit
composers, shown at the bottom of Table 1. As can be seen,
one-hit and multi-hit composers significantly differ in the
frequency of vocal and instrumental hits, but do not differ in
the other genres.

Peak Age Effect
The most fundamental analysis compares the ages at which
one-hit versus multi-hit composers wrote their most popular
works. The 89 composers in each group were first
compared. Results show that one-hit composers were
significantly younger than their multi-hit counterparts when
they wrote their most popular work, t (176) = -2.43, p = .02,
effect size eta2 = .03, M (SD) = 36.5 (9.2) and 40.1 (11.6)
years for one-hit and multi-hit composers, respectively.
This result supports the hypothesized age difference
between one-hit and multi-hit composers. However, as
noted above, the initial selection criteria were somewhat
arbitrary, and composers in each group vary in one-hit or
multi-hit prototypicality. Thus, the 45 most prototypical
composers in each group were also compared. The analysis
again showed a significant effect, t (88) = -2.57, p = .01,

Table 1: Frequencies of top hits in five musical genres.

One-hit
Multi-hit
χ2 (1)
Cramer’s phi
*p < .05

443

Choral Instrumental Opera Orchestral Vocal
5
12
29
20
23
7
24
18
31
9
0.3
4.0*
2.6
2.4
6.1*
.04
.15
.12
.12
.19

genre. In all, 394 composers contributed. A total of 825
genre-composer combinations were analyzed.
Descriptive results are shown in Table 2. Within each
landmark, peak ages vary by genre, and the variability
generally increases from first to last hit. Within each
landmark, variability is fairly consistent across genres, and
within each landmark-genre combination, the range is large.

To see if genres show intrinsic peak age effects, a 2
(group) x 5 (genre) factorial ANOVA was performed.
Group was significant, F (1, 168) = 3.84, p = .05, eta2 = .02,
replicating the earlier effect. Genre was significant, F (4,
168) = 4.00, p = .004, eta2 = .09, indicating inter-genre peak
age differences. There was no interaction, F < 1. Overall M
(SD) peak age for choral, instrumental, opera, orchestral,
and vocal works, respectively, were: 46.5, 34.4, 38.5, 41.4,
and 34.7 (15.2, 11.7, 8.5, 10.2, and 7.6). Tukey-Kramer
post hoc comparisons (alpha = .05) revealed that choral
works’ late peak significantly differed from the rather early
peaks for instrumental and vocal works, consistent with
likely differences in ideation and elaboration rates: on
average, more complex genres have later peaks. Operas and
orchestral works did not reliably differ from other genres.
Within each genre, one-hit and multi-hit composers’ peak
ages were also compared, but largely due to decreased
power, intra-genre comparisons between one-hit and multihit composers generally did not yield significant
differences: for choral works, t (10) = .020; for instrumental
works, t (34) = 0.70; for operas, t (45) = 0.56; for vocal
works, t (30) = 1.34, all n.s. The comparison on orchestral
works was statistically significant, t (49) = 2.12, p = .04,
eta2 = .08.
Thus, the overall peak age effect is not strongly
localizable to strong effects within particular genres.
Instead, the peak age effect stems from an overall relation
between the frequencies with which one-hit versus multi-hit
composers wrote hits in various genres and those genres’
natural age trajectories. For instance, one-hit composers
were likelier than multi-hit composers to have a top hit that
was a vocal work, which on average peak earlier than most
other genres. Also contributing to the overall age effect was
a tendency for multi-hit composers’ hits to be orchestral
works and for them to have written their orchestral hits
somewhat later than did one-hit composers. While multi-hit
composers were more likely to have an instrumental top hit,
a smaller inter-group peak difference and greater age
variability among instrumental hits reduces their impact.
Choral works and operas did not influence the age effect.

Table 2: Career landmarks in five musical genres.
First Hit
Choral
Instrumental
Opera
Orchestral
Vocal
Overall
Best Hit
Choral
Instrumental
Opera
Orchestral
Vocal
Overall
Last Hit
Choral
Instrumental
Opera
Orchestral
Vocal
Overall

M
28.2
23.6
31.4
26.8
24.7
26.5
M
42.8
41.1
41.8
40.1
36.0
40.3
M
60.1
60.5
53.9
57.9
52.9
57.5

SD
9.7
9.0
9.0
8.2
9.2
9.3
SD
12.6
14.2
10.3
11.9
12.0
12.6
SD
16.4
14.7
13.0
14.7
14.2
14.8

Range
9-51
5-68
11-66
9-57
6-54
5-68
Range
19-72
18-86
18-76
12-76
12-71
12-86
Range
23-96
25-90
25-85
21-87
25-86
21-96

For each landmark, a one-way ANOVA was performed,
using genre as the between-subjects variable and residual
age as the dependent measure, after controlling for hit year
and lifespan. All three ANOVAs were significant: for first,
best, and last hit, F (4, 820) = 20.68, 5.73, and 9.41, all p <
.001, eta2 = .09, .03, and .04, respectively. Tukey-Kramer
post-hoc comparisons (alpha = .05) showed varied patterns
across the landmarks. For first hit, instrumental and vocal
hits appear significantly earlier than choral works; orchestral
works appear significantly later than instrumental works;
operas appear significantly later than any other genre. For
best hit, vocal works peak significantly earlier than all other
genres, which show no significant differences among
themselves. For last hit, there were fewer differences.
Vocal works end before choral, instrumental, and orchestral
works; instrumental works end after operas and vocal
works. Other comparisons were not significant.
These results provide a thumbnail sketch of the genres’
contrasting trajectories. Vocal works are the domain of
younger composers, showing an early onset, peak, and
conclusion. Operas are more concentrated around the
middle of composers’ careers, with the latest first hit age
and a rather early last hit age. Choral and orchestral works
begin and end later than most other genres. Instrumental
works have the longest overall span, on average showing the

Generalizing Career Landmarks Across Genres
The argument that the peak age effect is partly explainable
by musical genres’ natural age trajectories would be
strengthened if age trends in a larger sample of composers
were found to be consistent with the preceding results. To
explore this possibility, three career landmarks (first, best,
and last hit) were estimated for all five genres (choral,
instrumental, opera, orchestral, and vocal) separately, using
recordings on the Arkiv website.
The 678 composers with more than 20 CDs represented
the initial population. From this group, composers were
selected whose most recorded work in each genre could be
accurately dated. Composers were excluded if their most
recorded work in a genre was undatable, if they had less
than two datable works in a genre, or if several works with
different dates were tied for the most recorded work in a

444

earliest first hit and the latest last hit. The results are
consistent with intuitive expectations about different genres’
ideation and elaboration rates and their consequent impact
on career landmarks. The results support the idea that
intrinsic differences in genres’ natural age trajectories
provide a reasonable explanation for one-hit composers’
early career peak. Particularly relevant is the finding that
vocal works peak earlier than any other genre and that this is
a general characteristic of classical music composition.

Discussion
This investigation quantitatively examined lifespan
creativity in a sample of quantitatively defined one-hit
wonders in classical music. Consistent with anecdotal
reports, on average one-hit composers wrote their most
popular works at earlier ages than multi-hit composers. The
observed age effect did not result from differences in
lifespan, broader historical trends, or differences in age at
career onset. Indeed, one-hit composers’ significantly later
start, coupled with their earlier peak, only exaggerates the
basic peak age effect. Thus, the small to medium effect
sizes found for many inter-group comparisons on
chronological age represent a lower limit on the magnitude
of the differences. Overall, the career landmarks of the
present sample of one-hit composers’ resembles those of a
sample of less eminent composers illustrated by Simonton
(1994, p. 244). While low eminence and one-hit status are
not necessarily synonymous, the parallel suggests that the
present documentation of one-hit composers is adequate for
meaningful comparisons with the multi-hit sample.
The most likely explanation for the peak age effect
involves a relation between the frequencies with which onehit versus multi-hit composers wrote hits in various musical
genres and the natural age trajectories of these genres. In
the one-hit and multi-hit groups and the more
comprehensive sample of composers, the pattern of career
landmarks was consistent with intuitive expectations about
inter-genre differences in ideation and elaboration rates
(Simonton, 1984). While the overall age effect was robust,
intra-genre, inter-group peak age comparisons were usually
not statistically significant.
This suggests that the
trajectories of each genre unfold in comparable ways for the
two groups, and that group differences in genre hit
frequency largely drive the overall effect. In particular,
compared to the hits of multi-hit composers, those of one-hit
composers are more likely to be vocal works. Also, multihit composers had somewhat more orchestral hits than onehit composers and showed a mildly later peak for such
works. Multi-hit composers were twice as likely as one-hit
composers to have an instrumental work as their top hit, but
a smaller inter-group peak difference and far greater age
variability among instrumental hits reduces their impact.
Finally, while choral works and operas did not influence the
observed peak age effect, one-hit composers’ hit operas
were significantly more highlight-dominated that those of
their multi-hit counterparts. This effect is also consistent
with the ideation-elaboration argument, as it suggests that
one-hit composers’ operas are largely famous for individual
set-pieces that are more easily elaborated than a whole
opera.
This ideation-elaboration argument is also informed by
Simonton’s (1980) finding that “as the thematic richness of
a work increases, the fame of any single theme within the
work becomes less dependent on the intrinsic properties of
melodic originality and becomes more dependent on
associations with other themes via the formal structure of
the piece” (p. 979). In other words, the acclaim of smallscale musical works seems especially subject to chance

Opera Highlights
Inter-genre differences in ideation and elaboration rates and
inter-group differences in hit genre frequency seem to
represent the most likely and parsimonious explanation for
the overall age effect. One-hit composers’ hits are often in
small-scale genres like vocal works, which have naturally
earlier peaks.
However, it is curious that one-hit
composers’ most frequent hit genre was opera (see Table 1),
a particularly complex and challenging form of musical
composition. Are there any differences in the hit operas of
the two groups? Although they do not differ in hit age, the
operas of one-hit and multi-hit composers might differ in
other respects. For instance, many operas are structured as a
series of reasonably independent numbers, which can
achieve fame in their own right. Thus, a one-hit composer
who is famous for an opera might in practice be famous for
an aria or other set-piece, a more modest achievement than
writing an opera that is great from beginning to end. Such
an effect would be consistent with one-hit composers’ bias
toward smaller-scale hits like songs.
Do one-hit and multi-hit composers differ in the extent to
which their hit operas are highlight-dominated? To examine
this question, the 47 operas among one-hit and multi-hit
composers’ top hits were examined. Using the Arkiv
website, the number of separate recordings of the most
recorded excerpt from each opera was tabulated and divided
by the number of complete recordings of each opera. The
resulting highlight ratios ranged from 0.79 to 33.5. Higher
numbers indicate a stronger dominance of the most popular
highlight over the complete opera. Overall, M (SD)
highlight ratio = 8.07 (8.0). Since the distribution was nonnormal (skew = 2.0, kurtosis = 3.6), ratios were transformed
by the natural logarithm, new M (SD) = 1.71 (0.88). In
addition, hit year was first partialled out of ln-transformed
highlight ratio, r (45) = .36, p = .01. Comparing the groups
on residual highlight ratio revealed that one-hit composers’
hit operas were significantly more highlight-dominated than
multi-hit composers’ hit operas, t (45) = 2.16, p = .04, eta2 =
.09, M (SD) = 1.94 (0.8) and 1.33 (0.9) for one-hit and
multi-hit composers, respectively, a medium to large effect
size. Thus, while the hit operas of one-hit and multi-hit
composers are written around the same age, the operas
themselves differ in the nature of their popularity. The fame
of one-hit composers’ operas seems largely driven by
popular highlights that outshine the opera as a whole; this is
much less true for multi-hit composers.

445

quantify than classical music. In particular, it would be
informative to compare the present results to those from
other domains that show more homogenous creative
products and presumably less variability in ideation and
elaboration rates. Would such domains show a peak age
effect analogous to that found here? Future research could
address these issues by examining if one-hit creators in
other domains also peak early and by investigating the
nature and role of genre-wise or individual differences in
ideation and elaboration rates.

factors; they largely rise or fall based on the hit-or-miss
quality of the melodic idea itself. This seems less true of
large-scale musical works; here, the process of working out
a more complex musical structure can compensate for
intrinsically weaker ideas, at least to some extent. Thus, not
only does it take longer to compose a work like a
symphony, but a symphony’s success may depend less on
the quality of its basic ideas than on how they are put
together, in contrast to small-scale works. Generally
speaking, if a composer has the elaborative skill to put
together an integrated large-scale work, its later success may
be less dependent on capricious chance factors than with
small-scale works.
Along these lines, one-hit and multi-hit composers differ
not only in career trajectories but in the variety of their
outputs. Many one-hit composers are strongly associated
with one type of music. Among the more prototypical onehit composers, only a handful wrote substantial amounts of
music in multiple genres. This pattern reflects Simonton’s
(2000) emphasis on “cross-training” as assisting the
development of creative expertise. This observation also
suggests some basic constraints on the nature of one-hit
composers’ major works: it is highly unlikely that a
composer’s only renowned work would be a massive,
structurally complex and thematically integrated
composition akin to a Brahms symphony or a Wagner music
drama. Indeed, operas aside, few of the most prototypical
one-hit composers ever even seem to have attempted largescale works, such as oratorios or sonata form works like
symphonies, concerti, or string quartets. In contrast, 87 of
the 89 multi-hit composers composed such works. The fact
that one-hit composers tend not to write in such forms, or
that when they do (as in opera), the works are often heavily
excerpted, reinforces this important distinction.
One limit of this work. For instance, the present approach
could be refined by using analyses besides means
comparisons (such as growth models of longitudinal
change) and more complete data from each composer, rather
than one estimate of peak age or three estimates for first,
best, and last hits (for each composer or composer-genre
combination). However, many one-hit composers are simply
not adequately documented for such analyses. Alternative
analyses might also employ different dependent measures,
such as citation in music reference books or the number of
CDs sold, rather than the number available, to examine the
robustness of the present findings. Another potential
objection is that measures of career duration may not be
reducible to the span between first hit and last hit, since
there may be periods in a creator’s career which are totally
obscure but are still productive. However, defining
creativity in terms of recognition of merit by others in the
field theoretically resolves this issue.
In sum, this study presented a methodology whereby the
careers and major works of objectively defined samples of
one-hit and multi-hit creators can be quantitatively
compared. In principle, this approach could be applied to
other domains, though these might be more difficult to

References
Arkiv Online Music Catalog. (n.d.). Accessed from
http://www.arkivmusic.com in February 2005; borderline
cases re-checked in August 2005.
Galenson, D. W. (2001). Painting outside the lines: Patterns
of creativity in modern art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Galenson, D. W. (2004a). A portrait of the artist as a very
young or very old innovator: Creativity at the extremes of
the life cycle. Working Paper 10515. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Galenson, D. W. (2004b). The life cycles of modern artists:
Theory and implications. Historical Methods, 37, 123136.
Murray, C. (2003). Human accomplishment. New York:
HarperCollins.
Simonton, D. K. (1980). Thematic fame, melodic
originality, and musical zeitgeist: A biographical and
transhistorical content analysis. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 38, 972-983.
Simonton, D. K. (1984). Creative productivity and age: A
mathematical model based on a two-step cognitive
process. Developmental Review, 4, 77-111.
Simonton, D. K. (1991a). Emergence and realization of
genius: The lives and works of 120 classical composers.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 829840.
Simonton, D. K. (1994). Greatness: Who makes history and
why. New York: Guilford.
Simonton, D. K. (1997). Creative productivity: A predictive
and explanatory model of career landmarks and
trajectories. Psychological Review, 104, 66-89.
Simonton, D. K. (2000). Creative development as acquired
expertise: Theoretical issues and an empirical test.
Developmental Review, 20, 283-318.
Simonton, D. K. (2003). Scientific creativity as constrained
stochastic behavior: The integration of product, person,
and process perspectives. Psychological Bulletin, 129,
475-494.
Various artists. (2003). One Hit Wonders. [CD]. Catalog
number 472700. Deutsche Grammophon.
Zickar, M. J., & Slaughter, J. E. (1999). Examining creative
performance over time using hierarchical linear modeling:
an illustration using film directors. Human Performance,
12, 211-230.

446

