UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Planning with Information Access Costs in Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6tb2h8k7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Waldron, Samuel M.
Patrick, John
Howes, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Planning with Information Access Costs in Mind
Samuel M. Waldron (waldronsm1@cardiff.ac.uk)
John Patrick (patrickj@cardiff.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Park Place
Cardiff, CF10 3AT UK

Andrew Howes (howesa@manchester.ac.uk)
Geoffrey B. Duggan (geoffrey.duggan@manchester.ac.uk)
Department of Informatics, PO Box 88, Sackville Street
Manchester, M60 1QD UK

Abstract
Least effort tradeoffs concerning the use of memory within
the Blocks World Task (Fu & Gray, 2000) are extended to an
analogous problem solving task. As the cost of accessing
goal-state information from the Blocks Problem Solving Task
increased, participants chose to access such information less
frequently, and in turn, made more problem solving moves
per goal-state visit. This strategy shift led to an increase in the
number of moves required to solve each problem, suggesting
that effective planning became difficult as the access cost
increased. In contrast, increasing the implementation cost, a
manipulation known to increase planful behavior (O’Hara &
Payne, 1998), revealed quite different problem solving access
strategies, and reduced the number of moves required to solve
each problem.
Keywords: Interactive behavior; Human problem solving;
Information access; Adaptive planning.

Introduction
Problem solving is often conducted within the context of an
external display (Larkin, 1989; Payne, 1991). However, the
time, physical effort, and mental effort associated with
accessing information from such displays may vary. For
example, information may be available at the click of a
button, or considerable time and effort may be required in
order to extract the necessary information from the
interface. Such information access costs have been shown to
determine what perceptual-motor and memory strategies are
used during interactive behavior (Fu & Gray, 2000; Gray &
Fu, 2004), but have yet to be extended to problem solving.
The current paper aims to test for the presence of shifts in
strategy due to information access cost during problem
solving, and assess consequences for planning proficiency.

Planning
Research assessing the manner in which humans go about
planning has informed us that planning and acting are
largely interleaved (Anderson, 1990). That is, we do not
plan complete sequences before we perform them. Rather,
we evaluate our plans as we progress through the problem
space. Typical planning behavior is said to be opportunistic
(Hayes-Roth & Hayes-Roth, 1979), in the sense that plans
can be revised in the face of new information, or as a
2335

consequence of an evaluation of a previous plan. The
proposed benefits of planning have also been found to
interact with the limited capacity of working memory
(Kotovsky, Hayes, & Simon, 1985; Phillips, Wynn,
Gilhooly, Della Sala, & Logie, 1999).
Moreover, problem solving within the context of an
external display has been shown to be sensitive to costs
within the environment. O’Hara & Payne (1998) stated that
“problem solving search strategies are chosen so as to
optimize performance within the constraints of a particular
situation” (p.34). Gray & Fu (2004) recast this assertion by
distinguishing between hard and soft constraints. Hard
constraints determine behavior that is, or is not possible,
whereas soft constraints bias towards certain behavioral
strategies.
An example of a soft constraint that promotes planfulness
within a problem solving context is the implementation cost.
Using the 8-Puzzle, O’Hara & Payne (1998) demonstrated
that increasing the cost of making each move from pressing
a function key to typing a string increased participant’s
propensity to plan ahead, and in turn, reduced the number of
moves needed to complete the task. Evidence of planfulness
came mainly from increased latencies between each move.
Verbal protocol analysis also suggested more planful
behavior as a function of increased implementation cost.
Thus, it appears that the extent to which problem solvers
choose to plan can be partially determined by costs within
the environment associated with completing the task.

Information Access Cost
The planning research briefly reviewed above assumes that
the information needed to solve a problem is either readily
available in the world, or is held in memory. For example,
the 8-Puzzle goal-state used by O’Hara & Payne (1998) is
so easy to maintain in memory that participants were not
required to search for additional information in order to
solve the problem. For the vast majority of other problem
solving tasks (e.g., Tower of Hanoi, Missionaries &
Cannibals, Water Jugs), all task-relevant information is
provided within the external display with little or no
associated access cost.
The converse, however, is often true of problem solving
in many applied situations. That is, the information required

to solve a problem may not always be readily available
within the external display, and may come from a variety of
sources. Gathering unavailable or uncertain information
routinely forms the first stage of the planning process in
many applied situations (Gronlund, Doughterty, Durso,
Canning, & Mills, 2005).
While there appears to be little work examining the
consequences of information access cost on problem
solving, Fu & Gray (2000) have used the Blocks World
Task (see Figure 1) to explore the consequences of access
costs on routine copying behavior. The aim of the Blocks
World Task is to recreate the pattern of blocks dictated by
the Target Window in the Workspace Window. This is
achieved by clicking on and dragging blocks one at a time
from the Resources Window into the Workspace Window.
Throughout the Fu & Gray (2000) study, all three windows
were covered by grey boxes, of which only one could be
uncovered at a time. The Resources and Workspace
windows could be uncovered by moving the mouse cursor
into each window. Each window was covered again the
moment the mouse cursor left the window.

condition uncovered the Target Window less frequently,
spent more time looking at the Target Window, and copied
more blocks per visit to the Target Window. These
differences indicate that as the information access cost
increased, behavior shifted away from reliance upon
perceptual-motor strategies, towards reliance upon internal
memory. This change in strategy was despite an increase in
the number of errors made by participants in the High-Cost
condition, and can be explained in terms of Anderson’s
(1990) rational analysis framework.
The aim of the current study was to assess the presence of
such shifts in strategy contingent upon access costs within
an analogous problem solving task. In particular,
consequences of access cost will be evaluated with regard to
participant’s ability to plan effectively.

Experiment
The Blocks Problem Solving Task (BPST) was developed,
and required participants to recreate the Target Pattern in the
Workspace Window by moving one block at a time into an
adjacent empty space (see Figure 2). The cost associated
with accessing each window and making each move was
manipulated.

Figure 1: Blocks World Task. Target Window is top-left,
Resources Window is bottom-left, and Workspace Window
is top-right.

Figure 2: Blocks Problem Solving Task. Target Window is
on the left, Workspace Window is on the right.

The cost of uncovering the Target Window varied
between the three conditions. In the Low-Cost condition
participants were required to hold down a function key. The
Target Window then remained uncovered until either the
function key was released or the mouse cursor entered either
of the other two windows. In the Control condition, the
Target Window was uncovered during times when the
mouse cursor entered the window. This was also the case in
the High-Cost condition, with an additional delay of one
second per uncovering. Once participants were confident
that the Target Pattern had been recreated in the Workspace,
they were instructed to click the ‘Stop Trial’ button. If the
two patterns matched, participants were taken to the next
trial. If they did not, participants were required to correct
their mistakes.
Fu & Gray (2000) found that when compared to the LowCost and Control conditions, participants in the High-Cost

Based upon Fu & Gray (2000), we predict that as the
information access cost (IAC) increases, perceptual-motor
strategies will be overlooked in favor of a strategy reliant
upon internal memory. Such evidence would indicate that
the IAC strategy shift observed during routine copying
behavior also extends to problem solving.
The cost associated with making each move, namely, the
implementation cost (IC) was also manipulated. We know
that such a manipulation increases planful behavior in the 8Puzzle (O’Hara & Payne, 1998), and should therefore
provide a useful comparison to planning behavior in the
current task.
Participants may adopt a number of strategies to cope
with higher access costs. On the one hand, a higher access
cost may prompt them to do more planning in the hope that
fewer moves are required and, by implication, fewer visits
to the Target Window (O’Hara & Payne, 1998). On the
other hand, they may try to remember bigger chunks of the

2336

target pattern (Fu & Gray, 2000), and not worry about the
number of moves made in the problem space. A betweensubjects design will be adopted in order to negate possible
contamination via asymmetric transfer (Poulton, 1982).

complete each trial, the time between each move (intermove latencies), and the frequency with which participants
clicked the stop button when in fact the two patterns did not
match (errors). By dividing the number of moves by the
number of Target Visits for each trial, an estimate of the
number of moves made per Target Visit was obtained.

Method
Participants Seventy-two Cardiff University undergraduate
Psychology students participated in the study for course
credit and were randomly assigned to one of six conditions.

Procedure Participants were seated approximately 50cm
away from the eye-tracker and handed an instruction sheet.
Two practice trials then followed a 16-point eye-tracker
calibration. Both practice trials were in the format of the
experimental condition. Different block configurations were
used for each of the twelve experimental trials. Each
participant within each of the six conditions received one of
twelve different randomized orders of trials.

Apparatus/Materials The experiment was written in Visual
Basic 6 and was conducted using a 2Ghz Pentium 4 PC
connected to a Tobii 1750 34 x 27cm eye-tracker monitor1,
extended keyboard, and mouse. All eye movements were
recorded at a rate of 15 frames per second, with time-stamp
accuracy of +/-3ms. Gaze estimation was within 1 degree of
accuracy, even across large head movements. Mouse
movements and key presses were also recorded and saved.
The Target Window and Workspace Window were the
same size and each contained sixteen blocks in a 4 x 4 grid.
Ten colored blocks and six empty spaces resided within
each window. No colors were used twice, and the empty
spaces were white. The rules of the task determined that
colored blocks could only be moved into adjacent
(horizontal or vertical) empty spaces. Movements were
made in two stages. Firstly, using the mouse participants
clicked to select the colored block they wished to move. The
second stage was dependent upon the level of IC.
Design IAC was manipulated on three levels: both windows
were permanently uncovered when IAC was Low. In
contrast, both windows were covered by grey masks when
IAC was Medium or High, and could only be uncovered by
placing the mouse cursor over the window to-be-opened.
The grey masks then reappeared the moment the mouse
cursor left the respective window. There was an additional
2.5 second lockout associated with uncovering the Target
Window when IAC was High.
IC was manipulated on two levels: when IC was Low,
participants were required to press the corresponding arrow
key depending upon the direction they wished to move the
block. When IC was High, participants were required to
type a string “move_left/right/up/down_”. On average, this
resulted in each move taking an extra 2.5 seconds to
implement.
Independent manipulation of IAC and IC resulted in six
between-subject conditions: low IAC/low IC; low IAC/high
IC; medium IAC/low IC; medium IAC/high IC; high
IAC/low IC; high IAC/high IC.
Several dependent measures were taken throughout the
experiment. The eye-tracker measured the frequency with
which participant’s eyes visited the Target Window, and the
time spent viewing the Target Window. Consecutive
fixations within the Target Window were collapsed and
counted as one visit. In addition, the Visual Basic program
recorded the number of moves made, the time taken to
1

Results
A 3 (Low/Medium/High IAC) x 2 (Low/High IC) betweensubjects ANOVA conducted upon each of the dependent
variables revealed quite different results for IAC and IC
(summarized in Tables 1 & 2 respectively). Only one
interaction between the two independent variables existed,
and will be addressed following separate discussions of the
IAC and IC. Target Visit Frequency and moves per Target
Visit data was log transformed in order to attain
homogeneity of variance. Non-transformed data are
presented in tabular and graphical format throughout.
IAC Target Visit Frequency (TVF) decreased as IAC
increased, F(2, 66) = 395.39, p <.001, MSE = 0.01, with
planned comparisons (Bonferroni corrected) revealing
significant differences between all conditions (ps <.001).
The non-significant trend was for Target Visit Times (TVT)
to increase as IAC increased, F(2, 66) = 2.84, p <.07, MSE =
27.97, and planned comparisons (Bonferroni corrected)
revealed significant differences between low and high (p
<.05), medium and high (p <.05), but not medium and low
conditions (p >.05).
Table 1: Effect of IAC
Low IAC
Medium IAC
High IAC
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
TVF
49.35 13.10 21.21 12.26 5.25
1.54
TVT
17.11
4.94
17.17
8.01
20.29
7.51
M/TV
0.89
0.35
2.53
1.60
8.70
2.56
IML*
68.71 22.99 72.73 27.20 79.76 26.62
Errors
0.06
0.11
0.13
0.13
0.19
0.15
Moves
38.04
6.06
40.16
5.82
42.36
5.94
Note. Values represent means per trial and exclude delays
incurred via IAC.
* Excluding error-correction data.

The Tobii 1750 eye-tracker does not require head mounts.
2337

Increasing the IAC not only affected information seeking
strategies, but also had consequences for problem solving
search strategies. Firstly, the number of moves participants
made per visit to the Target Window (M/TV) increased

dramatically as a function of IAC, F(2, 66) = 349.36, p
<.001, MSE = 0.01. When IAC was low, participants
generally chose to interleave a minimum of one visit to the
Target Window per move made in the Workspace Window.
When the IAC was high, however, participants were
prepared to make up to nine moves in the Workspace
Window per visit to the Target Window. Although at first
glance inter-move latencies (IML) appeared to increase as
IAC increased, F(2, 66) = 3.71, p <.05, MSE = 342.14,
removal of error-correction data meant that the marginal rise
became non-significant, F(2, 66) = 2.34, p >.05, MSE =
320.43. By error correction data, we mean trial data during
which the participant pressed the stop button when in fact
the two patterns did not match (and thus had to spent time
identifying and correcting the error). Removal of error data
did not affect any other variable, and on average, accounted
for less than 13% of the data. Finally, the number of errors
made increased as IAC increased, F(2, 66) = 6.03, p <.01,
MSE = 0.02, as did trial duration, F(2, 66) = 6.53, p <.01,
MSE = 781.45, (Low: Mean = 125.91, SD = 66.79; Medium:
Mean = 135.79, SD = 76.06; High: Mean = 154.62, SD =
69.63), and the number of moves required to solve each
trial, F(2, 66) = 7.14, p <.01, MSE = 15. 64.
In sum, increasing the cost associated with accessing
goal-state information from the BPST reduced the
frequency with which said information was accessed,
marginally increased the time spent viewing such
information, and increased the number of moves made per
access. An increase in IAC did not lead to a reliable rise in
inter-move latencies, but did increase the frequency with
which errors were made, trial duration, and ultimately, the
number of moves required to solve each problem.

66) = 59.24, p <.001, MSE = 0.01. In addition, a dramatic
rise in inter-move latency (IML) was observed as a function
of IC, F(1, 66) = 38.43, p <.001, MSE = 354.46, that was
not affected by the removal of error-correction data.
Increasing the IC also reduced the frequency with which
errors were made, F(1, 66) = 6.85, p <.01, MSE = 0.02, and
the number of moves required to solve each problem, F(1,
66) = 89.00, p <.001, MSE = 15.64. As with IAC, trial times
increased as a function of IC, F(1, 66) = 377.61, p <.001,
MSE = 781.45, (Low: Mean = 60.94, SD = 12.66; High:
Mean = 97.14, SD = 24.80).
In sum, increasing the cost of making each move from
pressing an arrow key to typing a string increased the
frequency with which participants chose to access goal-state
information, increased the time spent viewing said
information, and reduced the number of moves made per
Target Visit. An increase in IC also led to reliable increases
in the latency between each move, a reduction in the number
of errors made, a reduction in the number of moves required
to complete each problem, and an increase in trial durations.

IC Increasing the IC induced comparatively different
information seeking and problem solving strategy
development. Target Visit Frequency (TVF) increased as IC
increased, F(1, 66) = 40.18, p <.001, MSE = 0.01, as did
time spent viewing the Target Window (TVT), F(1, 66) =
48.12, p <.001, MSE = 27.97.

Figure 3: Interaction between IAC and IC on number of
Target Visits per trial.

Table 2: Effect of IC.
Low IC
High IC
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
TVF
19.07
15.14
28.86
24.27
TVT
13.86
5.10
22.52
5.94
M/TV
4.84
3.90
3.22
3.60
IML*
55.50
12.87
91.96
22.20
Errors
0.16
0.13
0.09
0.14
Moves
44.58
5.33
35.79
2.78
Note. Values represent means per trial and exclude delays
incurred via IAC.
* Excluding error-correction data.
Rather than increasing the moves per Target Visit (M/TV)
ratio, the high IC reduced the number of moves participants
were prepared to make per visit to the Target Window, F(1,

2338

Target Visit Frequency

70
Low IC

60

High IC

50
40
30
20
10
0

Low IAC

Medium IAC

High IAC

The only interaction between IAC and IC concerned the
frequency with which participants visited the Target
Window, F(2, 66) = 8.03, p <.001, MSE = 0.01, (see Figure
3). Simple main effects indicated that the effect of IAC was
significant at both Low, F(2, 66) = 72.51, p <.001, MSE =
50.44, and High, F(2, 66) = 178.22, p <.001, MSE = 50.44,
levels of IC. The effect of IC, although significant at Low,
F(1, 66) = 55.12, p <.001, MSE = 50.44, and Medium, F(1,
66) = 26.74, p <.001, MSE = 50.44, levels of IAC, was not
apparent at High IAC, F(1, 66) = 0.51, p >.05, MSE = 50.44.
This we believe, is likely to be due to a ceiling effect.
Pearson correlational analysis was also conducted in order
to assess the inter-relationships between some of the
dependent variables. Correlations were computed for
measures within each of the six between-subject treatment
combinations and also across the complete data-set. The
only significant correlation consistently found within each
of the six treatment combinations and across the data-set
indicated that as Target Visit Frequency increased, the
number of moves made per Target Visit decreased (-.78).

Despite similar correlations, this relationship varied with
IAC (as illustrated by Figure 4).
Low IAC
Medium IAC
High IAC

Target Visit Frequency

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Moves per Target Visit

Figure 4: Scatter plot of relationship between Target Visit
Frequency and Moves per Target Visit as a function of IAC.
Other significant correlations across the data-set included
those found between Target Visit Frequency and moves (.49), moves per Target Visit and moves (+.47), and intermove latency and moves (-.49). These relationships between
the aforementioned variables suggest that in order to reduce
the number of moves required to solve the current set of
problems, participants should visit the Target Window
frequently, make fewer moves in the Workspace Window
per visit, and increase planning time between each move.

Discussion
Firstly, the results indicate that the shifts in strategy
contingent upon the IAC observed by Fu & Gray (2000)
during routine copying behavior extend to an analogous
problem solving task. Secondly, a tentative argument can be
put forward that such shifts in information access strategy
make efficient problem solving and planning behavior
difficult in the current task.
The rational analysis framework (Anderson, 1990) has
previously been adapted to explain the tradeoff between
perceptual-motor and memory strategies in studies using the
Blocks World Task (Fu & Gray, 2000) and simulated VCR
programming (Gray & Fu, 2004). Here, we take a similar
perspective and argue that as the IAC increases, the cost of
accessing goal-state information following each move is
considered higher than the cost of using memory (thus,
reducing the number of times goal-state information needs
to be accessed).
In a related study, Pfeiffer (2004) found similar shifts in
problem solving search strategy upon the removal of
current-state information. When such information was not
continually available during the seven balls and boxes
problem, participants tended to rely upon memory and make
up to nine moves per current-state request. Interestingly,
participants were no worse at completing the balls and
boxes puzzle when current-state information was only
available upon request, compared to when current-state
information was continuously available within the external
display. Differences in the volume of information to be held
2339

in memory may explain why Pfeiffer’s study did not reveal
any negative consequence of reducing the availability of
current-state information, whereas the present study did
demonstrate negative consequences associated with
increasing the cost of accessing goal-state information.
In order to maintain an internal representation of the
entire problem space in Pfeiffer’s study, participants would
have been required to maintain in memory the positioning of
up to seven balls in seven boxes. In the present study,
however, participants will have been required to maintain in
memory the positioning and color of ten blocks within a 4 x
4 grid. It is likely, therefore, that in order to work from
memory, participants in the current study will have had to
decompose the goal-state into chunks of three/four pieces at
a time (Chase & Simon, 1973). Essentially, this would
involve problem solving with limited goal-state knowledge
in mind.
This argument draws parallels with the finding from Fu &
Gray (2006) that reductions in information seeking behavior
as a function of increased IAC may lead to poor exploration
of the problem space. Fu & Gray (2006) demonstrated that
individuals tend to plan less when the cost of planning is
high, and stop planning when a reasonable plan is formed. It
is suggested that a similar argument may explain the
increased number of moves required to solve the BPST in
the current study as a function of IAC. Further
experimentation is required to evaluate the extent to which
this can account for the data. For now, contrasting the
effects brought about by manipulating the IAC and IC may
provide a better understanding of why raising the IAC
increased the number of moves required to solve each
problem.
Corroborating the results reported by O’Hara & Payne
(1998), the present study found that increasing the IC
increased planful behavior, as evidenced by a reduction in
the number of moves required to solve each problem, and an
increase in inter-move latencies. Interestingly, the
information access strategies induced by raising the IC stand
in opposition to those associated with an increase in IAC.
Most importantly, increasing the IC increased the frequency
with which participants chose to access goal-state
information throughout each trial, and in doing so,
decreased the number of moves made per access. The
opposite is true of an increase in IAC.
If we assume that behavior in the current study is
representative of efficient problem solving when IC is high,
it would follow that regular inspection of the goal-state
between moves is also representative of efficient problem
solving. Such a proposal would be consistent with
opportunistic theories of planning (e.g., Hayes-Roth &
Hayes-Roth, 1979), and evidence suggesting that planning
and acting are largely interleaved (Anderson, 1990). Such
an argument necessitates the assumption that participants in
the high IC condition are choosing to shift their information
access strategies in said manner in a direct attempt to
increase problem solving efficiency. On the other hand, it
could be possible that participants in the high IC conditions
chose to increase the frequency with which they accessed
goal-state information because of an increased likelihood
that information would be forgotten while typing move

sequences, (compared to pressing arrow keys). If this was
true, however, one would expect the number of Target
Visits to differ to a greater extent as a function of IC when
IAC was high, compared to when it was low. The opposite,
in fact, was observed: increased IC led to a significant
increase in the number of goal-state inspections when IAC
was low, but had no significant effect when IAC was high.
Although likely to be the result of a ceiling effect, the
pattern of data does not support the ‘forgetting hypothesis’.
Strategies that increase the frequency with which goalstate information is accessed in the current task will not only
facilitate the interleaving of planning and acting, but will
also decrease reliance upon memory, known to improve
problem solving efficiency and planning behavior
(Kotovsky, Hayes, & Simon, 1985; Phillips et al., 1999).
Kotovsky, Hayes, & Simon (1985), for example, found that
increasing the load on working memory whilst solving the
Tower of Hanoi prevented even minimal planning from
occurring. Problem solving efficiency improved as rules
were built into the external representation of an isomorphic
version of the task. Similarly, Phillips et al., (1999) found
reduced levels of planning as secondary tasks, designed to
tax working memory, were introduced whilst participants
attempted to solve versions of the Tower of London task.
Phillips et al., went on to highlight the importance of
memory in formulating, retaining, implementing, and
revising plans online.
Davies (2003) distinguished between initial and
concurrent planning during solutions to well-structured
problems (such as the BPST). The increased inter-move
latencies and decreased number of moves made per Target
Visit associated with an increased IC in the current task are
likely to be reflective of concurrent planning. The fact that
increasing the IAC did not affect inter-move latencies (once
error correction data was removed from the analysis), and
more notably, increased the number of moves made per
Target Visit, suggests that if participants are making use of
planning strategies in the high IAC conditions, these will be
in the form of initial planning, and not concurrent planning.
Further verbal protocol studies are required to determine the
extent to which each type of planning is represented within
each of the conditions.
Implications for display design are twofold. Firstly, if
accurate problem solving is of utmost importance, and the
speed of problem solving is of less importance, seeding
implementation costs into the design of an interactive
display may improve problem solving accuracy via planful
behavior. Secondly, when solving problems of similar
complexity and volume to the BPST employed here,
information required to solve the problem should be readily
available at minimum cost.

Conclusion
Insight is provided into higher-level cognitive planning
using theory originally built upon perceptual processing
tasks. In sum, it appears that an increase in the cost
associated with accessing goal-state information promotes
the use of memory and initial planning during problem
solving. In contrast, information access strategies induced
by an increase in implementation cost rely less upon
2340

memory during problem solving, and more upon concurrent
planning.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the UK MoD’s Defence
Technology Centre: Data and Information Fusion (project
4.9).

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chase, W. G. & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Davies, S. P. (2003). Initial and concurrent planning in
solutions to well-structured problems. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A(7), 1147-1164.
Fu, W.-T. & Gray, W. D. (2000). Memory versus
perceptual-motor tradeoffs in a blocks world task.
Proceedings of the Twenty-second Annual conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 154-159). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Fu, W.-T. & Gray, W. D. (2006). Suboptimal tradeoffs in
information seeking. Cognitive Psychology, 52(3), 195242.
Gray, W. D. & Fu, W.-T. (2004). Soft constraints in
interactive behavior: The case of ignoring perfect
knowledge in-the-world for imperfect knowledge in-thehead. Cognitive Science, 28, 359-382.
Gronlund, S. D., Dougherty, M. R. P., Durso, F., Canning, J.
M., & Mills, S. H. (2005). Planning in Air Traffic
Control: Impact of problem type. The International
Journal of Aviation Psychology, 15(3), 269-293.
Hayes-Roth, B. & Hayes-Roth, F. (1979). A cognitive
model of planning. Cognitive Science, 3, 275-310.
Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1985). Why
are some problems hard? Evidence from tower of Hanoi.
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 248-294.
Larkin, J. H. (1989). Display-based problem solving. In D.
Klahr & K. Kotovsky (Eds.). Complex information
processing: The impact of Herbert A. Simon. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
O’Hara, K. P. & Payne, S. J. (1998). The effects of operator
implementation cost on planfulness of problem solving
and learning. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 34-70.
Payne, S. J. (1991). Display-based action at the user
interface. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies,
35, 275-289.
Pfeiffer, T. (2004). Problem solving with a simple
transformation problem with and without continuous
external support. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 16(4), 555-572.
Phillips, L. H., Wynn, V., Gilhooly, K. J., Della Sala, S., &
Logie, R.H. (1999). The role of memory in the tower of
london task. Memory, 7(2), 209-231.
Poulton, E. C. (1982). Influential companions: Effects of
one strategy on another in the within-subjects designs of
cognitive psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 91(3), 673690.

