UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Priming of Syntactic Rules in Task-Oriented Dialogue and Spontaneous Conversation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1r79b4hm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Reitter, David
Moore, Johanna D.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Priming of Syntactic Rules
in Task-Oriented Dialogue and Spontaneous Conversation
David Reitter (dreitter@inf.ed.ac.uk),
Johanna D. Moore, Frank Keller
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
United Kingdom
One reason for the repeated use of linguistic structure is
cognitive economy, which may well translate to computational economy. Repetition at lexical and syntactic levels
leads to global alignment at semantic and situation model levels. Interaction partners establish a common sub-language
over the course of a conversation: they agree on terms to use
for objects, and methods to interpret the real world, creating
common ground via the basic and automatic mechanism of
priming, all without the expensive requirement to explicitly
model their respective interlocutor’s perspective (Pickering
and Garrod, 2004).
Pickering & Garrod’s (2004) Interactive Alignment Model
assumes that higher-level (semantic, situation-level) alignment is due to lower-level alignment (including syntactic
priming). This predicts more priming in task-oriented dialogue, because situation-level alignment is typically required
to perform a given task. In this paper, we test this prediction by comparing priming in spontaneous and task-oriented
dialog. We distinguish comprehension-production (CP) priming, where the speaker first comprehends the prime (uttered
by his/her interlocutor) and then produces the target, and
production-production (PP) priming, where both the prime
and the target are produced by the same speaker.

Abstract
Previous work provided corpus evidence for structural priming
for specific syntactic constructions. The present paper extends
these results by investigating priming effects involving arbitrary syntactic rules in spoken dialogue corpora. We demonstrate the existence of within- and between-speaker priming in
both spontaneous conversation (the Switchboard corpus) and
task-oriented dialogue (the Map Task corpus). We also find
that between-speaker priming is stronger in the Map Task corpus. This supports the hypothesis that in task-oriented dialog,
low-level priming is linked to higher-level alignment of situation models.
Keywords: Structural priming; dialogue; task-orientation;
language production; language comprehension; speech

Introduction
Priming is a wide-spread phenomenon in both language comprehension and language production. A classical priming
phenomenon is that a word (the target) is recognized more
quickly and more accurately if it is semantically similar to a
preceding word (the prime). Similar priming effects have also
been demonstrated for syntactic constructions (Bock, 1986;
Branigan et al., 2000). Here, the key finding is that speakers
tend to repeat a given syntactic choice (e.g., active vs. passive)
in the target, if the same choice was made in the prime. However, such structural priming effects have mostly been demonstrated in carefully controlled psycholinguistic experiments,
thus raising the question of whether priming can also occur
in natural, fully spontaneous conversation. Recent work addressed this question, providing evidence for priming effects
in corpus data (Gries, 2005; Szmrecsanyi, 2005; Dubey et al.,
2005).
In spite of corroborating experimental and corpus evidence, all current studies on structural priming share a serious limitation. They only deal with a small set of syntactic
rules or constructions such as active vs. passive voice or direct object vs. prepositional object (e.g., as in give your friend
the book vs. give the book to your friend). This raises the
question of whether syntactic priming only affects these specific constructions, rather than being a more wide-spread phenomenon, perhaps applying to arbitrary syntactic rules. The
present paper addresses this question.
From a theoretical perspective, priming allows insights into
the architecture of the human language faculty. By identifying the units in which priming occurs, we can pinpoint structures used in processing. Also, priming may help explain the
ease with which humans engage in conversations.

Methodology
In this study, we examined two spoken-language corpora with
respect to structural repetition. The Switchboard (Marcus
et al., 1994) and HCRC Map Task (Anderson et al., 1991)
corpora both contain transcriptions of spoken dialogue and
phrase-structure-based syntactic tree annotation.

Corpus processing
The trees were converted into phrase structure rules in order
to list the rules that license the trees. For example, the (hypothetical) tree
S
!aa
!
!
a
!
a
NP
VP
PPP


P
NP
NP
we
V
@
@
gave them Det N
a

toy

would have been converted to three phrase structure rules:
(R1) S → NP VP,
685

(R2) VP → V NP NP and
(R3) NP → Det N.
This conversion is unique.1
Given the phrase structure rules for each utterance, we can
now identify the repeated use of rules. A certain amount
of repetition will obviously be coincidental. But structural
priming would predict that a rule (target) occurs more often
closely after a potential prime of the same rule (stimulus) than
further away. Therefore, we can correlate the probability of
repetition with the distance between prime and target.
As syntactic structure, we count each syntactic rule which
licenses part of the syntactic analysis for a tree. For example,
if a sentence-level conjunction leads to the rule S → S conj
S, and such a conjunction occurs in utterances 3 and 11, we
would observe a repetition at distance 8. This way, every syntactic rule is counted as a potential prime and (almost always)
as a target for priming. Because interlocutors tend to stick to
a topic during a conversation for some time, we exclude cases
of syntactic repetition that are solely due to repetition of an
entire phrase.

tween prime and target, or other variables such as corpus
choice. If we see priming as a form of pre-activation of syntactic nodes, it indicates the decay rate of pre-activation. The
scale for this coefficient is the logarithmic distance in number
of utterances.3
The fitting algorithms for GLMMs allow non-normally distributed response variables, as in our case with the binary
variable indicating priming / non-priming. We trained our
models using Penalized Quasi-Likelihood (Venables and Ripley, 2002). The reported experiments were conducted on random samples of the corpora.
Table 1 summarizes a GLMM along with further figures
that allow us to estimate whether the coefficients obtained are
reliable (statistically significant).

Syntactic repetitions
Every pair of two equal syntactic rules up to a maximal distance is a potential case of priming-enhanced production.
Consider the example shown in Figure 1, where a small subset of the rules that license constituents are marked. Two syntactic repetitions shown here are data points for our analysis.
Repetitions a and b are both at distance 2, because the occurrences (prime and target) are two utterances apart. Repetition
c would be included at distance 1, if the lexical content of
prime and target differed. In c, however, we see a syntactic repetition that is due to lexical repetition. Repetitions of
unary rules such as the one marked as d are not included. The
third sentence lends the opportunity to include another repetition (of the prepositional phrase rule PP → IN NP), but
unlike Dubey et al. (2005), this study is not concerned with
within-utterance repetitions.
The following analysis shows the distribution of repetition
probability over distance from the repetition (target) to the
prime. In our data, each repetition occurrence of a syntactic
rule R at distance d counts as priming. Each case where R
occurs, but isn’t primed d units beforehand in the dialog, is
counted as non-priming.
Our goal is to model p̂(prime|target, n), that is, the sampling probability that a prime is present in the n-th utterance
before target occurs. Without syntactic priming in the general
case, we would assume that

Generalized Linear Mixed Effects Regression
There are several ways to identify an effect of distance on
repetition probability. One can normalize the number of
observed repetitions by the number of expected repetitions
for each syntactic rule by taking its prior probability of occurrence into account. The disadvantage of this is that for
rare rules, we will see a grossly higher error than for rules
with higher frequency. Such a data set would be difficult to
model. Alternatively, one can examine the distribution of repetition counts over prime-target-distances and use a sampling
technique to balance the number of trials across distances.
Thirdly, we can contrast cases of structural repetition and
cases where no repetition occurs between two speech units
that occurred a chosen distance apart. We adopt the latter
technique.
In this study, we use generalized linear mixed effects regression models (GLMM). In all cases, a rule instance target
is counted as a repetition at distance d iff there is an utterance
prime which contains the same rule, and prime and target are
exactly d units apart. GLMMs with a binary response variable can be considered a form of logistic regression.2
Regression allows us to fit a model to our data. A model
is simply a choice of coefficients βi , one for each explanatory variable i (and one for each of their interactions). βi expresses the contribution of i to the probability of the outcome
event, that is, in our case, successful priming. Our data is represented by extracted features – in our context, we will call
them factors (discrete) and predictors (continuous explanatory variables).
For example, the βi estimates allow us to predict the decline of repetition probability with increasing distance be-

p̂(prime|target, n) = p̂(prime|target).
In order to eliminate cases of lexical repetition of a phrase,
e.g., names or lexicalized noun phrases, which we consider
topic-dependent or cases of lexical priming, we only collect
syntactic repetitions with at least one differing word.
For instance (Figure 1), we would have two cases of priming for the rule PP → IN-NP, namely at distance 2 (a,b), and
two of non-priming at distance 1 (two occurrences of that rule
and their non-occurrence in the previous utterance).
The distance between stimulus and target (D IST) is initially
counted in utterances (Experiments 1 – 3), but later in seconds
(Experiments 4 & 5), which also includes within-utterance
priming. Additive priming by a stimulus that is repeated several times is not captured by the model. We looked for repetitions within windows of 25 utterances or 15 seconds. So,

1
Obviously, when dealing with speech, we encounter constructions that cannot be analyzed with a traditional phrase-structure
rules. The annotation of both corpora commonly assigns ad-hoc
rules with flat derivations in such cases. This leads to a large set
of extracted rules. Such rules are unlikely to be repeated. For the
analysis of repetition, they represent no theoretical obstacle.
2
The data are assumed to be binomially distributed. We will not
generally give classical R2 figures, as this metric is not appropriate
to such GLMMs.

3

In our analysis, we will focus on the coefficients rather than on
the intercept β0 because long-term adaptation effects and the granularity of syntactic annotations will show up in β0 . Both lie out of
the scope of this study.

686

g: and then continue down [PP>IN-NP in that forty-five degree]
f: mmhmm

b

a

g: and turn [PP>IN-NP on the [NP>NP-PP outside [PP>IN-NP of the monument]]
c
f: [NP>NP-PP outside of the monument]
g: yeah and then a very [AP>JJ slight] turning up again north sort of northwest
d

Figure 1: Two instances of syntactic repetitions (a,b), a lexical-syntactic one (c) and a preterminal rule (d) from Map Task.
The model shows a reliable effect of ln(D IST): there are
more repetition pairs with short distances than long ones
(t = − 7.2, p < 0.0001).
ROLE interacts with the decay coefficient for ln(D IST)
(t = 8.8, p < 0.0001). The concrete result of that interaction
is that the parameter for ln(D IST) in our model is − 0.14
in PP priming, but 0.02 in CP priming. In Switchboard, we
find evidence for PP priming, but for CP priming, the resulting decay coefficient (0.19) is actually positive, suggesting
that speakers try to avoid repeating their interlocutor’s sentence structure. Recall that high-frequency outliers had been
dropped from the analysis. If we include them, we see that
the difference between CP and PP is even stronger. Thus, in
Experiments 3 and 5, we include the rule frequency as a predictor to evaluate the effect of frequency on priming strength.

each rule occurrence in the dialog can lead to up to 25 (or 15)
data points for the various distances.
From our analysis, we drop all hapax rules (frequency f =
1) as well as outliers, that is 15 highly frequent rules (f >
2, 000, out of 759) in the case of Map Task, and accordingly 9
(f > 12, 000, out of 4695) in the larger Switchboard corpus.
We include the target utterance as a random factor in our
model, grouping the several measurements (up to 25 for utterances or 15 for time) as repeated measurements, since they
depend on the same target rule occurrence and are partially
inter-dependent.
Again: without priming, one would expect that there are
equally many cases of syntactic repetition, no matter the distance between first (prime) and second (target) occurrence.
The analysis attempts to reject this null hypothesis and show a
correlation of the effect size with the type of corpus used. We
expect to see the syntactic priming effect found experimentally translate to more cases for shorter repetition distances,
since priming effects usually decay rapidly (Branigan et al.,
1999). (cf. Figure 3, which illustrates the decay.)
Additionally, we distinguish cases of self-priming (PP) and
priming between speakers (CP) using the factor ROLE.
A predictor F REQ is included to express the logarithm of
the normalized frequency of the repeated syntactic rule in the
corpus (Experiments 3 – 5).

Exp. 2: Repetition in task-oriented dialogue
To determine whether the type of dialogue affects syntactic
repetition effects, we also analyzed the HCRC Map Task corpus. Map Task comprises more than 110 dialogs with a total of 20, 400 utterances, using 759 different phrase structure
rules. Using exactly the same methodology as for Switchboard, we find 402, 000 syntactic repetitions in Map Task between the 157, 000 rules extracted from its syntactic analyses.
Like Switchboard, HCRC Map Task is a corpus of spoken,
two-person dialogue in English. Unlike Switchboard, Map
Task contains task-oriented dialogue: interlocutors work together to achieve a task as quickly and efficiently as possible. Subjects were asked to work together to find a route on
a map. The interlocutors are in the same room, but have separate maps and are unable to see each other’s maps. One of
them, the Instruction Giver, is to describe a route, while the
other one, the Instruction Follower, is to follow it on her own
map. Their maps differ with respect to names of some locations, certain features (potential waypoints), and missing or
displaced labels. Interlocutors were in the same room, while
(in Switchboard) they used a telephone connection.
Syntactic priming as an instance of general priming or preactivation is an almost universal effect. We know, however,
that some control is exerted by the conditions of the dialogue
and possibly by speakers tailoring their utterances to match
the needs of their audience. Still, we would expect to find
syntactic priming in the task-oriented dialogue of Map Task.

Exp. 1: Repetition in spontaneous conversation
Switchboard is a corpus of spontaneous spoken telephone
dialogue among randomly paired, North American speakers
who were given a general topic, but otherwise remained unrestricted. 80,000 utterances of the corpus have been annotated
with syntactic structure. We use time-aligned (per word) data
from the Paraphrase project (Carletta et al., 2004). 1, 293, 000
repetitions could be found in 472, 000 extracted phrase structure rules, 4, 700 of which distinct.

Results
Syntactic rules (targets) are used more frequently when they
occur shortly after the same rule (prime). The closer prime
and target occur to one another, the stronger the preference
is to repeat. Priming is present within a speaker (PP) and
it decays rapidly, but there is a negative effect for priming
between speakers (CP).
687

Time PP SWBD
Time CP SWBD
Time PP MAPT
Time CP MAPT

0.014

0.016

Utts CP MAPT

0.012

Utts PP MAPT

Switchboard

PP

Switchboard

CP

0.010

p(prime=target|target,distance)

Utts CP SWBD

Map Task

PP

0.008

Utts PP SWBD

Map Task

CP

0.00 - 0.05 - 0.10 - 0.15 - 0.20 - 0.25 - 0.30 - 0.35

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

distance: Temporal Distance between prime and target (seconds)

Figure 2: Priming effect sizes ( ln(D IST)) under different
ROLE and S OURCE situations. Prime-target distance by number of utterances (Exp. 3) and seconds (Exp. 5). 95% CI. Effects estimated from separately fitted nested regression models on separately sampled datasets.

Figure 3: Decaying repetition probability estimates depending on the increasing distance between prime and target, contrasting different ROLE and S OURCE situations. (Exp. 5)

Again, a GLMM was built to correlate priming condition
with the set of factors and predictors.

Results
As seen in the previous experiments, it can make a difference
whether a speaker primes themself or is primed by their interlocutor. Interestingly, the gap between CP and PP priming
is substantially affected by the choice of corpus (last two interactions in Table 1). In both corpora, we find a positive PP
priming effect. However, in Map Task, CP and PP priming
cannot be distinguished (cf. Experiment 2), while in Switchboard, there is little CP priming (cf. Experiment 1). Figure 2 (first four bars) provides the resulting priming strength
estimates for the four factorial combinations of ROLE and
S OURCE at increasing distance. Also, priming is stronger for
less frequent rules.
For Switchboard, the model estimates a higher coefficient for ln(D IST), suggesting that there was faster decay in Map Task (Baseline effect of LN (D IST ): βlnDist =
−0.092, p < 0.0001; βlnDist:CP = 0.083, p < 0.0001;
βlnDist:M apT ask = −0.044, p = 0.05;
βlnDist:CP :M apT ask = −0.140, p < 0.0001).
Frequency is negatively correlated with decay
(βlnDist:lnF req = 0.049, p < 0.0001).
Finding the marked difference between CP and PP priming, and also a clear PP priming effect in spontaneous conversation, extends Dubey et al. (2005), who do not find reliable evidence of adaptation within speakers in Switchboard
for selected syntactic rules in coordinate structures.
Thus, the data is consistent with the hypothesis that semantic alignment in dialogue is based on lower-level (syntactic)
priming. However, when comparing data across corpora, we
need to be careful to ensure that differences in genre and annotation are not the primary cause of the effect at hand. The
coefficient for pre-activation decay is sensitive to utterance
length, which becomes an issue for instance when utterances
are not consistently marked or if decay occurs over time and
not with utterances. Indeed, most utterances in Switchboard
are actually dialogue turns, and given the genre, they are usually longer than those in Map Task. Therefore, it makes sense

Results
Once again we find that repetition is more likely the shorter
the distance between prime and target utterances is. Unlike in
Switchboard, interlocutors repeat each other’s syntactic structures more readily and more similarly to the way they repeat
their own structures.
The model showed a reliable effect of ln(D IST)
(t = − 71.2, p < 0.005) .
ROLE had a reliable constant effect on repetition rates
(t = − 11.0, p < 0.0001), but there was no interaction
between ROLE and D IST (p = 0.92).
This finding confirms experimental results by Bock and
Griffin (2000) and Branigan et al. (1999), who find syntactic priming over longer distances, even though the effect decays. (The effect of ROLE on bias may be related to speaker
idiosyncracies, i.e. more chance repetition within speakers.)
To determine whether there is a significant influence of dialogue type on priming, comparing the effects we have seen
in experiments 1 and 2, we built a further model, described in
the next section.

Exp. 3: Comparing corpora
With their Interactive Alignment Model, (Pickering and Garrod, 2004) argue that the situation-model alignment of speakers is due to lower-level priming effects. In task-oriented dialogue, and in the task carried out by participants in Map Task,
speakers need to align in order to successfully complete their
tasks. Thus, the theory would predict that syntactic priming
between speakers (CP) is greater in task-oriented dialogue.
We test this hypothesis by fitting a model of the joint data
set with S OURCE as a binary factor, indicating whether a repetition stems from Map Task (task-oriented) or Switchboard
(not task-oriented). From Map Task, only dialogues in which
interlocutors could not see one another where included.
688

Intercept
ln(D ISTT ime )
ln(F REQ)
ln(D IST) : ln(F REQ))
ln(D IST) : (ROLE = CP )
ln(D IST) : (ROLE = P P ) : (S OURCE = M apT ask)
ln(D IST) : (ROLE = CP ) : (S OURCE = M apT ask)

coefficients (βi )
-3.778
-0.057
0.538
0.083
-0.031
-0.050
-0.137

Std. Error
0.025 ***
0.015 **
0.190 ***
0.010 ***
0.012 *
0.014 **
0.018 ***

Table 1: The regression model for the joint data set of Switchboard and Map Task (Exp. 5). This is the minimal model without
insignificant covariates. * p < 0.01, ** p < 0.005, *** p < 0.0001.

Exp. 5: Priming over time

to verify the hypothesis using time as the relevant decay correlate. We do so in Experiments 4 and 5.

While time- and utterance-based models fit their respective
data similarly well, time is a theoretically attractive measure
of distance, in particular because the utterance is difficult to
delineate in the context of speech.
The methodology of this experiment is as in Experiment 3,
except that D ISTT ime is the distance predictor, instead of the
D ISTU tts used previously.

Exp. 4: Pre-activation decay: over time, or with
each utterance?
While the previous experiments have shown that repetition
probability decays soon after any stimulus, it is unclear
whether the pre-activation diminishes with time, or with actual linguistic activity. To some extent, corpora can help make
that distinction.
The differences between conversational and task-oriented
dialogue that we pointed out (Experiment 3) are founded on
the correlation of distance between prime and target and repetition likelihood. This correlation is likely to be sensitive to
the scale of D ISTANCE. As an alternative, we can use the
delay between the left boundaries of the priming and target
phrases as the relevant predictor.
The models discussed measure the distance between prime
and target in utterances. In this experiment, we fitted a second
regression model, estimating decay over time.
To compare the two (obviously interrelated) predictors
D ISTT ime and D ISTU tts , we estimated two simple linear regression models, one for time, the other one for number of
utterances as predictor. Such regression models can, as opposed to GLMMs, produce a meaningful R2 measure. In
these models, we include the maximum-likelihood estimate
of the number of chance repetitions, which is calculated from
the overall frequency of each syntactic rule (this is in addition
to the covariates discussed before). The response variable
here is not binary, as in the other experiments, but a count
of actual rule repetitions. The complete interaction term is
rep ∼ ln(D ISTU tts ) ∗ ROLE ∗ S OURCE + E XPECTED.4
The goodness-of-fit measure R2 helps us determine how
much of the variance in our data is explained by the model.

Results
The interaction of corpus type and priming decay found in
Experiment 3 holds. CP priming is stronger in task-oriented
dialogue. Table 1 contains the estimated model.
The model based on temporal distance makes essentially
comparable predictions. The S OURCE has an interaction effect on the priming decay ln(D IST), both for CP priming
(βlnDist:CP :M apT ask = − 0.137, t = − 7.6, p < 0.0001)
and for PP priming (βlnDist:P P :M apT ask = − 0.050,
t = − 3.7, p < 0.0005). Figures 2, 3 provide the predictions for the four combinations of ROLE and S OURCE.

Discussion
Both corpora of spoken dialogue we investigated showed an
effect of distance between prime and target in syntactic repetition, thus providing evidence for a structural priming effect
for arbitrary syntactic rules. In both corpora, we also found
reliable effects of both production-production (PP) priming
(self-priming) and comprehension-production-priming. But
only in the Map Task, a corpus of task-oriented dialogue did
we find evidence for stronger CP priming than PP priming.
A possible explanation for these results is the reduced cognitive load that we can reasonably assume for spontaneous,
everyday conversation (as in the Switchboard corpus). Pickering and Garrod (2004) suggest that interlocutors reduce
their workload by aligning their linguistic and semantic representations, as re-using structure is easier than creating it.
As cognitive load in non-task oriented, spontaneous conversion is low, speakers reduce the amount of priming that is
required in dialogue that related to a difficult difficult task.
The fact that we consistently see stronger priming for less
frequent syntactic rules supports the cognitive-load explanation: frequently used rules are more accessible, hence their
representations need less pre-activation.
Another reason may simply be that interlocutors in Switchboard (as in all spontaneous dialogue) switch topics frequently, engaging in longer turns in between. Such a sequence of monologues may, in general, be less affected by

Results
For distance over utterances, R2 is 0.91, for time (in 1-second
buckets) it is 0.89, a similar size.
Thus, there is no compelling empirical evidence to assume
D ISTT ime as a predictor over the work-load-based one (using
utterance distance) chosen before. Because we cannot reasonably opt for one of the alternatives, we will reevaluate the
effect of corpus choice seen in Experiment 3, this time using
D ISTT ime .
4
These models assume a normal distribution as opposed to the
appropriate Poisson one.

689

ing?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
129:177–192.
Holly P. Branigan, Martin J. Pickering, and Alexandra A. Cleland. 1999. Syntactic priming in language production: Evidence for rapid decay. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
6(4):635–640.
Holly P. Branigan, Martin J. Pickering, and Alexandra A. Cleland. 2000. Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition,
75:B13–25.
Jean Carletta, S. Dingare, Malvina Nissim, and T. Nikitina.
2004. Using the NITE XML toolkit on the Switchboard
corpus to study syntactic choice: a case study. In Proc. 4th
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Lisbon.
Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-to-fine nbest parsing and MaxEnt discriminative reranking. In Proc.
43th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Amit Dubey, Frank Keller, and Patrick Sturt. 2005. Parallelism in coordination as an instance of syntactic priming: Evidence from corpus-based modeling. In Proc.
HLT/EMNLP-2005, pages 827–834. Vancouver.
Amit Dubey, Frank Keller, and Patrick Sturt. 2006. Integrating syntactic priming into an incremental probabilistic parser, with an application to psycholinguistic modeling. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics. Sydney.
Stefan Th. Gries. 2005. Syntactic priming: A corpusbased approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
34(4):365–399.
Roland Kuhn and Renato de Mori. 1990. A cache-based natural language model for speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
12(6):570–583.
M. Marcus, G. Kim, M. Marcinkiewicz, R. MacIntyre,
A. Bies, M. Ferguson, K. Katz, and B. Schasberger. 1994.
The Penn treebank: Annotating predicate argument structure. In Proc. ARPA Human Language Technology Workshop. Plainsboro, New Jersey.
J. Pearson, M. Pickering, H. Branigan, J. McLean, C. Nass,
and J. Hu. 2004. The influence of beliefs about an interlocutor on lexical and syntactic alignment: Evidence from
human-computer dialogues. In 10th Annual Conference
Architectures and Mechanisms of Language Processing.
Aix en Provence, France.
Martin J. Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27:169–225.
David Reitter, Frank Keller, and Johanna D. Moore. 2006.
Computational modelling of structural priming in dialogue.
In Proc. Human Language Technology conference - North
American chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics annual meeting ’06. New York City.
Benedikt Szmrecsanyi. 2005. Creatures of habit: A corpuslinguistic analysis of persistence in spoken english. Corpus
Linguistics and Linguistic Theory, 1(1):113–149.
William N. Venables and Brian D. Ripley. 2002. Modern Applied Statistics with S. Fourth Edition. Springer.

priming. The hypothesis that topic switches reduce priming
may be tested in a future study.
On the other hand, one could expect that the impoverished
single channel (phone line in Switchboard) leads speakers to
make an effort to at least accept more self-priming (PP), designing their message so that they could be easily understood.
Such audience design would be in line with work by Pearson
et al. (2004), who found that speakers use less alignment (or
priming) when talking to an (artificial) interlocutor that was
perceived to have better linguistic capabilities. However, we
see little actual evidence of speakers having difficulty understanding each other over the phone line, and they only show
self-priming effects in the time-distance based models.
The Interactive Alignment Model (Pickering and Garrod,
2004) provides a viable explanation for the different effects
that the two corpora expose. What we observe is the reciprocal boosting of syntactic priming and the alignment of the
situation models present in task-oriented dialogue. The interaction partners synchronize their situation models in the taskoriented setting, which co-occurs with cross-speaker priming
(CP) on other communicative levels. While self-priming may
have to do with reduced cognitive load in production, the CP
priming may be enhanced by sharing a situation model.

Conclusions
Reliable syntactic priming effects can detected in dialogue
even when the full range of syntactic rules is taken into account instead of selected constructions with known strong
priming effects. We have modelled syntactic priming as the
decay of repetition probability of syntactic rules, either in the
course of linguistic activity, or over time.
The parameters of priming vary with the setting of the conversation. In particular, we believe that the task-orientedness
of the dialogue and increased cognitive load may boost alignment between speakers.
Since dialogue systems are often task-oriented, they may
leverage the effect to resolve ambiguities or to produce better aligned output. Priming phenomena could also be exploited to aid automated processing, for instance in Automatic Speech Recognition using Cache Models (Kuhn and
de Mori, 1990) and also in parsing (Charniak and Johnson,
2005; Dubey et al., 2006).

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Roger Levy and Martin Pickering
for their helpful comments. A preliminary version of Experiment
5 on separately sampled data has been described in Reitter et al.
(2006). The first author was supported by the Edinburgh Stanford
Link.

References
A. Anderson, M. Bader, E. Bard, E. Boyle, G. M. Doherty,
S. Garrod, S. Isard, J. Kowtko, J. McAllister, J. Miller,
C. Sotillo, H. Thompson, and R. Weinert. 1991. The HCRC
Map Task corpus. Language and Speech, 34(4):351–366.
J. Kathryn Bock. 1986. Syntactic persistence in language production. Cognitive Psychology, 18:355–387.
J. Kathryn Bock and Zenzi Griffin. 2000. The persistence of
structural priming: transient activation or implicit learn690

