UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Probabilistic Reasoning in Preschoolers: Random Sampling and Base Rate

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wx0c3n9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Denison, Stephanie
Garcia, Vashti
Konopczynski, Kathleen
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Probabilistic Reasoning in Preschoolers: Random Sampling and Base Rate
Stephanie Denison (smdeniso@interchange.ubc.ca)
Kathleen Konopczynski (konopczy@interchange.ubc.ca)
Vashti Garcia (vashti@psych.ubc.ca)
Fei Xu (fei@psych.ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
2136 West Mall, Vancouver, B.C. CANADA V6T 1Z4

Abstract
Recent research in cognitive and language development
suggests that infants and young children are capable of
complex computations and statistical inference. The present
studies investigated whether 4-year-old children can solve
simple probabilistic reasoning problems. Two experiments
investigated children’s ability to use information from a
sample to make generalizations about a population and vice
versa. Results suggest that even young children can use the
random sampling assumption and base rate information in
simple probabilistic reasoning tasks. Future studies for
addressing alternative interpretations and implications for
learning and conceptual development are discussed.

Introduction
Research on cognitive and language development in
recent decades has focused on specifying initial knowledge
and concepts in infancy, and contemporary theories of
development have emphasized the important role of innate
constraints (e.g., Carey & Spelke, 1994; Spelke et al., 1992;
Spelke, 1996). In the last few years, several laboratories
have begun to investigate what kind of learning mechanisms
are available to infants and young children, and how prior
constraints and statistical information present in the input
may be combined in rational ways (e.g., Aslin, Saffran, &
Newport, 1998; Gerken, 2005; Gomez, 2002; Maye,
Werker, & Gerken, 2002; Marcus, Vijiyan, Rao, & Vishton,
1999; Newport & Aslin, 2004; Saffran, Aslin, & Newport,
1996; Sobel, Tenenbaum, & Gopnik, 2004; Tenenbaum &
Griffiths, 2001; Tenenbaum & Xu, 2000; Xu & Tenenbaum,
2005).
The current studies investigated whether young children
are capable of rudimentary probabilistic reasoning.
Previous studies in the Piagetian tradition of developmental
psychology have tried to address some related issues. For
example, Yost, Siegel, and Andrews (1962) asked whether
5-year-old children were able to use probability in making
decisions, using a modified version of a task that Piaget had
devised. Children were shown two boxes filled with
marbles of different colors. One of the boxes had more red
marbles than green ones, and the other had more green ones
than red ones. The child was asked to choose a box if she
wanted to draw a red marble. Children chose correctly at
above chance level. Other studies have investigated
whether older children were able to solve more complex

1216

probability tasks (e.g., Acredolo, O’Connor, Banks, and
Horobin, 1989; Schlottman, 2001).
Our experiments focused on children who have not
received any formal schooling. The question was whether
they might already have certain intuitions about
probabilities in the absence of any formal instructions.
Experiment 1 asked whether 4-year-old children were able
to use information from a sample to make generalizations
about a population. Children were shown that a sample was
drawn randomly from one of two boxes. They were then
asked which box the sample came from given the ratio of
the sample (e.g., the sample may have five yellow dog
bones and one blue one. The two boxes had either mostly
yellow dog bones or mostly blue dog bones). If the child
assumes that the sample was drawn randomly from the box,
then she would judge that it is more likely to get a sample of
five yellow and one blue dog bones from the box that
contained mostly yellow dog bones. Experiment 2 asked the
children to use base rate information about a population to
reason about a sample. Children were shown the content of
a box (e.g., it contains mostly yellow dog bones). They
were then asked which of two samples (e.g., one had five
yellow ones and one blue one, and the other had one yellow
one and five blue ones) came from the box. Again, if the
child assumes that the sample was drawn randomly from the
population, she would judge that the sample with five
yellow ones and one blue one was more likely to have come
from the box that contained mostly yellow dog bones.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Twelve preschoolers participated in this experiment (6
girls and 6 boys; mean age 4 years 0 months, ranging from 3
years 9 months to 4 years 4 months). Data from an
additional four children were excluded from the final
analyses due to either non-compliance with the procedure
(1) or failure to complete the experiment (3). Participants
were recruited from a database and their parents were
contacted by phone and mail; they received no payment for
participating. Their parents received either parking
validation or transit reimbursement to cover travel expenses
to the Baby Cognition Lab at the University of British
Columbia from the Greater Vancouver Area. At the end of

the experiment, the children received a small token gift such
as a t-shirt, stuffed animal, or colouring book.
Materials
The materials used in this experiment included three
pairs of boxes, three sets of objects, a large white foam core
screen and a stuffed animal. The small stuffed animal was a
pelican approximately six inches in height, and it played the
role of a puppet that needed help playing a game. The
screen measured 108 cm in width and 50 cm in height.
Stimuli. Gold and silver pinecones, red and green ballshaped ornaments, and yellow and blue Milkbone dog bones
served as the three sets of stimuli. The pinecones were
approximately 13 cm in diameter, the ornaments were
approximately 12.5 cm in diameter, and the dog bones were
approximately 1 cm thick, 7 cm long and 2.5 cm wide.
Boxes. We created pairs of identical boxes, each filled
with one set of objects. Each individual set of boxes and
stimuli differed in color and size. All of the boxes were
made from cardboard mailing boxes and the only
differences between the sets of boxes were the colours and
sizes of the materials used and the stimuli contained. The
boxes that contained the pinecone stimuli were 20 x 31 x 41
cm. They were covered in green bristol board and the front
side of each box was cut out leaving a 4 cm frame of
mailing box and bristol board. We secured a transparent
plastic covering to the inside of the frame to allow the child
to see the contents of the box. This front window was then
covered with purple foam boards attached to the bottom of
the box with black tape and attached to the top with magnets
so that the cover could be taken down during the experiment
to allow the child to see the contents of the boxes. The
ornament boxes were 31.5 cm cubes covered with blue
bristle board and maroon front covers and the dog bone
boxes were 22 x 26.5 x 31 cm covered with purple bristol
board and maroon front covers.
We divided the inside of each box in half with a piece
of black cardboard so that all boxes had two compartments.
The front half of each box held the stimuli that served as the
outcome of the trials for the child to view through the front
window of the boxes. Within the pairs of boxes, the
population stimuli differed only by the 5:1 ratio of one
colour to the other. The splitting of the boxes into two
compartments created the illusion that the boxes were
completely full of stimuli when in reality, the back half of
the boxes contained fixed samples to be pulled out during
the experiment. This made it possible for the sample to
appear to be drawn randomly. In the dog bone boxes, the
mostly blue box contained 60 blue dog bones and 12 yellow
ones, while the mostly yellow box contained 60 yellow dog
bones and 12 blue ones. The pinecone and ornament boxes
also contained 5:1 colour ratios of, 105:21 and 120:24
(number of items in each color), respectively.
An opening in the top of each box allowed the
experimenter to reach into the back half of the boxes. This
opening was covered with two pieces of opaque spandex
material taped to the inside of the boxes so that they

1217

overlapped slightly in the middle. Containers with the
desired samples to be pulled out during the trials sat in the
back half of the boxes. For example, with the dog bone
boxes, the box with mostly yellow dog bones in the front
half had a sample of five yellow dog bones and one blue one
in the back. The box with mostly blue dog bones in the
front half had a sample of five blue dog bones and one
yellow one in the back half. The boxes containing the
pinecone and ornament stimuli had samples in the back set
up in the same way.
Design
Each child completed 12 trials. On each trial, the
experimenter pulled out a sample of six objects, five of one
colour and one of the other colour from the back half of the
boxes. The sampling appeared random to the child. The
order of the different sets of objects was counterbalanced.
At the beginning of each trial, two boxes were put on the
table, one in front of the other. We randomized which box
was placed in front and from which box the sample was
removed. We also counterbalanced the sides that each box
appeared on when the outcomes were revealed (see
procedure below).
Procedure
Upon arrival, participants and their parents met with the
experimenter in the lab waiting area where the child played
with some toys and the parent filled out a consent form.
Next, we informed the parent that the child would be
playing with some boxes and a stuffed animal during the
experiment. We asked the parents not to influence their
child in any way during the study.
Once the parent and the child felt comfortable, they
entered the experiment room where the child sat in a chair in
front of a table facing the experimenter and the parent sat in
a chair behind their child. In the corner of the room behind
the child, a video camera recorded the session. The
experimenter introduced “Pete” the pelican, “This is Pete
the pelican, and Pete likes to play tricky games but he isn’t
very good at getting the right answer. Can you help Pete
play a game today?” Next, familiarizations began: the
experimenter showed the child each of the three pairs of
boxes one at a time. The experimenter began with the dog
bone boxes and put the two identical boxes onto the table.
After this, she pulled down the front covers on each of the
boxes and allowed the child to see that one box contained
mostly blue dog bones and the other contained mostly
yellow dog bones. Next, the experimenter asked the child,
“What colours are the dog bones in the boxes?” and did not
say anything else about the contents of the boxes (e.g. the
ratio). This was done next for the ornament boxes and
finally for the pinecone boxes in exactly the same manner.
After completion of the familiarization phase, the
experimenter asked, “Are you ready to play the game with
Pete now?” Once the child replied, test trials began. The
experimenter picked up two identical boxes and put them on
the table, one in front of the other. She shook one box back

and forth a few times, closed her eyes, reached in, pulled out
a handful of objects, and then repeated this action once more
to reveal a six-piece sample, e.g. five blue dog bones and
one yellow. Once she revealed the sample, the experimenter
described it to the child by mentioning the numbers and
colours of the stimuli (“Wow, there are five blue dog bones
and one yellow one”). After this, the experimenter said,
“Now I am going to hide the boxes and mix them around so
that you and Pete can’t tell which box those bones came
from.” The experimenter pulled up the large screen which
was high enough that the child could not see over it and
switched the boxes around for approximately seven seconds
while saying “I’m switching the boxes around so that you
and Pete can’t tell which one the dog bones came from”.
She then removed the screen to reveal the boxes side by side
and opened the covers to reveal their contents while saying,
“Those dog bones (pointing at the sample) came from one
of these two boxes. I can tell that Pete is stumped. Can you
help him and point to which box you think they came
from?” The child then pointed to the box that he/she
believed the sample came from and the experimenter said,
“Thank you”. The experimenter placed the boxes under the
table and the next trial began with another pair of boxes.
The experiment continued until all 12 trials were
completed. On the last trial, the experimenter asked the
child, “Why do you think all of those came from that box
you pointed to?” This question aimed to see if children
could articulate their reasoning and state explicitly why they
had made the choices they did.
Each child took approximately fifteen minutes to
complete all 12 trials and the final question. T h e
experimenter then explained the experiment to the parent
and allowed the child to choose a prize.
Data Analysis
The video recording of the experimental sessions was
used for coding. On each trial, the child received one point
for a correct response and zero points for an incorrect
response. We also recorded verbatim each child’s response
to the final question from the videotape.

Results and Discussion
Children selected the correct box 74% of the time,
which is reliably different from chance (50%), t (11) =
4.4336, p < .005. There were no differences across stimulus
sets.
In order to succeed on this task, children may have
made the assumption that the sample was randomly drawn
from the population. With that assumption, the probability
of drawing a sample of a certain ratio may be computed and
an educated guess can be made. However, we do not know
the precise nature of the computations given these results.
With the exception of one child, none of the children
were able to articulate explicitly why they chose one box as
opposed to the other, suggesting that the reasoning process
was implicit and perhaps not accessible to verbal description
or conscious reflection.

1218

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 investigated whether children can reason
about a sample when given information about the base rate
of a population. The task is essentially the converse of that
of Experiment 1. Instead of being asked which population
the sample came from, the children were asked which one of
two samples was drawn from a given population.

Method
Participants
Eighteen preschoolers participated in Experiment 2 (8
girls and 10 boys; mean age 4 years 1 month, ranging from
3 years 9 months to 4 years 5 months). Data from an
additional five children were excluded from the final
analyses due to inability to understand the meaning of the
word “more” (3), non-compliance with the procedure (1),
and parental interference (1). Recruitment was the same as
in Experiment 1.
Materials
Experiment 2 used the same materials as Experiment 1
(Pete the puppet, the large screen, and the three pairs of
boxes) with the addition of six small containers, some
stickers and some cards. There were three pairs of identical
containers, one pair for each pair of boxes, and they held the
6-piece samples during the trials. The containers for the
ornaments and pinecones were made out of Plexiglas and
measured 20 x 4.5 x 4 cm and 24.5 x 5 x 4 cm, respectively.
The dog bone containers were made out of small cardboard
boxes that were 18.5 x 8.5 x 5.5 cm with the top and front
side removed. Each pair of containers held a sample
including 1 piece of stimuli of 1 colour and 5 pieces of
stimuli of the other colour (e.g. one dog bone container held
5 blue bones and 1 yellow and the other held 5 yellow bones
and 1 blue). The stickers were small (none bigger than 3
cm3) and assorted, and were given to the children as prizes
throughout the game. The cards came from a deck of cards
intended for a children’s “Go Fish” game and were 12 x 9
cm with pictures of animals on them. They were given to
the children at the beginning of the game for them to put
their stickers on.
Design
Each child completed 12 test trials as in Experiment 1.
The goal of Experiment 2 was to see if children can use base
rate information to decide which of two samples was drawn
from a population. We included a practice trial in
Experiment 2, as the procedure was more difficult for the
children to follow and we wanted to alleviate some of the
mystery as to what was happening behind the large white
screen. In the practice trial, we showed the child a box,
asked them to describe its colours and stimuli, and asked
which colour there were more of in the box to determine
whether they understood the concept of “more or most”. At
the end of the practice trial, we also switched the placement
of the two samples and asked them which ones came from
the box again. This switch was done in order to

demonstrate that the correct sample could appear on either
side, preventing the child from assuming that the sample on
the correct side during the practice trial must always be the
correct sample.
The child then completed up to a maximum of 12 test
trials. A test trial consisted of the experimenter pulling up
one box from a pair onto the table and lowering the front
cover of the box to allow the child to view its contents
before closing the box. At the end of the trial, the child was
required to point to one of two samples that they believed
had come from the box. At the end of the 3rd, 6th, 9th, and
12th trials, the experimenter asked the child if she
remembered what was in the box. This allowed us to detect
whether the children were in fact able to remember what
was in the box by the end of the trial. The child also chose a
sticker as a prize on every third trial to provide them with
some motivation for focusing on the game.
Across the 12 trials for each child, the order of stimuli
presentation was counterbalanced in the same way as
Experiment 1. In the first six trials, each child saw all six
boxes and then saw them again in a different order in the
last six trials. We also counterbalanced which side the
correct sample appeared on. For the practice trial, we
always used the box assigned to trial 3 for the
counterbalance used for that particular child.
Procedure
The procedure was similar to Experiment 1 in that
“Pete” the pelican was used in the same capacity and was
introduced in the same way but with a slight addition to his
character. The experimenter said, “This is Pete the Pelican.
Pete loves to play tricky games, but he is not very good at
getting the right answer. Pete needs you to help him play a
fun game today because he isn’t very good at remembering
things. You need to have a good memory to do well at this
game. Do you have a good memory?” This primed the
children to be aware that they would need to pay close
attention and use their memory. Familiarizations then
proceeded exactly as in Experiment 1.
After the completion of the familiarization phase, the
experimenter said, “Are you ready to play the game with
Pete now?” Once the child responded, the experimenter
said, “Good, now the first thing you get to do is choose one
of these cards to put stickers on during the game. If you do
a really good job of helping Pete you will get to choose
some stickers every once in a while.” The child then chose
a card and placed it next to them, having the card with them
throughout the game served as a reminder that they would
be rewarded if they gave their best effort.
The experimenter then began with the practice trial.
The experimenter pulled up the box, e.g. mostly silver
pinecones, placed it on the table and opened the front cover.
She then asked, “What do you see?” The children then
typically answered by naming the objects and the colours.
Then the experimenter asked, “Are there more silver
pinecones or more gold ones in the box?” Once the child
answered, the experimenter closed the box and presented

1219

one empty container and the sample of five gold pinecones
and one silver pinecone in another container. She placed
one container on either side of the box. She then pointed at
the sample and said, “Those pinecones there came from
Pete’s house. Now lets shake up the box and take some out
of there.” She then pulled out five silver pinecones and one
gold one from the top of the box and placed them in the
empty container. This was done the same as in the test trials
of Experiment 1, so that the sampling appeared to be
randomly drawn. While pointing at the two samples, the
experimenter said, “Now, Pete doesn’t want to get these
mixed up. This is an easy one, can you point to which
group came from the box?” (Child points to a container.)
“Thanks.” Then, the experimenter switched the samples to
the opposite sides. “And again, can you point to which ones
came from the box?” (Child points.) “Thank you, and
where did the other ones come from again?” Child usually
responded with “Pete’s house.”
The experimenter then removed the box, said, “Okay,
let’s try one where you have to use your memory”, and
began the first test trial. For example, using the dog bones,
the experimenter pulled up the mostly blue dog bone box
and opened the front cover to allow the child to see the
population. She then said, “Now look inside the boxes, can
you tell me what is inside?” The child then responded and
if they only said “dog bones”, the experimenter asked what
colours the dog bones were but did not mention anything
else (e.g. the ratio). The experimenter then said, “Good,
Pete needs you to remember exactly what the colours look
like, take a picture with your brain so you really remember
what is inside.” The experimenter placed the large screen
on the table saying, “I’m putting up this screen so that you
and Pete can’t see.” She then shook the box around, said
“I’m taking out some dog bones now”, and picked up the
two containers of pinecones from the floor where the child
could not see and placed them on either side of the box. The
experimenter then removed the screen and said to the child
while pointing at the two samples, “Only one of these came
from inside the box, can you help Pete and point to which
one?” Once the child pointed, the trial was over and the
next test trial began.
After the child pointed to a sample on the 3rd, 6th, 9th,
and 12th trials, the experimenter asked, “Do you remember
what was in the box?” The child typically responded by just
naming the stimuli, so the experimenter then asked, “Were
there more blue dog bones or yellow dog bones in the box?”
Once the child replied the experimenter opened the box and
allowed her to see if she were correct. If she was correct,
the experimenter said, “Good job! Since you did such a
good job of remembering, you win a sticker” and if the child
were wrong, she said, “Oh no, well, that was a good try, you
can pick a sticker anyway and we can try another one”.
After this, the experimenter said, “Okay, would you like to
try a few more? And if you do a really good job, you’ll
have a chance to win some more stickers.” If the child
agreed, the experimenter completed three more trials. If the

child did not want to continue, the experimenter said,
“Okay. Well, you did a great job. You’re all finished”.
Each child took approximately ten to twenty minutes to
complete the experiment. The experimenter then explained
the study to the parent and allowed the child to choose a
prize.
Data Analysis
Data analysis was the same as Experiment 1. A child
received 1 point for a correct response and 0 points for an
incorrect response. We also coded whether the child
remembered the content of the box on the memory
questions.

Results and Discussion
Not all children completed all 12 trials. Eight children
completed all 12 trials, while seven children completed 9
trials and three children completed 6 trials. Because the
memory demands were high in this task, we removed all
trials where the children did not remember which colour
there was more of in the box. Memory probes were
administered on the 3rd, 6th, 9th, and 12th trials, therefore
we included triplets of trials based on the child’s answer on
the memory probe. For example, if the child was incorrect
on Trial 3 and correct on Trial 6 when answering the
memory questions, we removed trials 1-3 and retained trials
4-6. Using this criterion, we eliminated 45 out of a total of
177 trials.
On average, children selected the correct sample 70%
of the time, which is reliably different from chance (50%), t
(17) = 3.7985, p < .005. There were no differences across
stimulus sets.
These results suggest that children were able to keep
track of the base rate information in the population. They
were then able to compute the probability of drawing a
sample of a certain ratio from the population. Again, we do
not know the precise nature of the computations give these
data.

General Discussion
Two experiments investigated whether 4-year-old
children were able to solve simple probabilistic reasoning
tasks. Experiment 1 showed that assuming random
sampling, children were able to generalize from samples to
populations. Experiment 2 showed that given base rate
information about a population, children were able to
predict which sample came from that population. Thus,
even in the absence of formal instructions, children may
already have certain intuitions that allow them to use
probability in their reasoning.
These results corroborate the findings of Sobel,
Tenenbaum, and Gopnik (2004). In their studies, 4-year-old
children were given base rate information (in this case,
whether there were a lot of objects that were ‘blickets’ in the
population) and the results suggest that the children were
able to take that information into account in a causal
reasoning task.
1220

Ongoing studies in our lab also provide preliminary
evidence that even 8-month-old infants are able to engage in
probability reasoning tasks. Using the violation-ofexpectancy looking time method and a modified version of
the tasks reported here, we found that infants looked longer
at the less probable outcome (Xu, Garcia, & Kerlin, in
preparation).
We have suggested here that children are sensitive to
the sampling procedure as well as the base rate information
in a population. However, we have not tested these
assumptions directly. One possible alternative interpretation
for these results is that instead of computing probabilities,
children may have simply looked for a match between the
sample and the population. This straightforward perceptual
matching strategy only requires children to keep track of the
global proportions (i.e., the ratio between the two colors in
each box, or just which color there was more of) in order to
succeed, without having to assume a random sampling
procedure or to compute probabilities. Clearly, future
studies are needed to address this alternative. One
possibility may be to manipulate the sampling procedure.
For example, we could compare a condition of random
sampling (much like in Experiment 1) with a condition in
which the experimenter looks into the box and draws out
each item very carefully as if she had a particular kind of
item in mind. Her deliberate choices may also be conveyed
by saying phrases such as “Ah, I got what I wanted” or
“Oops, wrong one” for each sampling. In the latter
condition we predict that children would be at chance in
choosing between the two populations. For the base rate
experiment, we may convey to the child that the
experimenter had a favorite color and she likes to have
many items of that color. In this case we predict that
children would always choose the sample with more items
of the experimenter’s favorite color.
In sum, our research makes two contributions to the
literature on learning and conceptual development. First, it
adds to the growing body of work cataloguing what learning
mechanisms are available to infants and young children. To
date we have evidence that infants and children are able to
keep track of distributional information in the input (e.g.,
Maye et al., 2002), compute transitional probabilities (e.g.,
Aslin et al., 1998; Saffran et al., 1996), and extract rules
from the input (e.g., Gerken, 2005; Marcus et al., 1999).
Here we show that young learners may also able to use
random sampling and base rate information in making
probability judgments (see also Sobel et al., 2004). Second,
the growing body of research on Bayesian models of
cognition and language (e.g., Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001)
depends on human learners possessing a certain level of
competence in probabilistic reasoning. Our results
demonstrate that even young children may have such
competence. Furthermore, it seems likely that these basic
reasoning abilities can be used in many domains of language
and conceptual development. Future research will explore
these issues in more detail.

Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Baby Cognition Laboratory
at UBC for helpful discussion. We also thank the children
and their parents for participating in the studies. This
research was supported by an undergraduate summer
research fellowship from the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) to S. Denison and
a grant from NSERC to F. Xu.

References
Acredolo, C., O’Connor, J., Banks, L, & Horobin, K. (1989)
Children’s ability to make probability estimates: skills
revealed through application of Anderson’s functional
measurement methodology. Child Development, 60, 933945.
Aslin, R.N., Saffran, J. R. & Newport, E.L. (1998)
Computation of conditional statistics in 8-month-old
infants. Psychological Science, 9, 321-324.
Carey, S., & Spelke, E. S. (1994). Domain-specific
knowledge and conceptual change. In L. Hirschfeld & S.
Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in
cognition and culture, pp. 169-200. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Gerken, L. (2006) Decisions, decisions: infant language
learning when multiple generalizations are possible.
Cognition, 98, B67-B74.
Gomez, R.L. (2002) Variability and detection of invariant
structure. Psychological Science, 13, 431-436.
Maye, J., Werker, J.F. & Gerken, L. (2002) Infant
sensitivity to distributed information can affect phonetic
discrimination. Cognition, 82, B101-B111.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Rao, S., & Vishton, P.M. (1999)
Rule learning by seven-month-old infants. Science, 283,
77-80.

1221

Newport, E.L., & Aslin, R.N. (2004). Learning at a distance:
I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies.
Cognitive Psychology, 48, 127-162.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Sobel, D., Tenenbaum, J.B. & Gopnik, A. (2004) Children’s
causal inferences from indirect evidence: backwards
blocking and Bayesian reasoning in preschoolers.
Cognitive Science, 28, 303-333.
Spelke, E. S. (1994). Initial knowledge: Six suggestions.
Cognition, 50, 431-445.
Spelke, E.S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J. & Jacobson, K.
(1992) Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review,
99, 605-632.
Tenenbaum, J.B. & Griffiths, T. (2001) Generalization,
similarity, and Bayesian inference. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 629-641.
Tenenbaum, J.B. & Xu, F. (2000) Word learning as
Bayesian inference. In L. Gleitman and A. Joshi (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 517-522). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Xu, F., Garcia, V. & Kerlin, L. (2006) Probabilistic
reasoning by 8-month-old infants. Manuscript in
preparation.
Xu, F. & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2005) Word learning as
Bayesian inference: evidence from preschoolers. In B.G.
Bara, L. Barsalou, and M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2381-2386). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Yost, P.A., Siegel, A.E., & Andrews, J.M. (1962)
Nonverbal probability judgments by young children.
Child Development, 33, 769-780.

