UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reading the Language of Action

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2z31d29g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Hard, Bridgette Martin
Recchia, Gabriel

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reading the Language of Action
Bridgette Martin Hard (hard@psych.stanford.edu)
Gabriel Recchia (grecchia@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Bldg. 420, Jordan Hall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Given the hierarchical organization in behavior, at what
level do people segment it and why? One solution proposed
to this problem is that people select a level on which to
segment behavior based on how much information they
need to gain. Segmenting behavior more finely or more
coarsely allows observers to gain more or less information,
respectively (e.g., Newtson, 1973).
A different possibility is that people segment on a single
level in response to instructions, but they typically attend to
and segment behavior on many levels simultaneously (Hard,
Lozano, & Tversky, in press; Zacks et al., 2001). This
possibility makes intuitive sense given how people process
other types of multi-level information streams.
Understanding discourse, for example, requires identifying
units of meaning on many levels: morphemes, words, phrase
constituents, and so on. Perhaps people read observed
behavior similarly to the way they read a book: by
identifying and integrating meaningful units across time,
likely based on their goal-subgoal relations. This view of
action understanding can be called the hierarchical
encoding hypothesis. The present studies aimed to test this
view.

Abstract
According to the hierarchical encoding hypothesis, people
segment observed behavior into units of action that are
integrated into larger units across time. Study 1 tested this
hypothesis by adapting techniques from studies of reading:
participants watched a self-paced slideshow of an activity.
Participants looked longer at slides corresponding to boundaries
between action units than at slides within units. This time may
reflect integration of information within that unit before
processing the next. Supporting this possibility, time spent at
boundaries between units increased more for coarse units of
action than for fine units of action. Studies 2 and 3 suggested
other reasons that looking time increases at unit boundaries:
boundaries between actions correspond to noticeable
discontinuities in the flow of action and are inherently more
interesting to observers than other parts of an action sequence.
Keywords: action parsing; hierarchical encoding; event
segmentation

Introduction
Everyday interactions—from buying a cup of coffee to
playing a game of basketball—depend on the ability to
make sense of others’ behavior. This ability is remarkable
given that human behavior is so dynamic, presenting
observers with a continuous, multi-media stream of physical
information. Part of understanding this stream is to segment
it into distinct actions like “pouring milk” or “shooting a
basket” (Baldwin & Baird, 1999; Newtson, 1973; Zacks,
Tversky, & Iyer, 2001). How is this accomplished? Part of
the answer is that people infer and monitor the intentions of
the actor (Baird, Baldwin, & Malle, 2006; Zacks et al,
2001). For example, when asked to view films of behavior
and to press a key to mark off boundaries or breakpoints
between individual actions (Newtson, 1973), people identify
breakpoints that correspond to changes in intentions, cued
by changes in the states of objects in a scene and also by
predictable changes in the actor’s body (Baldwin & Baird,
1999; Newtson, Engquist, & Bois, 1977).
The ability to make sense of behavior is also remarkable
given the complexity of everyday activities: they can be
segmented in different ways and on different levels. This is
because the underlying structure of most activities is a
hierarchy of parts and sub-parts, reflecting the hierarchical
structure of the actor’s goals and subgoals (e.g., Abbott,
Black, & Smith, 1985; Bower, Black, & Turner, 1979;
Newell & Simon, 1972; Schank & Abelson, 1977). Thus,
activities can be segmented on a coarse temporal grain,
corresponding to larger goals, or on a fine temporal grain,
corresponding to component subgoals.

Study 1: Evidence of Hierarchical Encoding in
On-Line Processing?
Theories of on-line discourse processing propose that
people construct a representation of linguistic information
that is updated whenever the listener or reader reaches the
end of a unit (e.g., Gernsbacher, 1985; van Dijk & Kintsch,
1983). Support for these theories comes from studies using a
moving-window method, in which readers see one word at a
time and press a key to reveal the next word. This technique
allows experimenters to measure reading time for individual
words as an index of processing load. Findings across
several studies have shown that reading time is longer for
words located at major clause boundaries and even longer at
sentence boundaries compared to non-boundaries
(Haberlandt & Graesser, 1989; Haberlandt, Graesser,
Schneider & Kiely, 1986). Increased reading time at clause
boundaries and sentence boundaries is often referred to as
“wrap-up time” and is believed to reflect demands of
interpreting and integrating information within and across
units of text. Wrap-up time is greater for sentence
boundaries because more information must be integrated
across a sentence than across a clause. Wrap-up time
appears to be functional: text recall performance is greater
when reading times at sentence-final words are longer.

1434

If people understand observed behavior hierarchically, in
the same way they understand discourse, then similar
patterns might be observed in on-line processing of an
action sequence. The present study tested this idea by
adapting the moving-window method. Observers viewed a
self-paced slideshow of an everyday behavior. The looking
time for each slide served as an index of processing load. If
action is understood by segmenting and integrating units
across time, then looking times may show a “wrap-up”
effect, such that slides at breakpoints between units are
looked at longer than slides within units. Compared to slides
at fine unit breakpoints, slides at coarse unit breakpoints
should be looked at longer because they require many
smaller units to be integrated and redescribed as a larger
one.

Method
Forty participants first viewed a slideshow of one of four
activities (cleaning a dorm room, eating breakfast, building
a TV cart, or putting on makeup). The slideshows were
constructed by taking a 3min long filmed activity, and
extracting 1 frame from each 1s interval. Slideshow viewing
was self-paced, and looking times for each slide were
measured. Participants studied the actions for later recall,
and then completed a free recall test. Because behavior,
unlike text, lacks punctuation marks, different viewers
might segment and organize a behavior stream in different
ways. To account for this possibility, each participant was
asked to identify levels of organization within the behavior
stream after they completed the recall test. Participants
identified levels of organization by viewing the film version
of the activity and pressing a key to segment what they
perceived as separate actions. Participants segmented the
film 3 times, into fine, intermediate, and coarse-sized units.
Half segmented small units first, and increased unit size on
each subsequent viewing. Half did the opposite.

Results and Discussion
Does Looking Time Increase at Breakpoints? Based on
the idea that observers update their representation of an
action sequence at breakpoints, observers should spend
more time processing slides at unit breakpoints than slides
within units. Looking time data for each participant was log
transformed to reduce positive skewness. There was a trend
for participants to look longer at slides presented earlier in
the slideshow. This trend was well-described by a power
function. Each participant’s looking time data was thus
fitted with a power function using a curve estimation
regression technique to factor out any influence of this
power function in further analyses. Fitting power functions
to the looking time data for each participant accounted for
an average 48% of variance (SEM = 3%). All further
analyses were conducted on the residuals from this
regression analysis. Because residuals represent the
difference between actual looking time for a given slide and
the looking time predicted by the corresponding power
function, the values of these residuals can be negative.

Recall that each slide in the slideshow represented 1s of
the video version of the same activity. For each participant,
the looking time for each slide was thus binned as a unit
breakpoint if the participant indicated a breakpoint in the
same 1s interval as that slide when segmenting the video. A
slide was binned as within-unit if the participant indicated
no breakpoint within that interval. The means and standard
deviations were then calculated for each bin. A looking time
score for each bin was calculated by dividing the mean
looking time for that bin by its standard deviation. This
looking time score represents an effect size estimate: how
much the mean looking time in a given bin differs from the
average looking time for all slides.
As predicted, participants looked longer at unit
breakpoints (M = 0.18, SEM = 0.03) than at points withinunits (M = -0.02, SEM = 0.01), paired-t(39) = 5.62, p <
.001. This supports the hypothesis that observers wrap up at
breakpoints.
Does Looking Time Increase with Unit Size? Observers
should need more time to integrate larger quantities of
information, leading to longer looking times for coarse
breakpoints than for intermediate or fine breakpoints. To
test this hypothesis, looking times already binned as unit
breakpoints were further binned as fine, intermediate, or
coarse breakpoints. On average, participants identified
53.15 (SEM = 8.01) fine breakpoints, 22.10 (SEM = 3.88)
intermediate breakpoints, and 8.90 (SEM = 1.46) coarse
breakpoints.
The results are shown in Figure 1. Unit size significantly
affected looking time scores, F(1.7, 64.8) = 5.43, p < .01.
As predicted, looking time increased linearly as a function
of unit size: looking times scores were highest for coarse
breakpoints (M = 0.35, SEM = 0.09), followed by
intermediate breakpoints (M = 0.22, SEM = 0.05), and then
fine breakpoints (M = 0.11, SEM = 0.03), F(1, 39) = 8.23, p
< .01. Because there were no effects or interactions of
activity or segmentation order, the data were collapsed
across conditions. A Greenhouse-Geisser correction was
applied to the degrees of freedom to adjust for violation of
sphericity.
Does Looking Time Predict Recall? Do people really look
longest at coarse breakpoints because they are integrating
smaller units into larger ones, as the hierarchical encoding
hypothesis proposes? If so, then we can make a prediction:
integration and chunking of information into larger units is
an effective memory strategy (e.g., Miller, 1956; Tulving,
1962); if looking time at coarse breakpoints reflects
integration of fine-level actions into coarser ones, then it
should predict better recall of those fine-level actions.
Participants’ free recall of the slideshow was coded by
simply counting the number of actions reported. Participants
recalled an average 23.43 actions (SEM = 1.62), most of
them very fine-level, like “she took 3 bites of a banana.”
One participant was excluded from the present analysis as
an outlier for recalling 51 actions—more than 2.5 standard
deviations above the mean. Participants with longer looking

1435

Mean Looking Time Score

time scores at coarse breakpoints recalled significantly
more actions overall, r(38) = .46, p < .01. Looking time
scores at other breakpoint levels did not predict recall. This
result is consistent with the proposal that processing time at
coarse breakpoints reflects integration of smaller units into
larger chunks.
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

more units that could be integrated, the more processing
load increased. These increases in processing load appeared
to reflect integration of smaller units into larger chunks,
because participants with the greatest increases were able to
recall more actions from the sequence. Participants with the
greatest increases in processing time were also more likely
to show enclosure in later patterns of segmentation. In
previous studies, enclosure patterns correlated with people’s
descriptions of the hierarchical relations among a set of
actions (Lozano et al., in press; Hard et al., in press).
Together, these findings support the hierarchical encoding
hypothesis: that people understand observed behaviors by
segmenting and organizing them into hierarchicallyorganized action units.

0

Study 2: Hierarchical Encoding or Change
Detection?

-0.1

Within-Unit

Fine
Breakpoints

Intermediate
Breakpoints

Coarse
Breakpoints

Figure 1: Mean looking time scores for slides that fell within
action units, or at fine, intermediate, or coarse-unit
breakpoints.
Does Looking Time Predict Enclosure? When observers
view a film of behavior and divide it into fine and coarse
units on two separate viewings, there is a reliable tendency
for coarse breakpoints to fall close to, but slightly after, a
fine breakpoint in time. This phenomenon is called
enclosure (Hard et al., in press). The enclosure phenomenon
appears to reflect an underlying, hierarchical encoding of
observed behavior. Enclosure scores, based on the
proportion of coarse-level breakpoints that fit this pattern,
correlate with observers’ spontaneous descriptions of
hierarchical organization in behavior, across several studies
(Lozano, Hard, & Tversky, in press; Hard et al, in press).
Enclosure scores also increase reliably when observers are
explicitly looking for coarse and fine units that are
hierarchically related (Hard et al., in press).
One explanation for enclosure is that it results from the
demands of integration processes at coarse breakpoints.
Increased processing load might slow down observers in
marking off a coarse breakpoint relative to a fine
breakpoint, producing a segmentation pattern where coarse
breakpoints fall close to, but slightly after fine breakpoints.
Supporting this interpretation, participants in the present
study with longer looking time scores at coarse breakpoints
had higher mean enclosure scores, r(39) = .45, p < .01.
Mean enclosure scores were (M = .61, SEM = .02),
significantly different from a chance enclosure score of .5,
t(39) = 5.87, p < .001, consistent with previous findings.
In Sum As observers watched a slideshow of an everyday
activity, processing load increased at breakpoints between
actions. Processing time increased more if those breakpoints
corresponded to moments when several smaller action units
could be integrated and chunked into a single unit. The

An important feature of breakpoints is that they correspond
to discontinuities in the behavior stream—often moments
when an actor dramatically reconfigures her body as she
completes one goal and begins pursuing the next (Newtson
et al., 1977). These reconfigurations likely involve a lot of
movement, which means that slides at and near breakpoints
might look very dissimilar from one another, at least relative
to slides within units. Thus, observers might look longer at
breakpoint slides because they are detecting dissimilarity, or
a change between that slide and the immediately previous
slide.
It is also possible that reconfigurations of the actor’s body
are more dramatic as unit size increases from fine to coarse.
If so, then people might look longer at coarse breakpoints
than intermediate and fine breakpoints because of greater
amounts of change at these breakpoints, and not because
they are integrating smaller action units into larger wholes.
Study 2 tests this alternative account of the results from
Study 1, through an analysis of change across an action
sequence and its relationship to segmentation and looking
time.

Method
The present study examined the amount of change occurring
in the slideshows described in Study 1. Each frame of the
slideshow was first passed through a convolution filter that
identifies high contrast areas of the image (e.g., near the
edges of people and objects in each frame). This process
eliminates irrelevant data and restricts later calculations of
change to the most salient features of the image. Each
resulting image was then inverted and each pixel was
assigned a numeric “contrast value” from 0 to 255
corresponding to its brightness, as defined by the HueSaturation-Brightness color model. Contrast values were
high for pixels near the edges of people and objects in each
frame, but low elsewhere.
A change index for each slide was calculated by pairing
each pixel from that slide with the corresponding pixel in
the previous slide, calculating the absolute value of the
difference between the contrast values of every such pair,

1436

and summing up these absolute values. If the actor’s body is
moving and reorienting dramatically from one slide to
another, then the contrast values of corresponding pixels in
the two slides should be more different than if there is little
movement and reorientation. For ease of interpretation,
change indexes were standardized for each slideshow. The
makeup slideshow was excluded from subsequent analyses
because several random lighting changes in the slides made
the change calculations unreliable.

function and de-trended by fitting a power function and
extracting residuals. Second, the number of times that a
given slide was selected as a coarse, intermediate, or fine
breakpoint was calculated. The logic here was that if
breakpoints affect looking time for individual participants,
then for the group of participants, the number of times a
slide was selected as a breakpoint should affect the mean
looking time. Third, the change index for that slide relative
to the previous slide was calculated. All calculations just
described were then standardized for each film.

Results and Discussion
Does Change Increase at Breakpoints? Do breakpoints
correspond to relatively high amounts of change? For each
participant from Study 1, the change index for each slide
was binned as a unit breakpoint or as within-unit, using the
same technique that was used to bin looking times. The
means and standard deviations were then calculated for each
bin. The mean change index for each bin was then adjusted
by dividing it by its standard deviation.
Breakpoint slides corresponded to greater amounts of
change (M = 0.24, SEM = 0.04) than slides within-units (M
= -0.14, SEM = 0.03), paired-t(29) = 7.25, p < .001. This is
consistent with previous findings that breakpoints involve
relatively dramatic bodily reorientations by the actor
(Newtson et al., 1977).
Does Change Increase with Unit Size? As shown in
Figure 2, change was affected by unit size, F(1.24, 36.06) =
9.28, p < .01. There was a significant linear trend, such that
coarse breakpoints had the highest change index (M = 0.71,
SEM = 0.16), followed by intermediate breakpoints (M =
0.25, SEM = 0.05), and then fine breakpoints (M = 0.19,
SEM = 0.04), F(1, 29) = 11.38, p < .01.
Does Change at Breakpoints Account for Looking Time
Effects? Physical changes in the action sequences, like
looking time, increased at unit breakpoints, and increased
more as unit size got coarser. Given the similar pattern of
results for change and looking time, it seems likely that
change and looking time are related. Indeed, the change
index for each slide correlated with looking times for 20 of
the 30 participants. These correlations were weak (M = .19,
SEM = .04), but were significantly different from 0, one
sample t(29) = 4.77, p < .001.
Given these findings, it is possible that participants in
Study 1 looked preferentially at breakpoints because they
were detecting this change, and not because they were
segmenting and organizing the behavior stream at
breakpoints. Suggesting against this possibility, breakpoints
predicted looking time, even controlling for change. This
was determined with a regression analysis in which each
slide in the three slideshows breakfast, cleaning, and TV
cart was treated as a “subject.” For each slide, three values
were calculated. First, the looking times of the 10
participants who viewed a slide were pooled and averaged
to determine the mean looking time in ms. Mean looking
times for each slideshow were then transformed with a log10

Mean Change Index

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
Within-Unit

Fine
Breakpoints

Intermediate
Breakpoints

Coarse
Breakpoints

Figure 2: Mean change index for slides that fell within
action units, or at fine, intermediate, or coarse-unit
breakpoints.
The numbers of intermediate and coarse breakpoints in a
given 1s interval were significant predictors of mean
looking time, even controlling for change (for intermediate,
B = 0.09, SE = 0.04, t(1) = 2.62, p < .001; for coarse, B =
0.20, SE = 0.04, t(1) = 5.45, p < .001). The number of fine
breakpoints in a given 1s interval did not significantly
predict looking time at the group level.
Second, according to regression coefficients, coarse
breakpoints led to larger increases in looking time than
intermediate breakpoints, even controlling for change.
Specifically, if the number of coarse breakpoints selected
for a given slide increased by 1 standard deviation, then the
mean looking time for that slide increased by 0.20 of a
standard deviation. Increasing the number of intermediate
breakpoints selected for a given slide only increased mean
looking time by 0.09 of a standard deviation. Although
these regression coefficients offer only a rough
approximation of how much intermediate and coarse
breakpoints influence looking time, their values suggest that
participants looked longer at coarse breakpoints than at
intermediate breakpoints, even controlling for physical
changes between slides.

1437

In Sum The present study tested an alternative
interpretation of results from Study 1: that breakpoints
correspond to more change as the actor orients from one
goal to the next, and that observers look longer at
breakpoints because they are detecting this change. Results
indicated that breakpoints do, in fact, correspond to

relatively high amounts of change, and that this change
becomes greater as units increase in size from fine to coarse.
Both of these findings are consistent with previous research
(Hard et al., in press; Newtson et al., 1977), but this is the
first study to demonstrate that different levels of
organization in human behavior correspond to changes of
different magnitudes. This finding has interesting
implications: it suggests physical “cues” in the behavior
stream that might assist observers in identifying hierarchical
structure.
Despite the relationship between change and breakpoints,
change could not fully account for results from Study 1.
Thus, it remains likely that patterns of looking time across
an action sequence reflect changes in processing load as
observers segment and organize observed actions into a
hierarchical representation.

Study 3: Hierarchical Encoding or
Informativeness?
Previous research indicates that breakpoints in action
convey a lot of the meaning of an action sequence. Looking
at a comic strip composed of breakpoints from an action
sequence can be almost as comprehensible as watching the
action sequence itself (Newtson & Engquist, 1976). Why
would sequences of breakpoints be so informative? Recall
that breakpoints typically correspond to moments when an
actor completes one goal and begins to pursue the next
(Baird et al., 2006). In activities that involve objects,
completing a goal typically means a distinctive, meaningful
change in the object or objects being acted on—changes that
can define an action and confirm observers’ understanding
of the action they’ve just seen. As the actor completes a
goal, shifts in eye gaze and body direction might cue
observers as to the next relevant goal, such as a new set of
objects to be acted on. These features of breakpoints might
explain why breakpoints can convey the gist of an action
sequence, and why they tend to be better recognized than
other points within the behavior stream (Newtson &
Engquist, 1976).
Thus, observers in Study 1 might have looked longer at
breakpoints because they represent information-rich parts of
the behavior stream. The present study tests this possibility
by showing a group of participants the slideshows from
Study 1 in a scrambled order. If breakpoints are inherently
more informative than other parts of an action sequence,
then observers should look longer at slides later identified as
breakpoints. Furthermore, looking at these breakpoints
slides should predict how much information observers get
from the action sequence.

segmentation task on the video version of the slideshow,
shown in its original form.

Results and Discussion
Looking time data were again log transformed and detrended with power functions. Fitting power functions to the
looking time data for each participant accounted for an
average 43% of variance (SEM = 3%). Participants looked
longer at unit breakpoints (M = 0.07, SEM = 0.03) than at
slides within-units (M = -0.04, SEM = 0.04). Although this
difference was not as striking as for Study 1, it was
significant, paired-t(39) = 3.40, p < .01. As can be seen in
Figure 3, looking time for breakpoints did not increase as
unit size increased from fine to coarse, F(1.03, 40.24) < 1,
ns. Thus, effects of unit size on looking time in Study 1
don’t seem explainable by differences in how informative
coarse breakpoints are relative to intermediate and fine
breakpoints.
If breakpoints convey meaningful information about the
behavior stream, observers who selectively look at
breakpoints should be able to make the best inferences
about what is happening in the slideshow and thus should be
able to list more actions later. Disconfirming this prediction,
recall was uncorrelated with looking time scores at coarse
breakpoints, r(38) = .15, p = .35, intermediate breakpoints,
r(38) = .10, p = .53, fine breakpoints, r(38) = .13, p = .44, or
breakpoints overall, r(38) = .19, p = .24. Participants
recalled an average 14.58 actions (SEM = 0.95),
significantly less than participants in Study 1, t(78) = -4.71,
p < .001.
In Sum The present study tested whether processing load
increases at breakpoints because they are informative parts
of an action sequence. People did in fact look longer at
slides corresponding to breakpoints, even when slides were
presented out of sequence. This suggests that breakpoints
are inherently more interesting than other parts of an action
sequence. Looking times for breakpoints in this study where
much shorter than in Study 1, however, and looking times
did not increase as unit size increased. Furthermore, looking
time at breakpoints did not predict amount of later recall,
suggesting that although breakpoints were interesting to
look at, spending more time looking at them did not help
participants to understand and remember what they saw. It
remains plausible, however, that breakpoints are truly
informative, but observers need to see them in a natural,
sequentially presented action sequence to make use of their
information content.

Method
The methods used in the present study were identical to the
methods used in Study 1, except that slides for a given
activity were presented in a randomized order. Forty
participants viewed one of the four activities, and then
recalled actions from it. Participants then performed the

1438

References

Mean Looking Time Score

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
Within-Unit

Fine
Breakpoints

Intermediate
Breakpoints

Coarse
Breakpoints

Figure 3: Mean looking time scores for slides in Study 3
that fell within action units, or at fine, intermediate, or
coarse-unit breakpoints.

General Discussion
How do people make sense of the continuous and complex
behaviors that other people perform? The hypothesis
explored here is that people encode observed behavior as a
set of hierarchically organized units. This involves
identifying and integrating units across time, usually based
on goal-subgoal relations. Supporting this hierarchical
encoding hypothesis, results from Study 1 showed that
processing load increases at the breakpoints between action
units, and that processing load increases even more upon
completion of several actions that can be integrated into a
single unit. Increased processing at breakpoints might
reflect something like “wrap-up” time—a phenomenon
found in studies on discourse processing that is believed to
reflect the progressive integration of units across time.
Studies 2 and 3 explored alternative reasons why
processing load increases at breakpoints. Breakpoints
correspond to relatively large amounts of change in the
physical orientation and movements of an actor. These
changes at breakpoints attract attention. Changes at
breakpoints may also be informative, because they
correspond to meaningful changes in both the actor’s body
and in the objects in a scene. This could explain why people
look longer at breakpoints even when they are presented out
of sequence. In the present studies, however, increased
processing load at breakpoints could not be fully explained
by either physical changes or relative informativeness. It
seems likely that on-line action understanding requires a
complex interplay between perceiving changes, interpreting
those changes, and integrating them into an ongoing
representation of the actor’s goals and subgoals.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a grant from the Norman H.
Anderson Research Fund. Thanks to Chris Pratt, Toti
Moreland, and Allison Woo for help in data collection and
to Gordon Bower, Barbara Tversky, and Sandra Lozano for
comments and insights.

Abbott, V., Black, J. H., & Smith, E. E. (1985). The
representation of scripts in memory. Journal of Memory
and Language, 24, 179-199.
Baird, J. A., Baldwin, D. A., & Malle, B. F. (2006). Parsing
the behavior stream: Evidence for the psychological
primacy of intention boundaries. Manuscript under
review, University of Oregon.
Baldwin, D. A., & Baird, J. A. (1999). Action analysis: A
gateway to intentional inference. In P. Rochat (Ed.), Early
social cognition: Understanding others in the first months
of life. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts in
memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177-220.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1985). Surface information loss in
comprehension. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 324-363.
Haberlandt, K., & Graesser, A. C. (1989). Processing of
new arguments at clause boundaries. Memory &
Cognition, 17, 186-193.
Haberlandt, K., Graesser, A. C., Schneider, N. J., & Kiely,
J. (1986). Effects of task and new arguments on word
reading times. Journal of Memory and Language, 25,
314-322.
Hard, B. M., Lozano, S. C., & Tversky, B. (2005).
Hierarchical encoding: Translating Perception into
Action. Manuscript under review, Stanford University.
Lozano, S. C., Hard, B. M., & Tversky, B. (2005).
Perspective-taking promotes action understanding and
learning. Manuscript under review, Stanford University.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Newtson, D. (1973). Attribution and the unit of perception
of ongoing behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 28, 28-38.
Newtson, D., & Engquist, G. (1976). The perceptual
organization of ongoing behavior. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 12, 436-450.
Newtson, D., Engquist, G., & Bois, J. (1977). The objective
basis of behavior units. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 35, 847-862.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans,
goals, and understanding: An inquiry into human
knowledge structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Tulving, E. (1962). Subjective organization in free recall of
"unrelated" words. Psychological Review, 69, 344-354.
Zacks, J., Tversky, B., & Iyer, G. (2001). Perceiving,
remembering, and communicating structure in events.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 2958.
van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies in
discourse comprehension. New York: Academic Press.

1439

