UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representation Across Time: Generalizing Temporal Effects on Perceived Similarity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9w995588

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bartels, Daniel M.
Day, Samuel B.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representation Across Time: Generalizing Temporal Effects on Perceived Similarity
Samuel B. Day (s-day2@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Daniel M. Bartels (d-bartels@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA
Abstract
Recent research suggests that the distance of a described
event in the future can affect the way in which it is construed.
In a previous paper, we demonstrated that temporal distance
can influence the perceived similarity between two events by
differentially highlighting their abstract and concrete
attributes. The current paper extends and clarifies these
findings, demonstrating similar effects for events that are
described as taking place in the past, and ruling out alternative
explanations based on planning and coordination of actions.
Taken together, the results of these studies suggest a general
effect of temporal distance, which makes certain kinds of
information more or less available.

will focus more on concrete, contextual information. These
are respectively referred to as high-level and low-level
construals, and they have been shown to lead to important
differences in people’s attitudes, decisions and behavior.
For instance, consider the prototypical example of an
individual agreeing to give a conference talk at some point
in the distant future. When the decision is made, and the
event is still several months away, the individual is likely to
be focusing on the event’s abstract features, which in this
case are largely positive—the opportunity to receive
feedback on one’s work, the chance for public exposure, and
so forth. As the date of the talk approaches, however, the
focus may begin to shift to some of the concrete, contextual
details that were absent in the initial representation, such as
the time and effort that are involved in preparation. In this
case, the fact that the high-level construal is more positive
than the low-level one suggests that one’s overall evaluation
of the event may grow more negative over the course of
time, as the event gets closer and its representation is
enriched with more concrete details.
Research has examined these intuitive effects more
systematically. One study (Liberman & Trope, 1998) gave
participants descriptions of events that, like the conference
talk example, had opposite evaluative valences for high- and
low-level construals. For instance, participants might hear
about a lecture that was on an interesting topic but was
scheduled at an inconvenient time, or about a less
interesting lecture that was scheduled more conveniently.
In other words, the scenarios pit the high-level attribute of
the lecture topic against the low-level contextual
information of its timing. When they asked participants to
predict their likelihood of attending the talk, they found that
they gave relatively more weight to the low-level
information (the lecture time) when the event was described
as being nearer in the future.
While much of the work on temporal construal has relied
on indirect measures such as preference, other research has
attempted to examine intertemporal representations more
directly. For example, Liberman, Sagristano, & Trope
(2002) asked participants to imagine a particular event (e.g.,
a camping trip) in the near or distant future. They then
asked them to sort a set of items that would be involved in
that event (e.g., flashlight, canteen) into mutually-exclusive,
meaningful categories. They found that when an event was
described in the distant future, people divided the objects
into fewer categories, each containing a greater number of
members. This was interpreted as reflecting classifications
that were based on simpler, more abstract object
representations, consistent with construal level theory.

Introduction
One of the hallmarks of human cognition is our ability to
think beyond the present moment. In fact, a large portion of
our cognitive lives is spent predicting and planning for the
future, and reviewing and reconstructing the past.
Importantly, these thought processes can have a profound
impact on our present lives, directly influencing our goals,
beliefs, and desires. For example, any significant decision
that an individual makes will almost certainly draw on their
representations of the possible future outcomes that might
occur, predictions about their own responses to those
outcomes, memories of similar situations from their past,
and so forth. If we are to understand human cognition,
then, it is crucial that we understand representation in a
temporal context.
Most psychological research has neglected this source of
cognitive variance, but what work has been done suggests
important differences between our thinking about the
present relative to the future or past. For instance, research
suggests that people consistently assign greater value to
entities and events in the near relative to the distant future
(see Frederick, et al, 2002, for a recent review). Other
findings show that individuals are generally quite poor at
making accurate predictions about their future emotional
states in various circumstances, often exaggerating the
degree and longevity of both positive and negative
responses (e.g., Gilbert et al., 1998).
More relevant for the current studies, research also
suggests that representations of temporally local and distant
events differ in the kind of information they contain.
Specifically, construal level theory (CLT; Trope &
Liberman, 2003) proposes that events in the distant future
will be represented in a way that highlights abstract, central,
goal-related features, while representations of closer events
1204

In a previous paper (Day & Bartels, 2004), we examined
the effects of temporal distance on the perceived similarity
between events. That experiment used pairs of events that
shared either abstract high-level commonalities (e.g., going
to the dentist and joining a gym, which both involve health
benefits) or concrete low-level commonalities (e.g., going to
the dentist and getting a tattoo, which both involve needles,
hoses, discomfort, reclining in a chair, etc.). Participants
were told that each pair of events represented plans that
some fictional individual had for the future (either the
current week or the following year), and they were asked to
indicate how similar they felt the events were to each other.
We predicted that the temporal distance of the events would
affect the relative salience of the different levels of
information, thereby affecting their perceived similarity. As
predicted, and consistent with construal level theory, we
found that participants’ similarity judgments gave relatively
less weight to low-level commonalities when the events
were described as being in the distant future.
This finding is relevant for at least two reasons. First, it
provides the most direct evidence to date of actual
representational change as a function of temporal distance.
Since similarity is assumed to be computed as a function of
featural
and
structural
commonalities
between
representations, changes in similarity imply changes in
representation. Second, the finding demonstrates that these
changes are pronounced enough to affect perceived
similarity, which is a foundational construct in psychology.
For instance, similarity is thought to play a critical role in
memory and reminding (Hintzman, 1984; Ross, 1984),
categorization (Hintzman, 1986; Medin & Schaffer, 1978;
Nosofsky, 1984), and inferencing and knowledge transfer
(e.g., Novick, 1988; Osherson, et al, 1990; Ross, 1984).
The finding that temporal distance can influence similarity
therefore greatly expands the role that it may play in
cognition more generally.

Temporal distance or strategic planning?
The research on temporal construal has generated robust
findings, and seems to be reflecting real changes in people’s
mental representations, but some important questions
remain. Perhaps foremost among these is the difficulty in
disentangling the effects of simple temporal distance from
the possible effects of strategic planning processes.
Construal level theory asserts that an event’s distance in
time is directly responsible for the observed representational
differences. However, it could also be the case that events
in the near future are simply more likely to cause
participants to actively reason about the planning and
coordination of the described actions. This planning would
then lead to activation of the specific contextual details of
the event. In that case, the differences in representational
content would be a secondary, indirect result of temporal
distance. This issue is relevant even for a conceptual task
such as the free sorting classification study described above,
since immediate planning for a camping trip would demand
attention to concrete factors such as the acquisition and
packing of the items, rather than to their more abstract
functions. The issue of planning and coordination is also

clearly relevant to our previous results, as will be discussed
shortly.
One clear way to circumvent this issue would be to
examine representations of events in the near and distant
past, rather than future. Presumably, consideration of
events that have already occurred would be much less likely
to result in reasoning about planning, and should therefore
provide a better test of purely temporal effects.
Surprisingly, although this approach has been suggested
(e.g., Liberman, Sagristano, & Trope, 2002), all of the
studies reported to date have looked only at representations
of the future.
Although there are many benefits to the similarity rating
task used in our previous study (Day & Bartels, 2004),
notably in its fairly direct examination of mental
representation, our methodology was particularly open to
issues of strategic planning. This is because it did not
explicitly differentiate between the temporal distance of the
events from the present, and the temporal distance between
the events themselves. That is, if one is told that two events
are planned for the current week, then it is clear that they are
both near to the present date, and near to one another. On
the other hand, if two events are simply described as being
planned for the following year, not only are they distant
from the current moment, it is also likely that they will be
more distant from each other, perhaps months apart. Events
that are temporally close to one another would clearly
demand more consideration of concrete details for the
coordination of their mutual planning, confounding a
straightforward temporal interpretation of our results. In
order to make strong conclusions about purely temporal
effects, then, it would be necessary to replicate our previous
study while explicitly controlling for the interval between
events.

Experiments
In this paper, we present two experiments that address
these issues and attempt to distinguish between direct
effects of temporal distance and possible intervening effects
of strategic planning. Experiment 1 looks for the first time
at temporal effects on the construal of events that are
described as taking place in the past. Experiment 2 looks at
the effects of inter-event distance by independently
controlling the interval between the events and the present,
and between the events themselves.
Since both of the current studies use the same general task
and design as Day & Bartels (2004), we will first discuss its
logic and motivation in more detail. As noted, our design
involved asking participants to judge the similarity between
two events. There were a number of reasons that we opted
for this approach. First, similarity judgments seem to reflect
distinctly cognitive processes. Although other theories have
suggested some differences in intertemporal representations
(e.g., Loewenstein, et al, 2001; Brendl, Markman &
Messner, 2003), these have largely relied on evaluative
content, such as differences in the amount or valence of
affective information included. Construal level theory
(formerly temporal construal theory; Liberman & Trope,
1998) is the first approach to provide a purely cognitive

1205

description of these intertemporal effects, namely,
differences in the abstractness and centrality of the content.
In spite of this, much of the existing research on CLT has
still relied on materials with evaluative content, using
dependent measures such as changes in preference at
different time intervals. Similarity appears to provide a
straightforward cognitive measure that is divorced from
evaluative judgment. It also provides perhaps the most
direct measurement of mental representation. Similarity is
generally believed to involve the computation of featural
and structural commonalities and differences between two
activated mental representations (e.g., Medin, Goldstone &
Gentner, 1993). If the perceived similarity between two
things changes systematically, it provides strong evidence
that one or both of the participating representations has
changed as well. Finally, as noted, similarity is a ubiquitous
concept in cognitive science, and is thought to play a role in
such integral processes as memory, categorization and
learning. Evidence that a factor influences perceived
similarity is therefore an indication that it could have
important consequences for cognition more broadly.
There are many different ways in which two things may
be similar to one another. In addition to simple featural
overlap (e.g., Tversky, 1977), research has shown that
people are sensitive to more abstract, structural
commonalities (Gentner & Markman, 1997; Markman &
Gentner, 1993). These different kinds of commonalities
map well to the notions of low-level and high-level
construals. If temporal distance is making one or the other
of these kinds of information more salient in two
representations, it should affect the outcome of any
similarity computations between them.
The test materials in our study consisted of pairs of events
sharing commonalities primarily at one of the two construal
levels. For instance, one item described a high school
student who was planning to call various colleges to request
information packages, and also planning to take the SAT.
These two events are clearly similar, but only in a very
abstract way. They both involve the general goal of
attending college, but the specific actions they require and
contexts in which they take place are quite different. Other
participants saw a different version of this item, in which
the student was planning to call colleges, but also planning

to call hotels to arrange a summer vacation in Mexico. In
this case, the two planned events are quite similar in their
concrete details, but share very little in a deeper, more
substantive way. If representations of events in the distant
future are indeed highlighting more abstract information,
and nearer events are emphasizing concrete details, we
should find different patterns of similarity based on when
these events are described as taking place. Consistent with
CLT, we found a significant interaction between the kinds
of commonalities and temporal distance. Specifically, event
pairs sharing low-level commonalities were rated as
significantly more similar when described in the near than
distant future, and high-level pairs were rated as more
similar in the distant than the near future.

Experiment 1
As discussed, an important issue in the study of temporal
construal is the role played by participants’ consideration of
planning and coordinating the actions. Construal level
theory proposes that temporal distance itself is affecting
people’s mental representations. However, it is also
possible that thinking about events in the near future makes
participants more likely to initiate reasoning processes about
how to accomplish specific actions. It could be these
thoughts that in turn lead to consideration of the concrete
details, making temporal distance only an indirect factor.
One way to compare these alternatives is by examining
people’s mental representations of events that are described
as having taken place in the past. Since events that have
already been accomplished should be considerably less
likely to lead to reasoning about planning those events,
findings of construal effects in those cases would provide
evidence for the direct temporal interpretation.
Effects for events in the past are an explicit—though
untested—prediction of construal level theory (e.g.,
Liberman et al, 2002; Trope & Liberman, 2003). Its authors
have noted indirect evidence from the fact that memories of
recent events contain more concrete detail than more distant
memories, which are more abstract (e.g., Bartlett, 1932;
Wyer & Srull, 1986), although they acknowledge that this
may be the result of memory processes rather than
differences in construal (Thompson et al., 1996).

Event Standard
Read and coded research
questionnaires
Went door-to-door distributing
leaflets about the environment

Low-level comparison

High-level comparison

Did taxes

Conducted telephone surveys

Went trick-or-treating with daughter

Wrote letters to congressmen and
local council members

Went to the dentist

Got a tattoo

Joined a health club

Bought diamond necklace for wife

Bought expensive watch for self

Took wife out for gourmet meal

Called colleges requesting
information packets

Called hotels to arrange Summer trip
to Mexico

Took the SAT

Table 1. Sample events. Low-level comparison sentences were designed to share concrete features and procedures
with the standard, while High-level comparisons share more abstract commonalities.

1206

In this study, we test this claim directly by collecting
similarity ratings for pairs of events that are described as
having taken place in the past. As in our previous work,
these events share either abstract, high-level features or
concrete, low-level ones, and are described as occurring in
the recent or distant past.

might read as follows: “This week, Karen went to the
dentist. This week she also joined a health club.”
The experiment was implemented as a computer-based
task. After instructions, the first sentence pair appeared on
the screen, followed by the prompt “How similar do you
think these activities are to each other?” Beneath this
prompt was a horizontal bar, with endpoints labeled “very
dissimilar” and “very similar”. Participants were instructed
to click a location on this bar to indicate their perception of
the similarity of the two events. This response was
converted to a value between 0 and 1, for the “dissimilar”
and “similar” endpoints, respectively. To ensure that
participants were attending to the task, response latencies of
less than 3 seconds for any item resulted in the warning
“Too Fast” appearing on the screen, followed by a delay of
several seconds before proceeding to the subsequent item.

Participants Forty-three undergraduate students from
Northwestern University participated in this study for partial
course credit.
Materials and Procedure The materials for this experiment
consisted of sentence pairs describing two actions that a
fictitious character had accomplished. Each test item
included a standard sentence, and one of two comparison
sentences. These comparison sentences were constructed to
share either high-level or low-level commonalities with the
standard, but not both. Sample materials are given in Table
1. In addition to these test items, the material set included
several filler sentence pairs, which were either literally
similar, sharing both high- and low-level features, or nonsimilar, sharing neither.
Additionally, these events were described as taking place
either in the recent past (“this week”) or the distant past
(“last year”). This distinction acted as a between-subjects
factor, with all events for a particular participant being
described at the same temporal distance. Commonality
level served as a repeated-measures factor, with half of the
standards randomly being paired with high-level
comparison sentences and the other half with low. Thus, the
experiment was a 2 (temporal distance: recent vs. distant
past) × 2 (commonality level: high vs. low pairing) mixed
design.
In total, 10 test items (five at each commonality level) and
13 filler items were presented in a completely randomized
order (different for each participant), with the exception that
all participants were given the same two initial items (one
literally similar, and one non-similar) to help “anchor” their
rating range and reduce variability. Within each item,
sentence order was randomized, with the standard appearing
first in approximately half of the pairs. A typical test item

Results and Discussion A 2 × 2 ANOVA revealed an
interaction between temporal distance and commonality
level, F (1, 41) = 6.01, p < .05, η2 = .13. Participants rated
high-level pairs as more similar in the distant past condition
(M = 0.69, SD = 0.09) than in the recent past condition (M =
0.63, SD = 0.16). Conversely, low-level pairs were rated as
more similar in the recent past condition (M = 0.50, SD =
0.18) than in the distant past condition (M = 0.41, SD =
0.14).
A main effect of commonality level was also observed.
Participants rated high-level pairs as more similar (M =
0.66, SD = 0.13) than low-level pairs (M = 0.45, SD = 0.17)
overall, F (1, 41) = 53.06, p < .001, η2 =.56. This
preference for high-level commonalities was also found in
our prior study, and is consistent with other data showing a
general preference for relational over attributional similarity
(e.g., Gentner & Clement, 1988; Goldstone, Medin, &
Gentner, 1991).
The results of this experiment are consistent with the
claim that temporal distance itself is responsible for the
observed representational changes.
Since the events
described had already been completed, there is no reason to
assume that participants would have engaged in planning
strategies when construing them. The actual distance in

Experiment 1

Experiment 2

0.80

0.80

Low-Level
High-Level

0.75

0.70

Similarity Rating

0.70

Similarity Rating

Low-Level
High-Level

0.75

0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40

0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35

0.35

0.30

0.30

Recent Past

Close

Distant Past

Temporal Distance

D-C

Temporal Distance

Figure 1. Results: Interactions between commonality level and temporal distance.

1207

Distant

time, regardless of the direction of that distance, appears to
be altering the information that people activate when
thinking about an event.
This finding bolsters the
suggestion that these effects reflect a fairly general
cognitive mechanism, perhaps mapping onto some notion
“psychological distance.” Interestingly, the specific pattern
of results found here is quite similar to that found in our
previous study, which looked at events planned for the
future. This again suggests general effects of temporal
distance.

similarity of the described events, and were warned if a
response was made too quickly.
Results and Discussion A 3 × 2 omnibus ANOVA revealed
a marginally significant interaction between temporal
distance and commonality level, F (2, 56) = 2.82, p = .068,
η2 = .09. As in prior research, a large main effect of
commonality level was also observed, F (1, 56) = 125.62, p
< .01, η2 = .69.
The tests of primary interest in this study were the
comparisons between the individual conditions.
A
difference score was calculated for each participant by
subtracting average similarity ratings for low-level pairs
from average ratings for high-level pairs. Independent
sample t-tests performed on these scores therefore reflect
the interaction between commonality level and temporal
distance. A comparison between the Close and Distant
conditions revealed a significant difference, replicating our
previous findings, t (1, 37) = 2.09, p < .05, d = .67. The
novel question for this study was whether the D-C condition
would more closely resemble the Distant or the Close
condition.
Tests showed the D-C condition to be
significantly different from the Close condition (t (1, 37) =
2.16, p < .05, d = .69), but not different from the Distant
condition (t (1, 37) < 1, p > .10). An intuitive look at the
data (Figure 1) confirms that the D-C participants performed
virtually identically to those in the Distant condition, while
the Close participants displayed a noticeably different
pattern. This finding supports the suggestion that the effects
observed in previous studies using this task were the result
of the events’ temporal distance from the present, not of
their distance from one another. When events are described
as taking place in the distant future, even when they are
explicitly described as near to each other, participants seem
to focus on their abstract rather than concrete attributes.
It is interesting to note that the effects in Experiment 2
were entirely due to changes in the ratings of low-level
pairs, with high-level pairs producing similar scores at all
temporal distances. Similar results were observed in our
previous paper, and have been found in some other pilot
data. This may again reflect a general preference for
abstract, relational commonalities, which may seem more
meaningful to participants. It is also consistent with the
details of Liberman and Trope’s initial claims (1998), where
they suggested that temporally distant representations
contain less concrete detail, while closer events are more
“enriched,” possessing both concrete and some abstract
information.

Experiment 2
The results so far are consistent with the claim that events
that are distant in time are represented differently than
closer events, containing relatively more abstract
information and less concrete contextual detail. However,
the similarity task used thus far leaves itself open to an
important confound, in that two events that are both in the
near future are also explicitly near to one another, while
events in the distant future are not. It could be the case that
thinking about two events that are temporally close to one
another leads participants to consider issues about
coordinating the actions required in accomplishing them,
causing the focus on concrete details. The results observed
thus far may therefore be the result of the temporal
relationship between the events themselves, rather than
between each event and the current moment.
Experiment 2 attempts to distinguish between these two
possibilities by including a condition with explicit
information about the temporal relationship between events.
This condition describes events that are in the distant future,
but are temporally close to one another. If this condition
leads to responses similar to those for events in the near
future, it would imply that the distance between events,
rather than their distance from the present, is the critical
factor behind the previous results. If, on the other hand, the
pattern of results resembles that observed for construals of
distant events without explicit inter-event information, it
would provide evidence for representational differences
based on distance from the present, as proposed by CLT.
Participants Fifty-nine undergraduate students from
Northwestern University participated in this study for partial
course credit.
Materials and Procedure The materials and design for this
study were identical to those of Experiment 1, with two
important exceptions. First, the event pairs were described
as plans that individuals had for the future, rather than
actions they had already accomplished. Also, a third
between-subjects condition was added to the design. In
addition to conditions in which events were described in the
near and distant future, Experiment 2 included a condition
describing events that were temporally distant from the
present, but explicitly close in time to each other. For
example, participants might read “Next year, Karen plans to
go to the dentist. That same day next year, she also plans to
get a tattoo.” This is referred to as the D-C (Distant-Close)
condition. As in the first study, participants rated the

General Discussion
These studies replicate and extend prior findings
demonstrating representational changes resulting from
temporal distance. When events are described as being
distant from the present moment, participants appear to give
relatively less weight to their specific concrete details, and
instead focus primarily on more abstract, central, goalrelated aspects. This was found to be true whether the
events were described as plans for the future or
accomplishments from the past. The effects did not appear
to vary with the distance between the described events, but

1208

rather reflected the distance of the events from the present
moment. Together, these findings support the proposal that
these differences in representational content are a direct
result of an event’s distance in time, and are not a byproduct
of engaging in reasoning about planning and the
coordination of actions.
These results provide important insights about the way
individuals think about the future and past in relation to the
present. Developmental psychologists have noted the
importance of “psychological distancing” in mental
representation, in which children “take a step back” from a
situation and try to construe its meaning independent of the
specific current context (e.g., Cocking & Renninger, 1993;
Zelazo & Lourenco, 2003). By leading to a focus on the
abstract, central properties of a situation, temporal distance
seems able to accomplish a similar feat for adults. The
demonstration of these effects on the perceived similarity
between events extends this phenomenon even further.
Specifically, it suggests that with greater temporal distance,
the way that individuals classify, are reminded of, and make
inferences from a situation will depend on the event’s more
abstract, meaningful attributes. In this way, distance in time
seems to provide us the opportunity to see beyond the
details of our immediate context, and to focus on the things
that matter.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by ONR award N00014-02-10078. Thanks to Dedre Gentner, Jason Jameson, Jennifer
Asmuth, and the Northwestern Similarity and Analogy
group.

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: An experimental and
social study. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brendl, C. M., Markman, A. B., & Messner, C. (2003). The
devaluation effect: Activating a need devalues unrelated
objects. Journal of Consumer Research, 29, 463–473.
Cocking, R., & Renninger, K. (Eds.). (1993). The
development and meaning of psychological distance.
Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Day, S. B., & Bartels, D. M. (2004). Temporal distance,
event representation, and similarity. Proceedings of the
Twenty-sixth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society, 274–278.
Gentner, D., & Clement, C. (1988). Evidence for relational
selectivity in the interpretation of analogy and metaphor.
In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol. 22, pp.
307-358). New York: Academic Press.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45–
56.
Gilbert, D. T., Pinel, E. C., Wilson, T. D., Blumberg, S. J.,
& Wheatley, T. P. (1998). Immune neglect: A source of
durability bias in affective forecasting. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 617-638.
Goldstone, R. L., Medin, D. L., & Gentner, D. (1991).
Relational similarity and the non-independence of

features in similarity judgments. Cognitive Psychology,
23, 222–264.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). Minerva 2: A simulation model of
human memory. Behavior Research Methods:
Instruments & Computers, 16, 96–101.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). Schema abstraction in a multipletrace memory model. Psychological Review, 93, 411–428.
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility
and desirability considerations in near and distant future
decisions: A test of temporal construal theory. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 5–18.
Liberman, N., Sagristano, M. D., & Trope, Y. (2002). The
effect of temporal distance on level of mental construal.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 523–534.
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N.
(2001). Risk as feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127,
267–286.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993b). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of similarity.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 517–535.
Medin, D. L., and Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context Theory
of Classification Learning, Psychological Review, 85,
207–238.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100(2),
254–278.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the context
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 104–
114.
Novick, L. R. (1988). Analogical transfer, problem
similarity, and expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 510–
520.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A.,
and Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185–200.
Read, D. (2004). Intertemporal choice. In D. J. Koehler &
N. Harvey (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of judgment &
decision making (pp. 424-443). Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishing.
Ross, B. H. (1984). Remindings and their effects in learning
a cognitive skill. Cognitive Psychology, 16(3), 371–416.
Thompson, C. P., Skowronski, J. J., Larsen, S. F., & Betz,
A.
(Eds.).
(1996).
Autobiographical
memory:
Remembering what and remembering when. Mawah, NJ:
Lawrence Earlbaum.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal.
Psychological Review, 110, 403–421.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327–352.
Wyer, R. S., & Srull, T. K. (1986). Human cognition in its
social context. Psychological Review, 93, 322–359.
Zelazo, P. D., & Lourenco, S. F. (2003). Imitation and the
dialectic of representation. Developmental Review, 23,
55–78.

1209

