UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Situated Learning and Galperin's Notion of Object-Oriented Activity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vw4n768

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Rambusch, Jana

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Situated Learning and Galperin’s Notion of Object-Oriented Activity
Jana Rambusch (jana.rambusch@his.se)
School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

Abstract

argued that situated learning, by downplaying internal
cognitive processes, actively disregards the very essence
of human learning. Subsequently, it fails to “provide . . . a
broader framework for understanding and improving educational practice” (Greeno, 1997, p. 15, describing the
advantages of social-cultural learning theories). More
exactly, considering cognition exclusively from a situated
learning point of view sidesteps the issues of generality
and transfer, which puts situated learning theories at the
risk of becoming “educationally trivial” for teachers and
educators (Kirshner & Whitson, 1997, p. 12).

Situated learning theories are largely based on the idea
that the knower cannot be separated from the known,
i.e. the individual, its context, and its activity in the environment mutually constitute each other. This way of
attending the issues of cognition and learning has been
heavily criticised by many researchers since sociocultural aspects such as social interaction and tool use are
not believed to explain the issues of transfer and generality. The approach developed by Russian psychologist
Piotr Galperin (1902–1988), on the other hand, provides
substantial support for situated learning theories and
should, thus, be considered a valuable complement to
the theoretical framework of situated learning.

From action to thought

Introduction
The paradigm shift from cognitivism (e.g. Pylyshyn,
1990) to situated cognition (e.g. Hutchins, 1995; Clark,
1997; Clancey, 1997) has also triggered an overall rethinking of educational practices and research. Rather
than viewing learning as exclusively taking place in people’s minds, many researchers now describe learning in
terms of a process emerging from activity in a subjective
and socially constructed world. Especially the theoretical framework of situated learning is strongly associated
with this new perspective on learning and knowledge appropriation. However, unlike traditional learning theories (e.g. Gagné, Yekovich, & Yekovich, 1993) which have
gained widespread acceptance in the scientific world and
in public, situated learning has been less successful in
gaining support of from teachers, educators and educational researchers.
The lack of acceptance has several reasons. Situated
learning theories are closely related to the philosophies of
situated cognition and have emerged in objection to cognitivist conceptions in educational thinking (e.g. Brown,
Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Rogoff, 1990; Lave & Wenger,
1991). From the situated perspective, traditional learning theories are insufficient for dealing with the phenomenon of learning. When considering learning as the
result of internal, innate processes, it has been argued,
it is impossible to understand how people learn, how
they make use of knowledge within and outside schools.
Instead researchers need to consider learning and knowledge appropriation in terms of interactions and meaningconstruction within a sociocultural context. The strong
emphasis on the social and tool-mediated nature of learning has not met with enthusiasm in the scientific community (e.g. Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996). It has been

The underlying tenet in situated learning, that learning is the result of social activity in context, has to a
large extent its origins in cultural-historical psychology,
an approach developed more than a half century ago by
L. S. Vygotsky (1932). Central to this approach is the
notion that cognition and learning are culturally and socially mediated by material and psychological tools and
result from meaningful activity. The idea of higher mental processes being a function of and created through
socially meaningful (mediated) activity was further explored by Leontiev (1978) and Galperin (1992a, 1992b).
The research carried out by Galperin is of special interest in this paper since his work provided an important
step to further investigation and understanding the process of internalisation. Galperin’s approach shares many
similarities with the theoretical framework of situated
learning, but his approach is, in contrast to most of them,
also concerned with how socially and culturally mediated
activity is transformed into mental activity. In other
words, his approach demonstrates that it is possible to
explain both internal, mental processes and the situated
and sociocultural nature of learning. This has also been
recognised by Arievitch and colleagues (Arievitch, 2003;
Arievitch & Haenen, 2005) who consider Galperin’s approach a necessary and long missing link between sociocultural learning theories and traditional, more cognitivist approaches to learning.
However, while many researchers consider the sociocultural aspects of learning in Galperin’s theory as a
welcome addition to traditional theories, they do not
seem to bother with the underlying assumptions and
philosophies which often are quite contrary to cognitivist (learning) theories. Galperin’s approach appears
to have much more in common with the conceptions

1998

of cognition and learning within the situated learning
framework. However, research in situated learning has
addressed questions concerning the nature of activity,
learning and knowledge appropriation from a wide diversity of perspectives and viewpoints. Thus, further
research is necessary to clarify and understand how and
to what extent Galperin’s approach can be integrated
with situated learning. This paper aims to explore in
some more detail the similarities, but also substantial
differences, between Galperin’s view on learning and central conceptions within situated learning. Furthermore,
practical implications of Galperin’s approach for university teaching are also addressed.

our thoughts the result of something internal, Galperin
considered activity a process in which an internal plane
of consciousness is formed (Wertsch, 1985). This position puts Galperin’s approach much closer to situated
perspectives on cognition and learning because dualistic
views on cognition (mind) and activity (body) are seriously questioned. Galperin’s approach, thus, can be seen
as a logical and valuable complement to situated learning theories as he explicitly and particularly addressed
the internalisation of socially and culturally mediated
human activity.

Situated learning

The idea of higher mental processes being a function
of and created through socially meaningful mediated activity is fundamental to cultural-historical psychology
(Galperin, 1992a; Leontiev, 1978; Vygotsky, 1932). The
phenomenon of human activity was approached from different research directions. Vygotsky (1932), for instance,
was mainly interested in exploring the importance of
symbolic tools and social interactions in human thinking, while Leontiev (1978) was more interested in studying the formation of activity, which is reflected in the
concepts of activity, action, and operation, and corresponding, motive, goal, and conditions. The underlying
idea is to describe activity in terms of socially meaningful behaviour which is centred around shared goals and
conditions. However, Leontiev’s concept of meaningful
activity was, according to Galperin (1992a), limited since
it was given “a psychological description with regard to
only one aspect – motivation” (ibid., p. 42). As a consequence, the object-related operational content of activity
was largely overseen, that is, that mental activity in fact
is highly dependent on external, object-related activity
(Galperin, 1992a).
One of the main problems was, according to Galperin
(1992a), the consideration of object-related activity as a
non-psychological process, and mental activity, in contrast, as a non-objective process. As long as the “external remained external, and the internal remained internal” (ibid., p. 44) and no explanation was given for what
exactly took place in the process of internalisation – as
defined by Vygotsky – the underlying dualistic views on
the mind would not change.
Galperin’s approach to activity, however, has not received as much attention as Leontiev’s and Vygotsky’s
theories, mainly because it has been largely associated
with “concrete educational procedures”, despite the fact
that Galperin himself considered his work an important
step to further investigation and understanding the origin and content of human functioning (Gindis, 1998).
This is also in line with Arievitch and Stetsenko (2000)
who described Galperin’s theory (1992b) as an advanced
account of cognitive development in relation to learning
as it placed the origin of thinking in the concrete, observable activities of the child. Galperin’s approach to
activity was to describe the internalisation of socially
meaningful activity by means of six different steps, that
is, he was concerned with how mental (orienting) activity, with its origin in material (practical) activity, evolves

Despite individual differences in approaches to situated
learning (e.g. Brown et al., 1989; Rogoff, 1990; Lave &
Wenger, 1991), there are some central themes common
to the situated learning literature. Since situated learning theories are closely related to situated cognition, they
seem, at least at first glance, heavily oppose to dualistic
assumptions, according to which the mind can be described and understood in isolation to its environment.
Cognition is situated since it emerges from the interaction between agent and environment, and therefore
sociocultural aspects and the situated nature of cognition and learning activity have been emphasised. Consequently, social interactions with other individuals and
the active use of external structures in the environment
are considered an important part of situated learning
activity.
Cultural-historical conceptions of activity, learning
and development have had important implications for
the situated learning framework. The notion of activity,
subsequently, is essential for situated learning theories
which is reflected in concepts such as participation and
apprenticeship. These concepts present the particular
interests of researchers in various disciplines (e.g. Brown
et al., 1989; Rogoff, 1990) and emphasise the indivisible character of learning and (work) practice, as well
as the social, distributed nature of learning and knowledge (Lave, 1988). The focus in situated learning is, in
other words, almost entirely on social-cultural aspects
of learning activity which, as already mentioned in the
introduction, gives rise to one or another question.
One of the main problems in situated learning is, according to its critics, the view on cognition and learning
as being distributed across people and artefacts; looking
at these processes exclusively from a sociocultural point
of view, it has been argued, completely sidesteps the issues of generality and transfer. The position taken in
situated learning, however, receives substantial support
from the work of Galperin (1992a, 1992b). The cornerstone in his approach, the conception of object-oriented
activity, strongly indicates that social interactions with
other people and the use of different kinds of tools is
a necessary precursor condition for all forms of mental
activity. In contrast to cognitivist approaches to cognition and learning where human activity is occurring
in and surrounded by an external, objective world, and

The concept of object-oriented activity

1999

through formal and informal instruction by adults in
the zone of proximal development (ZPD). In addition
to Vygotsky who strongly emphasised the importance
of speech, signs, and symbols as unique human tools in
practical activity, Galperin recognised and explored the
role of human (practical) activity in thinking. Galperin
strongly believed that practical human activity constitutes the basis for the development of semiotic means,
and described learning in terms of an internalisation of
action to thought.
The underlying assumption in Galperin’s approach
to learning and activity is that there are two different
types of actions: (1) an ideal action that is performed
in the presence of objects and (2) an ideal action that is
carried out separately, without any presence of objects
(Arievitch, 2003). While the first type of actions is characteristic for different types of animals, the second type
of actions can according to Arievitch only be found in
humans and constitutes the basis for a wide range of cognitive phenomena (e.g. ‘mental models’, inner speech).
Therefore, despite the fact that all actions are objectrelated, only the second type is performed without a
physical execution. This, however, does not mean that
the second type of action is carried out according to some
internal (mental) laws; rather, it is performed according
to the laws of the external world, that is, material forms
of external activity is gradually transformed into mental
forms of that same external activity.
The idea of material action being the fundamental basis of all forms of mental action is highly consistent with
findings within embodied cognition research (e.g. Hesslow, 2002; Barsalou, 2003; Grush, 2004) because this
assumption suggests that mental processes are deeply
rooted in sensorimotor activity.

Stepwise learning
The central idea in Galperin’s theory (1992a, 1992b) is
to describe the internalisation of an object-oriented activity (the formation of mental activity) as a process in
which an action passes through a series of stages. At each
of these stages, an action is carried out in a new form
and undergoes changes in several directions. Galperin
conceptualised a process of internalisation in which an
action must go through six different steps before becoming a complete mental action (Galperin, 1992b). However, the realisation of an action usually depends on
a number of varying factors such as the learning task
and the learner’s prior knowledge and experiences, sometimes leading to situations in which the sequence of the
steps can be changed or a certain step is rather unnecessary. The stepwise teaching strategy, accordingly, serves
as a guideline for teachers rather than as an instruction
manual that needs to be followed in every single detail.
Galperin, after having eventually abandoned the idea of
a strict sequence, particularly emphasised four distinctive phases (steps) of the teaching-learning process: (1)
orientation, (2) communicated thinking, (3) dialogical
thinking and (4) acting mentally.
In the orientation phase, the new action to be learned
is brought to the learner’s attention, that is, the learner

gets to know the task and its conditions. The orientation phase, accordingly, is designed to provide the learner
with all the information necessary for a successful action
execution. The information is given to the learner in
form of an orienting chart (‘cheat chart’) where aspects
such as the intended output, means and objects of an action are explicitly described. Working with such a chart
guarantees that the action in question is initially realised
on the materialised level.
After the learner has learned to use action specific objects and representations of them, the action is separated
from its materialised forms in the second phase (Communicated thinking = overt speech). Instead, overt or social
speech is frequently used. The learners are encouraged to
communicate about the action, and to think aloud while
executing it without the use of objects and its representations. The execution of the action at this stage is neither
material nor completely mental “since the pupil is not
yet able to perform it silently ‘in his mind’ ” (Galperin,
1969, p. 260). At this stage, the use of overt speech is
not only an opportunity for the learner to execute an
action without external (materialised) tools, but also to
communicate with others, that is, to establish a social
relation with others and to execute an action in a way
which can be understood by others (Galperin, 1989).
The phase of dialogical thinking is seen as a complement to the previous phase. By encouraging the learner
to establish a dialogue with him/herself, a transformation of the structure of speech takes place. As pointed
out by Haenen (2001), “the psychological significance of
an audible image lies in the fact that it is more stable and stronger than a perceptual image, which should
evolve on the basis of merely a materialised action without the subsequent overt speech” (p. 164). During dialogical thinking, an action is mastered on a more routine
level, resulting in an almost automatic action.
At the final stage (Acting mentally), an action has
become a pure mental act. Instead of controlling the
outcomes of single operations, the teacher now focuses
on the final outcome of the action. The action, to put it
in Haenen’s words, “has been transformed into a mental
phenomenon and has become a chain of images and concepts” (Haenen, 2001, p. 164). The action now has an
orienting function as it is mentally performed by means
of mental images and concepts reflecting real-life situations. These concepts help a person to deal with similar
and differing situations on the basis of previous experiences.

The contributions to situated learning
Situated learning has almost exclusively concentrated
on the role of human caretakers and other individuals in learning without addressing questions regarding
how these social-cultural processes transform into mental processes. The research carried out by Galperin, on
the other hand, has been instrumental in revealing the
interdependency of socially and culturally mediated activity and mental activity. Galperin’s approach, thus,
can be considered a crucial link between situated learning and cultural-historical conceptions of (mental) ac-

2000

tivity. Moreover, Galperin’s interest in transforming his
theory into a teaching framework is also what distinguishes his research from most research within situated
learning. Being more concerned with a better understanding of human cognition and learning in general (cf.
Clancey, 1995), most researchers advocating the situated
and sociocultural nature of learning have successfully bypassed questions regarding the implications of situated
learning theories for educational practice. However, if
the theoretical framework of situated learning aims to
provide an alternative framework for understanding and
improving educational practice, researchers within situated cognition and learning need to consider and examine the implications for educational practice in schools
and other educational organisations. Here, Galperin’s
stepwise learning strategy could serve as a useful complement for ‘practical research’ within situated learning.

tion (e.g. Clark, 1997; Svensson & Ziemke, 2005). Given
the strong emphasis on material action (sensorimotor activity) and its striking similarities with the theoretical
framework of situated learning, Galperin’s approach can,
thus, rather be considered an important link between the
research fields of situated learning and embodied cognition (cf. Rambusch & Ziemke, 2005).

Stepwise learning in undergraduates
In order to explore a) what a situated learning perspective would be like in practice, and b) how, and to
what extent, Galperin’s stepwise teaching strategy could
be applied to university teaching, a small case study
was carried out at the University of Skövde, (Sweden).
The participants were 13 undergraduate students in the
cognitive science program. The students participating
were enrolled in the course “Situated cognition” in the
course of which they were introduced to central terms
and ideas within the theoretical frameworks of situated
and embodied cognition. During a lecture that specifically focused on situated learning and Galperin’s theory,
the students were engaged in an exercise. Its purpose
was threefold. Firstly, the students were given the opportunity to experience Galperin’s theory in practice.
Secondly, they were to gain a better understanding of
central concepts in situated cognition; concepts such as
‘situated’ and ‘context’ are usually understood by students at a fairly general level, without necessarily grasping their hidden, underlying meanings. Thirdly, as researchers, we were interested in the outcome of the exercise.
The preparation of the exercise was a challenge because there is not much material to rely on, since most
studies carried out with the aim of testing the implications of Galperin’s approach for educational practice
focus on children.1 Another problem we had to deal
with was the content of the orienting chart. Most orienting charts are quite complex and usually contain a
huge amount of information about how an action is to
be executed, in what order, and why. Since we were
dealing with undergraduates, the information given to
them had to be at a more abstract level.
The exercise was divided into four different stages,
each of which corresponded to one of the stages described
by Galperin. The students were divided into groups of
three (four) to make sure all students would engage in
the group’s discussions. The students particularly appreciated the opportunity to actively work with central concepts within situated cognition while discussing
them with their peers. The material they were provided
included, among other things, a number of quotes reflecting different perspectives on situated cognition and
learning, pictures of various real-life situations, and a list
with central concepts that can be found in the situated
cognition and learning literature, that is, the students

The approach developed by Galperin (1992a, 1992b)
bears, for instance, many similarities to the approach
introduced by Collins, Brown, and Newman (1989). In
both cases, learning is described as a process in which
observation, guidance, and practice are essential elements, and which is characterised by transparent access
to learning strategies and methods. However, the approaches of Galperin (1992b) and Collins et al. (1989)
differ in some aspects as Galperin’s teaching strategy
is characterised by precise steps that are introduced to
and need to be carried out by the students, while Collins
et al. emphasise the visible access to strategies and methods in more general terms. Having access to the implicit
knowledge of teachers and instructors, in Collins’ terms,
means mainly the observation of the instructor’s actions
in a community of practice. This is also why learning
here is viewed as highly context-dependent, which according to Collins et al. (1989) sometimes makes necessary a de-contextualisation of knowledge. Galperin, on
the other hand, did not distinguish between ‘real-life situations’ and ‘classroom situations’ because, according to
him, the transformation of material actions to mental actions is the process in which knowledge is actively created
and being generalised. The tools and information given
to the students contain, in other words, situation-specific
knowledge, but once a material action has transformed
into a mental action, the transformed (and thereby generalised) knowledge can be used in different situations.
Still, there appear, at least at first glance, to be some
aspects in Galperin’s theory that are not consistent with
situated learning theories in general. Galperin’s approach is, according to Arievitch (2003), largely based
on the assumption that humans attain and use different
kinds of mental representations, which is an assumption
that seems to be very close to traditional perspectives
on learning and activity. However, as already pointed
out, dualistic perspectives on human thinking are seriously challenged by Galperin, which is why Arievitch
and Haenen (2005) view on his approach as a link to
cognitivist learning theories can be questioned. Moreover, the role of mental representations in human cognition is also intensively being discussed in a wide range
of research fields within situated and embodied cogni-

1
Galperin and colleagues carried out more than 800 experiments and studies in many different places (Haenen, 1996).
Most of this research, however, is only available in Russian,
and those few studies translated into English focus primarily
on children.

2001

worked with concepts such as ‘situated’ and ‘context’
on a material basis while a number of questions helped
them orient their actions. To make sure that all students
would take part in all four steps, they were asked to write
down their thoughts and ideas at stage three and four.
The material written by the students was collected after
the exercise and reviewed later. The students’ thoughts
and reflections were put together in one document and
eventually returned to them to provide feedback and to
assist their learning processes.

Conclusions
This paper has shown that the theoretical framework
of situated learning and the approach developed by
Galperin (1992a) to a considerable extent share the same
underlying assumptions concerning the role of sociocultural aspects in human thinking. There are, naturally,
also some differences, but most of them are complementary rather than contrary to each other, Galperin’s
teaching strategy being one example. His approach,
thus, can be considered a good starting point for future
educational ‘practice research’ within situated learning.
The emphasis here is on starting point, because there are
many learning aspects that only have played a minor
role in Galperin’s theory, e.g. the role of human caretakers and other individuals in a community of practice. These aspects, on the other hand, have exhaustively
been explored within the theoretical framework of situated learning (e.g. Rogoff, 1990; Lave & Wenger, 1991),
and would add a more specifically social dimension to
Galperin’s ideas.
The exercise carried out at the University of Skövde
suggests that Galperin’s stepwise strategy also can be
used for teaching at college and university level. Students’ reflections on this exercise (and the course as a
whole) indicated that it was a success, despite problems
encountered before and during the exercise. One of the
students commented, for instance, that the repetition
during phases two and three helped her attain a better
understanding of several aspects of situated cognition.
However, there were also several limitations of which the
limited amount of time was a crucial one. The students
had to go through all four steps within two hours, which
did not leave much room for deeper, theoretical reflections. At the time, the lecture schedule was set, and
changing it was not an option. Another serious limitation was the character of the case study; the fact that is
was an exercise rather than a pure case study made it
difficult for us to study and outline in greater depth and
detail the ongoing activities, learning processes and outcomes. It became also clear that the role of the teacher
is crucial for the outcome of such an exercise; it was
impossible to provide the students with all information
necessary in one single ‘cheat chart’. More detailed explanations are needed sometimes, and not all knowledge
held by a person can be written down, but becomes only
‘visible’ during people’s interactions with each other (cf.
Lave & Wenger, 1991).

Future work
With the classroom study in mind, future research needs
more closely to address questions regarding the issues of
generalisation and transfer by outlining the role of actions and the mechanisms involved in the transformation of material activity into mental activity (cf. Martin
& Schwartz, 2005). Further empirical investigation is
also necessary to study in greater detail how Galperin’s
approach can be translated into a concrete and effective
educational program.
Moreover, the central assumption in Galperin’s approach is that all mental activity is based on material
activity which implies that we, in one way or another,
always go through the steps described by Galperin. So
far, most studies have concentrated on applying the stepwise procedure in different places such as schools and
work places, that is, researchers and/or educators make
sure that the four steps are more or less followed. More
research, subsequently, is needed to explore and verify the existence of stepwise learning processes in peoples’ daily activities. This is another critical area in
which situated learning research is required. The conceptions of apprenticeship and participation are largely
based on ethnographic (anthropological) studies of learning and everyday activity, and those studies have repeatedly demonstrated how different schooling is from daily
activities, where activities themselves and culture usually give meaning and purpose to what is learned.
In conclusion, the theoretical framework of situated
learning can rely on a strong body of research from a
broad range of different research areas, and in combination with research carried out in the area of embodied
cognition and Galperin’s ideas, the theoretical framework of situated learning could take the step from being ‘educationally trivial’ (Kirshner & Whitson, 1997) to
‘educationally effective and necessary’.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my colleagues Jessica Lindblom
and Tarja Susi for helpful comments and discussions. I
would also like to thank all students who participated in
the study.

References
Anderson, J. R., Reder, L., & Simon, H. A. (1996). Situated learning and education. Educational Researcher,
25 (4), 5–11.
Arievitch, I. M. (2003). A potential for an integrated
view of development and learning: Galperin’s contribution to sociocultural psychology . Mind, Culture &
Activity, 10 (4), 278–288.
Arievitch, I. M., & Haenen, J. P. P. (2005). Connecting sociocultural theory and educational practice:
Galperin’s approach. Educational Psychologist, 40 (3),
155–165.
Barsalou, L. W. (2003). Situated simulation in the human conceptual system. Language & Cognitive Processes, 18, 513–562.

2002

Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated
cognition and the culture of learning. Educational Researcher, 18 (1), 32–42.
Clancey, W. J. (1995). A tutorial on situated learning.
In J. Self (Ed.), Proceedings of the international conference on computers and education, Taiwan . Charlottesville, VA: AACE.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition: on human
knowledge and computer representations. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there. Putting brain, body, and
world together again . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989).
Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.),
Knowing, learning and instruction – essays in honour
of robert glaser. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Gagné, E. D., Yekovich, C. W., & Yekovich, F. R. (1993).
The cognitive psychology of school learning. New York:
Longman.
Galperin, P. I. (1969). Stages in the development of
mental acts. In M. Cole & I. Maltzman (Eds.), A
handbook of contemporary soviet psychology (pp. 249–
273). New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Galperin, P. I. (1989). Mental actions as a basis for the
formation of thoughts and images. Soviet Psychology,
27, 45–64.
Galperin, P. I. (1992a). The problem of activity in soviet
psychology. Journal of Russian and East European
Psychology, 30 (4), 37–59.
Galperin, P. I. (1992b). Stage-by-stage formation as
a method of psychological investigation. Journal of
Russian and East European Psychology, 30 (4), 60–80.
Gindis, B. (1998). Piotr Galperin: Psychologist in vygotsky’s footsteps. Culture & Psychology, 4 (4), 501–506.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong
questions. Educational Researcher, 26 (1), 5–17.
Grush, R. (2004). The emulation theory of representation: motor control, imagery, and perception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 377–442.
Haenen, J. (1996). Piotr Galperin: Psychologist in Vygotsky’s footsteps. Commack, New York: Nova Science
Publishers, Inc.

Haenen, J. (2001). Outlining the teaching-learning processes: Piotr Galperin’s contribution. Learning and
Instruction, 11, 157–170.
Hesslow, G. (2002). Conscious thought as simulation
of behaviour and perception. Trends in Cognitive Science, 6 (6), 224–242.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild . Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kirshner, D., & Whitson, J. A. (1997). Situated cognition: social, semiotic, and psychological perspectives .
Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice. mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life. Cambridge: CUP.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning. Legitimate peripheral participation . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Leontiev, A. N. (1978). Activity, consciousness, and
personality. Hillsdale: Prentice Hall.
Martin, T., & Schwartz, D. L. (2005). Physically distributed learning: Adapting and reinterpreting physical environments in the development of fraction concepts. Cognitive Science, 29 (4), 587–625.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1990). Computation and cognition. In
J. L. Garfield (Ed.), Foundations of cognitive science.
New York: Paragon House.
Rambusch, J., & Ziemke, T. (2005). The role of embodiment in situated learning. In B. Bara, L. Barsalou, &
M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. (pp. 1803–
1808). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking – cognitive
development in social context. . New York: Oxford
University Press.
Svensson, H., & Ziemke, T. (2005). Embodied representation: What are the issues? In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2116–2121). Stresa, Italy, July.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1932). Mind in Society. The development of higher psychological processes . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press. (Reprint: 1978)
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Vygotsky and the social formation
of mind. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

2003

