UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Speaker/Gender Effect: Impact of the Speaker's Gender on Learning with Narrated
Animations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80q5w2gn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Gerjets, Peter
Linek, Stephanie B.
Scheiter, Katharina

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Speaker/Gender Effect:
Impact of the Speaker’s Gender on Learning with Narrated Animations
Stephanie B. Linek (s.linek@iwm-kmrc.de)
Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center,
Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center,
Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen,
Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

According to the limited capacity assumption, these two
separate channels are both limited with respect to the
amount of information that can be processed at a time. The
active processing assumption emphasizes that learners need
to engage in sense-making activities and deeper cognitive
processing of the instructional materials to achieve meaningful learning outcomes. Active processing includes the
selection of relevant information, the organization of the
selected information into coherent meaningful representations as well as the integration of the verbal and pictorial
representations with each other and with prior knowledge
(Mayer, 2001).
These assumptions have allowed deriving several design
guidelines for multimedia learning, thereby inspiring numerous empirical investigations. But until now the focus of
this research has mainly been on the question of how to
combine pictorial and verbal information (e.g., temporal and
spatial contiguity principle). However, comparably less
work has been done to find out how each of the single representational formats should be best designed. While there
are hardly any design recommendations for pictorial representations (e.g. Tversky, Morrison, & Betrancourt, 2002),
some first insights exist with regard to how to present verbal
information as part of multimedia messages. In the following section multimedia principles for the design of verbal
information will be discussed.

Abstract
Current cognitive multimedia design theories provide several
guidelines for how to integrate verbal and pictorial information. Based on a dual-channel information processing model,
many authors have suggested using spoken rather than written
text along with pictorial representations (e.g., animations).
However, the directives for the design of auditory text (narration) are still fragmentary, especially with regard to the kind
of voice to be used. In the current paper a very fundamental
question regarding the implemented voice was addressed,
namely, whether to use a male or a female voice for the presentation of verbal information in multimedia learning environments. In the experiment reported learners studied animations that aimed at teaching students how to solve probability
problems. The expository text was presented as narration. The
learner’s gender and the speaker’s gender were varied between subjects. The results show that learners achieved better
learning outcomes when the narration was presented by a female speaker rather than a male speaker. This finding occurred irrespectively of the learner’s gender (speaker/gender
effect). The results suggest augmenting purely cognitive approaches to multimedia design by social-motivational assumptions.

Cognitive Science and Multimedia Design
In the last ten years, multimedia learning environments have
become ubiquitous means for conveying knowledge in the
Social as well as in the Natural Sciences. Unfortunately in
many cases the design of these environments is still driven
by intuition and technological capabilities of the designers,
rather than by empirically validated guidelines. However,
recently theories of multimedia design based on Cognitive
Science have been developed like Richard Mayer’s (2001)
cognitive theory of multimedia learning (CTML), from
which guidelines regarding the design of verbal and pictorial representations in multimedia messages can be derived.
The CTML states that incoming information consists of
either verbal or pictorial representations, which are processed in a visual or a verbal channel depending on the modality of the representation (i.e., dual-channel assumption).

Designing Verbal Explanations
According to the modality principle, dynamic visualizations
that need verbal explanations are best presented as animations with auditory text (narrated animations) instead of
written text (Moreno & Mayer, 1999). Theoretically, this
principle has been ascribed to the dual-channel and limited
capacity assumption. If written text is used to present explanations, the visual channel’s limited capacity may be easily
overloaded due to the fact that the verbal and pictorial information need to be processed within the same channel in
parallel. On the other hand, presenting text as narration allows the distribution of processing requirements across both

483

While this explanation of the voice principle offered by
the social agency theory seems plausible at first sight, there
are a couple of open questions with regard to the empirical
evidence in favor of this explanation and with regard to the
methodological approach taken towards the investigation of
social-motivational aspects in multimedia learning. These
issues are discussed in the next section by revisiting the
voice principle and deriving consequences for future research.

channels, the visual and the auditory channel, thus unburdening the cognitive system (The problematic issue of mapping the distinction between the two channels onto
Baddeley’s distinction between different working memory
subsystems will not be discussed here, but is adressed in
Rummer, Schweppe, Scheiter & Gerjets, submitted).
But when following the modality principle and using narration instead of written text, the question arises, which kind
of voice should be used. This question goes beyond taking
into account pure cognitive assumptions and pertains to additionally considering socio-motivational aspects in learning. However, there are also design principles for multimedia messages in CTML that rely on a socially enhanced
view, for instance, the voice principle (Mayer, Sobko, &
Mautone, 2003). The voice principle was investigated in a
seminal study by Mayer, Sobko, and Mautone (2003), who
compared the effectiveness of a standard accent versus foreign accent voice and a human versus a machinesynthesized voice that accompanied dynamic visualizations.
They found that people learned better with a standard accent
voice and with a human voice (voice principle).
Mayer et al. (2003) explained these findings by their social agency theory that is linked to CTML and suggests that
people apply social rules to media, which in turn influences
learning. The theory postulates several successive steps.
First, it is assumed that stimuli like voices or pictures of the
speaker in multimedia messages can act as social cues. According to this assumption, a human voice provides a
stronger social cue than a machine-synthesized voice. Second, due to social cues, learners interpret the multimedia
message as a kind of social communication in contrast to
pure information delivery. Third, the interpretation of the
multimedia learning scenario as a social communication
situation leads to the activation of social conversation
schemas. That is, social rules of human-to-human communication like the cooperation principle suggested by Grice
(1975) are applied to the human-computer interaction. The
social agency theory borrows this assumption from the media equation theory (Reeves & Nass, 1996) according to
which persons tend to behave towards media as towards
humans (“media equal real life”, Reeves & Nass, 1996,
p. 5). According to media equation theory that mainly describes affective and social-motivational variables “individuals’ interactions with computers …are fundamentally
social and natural” (Reeves & Nass, 1996, p. 5). The social
agency theory by Mayer et al. (2003) ties these assumptions
of media equation theory to cognitive aspects of learning.
Fourth, following Grice’s cooperation principle, learners
assume that the speaker is trying to say something meaningful and therefore in turn try to make sense out of the spoken
words. Social cues thus result in learners being more motivated and investing more effort to understand the spoken
words. Accordingly, they engage in deeper cognitive processing of the instructional materials. Fifth, the result of such
deeper cognitive processing is a more meaningful mental
representation, which expresses itself mainly in better
transfer test scores.

The Voice Principle Revisited: Methodological
Drawbacks and Consequences for Future Research
No Evidence for Mediators Most studies that rely on the
social agency theory as a theoretical background have yet
failed to provide support for the complex causal chain that is
assumed by the theory. In particular, there is hardly any
evidence for the assumption that motivation and effort mediate the relation between the presence of social cue and
learning outcomes.
Methodical Variation of the Social Cue As Mayer et al.
(2003) compared only two voices to each other, there may
have been differences on more than just one dimension (i.e.,
accent). When comparing only one standard accent voice
with one foreign accent voice it is rather impossible to keep
all the other voice features like pitch, intonation, and other
speaker-characteristics constant at the same time.
Alternative Explanations Based on the current empirical
data it is yet unclear whether the social agency theory is
needed for explaining the superiority of standard accent
human voices over foreign accent human voices and machine-synthesized voices. Mayer et al. (2003) themselves
admit that this pattern of results could also be explained by
the cognitive load theory (CLT, Sweller, van Merriënboer,
& Paas, 1998). According to the CLT explanation, processing a human standard accent voice imposes less cognitive
demands onto learners, leaving more cognitive resources for
deeper processing of the instructional materials. To rule out
this explanation, it would be necessary to compare different
voices with regard to cognitive load, but this measure has
unfortunately not yet been obtained by Mayer et al. (2003).
Consequences for Future Research From these three
methodological drawbacks, different consequences for future research can be drawn: First, a measurement of additional variables should be included, for instance, cognitive
load during learning or potential moderators like the motivation to listen to different speakers or the mental effort invested. Second, multiple voices should be presented within
each experimental condition so that differences can be
traced back unambiguously to the experimental variation
and are not caused by other speaker characteristics. Third, it
would be more insightful to implement a comparison of
voices that lead to different predictions depending on
whether one takes a social-motivational or a purely cogni-

484

sues. As we used a mathematical domain in the current
study, learners should be more motivated to listen to a male
speaker and put more effort to sense-making activities,
which in turn should improve learning outcomes. On the
other hand, women are commonly seen as nicer and warmer
compared to men. With respect to this latter gender stereotype, learners should be more motivated to listen to a female
speaker and put more effort in trying to understand the verbal explanations, which in turn should improve learning
outcomes. Thus, learning outcomes should be moderated by
the particular gender stereotype that is being applied towards the speaker.
Moreover, when taking into account principles of interpersonal attraction, there may be interactions between the
gender of the learner and the speaker’s gender. According to
the concept of similarity-attraction learners should prefer
listening a speaker of the same gender and might thus show
better learning outcomes when being given the opportunity
to do so. However, according to the concept of complementary-attraction, learners might as well prefer listening to a
dissimilar person and thus might benefit from listening to a
speaker of the opposite gender. Again, learning outcomes
would be moderated by the particular stereotype that is being applied towards the speaker. To conclude, there are reasonable explanations from a social-agency perspective to
expect better learning outcomes for male or female speakers
and for a speaker of the same or opposite gender, respectively.
On the contrary, from a cognitive perspective there is no
obvious reason why male versus female voices should result
in different learning outcomes. Both kinds of voices are
equally common and understandable. The processing of a
male versus a female voice requires an equal amount of cognitive resources, which implies the same amount of free
cognitive resources for deeper processing. Thus, from a
cognitive point of view, no effects of the speaker’s gender
on learning outcomes are expected.

tive perspective. As mentioned above, the voices compared
by Mayer et al. (2003) lead to the same predictions from
both perspectives. Thus, this comparison is not apt to decide
whether the voice effects found can be best explained by
social-motivational or purely cognitive mechanisms. Therefore, we suggest comparing voices that do not differ with
regard to their cognitive processing demands, but that nevertheless activate different social schemas. These constraints
are satisfied by varying the gender of the speaker. When
contrasting male and female voices one would not expect
any differences from a purely cognitive perspective,
whereas a socially enhanced view allows for several predictions with regard to social-motivational variables, which in
turn may affect learning. Therefore, speakers of different
gender can serve as an appropriate experimental variation to
clarify the relevance of social-motivational factors and give
further insights into the relationship between cognitive and
social aspects of multimedia learning.
According to the social agency theory, the gender of the
speaker can have several implications for learning. For instance, it can be assumed that speakers of different gender
activate different social schemas due to gender stereotyping,
which is a ubiquitous phenomenon in human-human interaction (Franzoi, 1996). Research on media equation theory
with regard to human-computer interaction has also demonstrated gender stereotyping towards media. For instance,
computers with female voices were rated as being more
competent regarding female topics like love and relationships, whereas male-voice computers were estimated as
being more competent regarding male topics like mathematics or computers (Nass, Moon, & Green, 1997). Additionally there is also evidence for principles of interpersonal
attraction towards media. For example, research on media
equation reveals that computer users ascribe a personality to
a computer based on verbal cues it delivers and prefer computers that resemble their own personality (Nass & Lee,
2001). However, there is not only evidence in favor of similarity-attraction, but also for complementary-attraction towards interactive computer characters (Isbister & Nass,
2000). This inconsistency of results matches the inconsistent
findings regarding similarity- and complementary-attraction
in human-human interaction (e.g. Franzoi, 1996).
In accordance with these findings in the context of media
equation theory it can be assumed that the speaker’s gender
may trigger gender stereotypes and other social principles,
which in turn influence the perception and evaluation of the
speakers. As a result, a male respectively female speaker
might be seen as an expert or a somehow likeable person
and this should increase the learner’s inclination to follow
Grice’s cooperation principle, should subsequently foster
sense-making processes, and finally should result in better
learning outcomes. Thus, from a social-motivational perspective, the speaker’s gender can have several implications
for learning.
On the one hand, regarding gender stereotyping, men are
typically perceived as more knowledgeable, stronger, and
more competent regarding technical and mathematical is-

Experiment
The aim of the presented study was twofold. First, the impact of cognitive versus social-motivational factors on
learning was investigated by comparing male versus female
voices. These voices differ from a social-motivational perspective, but not from a cognitive one. Second, a practical
question regarding the voice principle was addressed,
namely whether using a male or a female human voice for
presenting narration along with animations would be more
appropriate.

Method
Participants 84 students (42 female, 42 male) of the University of Tuebingen, Germany, participated in this study
for either course credit or payment. Average age was 25.58
years.

485

(Ryan, 1982) to assess the motivation towards another person also participating in an experiment. The SIQ contained
six subscales: Relatedness, interest, perceived choice, pressure, effort and value. The range of the scale was from 1 to
7, whereby higher values represented higher relatedness,
interest etc. Cognitive load was measured by a modified
version of the NASA-TLX (Hart & Staveland, 1988) that
had been successfully used as an instrument for assessing
cognitive load in former studies (Gerjets, Scheiter, & Catrambone, 2004). The scale contained separate subscales for
intrinsic, extraneous, and germane cognitive load. Additionally, we included a question that asked for the amount of
exertion to process the voice, respectively, the understandability of the speaker. The range of the rating scale was
from 0 to 10, whereby high values reflected high cognitive
load and high amount of exertion to process the voice. All
questionnaires were presented as paper-pencil-based versions directly after the learning phase.
Learning success was assessed by 11 test problems of
varying transfer distance that were embedded in the last
section of the hypermedia learning environment. For each of
the test problems, one point was assigned for a correct answer; no partial credits were given. The problem-solving
performance was expressed as the percentage of correct
answers. Additionally, learning time spent on studying the
animations (in seconds) was measured.
Moreover, several control variables were registered including socio-demographical data, prior-knowledge (measured by a multiple choice questionnaire on important concepts and definitions from the field of probability theory),
and intrinsic motivation (measured by a shortened version
of the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory, Ryan, 1982).

Materials and Procedure A hypermedia learning environment on probability theory was used for experimentation,
which consisted of four parts: a short technical instruction to
the system and to the experiment, a short introduction to the
domain of probability theory, a learning phase with eight
worked-out examples, and a subsequent test phase. At the
beginning of the experiment a questionnaire was used to
measure participants’ prior knowledge. In the domain introduction the basic notion of random experiments and the
general rationale behind calculating probabilities were explained. In the subsequent learning phase participants had to
acquire knowledge on four different problem categories,
whereby each category was explained by means of two
worked-out examples. The worked-out examples were presented auditory as narrations, which were accompanied by
animations illustrating the respective problem statement as
well as each solution step. The animations depicted objects
and relations described in the problem statement in a concrete way (cf. Scheiter, Gerjets, & Catrambone, 2006). The
narrated animations were learner-controlled in that learners
could start, stop, and replay them. Time management was
left to the learners. Depending on the experimental condition participants received a narration that was spoken by a
male or a female speaker. Subsequent to the example-based
learning phase the participants had to fill out several paperbased questionnaires. Finally, they had to work on a short
exam with 11 test problems that were embedded in the hypermedia learning environment. The instructional materials
were no longer available during problem solving.
Design and Dependent Measures The learner’s gender and
the speaker’s gender were varied between subjects as independent variables, resulting in a 2 x 2 design.
For the variation of the speaker’s gender the narrations
were either spoken by male or female speakers. To counterbalance the effects of speaker-specific characteristics, three
different male and three different female voices were recorded and randomly assigned to learners within the respective experimental conditions. The speed of the narrations
showed only small differences among the six speakers and
was synchronized with the animations. All speakers were
standard-accent native speakers and their voices were adjusted in loudness.
As dependent variables social-motivational as well as
cognitive variables were measured. For the evaluation of the
different speakers, we used a German translation of the
Speech Evaluation Instrument (SEI) by Zahn and Hopper
(1982) in the short version used by Mayer et al. (2003). The
SEI comprised the three subscales superiority, attractiveness, and dynamism, whereby larger values indicated higher
superiority, higher dynamism, and higher attractiveness.
The scales ranged from 1 to 8. Additionally, the motivation
with respect to the speaker was assessed. For this purpose
we designed a questionnaire called the Speaker Impression
Questionnaire (SIQ) in reference to the Subject Impression
Questionnaire. The latter has been developed by Deci and
Ryan as a variation of the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory

Results
The data were analyzed by means of a 2 x 2 ANOVA with
the learner’s gender and the speaker’s gender as betweenfactors. For the analysis of problem-solving performance we
included two additional control variables, namely the final
high school grade and intrinsic motivation, resulting in a 2 x
2 ANCOVA. Both covariates showed a significant correlation with problem-solving performance (final high school
grade: r = -.36, p = .001, better school grades were associated with better learning outcomes; intrinsic motivation:
r = .26, p = .02, higher intrinsic motivation was associated
with better learning outcomes), but were independent from
each other (r = -.01, p = .94). For means see Table 1.
Effects for the Learner’s Gender An analysis of the SIQsubscales showed that male learners indicated a higher feeling of choice to listen to the speaker (F(1, 80) = 4.15,
MSE = 2.33, p = .05), that is, male learners felt more freedom to listen to the speaker compared to female learners.
Analysis of cognitive load measurements indicated that
male learners rated the task difficulty (intrinsic cognitive
load) as being lower in contrast to female learners
(F(1, 80) = 6.17, MSE = 4.63, p = .02). The analysis of
problem-solving performance revealed that male learners

486

No further significant effects for the speaker’s gender
could be detected (all Fs < 1; except SEI-superiority:
F(1, 80) = 1.85, MSE = 1.12, p = .18; SEI-dynamism:
F(1, 80) = 3.50, MSE = .83, p = .07, SIQ-relatedness:
F(1, 80) = 2.69, MSE = 1.30, p = .11).

achieved better learning outcomes (cf. Figure 1) compared
to female learners (F(1, 78) = 5.86, MSE = 379.84, p = .02).
Additionally, male participants spent less time on studying
the
animations
compared
to
female
learners
(F(1, 80) = 4.70, MSE = 164223.44, p = .03). No further
significant effects for the learner’s gender could be observed
(all Fs < 1; except SIQ-pressure: F(1, 80) = 1.55,
MSE = .93,
p = .22,
SIQ-value:
F(1, 80) = 1.45,
MSE = 1.73,
p = .23,
germane
cognitive
load:
F(1, 80) = 1.54, MSE = 3.35, p = .22, extraneous cognitive
load: F(1, 80) = 1.38, MSE = 1.35, p = .24).

Interactions Between Learner’s and Speaker’s Gender
The analysis revealed no significant interactions between
the learner’s and the speaker’s gender (all Fs < 1; except
SEI-superiority: F(1, 80) = 1.96, MSE = 1.12, p = .17, SIQrelatedness: F(1, 80) = 1.83, MSE = 1.30, p = .18, SIQeffort: F(1, 80) = 2.76, MSE = 2.28, p = .10, learning time:
F(1, 80) = 2.45, MSE = 164223.44, p = .12).

Table 1: Means as a function of the learner’s gender
and the speaker’s gender

SEI:
- superiority
- attractiveness
- dynamism
SIQ:
- relatedness
- interest
- perceived choice
- pressure
- effort
- value
Cognitive load:
- intrinsic
- germane
- extraneous
Exertion to process the voice
Performance
(% correct)
Learning time
(in seconds)

Speaker’s gender
Male
Female
Male Female Male Female
5.23
5.49
4.27

5.36
5.50
4.22

5.87
6.18
4.74

5.35
6.21
4.49

3.80
3.81
4.52
2.12
3.56
4.69

4.08
3.78
4.02
2.29
3.00
5.29

4.54
4.71
4.90
2.07
3.67
4.88

4.15
4.24
4.05
2.43
4.21
4.98

2.62
1.60
.67

3.81
2.36
1.05

2.98
1.81
.69

4.12
2.02
.90

.67

.64

.60

.90

48.44

33.97

53.96

47.62

858.19

911.48

706.76

1037.05

Problem Solving Performance (%)

Learner’s gender

60

50

male speakers

40

female speakers
30

20

10

0
male learners

female learners

Figure 1: Problem-solving performance as a function of the
learner’s gender and the speaker’s gender

Summary and Discussion
The presented study addresses the effect of using a male or a
female voice for narrations accompanying animations depending on the learner’s gender. Irrespective of the
speaker’s gender, the results demonstrate a superiority of
male learners in that male learners required less learning
time, reported less cognitive load, and performed better in
the subsequent problem-solving test. These findings are in
line with prior findings obtained with the hypermedia learning environment used for experimentation. They confirm
also prior research on gender differences in quantitative
(mathematical) abilities (for an overview see Halpern,
1992).
With respect to the speaker’s gender the data revealed a
bias in the speaker evaluation in favor of female speakers in
that female speakers were rated as being more attractive
than male speakers. Additionally, learners showed a higher
motivation for listening to female speakers in terms of reporting higher interest and willingness to invest effort into
studying the instructional narrations. This is in line with the
gender-stereotype “women are nicer than men”. Finally and
most important, learners listening to female speakers
showed better problem-solving performance. Thus, there is
a speaker/gender effect with regard to learning outcomes
that is in line with the stereotype applied.
As argued in the theoretical section, one would not expect
any differences for learning from narrated animations presented by a male versus a female speaker from a purely

Effects for the Speaker’s Gender The data for the speaker
rating (SEI) showed a significant speaker effect for the subscale attractiveness (F(1, 80) = 7.42, MSE = 1.41, p = .01).
Female speakers were perceived as being more attractive
compared to male speakers. Analyses of the SIQ-subscales,
moreover, showed that learners were more interested in listening to a female speaker (F(1, 80) = 4.29, MSE = 2.28,
p = .04) and that they invested more effort in listening to a
female speaker (F(1, 80) = 3.99, MSE = 2.28, p = .05). Most
important, the analysis of learning outcomes revealed that
learners listening to a female speaker showed a better problem-solving performance (cf., Figure 1) compared to learners listening to a male speaker (F(1, 78) = 4.52,
MSE = 379.84, p = .04).

487

Halpern, D. F. (1992). Sex differences in cognitive abilities
(2nd ed). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hart, S. G., & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of
NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of experimental
and theoretical research. In P. A. Hancock & N. Meshkati
(Eds.), Human Mental Workload. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Isbister, K., & Nass, C. (2000). Consistency of personality
in interactive characters: Verbal cues, non-verbal cues and
user chracteristics. Interbational Journal of Human Computer Studies, 53, 251-267.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., Sobko, K., & Mautone, P. D. (2003). Social
cues in multimedia learning: Role of speaker’s voice.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 419-425.
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (1999). Cognitive principles of
multimedia learning: The role of modality and contiguity.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 358-368.
Nass, C., & Lee, K. M. (2001). Does computer-synthesized
speech manifest personality? Experimental tests of recognition, similarity attraction, and consistency attraction.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 7, 171181.
Nass, C., Moon, Y., & Green, N. (1997). Are machines gender neutral? Gender stereotypic responses to computers.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 27, 864-876.
Reeves, B., & Nass, C. (1996). The media equation. Stanford, California: CSLI Publications.
Ryan, R. M. (1982). Control and information in the intrapersonal sphere: an extension of cognitive evaluation
theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43,
450-461.
Rummer, R., Schweppe, J., Scheiter, K., & Gerjets, P.
(2006). Lernen mit Multimedia: Die kognitiven
Grundlagen des Modalitätseffekts. Manuscript submitted
for publication. [Learning with multimedia: The cognitive
foundations of the modality effect].
Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Catrambone, R. (2006). Making
the abstract concrete: Visualizing mathematical solution
procedures. Computers in Human Behavior, 22, 9-26.
Sweller, J., van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C.
(1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychological Review, 10, 251-296.
Tversky, B., Bauer Morrison, J., & Betrancourt, M. (2002).
Animation: can it facilitate? International Journal of Human Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
Vollmeyer, R., Rollett, W., & Rheinberg, F. (1997). How
motivation affects learning. Proceedings of the Nineteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
796-801). London: Erlbaum.
Zahn, C. J., & Hopper, R. (1985). Measuring language attitudes: The speech evaluation instrument (SEI). Journal of
Language and Social Psychology, 4, 113-122.

cognitive view. Thus, the speaker/gender effect clearly indicated that a social-motivational perspective needs to be
taken into account, when designing instructional multimedia
messages. The pattern of findings is therefore in accordance
with the assumptions of the social agency theory (Mayer et
al., 2003).
Although the speaker/gender effect demonstrates the importance of social factors for learning, the relationships between cognitive, social-motivational, and performance variables are, however, not fully understood. Although our findings are in line with the five steps assumed by the social
agency theory, the connection between motivation and
learning outcomes remains unclear. Motivation per se does
not improve learning; rather additional learning activities
like activation, concentration, or sophistication of strategies
need to be considered as mediators (Vollmeyer, Rollett, &
Rheinberg, 1997) and should be addressed in further studies.
Another issue for further research pertains to the role of
individual preferences. An alternative interpretation of the
found speaker/gender effect is based on the assumption that
there are individual preferences for a specific speaker. If
most learners preferred a female speaker, the probability to
get one’s preferred speaker would be much higher in the
case of a female speaker. Thus, learners may have achieved
better learning outcomes, because they had been given the
opportunity to listen to their individually preferred speaker
and not because of stereotyping or some other social principle. In that case, individual preferences for a female speaker
might have served as the mediator for the found
speaker/gender effect. If this line of reasoning was correct,
the speaker/gender effect should disappear if people can
choose the speaker by themselves, because in this case everybody gets his or her preferred speaker - which implies that
the speaker’s gender should not make a difference any
longer.
To sum up, the reported study demonstrates the significance of voice features for the design of narrated animations. The found speaker/gender effect provides strong support for the impact of social factors for learning. Thus, the
prevailing purely cognitive approaches should be augmented by social factors. For practical design considerations, the speaker/gender effect suggests using female
voices irrespectively of the learner’s gender for a mathematical domain.

References
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. Subject Impression Questionnaire.
Retrieved
February
17,
2004,
from
www.psych.rochester.edu/SDT/measures/intrins_scl.html
Franzoi, S. L. (1996). Social psychology. Dubuque, IA:
Brown & Benchmark Publishers.
Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K., & Catrambone, R. (2004). Designing instructional examples to reduce intrinsic cognitive
load: Molar versus modular presentation of solution procedures. Instructional Science, 32, 33-58.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.). Syntax and semantics (Vol.3). New York:
Academic Press.
488

