UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Streaming x, y Coordinates Imply Continuous Interaction During On-line Syntactic
Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/23k88001

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Cargill, Sarah A.
Dale, Rick
Farmer, Thomas A.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Streaming x, y Coordinates Imply Continuous
Interaction During On-line Syntactic Processing
Thomas A. Farmer (taf22@cornell.edu), Sarah A. Cargill (sec57@cornell.edu), Nicholas C. Hindy
(nch24@cornell.edu), Rick Dale (rad28@cornell.edu), and Michael J. Spivey (mjs41@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Abstract

interpreted as a destination (or Goal) for the referring
expression the apple, thus attaching to the verb Put (VPAttachment), or alternatively, could be interpreted as a
modifier of the referring expression, such as ((Put the apple
on the towel) in the box) (NP-attachment). In the absence of
any contextual or other potentially influential information,
there exists a strong and well-documented bias for VPattachment (Britt, 1994; Spivey-Knowlton & Sedivy, 1995).
This VP-attachment bias can, however, be influenced by
information contained within a visual scene presented in
concert with the syntactically ambiguous spoken instruction
(Tanenhaus et al., 1995; Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill, &
Logrip, 1999; Spivey et al., 2002; Snedeker & Trueswell,
2004). When ambiguous sentences like (1a) are heard in the
presence of visual scenes where only one possible referent is
present (an apple already on a towel), along with an
incorrect destination (an empty towel), and a correct
destination (a box), participants often look to the incorrect
destination until the second disambiguating PP is heard,
upon which time eye-movements tend to be re-directed to
the correct destination. The tendency in the one-referent
context to look at the incorrect destination until the
disambiguating second PP is heard is referred to as “the
garden-path effect,” and is indicative of initially attaching
the PP to the VP.
The garden-path effect, however, can be dramatically
attenuated when two possible referents (say, an apple on a
towel and another apple on a napkin) are present. When
hearing an ambiguous sentence like (1a) in a two-referent
visual context, participants tend to look at the correct
referent (the apple on the towel) and move it to the correct
destination without looking very often at the incorrect
destination. In accordance with various instantiations of
referential theory (Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Spivey &
Tanenhaus, 1998), thus, it seems that the when two possible
referents are present, an expectation is created such that the
two similar entities will be discriminated, thereby forcing a
modifier interpretation of the initial PP.

Although many theories of on-line syntactic processing
invoke the parallel activation of multiple syntactic
representations, evidence supporting simultaneous activation
has been inconclusive. Here, we exploited the continuous and
non-ballistic properties of computer mouse movements,
identified by recording streaming x, y coordinates, in order to
determine the validity of serial versus parallel accounts of
sentence processing.
Participants heard structurally
ambiguous sentences while viewing scenes with properties
either supporting or not supporting the difficult relative clause
interpretation. The curvatures of the elicited mousemovement trajectories revealed both an effect of visual scene,
and competition between the simultaneously active syntactic
representations.
Keywords: Sentence Processing; Language Comprehension;
Mouse-Tracking; Multiple Constraints

Recently, it has been demonstrated that continuous
nonlinear trajectories recorded from the streaming x, y
coordinates of computer-mouse movements can serve as an
informative indicator of the cognitive processes underlying
both spoken word recognition (Spivey, Grosjean, &
Knoblich, 2005), and categorization (Dale, Kehoe, &
Spivey, in press). Unlike saccadic eye movements, mouse
movements are generally smooth and continuous, and can
curve substantially mid-flight. Additionally, whereas selfpaced reading affords 2-3 data points (RTs) per second, and
eye-movement data allow for approximately 2-4 data points
(saccades) per second, “mouse-tracking” yields somewhere
between 30-60 data points per second, depending on the
sampling rate of the computer used. These properties of
tracked mouse-movements are beneficial in that, crucially,
they allow a truly graded stimulus-elicited response pattern
to emerge within an individual trial. Here, we exploit the
continuous nature of mouse-movement trajectories, in
relation to the visual-world paradigm (Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995; Spivey, Tanenhaus,
Eberhard, & Sedivy, 2002), in order to explore unresolved
issues prevalent within the domain of syntactic processing.

Purpose
The purpose of this present study was two-fold. One goal
was to determine the degree to which the mouse-tracking
procedure reported initially by Spivey et al. (2005) can be
used to illuminate the nature of the cognitive processes
underlying the comprehension of complex syntactic

1a) Put the apple on the towel in the box.
1b) Put the apple that’s on the towel in the box.
In example (1), the prepositional phrase (PP) on the towel
creates a syntactic ambiguity in that it can be initially
208

structure. The context effect reported in relation to the
visual world paradigm is highly replicable when tracking
eye-movements. As such, recording mouse movements in
this paradigm serves as a strong test case by which to
evaluate the efficacy of the mouse-tracking procedure for
the study of language processing in real-time.
If the mouse-tracking technique can produce results from
the visual-world paradigm commensurate with those
obtained by tracking eye movements, we would predict that:

the one-referent context, one might expect that if both
possible representations of the ambiguous PP were active,
participants might look back and forth between the correct
and incorrect destinations until disambiguation occurs, and
indeed, this kind of pattern has been observed (Tanenhaus et
al,. 1995). However, due to the ballistic nature of saccadic
eye movements, it is impossible to determine whether such
vacillatory looking is indicative of simultaneous partial
activation of both possible representations, or if it indicates
an alternation between one complete representation and then
the other. That is, distributions of eye movement patterns
are almost always bimodal. There are saccades to the
location of the incorrect destination and there are saccades
to the location of the correct destination. Extremely rarely
are there saccades to a blank location in between two
potential targets.
In light of the ability to record many data points per
second, and in light of their ability to curve mid-flight as a
result of competition between multiple potential targets,
however, mouse movements do have the ability to convey
the continuity of processing. The second purpose of this
study was to exploit this noted continuity with the goal of
determining whether partial activation of each possible
representation occurred. In order to do so, an area-based
measure was used to determine the amount of curvature
toward the incorrect destination that was exhibited by the
ambiguous and unambiguous trajectories in the one-referent
context. If only one representation were active at any one
time, then the trial-by-trial distribution of trajectory
curvatures, with the ambiguous instruction in the onereferent context, should be bimodal—comprised of highly
curved “garden-path” movements and non-curved correctinterpretation movements.
In contrast, if both
representations were active and competing simultaneously,
one should expect to see a unimodal distribution with a
continuous range of less- and more-curved trajectories—that
is, a gradation of “garden-pathing.”

1) averaged trajectories recorded in response to
ambiguous sentences in the one-referent context
should show significantly more curvature toward the
incorrect destination than the trajectories elicited by
unambiguous sentences—a trend corresponding to
the garden-path effect, and
2) the curvature of averaged trajectories in the tworeferent condition should not differ between
ambiguous and unambiguous sentences, thus
demonstrating an effect of referential context.
Importantly, however, the goal of this study was not simply
to replicate the context and garden-path effects with a new
methodology, but also to demonstrate the ability of the
mouse-tracking method to test distributional patterns in
garden-path effects that can speak to the debate over serial
versus parallel syntactic processing.
One dimension by which contemporary theories of
syntactic processing can be distinguished is the degree to
which they rely on the activation of one versus multiple
syntactic representations at any given time during the
sentence comprehension process. The two-stage theories
(e.g. Frazier & Clifton, 1996; Ferreira & Clifton, 1986)
posit that an initial first-pass analysis of a sentence, based
largely upon syntactic information, is pursued. Should the
initial syntactic analysis fail, other non-syntactic sources of
information may be accessed during a revision stage in
order to facilitate comprehension. Implicit in two-stage
theories is the assumption that, at least initially, only one
structural representation of an ambiguous sentence is
represented.
Multiple constraint-based theories (e.g. McRae, SpiveyKnowlton, & Tanenhaus, 1998; Pearlmutter & MacDonald,
1995), on the other hand, describe language comprehension
as an interactive process whereby multiple sources of
information become accessible on-line and constrain
possible interpretations of a sentence in real time. In
contrast to the two-stage theories detailed above, the
language comprehension system must engage in a process
of rapidly evaluating multiple possible syntactic analyses in
order to arrive at the (ultimately) correct interpretation of
the sentence. As such, most constraint-based theories posit
parallel partial activation of multiple syntactic
representations.
Determining whether or not multiple structural
representations are active during early on-line processing
has proven to be an extremely difficult enterprise. Within

Method
Participants Forty right-handed native-English speaking
undergraduates from Cornell University participated in the
study for extra credit in psychology courses.
Materials and Procedure Sixteen experimental items,
along with 102 filler sentences, were adapted from Spivey,
et al. (2002) and digitally recorded. Each of the 16
experimental items was spliced in order to produce both an
ambiguous sentence condition (1a), and an unambiguous
sentence condition (1b). Each of the visual contexts
corresponding to the 16 experimental items was varied to
produce a one-referent condition and a two-referent
condition. The one-referent visual context (illustrated in
Figure 1) contained the target referent (an apple on a towel),
an incorrect destination (a second towel), the correct
destination (a box), and a distracter object (a flower). In the
two-referent context, all items were the same except that the

209

object placements in the experimental trials. In addition to
the movement used in the experimental instructions, eleven
distinct movements were possible in the visual scene across
trials, and an approximately equal number of filler sentences
(either eight or ten) were assigned to each of these
movements. Therefore, ten sentences required an object in
the upper left-hand corner of the display be moved to the
upper right corner of the display, eight sentences required an
object in the upper left-hand corner of the display be moved
to the bottom left-hand corner of the display, and so on.
In each scene, participants saw four to six color images,
depending on how many objects were needed for the scene.
The images were constructed from pictures of real objects
taken by a digital camera and edited in Adobe Photoshop.
The visual stimuli subtended an average of 5.96 X 4.35
degrees of visual angle, and were 14.38 degrees diagonally
from the central cross. The mouse movements were
recorded at an average sampling rate of approximately 40
Hz.
The experimental items were counterbalanced across four
presentational lists. Each list contained four instances of
each possible condition, but only one version of each
sentence frame and corresponding visual context. Two filler
sentences were included with the experimental items as
described above, and three filler sentences were included
with each of 24 distracter scenes. The presentation order
was randomized for each participant. Three practice items
were incorporated into the beginning of each list.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the four
presentation lists.

Figure 1. An example of a one-referent display for the
instruction “Put the apple (that’s) on the towel in the box.”
The trajectories plotted are the averaged trajectories elicited
in this context.
distracter object was replaced with a second possible
referent (such as an apple on a napkin). Twenty-four
distracter scenes, designed to accompany filler sentences,
were constructed by using different combinations of the
objects presented in the experimental trials, in addition to a
set of new and easily recognizable objects.
Spoken instructions were recorded using a Mac-based
speech synthesizer program. At the beginning of each
sound-file for every item, participants first heard “Place the
cursor at the center of the cross.” Then, for the sound-files
accompanying experimental scenes, the experimental
sentence always occurred second, followed by two
additional filler instructions. Thus, for experimental items,
participants viewed the appropriate scene while hearing, for
example:
1) Place the cursor at the center of the cross.
2) Put the apple on the towel in the box (experimental trial).
3) Now put the apple beside the flower (filler sentence).
4) Now put the flower in the box (filler sentence).
For filler sentences presented with a distracter scene,
participants heard three scene-appropriate unambiguous
instructions. In all cases, two seconds separated the offset of
one sentence from the onset of the next sentence within each
trial.
In both the one- and two-referent conditions, the target
referent always appeared in the top left corner of the screen,
the incorrect destination always appeared in the top right
corner of the screen, and the correct destination was always
located at the bottom right portion of the screen. The
distracter object in the one-referent trials, and the second
referent in the two-referent trials, always appeared in the
bottom left corner of the screen.
The filler sentences were constructed to prevent
participants from detecting the regularity created by the

Results
Data Screening and Coding Mouse movements were
recorded during the grab-click, transferal, and drop-click of
the referent object in the experimental trials. As a result of
the large number of possible trajectory shapes, the x, y
coordinates for each trajectory from each experimental trial
were plotted in order to detect the presence of any aberrant
mouse movements. A trajectory was considered valid and
submitted to further analyses if it was initiated at the top left
quadrant of the display and subsequently terminated in the
bottom right quadrant, signaling that the correct referent had
been picked-up and then placed at the correct destination.
This screening procedure resulted in 29 trials being deleted
from further analysis, accounting for less than 5% of all
experimental trials. Table 2 displays the number of trials,
per condition, included in the final dataset.
All analyzable trajectories were time-normalized to 101
time-steps by a procedure originally described in Spivey,
Grosjean, and Knoblich (2005). All trajectories were aligned
so that their first observation point corresponded to (0, 0)
and their last recorded point to (1,1). Then, across 101
normalized time-steps, the corresponding x and y
coordinates were computed using simple linear
interpolation. In order to assess the statistical reliability of
any observed ambiguous-unambiguous trajectory
divergences, and in an attempt to extract as much valuable

210

information from these rich trajectories as possible, we
conducted several different sets of analyses.

one for x-coordinates and one for y-coordinates. Based on
time-steps, x and y-coordinates were grouped into three
time-bins: 1-33, 34-67, and 68-101, yielding a third
independent variable of segment. The three-way interaction
was significant for the x-coordinates, F(2, 78) = 5.06,
p=.009, and for the y-coordinates, F(2, 78) = 48.75, p <
.0005. As illustrated, indirectly, in Figure 1, and
demonstrated by the t-tests above, the effect is especially
prevalent among the points comprising segment two. As
such, only the context x ambiguity interaction at segment
two will be considered in further detail here.
In the middle time segment, the context X sentence type
interaction was significant for both the x-, F(1, 39) = 7.15, p
= .011, and the y-coordinates, F(1. 39) = 8.13, p = .007. The
means and standard errors for all possible combinations of
the independent variables in the x- and the y-coordinate
analyses appear in Table 1. To assess the context effect, we
compared each point in the one-referent context to its
commensurate point in the two-referent context. For the xcoordinates, there was no difference between coordinates in
the one-referent context versus the two-referent context for
the unambiguous sentences, t(39) = .99, n.s., but there was
for the ambiguous sentences, t(39) = 4.14, p < .0005, d =
.655, with the x-coordinates for the one-referent context
being closer to the right side of the screen. For the ycoordinates, there was no difference in average screen
location for the unambiguous sentences in the one- versus
two-referent context, t(39) = 1.26, n. s., but there was for the
ambiguous sentences, t(39) = 3.71, p = .001, d = .586, with
the y-coordinates in the one-referent condition being closer
to the top of the display.

Context and Garden-Path Effects The mean ambiguous
and unambiguous trajectories illustrated in Figure 1
demonstrate that, as hypothesized, in the one-referent
context, the average ambiguous trajectory was more curved
toward the incorrect destination and had lower velocity than
did the average trajectory elicited by the unambiguous
sentences. Noteworthy also is the fact that the average
trajectory for the unambiguous sentences traveled to the
correct destination much more quickly than did the average
trajectory elicited by the ambiguous sentence. Both of these
trends support the notion that participants were gardenpathed by the syntactic ambiguity manipulation.
In a preliminary attempt to discern whether or not the
divergences observed across the ambiguous and
unambiguous trajectories in the one-referent context were
statistically reliable, we conducted a series of t-tests. Given
the differences in velocity between the trajectories across
the two sentence conditions, the t-tests were conducted
across the x-coordinates of each sentence condition, and the
y-coordinates of each sentence condition, separately, at each
of the 101 time-steps. In order to avoid the increased
probability of a Type-1 error associated with multiple ttests, and in keeping with Bootstrap simulations of such
multiple t-tests on mouse-trajectories (Dale, Kehoe, &
Spivey, in press), an observed divergence was not
considered significant unless the coordinates between the
ambiguous and unambiguous sentences elicited p-values <
.05 for at least eight consecutive time-steps.
In the one-referent context, two significant divergences
were found when comparing the x-coordinates from the
ambiguous and unambiguous trajectories at each time-step.
The comparisons between sentence conditions from timestep 41 to time-step 54 all elicited p-values < .05 (all t’s >
2.057). The average effect size, computed by Cohen’s d,
was .348, a medium-sized effect in the context of Cohen’s
benchmarks for effect size (Cohen, 1988). There were also
significant differences (p’s < .05) in x-coordinates from
time-steps 64 to 79 (all t’s > 2.057), with a medium-sized
effect (average d=.347). The y-coordinates at each time-step
were compared in the same manner for the ambiguous and
unambiguous trajectories in the one-referent context. The ttests revealed differences in y-coordinates from time-steps
29 through 82 (all p’s < .05, all t’s > 2.068), and the average
d was .433, also a medium-sized effect. The same analyses
were conducted on the x and y coordinates from the
ambiguous and unambiguous trajectories at each time-step
in the two-referent condition. For both the x-coordinate and
y-coordinate comparisons, no single t-test yielded a p-value
< .05 at any of the 101 time-steps.
In order to avoid concerns associated with multiple
comparisons in the t-tests above, and to assess directly the
statistical reliability of the context X ambiguity status
interaction, we conducted two separate 2 X 2 X 3 ANOVAs,

Table 1: Means (SEs) for the middle-segment ANOVAs
Set
X

Context
One Referent

Two Referent

Sentence Type

527.02 (22.47)

Unambiguous

575.95 (18.26)

Ambiguous

613.15 (11.70)

Unambiguous
Y

One Referent

Two Referent

Mean Coordinate (SE)

Ambiguous

592.14 (14.01)

Ambiguous

-340.06 (19.79)

Unambiguous

-406.12 (13.81)

Ambiguous

-416.47 (11.13)

Unambiguous

-419.95 (9.84)

Finally, in order to account for both the x- and ycoordinates in one analysis, we computed the average
Euclidean distance at each time-step between points in the
ambiguous and unambiguous sentence conditions, per
context. Figure 2 illustrates that the distance between the
ambiguous and unambiguous trajectories in the one-referent
context is similar during the beginning of the trial but then
diverges such that the distance between the conditions is
larger in the one-referent than in the two-referent context.

211

came not from two different types of trials but from a single
population of trials.

250

One-Referent
Two-Referents

Euclidean Distance

200

Table 2. Statistics necessary for the assessment of
bimodality in distributions

150

100

Condition

n

Variance

Skewness

Kurtosis

Bimodality (b)

1 Referent
Ambiguous

146

1.477E+10

-.289

-.535

.429

1 Referent
Unambiguous

157

1.699E+10

-.126

-1.141

.529

2 Referents
Ambiguous

150

1.629E+10

-.387

-.731

.493

2 Referents
Unambiguous

159

1.647E+10

-.545

-.533

.514

50

0
1

Time

Figure 2. The Euclidean distance between the ambiguous
and unambiguous sentence conditions, per context.
Paired-samples t-tests, conducted at each time-step as
those above, revealed differences in the Euclidean distance
between ambiguous and unambiguous sentence in the one
versus two-referent context from time-steps 37 through 73,
all p’s < .05 (all t’s > 2.107), with an average effect size of d
= .459. In Figure 1, it is evident that in the one-referent
context the average ambiguous trajectory is closer to the
incorrect destination than the average trajectory at all of
these time-steps. Thus, in the presence of the garden-path
effect, it seems clear that there exists more attraction to the
incorrect destination for the ambiguous sentences.

Distribution of Trajectory Curvature for the
Ambiguous Sentence Conditions
35
One-referent
Context

30

Frequency

25
20
15
10

Serial versus Parallel Activation In order to assess
whether or not the distribution of responses in the
ambiguous conditions was bimodal (thus indicating only
discrete garden-paths and discrete non-garden-paths), we
computed the area under the curve on a trial-by-trial basis.
First, a time-normalized straight line from the coordinates
(0, 0) to (1, 1) of the observed trajectory from the trial was
computed. Then the area (in pixels) between the straight line
and the observed trajectory was calculated, thus resulting in
an index of trajectory curvature. Area subtending toward
the incorrect destination was coded as positive area, and
area subtending in the opposite direction from the straight
line was coded as negative.
Figure 3 illustrates the shape of the distribution of
trajectory curvatures for the one-referent ambiguous trials
(top panel) and the two-referent ambiguous trials (bottom
panel). As an index of bimodality, we calculated the
bimodality coefficient b (SAS Institute, 1989, based on
work by Darlington (1970)—see DeCarlo (1997) for a
discussion), which has a standard cut-off value of b=.555,
whereby values greater than .555 indicate the presence of
bimodality. Although we focus on the one-referent
ambiguous response distribution here, Table 2 presents the
descriptive statistics for each distribution, along with each
distribution’s corresponding bimodality statistic value. The
b value for each distribution is less than .555, indicating no
presence of bimodality within the distributions. Notably,
with regard to the distribution of responses in the onereferent ambiguous condition, b < .555 indicates that the
graded spatial attraction effects elicited in this condition

5

10
0

00
0
00
0

33
2

27
6

0

0

00

22
02

16
43
0

0

84
00

10

52
50

-2
82

90
0
-2
27
00
0
-1
71
10
0
-1
15
20
0
-5
93
00

0

-3
40
0

35
Two-referent
Context

30

Frequency

25
20
15
10
5

33
2

0

61
0
27

02
0

22

00

0

43
16

84
0

50
0

10

-2
82

90

0

0

52

0.8

00
71
10
0
-1
15
20
0
-5
93
00
-3
40
0

0.6

-1

0.4

27
0

0.2

-2

0

Trajectory Curvature (pixels)

Figure 3. Distributions of trajectory curvature in the
ambiguous sentence conditions. There is no evidence of a
bimodal distribution in the one-referent context.

General Discussion
Converging evidence from the statistical analyses presented
above shows that the effects traditionally associated with the
visual-world paradigm are replicable with the mousetracking methodology. In the one-referent scene,
212

References

participants’ mouse movements in response to the
ambiguous sentences curved significantly closer to the topright of the screen (toward the incorrect destination) than in
response to unambiguous sentences. Thus, it would seem
that when only one referent was present, the incorrect
destination (the towel) was partially considered relevant,
until disambiguating information was processed — a trend
corresponding to the garden-path effect associated with this
condition. Importantly, the divergence between the x- and ycoordinates of the trajectories in the ambiguous and
unambiguous conditions was completely absent in the tworeferent context.
Additionally, by capitalizing on the continuous, nonlinear, and non-ballistic properties of trajectories produced
by mouse movements, mouse-tracking has the potential to
answer questions that have traditionally been difficult to
answer with more traditional methodologies. The lack of
bimodality in the distribution of trajectory curvature in the
one-referent ambiguous sentence condition suggests that the
garden-path effect so frequently associated with this
manipulation is not an all-or-none phenomenon. That is, the
activation of one structural representation does not forbid
simultaneous activation of other possible representations.
Instead, the garden-path effect is graded, meaning that
although sometimes one syntactic alternative may be
strongly considered over another, it is also the case that,
until disambiguating information is presented, both can be
considered, in parallel – and the simultaneously active
representations may compete over time. Moreover, the lack
of bimodality in this condition alleviates the concern that the
mean curvature found in the one-referent ambiguous
condition is a result of collapsing across discrete movements
to the correct destination and discrete movements to the
incorrect destination that were followed quickly by
movements to the correct destination.
The results presented here support multiple-constraintbased accounts of real-time language comprehension in two
respects. As discussed above, the curvature-distribution
analyses indicate graded sensitivity to syntactic ambiguity,
thus denoting parallel partial activation. Additionally, the
replication of the context effect demonstrates that nonsyntactic, and indeed even non-linguistic, information can
exert an early influence on syntactic processing.
More broadly, the results presented here demonstrate that
the mouse-tracking technique can be used with tasks that
involve complex and highly interactive displays. The results
of this study also serve to attenuate worries that, given the
large space of possible movements, data collected through
the tracking of mouse movements might be too noisy to
yield interesting and statistically reliable results. Finally, it
is important to note that we do not advocate, or foresee, the
usurping of eye-tracking data in light of the advantages of
mouse-tracking enumerated here. Instead, we believe that
the two techniques can be used in a complementary (even
simultaneous) fashion in order to more fully unlock the
nature of the complex interactions associated with highlevel cognitive processes.

Altmann, G. T. M., & Steedman, M. J. (1988). Interaction
with context during human sentence processing.
Cognition, 30, 191-238.
Britt, M. A. (1994). The interaction of referential ambiguity
and argument structure in the parsing of prepositional
phrases. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 251-283.
Dale, R., Kehoe, C., & Spivey, M. J. (in press). Graded
motor responses in the time course of categorizing
exemplars. Memory and Cognition.
Darlington, R. B. (1970). Is kurtosis really “peakedness”?
American Statistician, 24, 19-22.
DeCarlo, L. T. (1997). On the meaning of kurtosis.
Psychological Methods, 2, 292-307.
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of
syntactic processing. Journal of Memory and Language,
25, 248-368.
Frazier, L., & Clifton, C. (1996). Construal. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
McRae, K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., & Tanenhaus, M. (1998).
Modeling the effects of thematic fit (and other
constraints) in on-line sentence comprehension. Journal
of Memory and Language, 37, 283-312.
Pearlmutter, N. J., & MacDonald, M. C. (1995). Individual
differences and probabilistic constraints in syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language,
34, 521-542.
SAS Institute. (1989). SAS/STAT user’s guide. Cary, NC:
Author.
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. C. (2004). The developing
constraints on parsing decisions: The role of lexicalbiases and referential scenes in child and adult sentence
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 49, 238-299.
Spivey-Knowlton, M., & Sedivy, J. (1995). Resolving
attachment ambiguities with multiple constraints.
Cognition, 55, 227-267.
Spivey, M. J., & Tanenhaus, M. (1998). Syntactic ambiguity
resolution in discourse: Modeling the effects of referential
context and lexical frequency. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 15211543.
Spivey, M. J., Tanenhaus, M., Eberhard, K., & Sedivy, J.
(2002). Eye movements and spoken language
comprehension: Effects of syntactic context on syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Cognitive Psychology, 45, 447-481.
Spivey, M. J., Grosjean, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological compretitors.
Proc. National Academy of Sciences, 29, 10393-10398.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. (1995).. Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632-1634.
Trueswell, J. C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. M., & Logrip, M. L.
(1999). The kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line
sentence processing in young children. Cognition, 73, 89134.

213

