UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Surprise: Disconfirmed Expectations or Representation-Fit?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sx5t3sz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Keane, Mark T.
Maguire, Rebecca

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Surprise: Disconfirmed Expectations or Representation-Fit?
Rebecca Maguire (rebecca.grimes@ucd.ie)
Mark T. Keane (mark.keane@ucd.ie)
School of Computer Science and Informatics, University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
Abstract

Probabilities, expectancy and schema-discrepancy

Surprise for a particular event is often thought to correspond to
the degree to which that event deviates from an expected
schema. However, in this paper we present two novel
experiments that challenge this view. Participants were asked to
rate how surprised they would be if an event, or series of
events, followed on from a number of short scenarios. In one
condition these events confirmed an expected outcome, while
in another they contradicted this outcome. A third condition
included a potential enabling factor along with the unexpected
outcome. The results show that, even when events deviate
significantly from an established schema, surprise is lower if
people have a means of integrating that event into their
representation. This finding is consistent with our theory of
Representation-Fit, which asserts that a person’s level of
surprise for a given event can be determined by how well that
event is supported by the prior discourse.
Keywords: Surprise, expectation, representation, discourse.

Introduction
Imagine how you would feel if you walked into your house to
discover a group of strangers huddled around your dining
room table playing cards and smoking cigars. Alternatively,
consider how you might react if you booked your holiday to
Outer Mongolia, only to bump into your next-door neighbour
strolling along a deserted mountain path. While such events
are unlikely to happen to us in real life, we have no difficulty
in imagining how we would feel if they were to occur:
essentially, we would be surprised. Surprise is classed as one
of the most basic and universal of human emotions (Darwin,
1879; Ekman, 1979), and as well as being associated with a
distinct subjective and physiological response, it is also
known to have some important cognitive manifestations (e.g.,
Fisk, 2002; Meyer, Reisenzein & Schützwohl, 1997; Teigen
& Keren, 2003). For example, the perception of a surprising
event will usually cause a person to cease what they are
currently doing and focus their attention on the event in
question (Schützwohl and Reisenzein, 1999). The purpose of
such a reaction is to discover why the surprising event
transpired, so that a similar event might be anticipated in
future circumstances.
While the subjective phenomenon of surprise is well
established, deciding what counts as a surprising event is a
more challenging task. Our aim in this article is to shed some
light on this issue, and more specifically, to assess the claim
that surprise follows disconfirmed expectations. We also put
forward an alternative hypothesis: namely, that surprise for a
given event is based on how well that event can be integrated
into a person’s discourse representation.

The most intuitive way of describing a surprise is to say that it
was unexpected. Likewise, it makes sense to assume that any
expected event would be unsurprising if it were to occur.
However, this account can be problematic, mainly due to the
disagreement surrounding what it means to expect something.
For instance, if we relate expectations to probabilities, then
every low probability event should be extremely surprising,
and vice versa. Evidently however, this is not always the case
(Shackle, 1969; Teigen & Keren, 2003). Consider a lottery
draw, where six numbers are selected at random. It is unlikely
that you would be surprised if the seemingly arbitrary
selection {3, 7, 15, 18, 24, 37} was drawn, despite the
extremely low probability of this particular sequence
occurring. In contrast, if the numbers selected were {1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6}, you would undoubtedly be far more surprised, even
though this sequence has exactly the same probability of
occurring as the former. In view of this, Shackle (1969)
proposed that, rather than defining surprise in terms of actual
probability, it can be more accurately described as a reflection
of subjective probability. Hence in the above example, the
latter combination of numbers has a much lower subjective
probability of occurring, due to its overtly meaningful pattern.
On the other hand, we know that some ‘random’ combination
of numbers is far more typical, making the first sequence
appear less surprising. This is in line with Tversky and
Kahneman’s (1983) finding that people will often make
systematic errors in probability judgements if they perceive
certain events as being more ‘representative’ than others.
Nevertheless, while a number of studies have found a strong
correlation between subjective probability and surprise (e.g.
Fisk, 2002), this relationship is not always quite so
straightforward. One important difference is that judgements
of probability are usually given before the event in question,
whereas surprise is experienced after that event has taken
place. Studies on hindsight bias have illustrated that people
will often adjust how likely they thought an event was after
that event has occurred (Hawkins & Hastie, 1990). It follows
that posing the question “How likely is it to rain today?”
might elicit a different response to “How surprised are you
that it rained today?” In light of this, Teigen and Keren
(2003) suggest that surprise at a given event might be more
accurately explained in terms of its subsequent comparison
with an alternative event. Specifically, their Contrast
Hypothesis maintains that surprise is dependent on the degree
of disparity between an observed and an expected outcome.
Investigating this hypothesis, Teigen and Keren (2003)
carried out an experiment which described Erik, an athlete

1765

competing in a 5,000m race. In one condition, participants
were informed that Erik was in second place behind a lead
runner, while in another condition they were told that all the
athletes, including Erik, had formed one large group as they
approached the finish line. When asked to indicate how
surprised they would be if Erik won the race, participants in
the first condition (where Erik was in second place) gave
slightly higher surprise ratings than those in the second
condition (where all the athletes had formed one group),
despite the fact that participants correctly rated Erik’s
probability of winning the race as higher in the first
condition. One explanation for this result is that the first
scenario induces an expectation (that the lead runner will win
the race) which is disconfirmed by Erik winning. On the other
hand, when all the athletes have a chance at winning the race,
no expectation is contradicted if Erik wins. A similar theory
was put forward by Meyer et al (1997): their CognitivePsychoevolutionary model proposes that surprise is
experienced when expectations based on existing schemas
fail to be confirmed. Surprise is therefore considered as a
reaction to a schema-discrepant event.
Henceforth, we will refer to the above theories as
encapsulating the Expectation-Disconfirmation hypothesis.
At first blush, this hypothesis seems intuitive. Consider, for
example how surprised you would be if you threw a ball up in
the air and it failed to fall to the ground. This is an extreme
case of an expectation (i.e., that the ball will drop due to
gravity) being contradicted. However, it may not always be
the case that disconfirmed expectations like this lead to such a
high level of surprise. Other factors in event comprehension,
in particular the adaptability of one’s existing representation,
may mitigate the extent of this phenomenon: in short, if a
person can account for why an expectation was disconfirmed,
then they might not be so surprised by it. This is the central
premise of our theory of Representation-Fit, which is outlined
in more detail below.

Surprise as representation-fit
Zwaan and Radvansky (1998) have shown that during
reading, people routinely construct situation models, or rich
representations, of the depicted events in a discourse. These
consist of a number of complex inferences about the central
characters, their goals and actions, as well as more general
information about the story’s temporal and spatial context.
As the reader encounters new events, this representation must
be continually updated, a process motivated by the need on
the part of the reader to achieve coherence among the text
constituents (Graesser, Singer & Trabasso, 1994).
Accordingly, each new event in a text must be coherently
integrated into the existing discourse representation for
successful comprehension to result.
Based on this premise, Grimes-Maguire and Keane (2005b)
devised a theory of Representation-Fit for surprise. In short,
this theory predicts that the more difficult it is for an
individual to coherently integrate a new event into their
discourse representation, the more surprising that event will
appear. As well as being an intuitive view, the underlying

principles of this theory rest on many well supported models
of comprehension (e.g. Constructivist theory, Graesser et al,
1994; Landscape model, Linderholm, Virtue, van den Broek
& Tzeng, 2004; Situation models, Zwaan & Radvansky,
1998). The main way in which this account differs from
existing theories of surprise is that it does not view the
process as being dependent on expectation. Instead surprise is
conceived as a retrospective judgement relating to how well a
given event can be connected with those that have preceded
it, like trying to fit a piece into a jigsaw puzzle. Consider a
scenario, for instance, where you leave your house to
discover that your car is no longer in the driveway. This is
obviously an unexpected, or schema-discrepant, event.
However, if you remember that you left the car in to be
serviced yesterday morning, you will be not be so surprised,
since a satisfactory explanation for this unexpected event has
been identified. A study conducted by Grimes-Maguire and
Keane (2005a) offered substantive empirical evidence for this
perspective. We found that when participants were asked to
indicate their level of surprise for the end event in a scenario,
they were extremely adept at detecting subtle differences in
how strongly that event was supported by the prior discourse.
We also observed that surprise ratings were not correlated
with on-line expectations, or forward inferences, arguing
against the claim that these two variables are linearly related.
However, while the findings of the above study are in
accordance with the theory of Representation-Fit, they do not
necessarily oppose the Expectation-Disconfirmation view
because no expected outcomes were explicitly disconfirmed
in the scenarios examined. Consequently, the experiments
detailed in the current paper investigate the influence of
representation-fit in cases where the discourse clearly
contains a schema-discrepant event.

Overview of experiments
In the following experiment, we devised a series of event
sequences that instantiated an expectation for a particular
outcome. This outcome was subsequently confirmed or
disconfirmed in two separate conditions. In addition, a third
condition was included where the disconfirmed outcome was
presented alongside an enabling factor for that outcome. The
Expectation-Disconfirmation hypothesis does not predict that
surprise ratings will be affected by an enabling factor, as
these events still contradict the expected sequence of events.
However, in accordance with the theory of RepresentationFit, we hypothesised that participants would be less surprised
when provided with the enabling factor for the disconfirming
outcome, as this event should facilitate representation
integration. Experiment 2 examines another potential
explanation for the observed findings.

Experiment 1
In order to explore the Expectation-Disconfirmation
hypothesis of surprise, a number of event sequences were
designed that strongly suggested a particular outcome (see
Table 1 for a sample material). For each of these scenarios,

1766

four hypothetical outcomes were generated, corresponding to
the following four conditions:
1. Expectation confirmed (C) described an event that
corroborated the expected outcome (e.g. in Table 1, the
alarm clock ringing at 7am supports the expectation that
is implied by the scenario body).
2. Expectation disconfirmed (D) described an event that
contradicted the expected outcome (e.g., the alarm clock
failing to ring directly opposes the intuitive expectation).
3. Expectation disconfirmed and enabling event (D+enable)
described the same disconfirming event as in the
previous condition alongside a potential enabling factor
for that event (e.g. a power-cut during the night explains
why the alarm clock might fail to ring).
4. Control (D+control) included the same disconfirming
event as in the latter two conditions in accompaniment
with an irrelevant event (e.g., a good night’s sleep should
not influence the functioning of an alarm clock). This
condition was intended to control for the enabling event
in the D+enable condition.
According to the Expectation-Disconfirmation hypothesis,
while the C condition should be judged as unsurprising, there
should be no difference in the surprise ratings given for the
latter three conditions. This is because all three contradict the
expected outcome by means of the same disconfirming event.
In contrast, we hypothesised that surprise ratings would
follow the trend C < D+enable < D. In line with the
Representation-Fit perspective, the D+enable condition
should be perceived as less surprising than the D condition,
since it offers the reader a rationalisation for why the
unexpected event might have occurred. This condition should
therefore be more easily integrated into the discourse
representation. We did not expect surprise ratings from the D
condition to differ from the D+control one.

Method
Participants Fifty-two undergraduate psychology and maths
students (all native English speakers) from University College
Dublin voluntarily participated in this experiment.
Materials Sixteen event sequences describing simple
everyday scenarios were generated, each of which
instantiated an expectation that was either confirmed or
disconfirmed in the four separate conditions as outlined above
(see Table 1 for an example).
Design The conditions were counterbalanced using four
different groupings of scenarios and conditions. Each
participant was presented with one of these groupings which
contained the 16 scenarios. Participants thus read a total of
four scenarios from each condition.
Procedure Participants were given a booklet containing the
16 scenarios, where instructions for the experiment were
displayed on the first page. Participants were informed that
they would be presented with a number of everyday scenarios
and that they should rate how surprised they would be if a

certain event, or series of events, followed on from that
scenario. An example was then provided to demonstrate the
nature of the task. Each scenario body was presented on a
separate page, followed by the words “How surprised would
you be if: X”, where X referred to the event, or series of
events, corresponding to one of the four experimental
conditions. Participants were required to rate their level of
surprise for this event on a 7-point scale, with 1 indicating
that they would be very unsurprised if the event occurred, and
7 indicating that they would be highly surprised if the event
occurred. The scenarios were presented in a different random
order to each participant.
Table 1: Scenario from Experiment 1. All participants read
the scenario body and rated surprise for one of the four
conditions. Mean surprise ratings are also displayed.
Scenario body
Anna has a very important job interview in the morning.
She has to get up far earlier than usual, so she makes sure to
set her alarm clock radio for 7am.
How surprised would you be if….?
1

The alarm clock woke her up at 7am

2

The alarm clock failed to ring at 7am

3
4

Surprise
(C)

1.88

(D)
There was a power-cut during the night
and the alarm clock failed to ring at 7am
(D+enable)
She had a quiet, good night’s sleep and the
alarm clock failed to ring at 7am
(D+control)

4.95
4.46
5.04

Results & Discussion
The results support the Representation-Fit account and argue
against the claim that disconfirmed expectations will
consistently lead to an equally high level of surprise. When
participants are provided with a reason for why an unexpected
event might occur, their surprise is lower than when they are
simply presented with this event on its own.
The mean surprise ratings for each of the four conditions
are displayed in Table 1. A one-way ANOVA, repeated
measures revealed a significant difference in these ratings
across conditions, both by participants, F1(3,153) = 134.401,
p < 0.0001, MSe = .858, and by materials, F2(3,45) = 107.801,
p < 0.0001, MSe = .331. Post-hoc analysis using Bonferroni
adjustments (all ps < 0.0083) showed that surprise ratings for
the C condition (M = 1.88, SD = 1.38) were significantly
lower than the ratings in the other three conditions. This
finding is intuitive, as outcomes that are consistent with
expectations will inevitably be judged as less surprising than
those that run contrary to expectations. The surprise ratings
for D (M = 4.95, SD = 1.77) and D+control (M = 5.04, SD =
1.74) were not significantly different, which demonstrates
that the addition of an irrelevant event had no effect on
perceived surprise. However, ratings for the D+enable
condition (M = 4.46, SD = 1.72) were significantly lower than
those for both the D and D+control conditions. This finding

1767

undermines the Expectation-Disconfirmation hypothesis, as it
suggests that the same unexpected event will not always be
judged as equally surprising. Participants provided with a
rationale for why this unexpected event might occur were less
surprised than participants presented with that unexpected
event in isolation. This suggests that subjective surprise is
based on the ease of representational integration rather than
on factors such as probability or schema-discrepancy.
In addition to the ANOVA we performed a trend analysis to
ascertain if our predicted trend of C < D+enable < D held
true. A Page’s L corroborated this trend across both
participants, L(2) = 703.5, p< 0.0001, and materials, L(2) =
220, p < 0.0001. This confirms that participants were more
likely to rate events in the D+enable condition as less
surprising than those in the D condition. In a further
investigation, we divided participants’ surprise ratings into
categories of low (1-2), medium (3-5) and high (6-7). We
then performed a chi-square analysis to see if there was a
relationship between surprise category and condition. The
association between these measures was significant, χ2(6, N
=832) = 370.931, p < 0.0001. Examination of the
standardised residuals (set at +/- 2) revealed that participants
were most likely to give a low surprise rating for C, a mid
surprise rating for D+enable and a high surprise rating for D
and D+control.
In summary, this experiment has shown that surprise for an
unexpected event is mitigated when a means for rationalising
that surprise is made available. Although this effect was not
great enough to lower surprise ratings to the base level of an
expectation-confirming event, we have demonstrated that
providing participants with a reason for a schema incongruent
event can significantly attenuate their level of surprise.

Experiment 1 were really interpreting enabling events as part
of the scenario and thereby altering their expectation, then
presenting the enabling event within the scenario body should
make no difference to perceived surprise. In opposition to this
view, we assume that this manipulation should considerably
alter surprise ratings for the unexpected outcome. That is, if
the enabling event is portrayed within the scenario body, then
it will be integrated into the reader’s representation from the
onset. When asked to rate surprise for the ‘disconfirming’
event, ratings should be lower since supportive information
for this event will be evident in the representation (i.e., when
readers know that there has been a power-cut, they should not
be surprised by the possibility that the alarm clock will fail to
ring). In contrast, when the enabling event is presented as part
of the hypothetical event sequence (as in the D+enable
condition), surprise should be greater because that sequence
will not be supported by the existing representation (i.e., the
occurrence of a power-cut during the night and the alarm
clock failing to ring still go against the expected sequence of
events).

Experiment 2

How surprised would you be if….?

It is possible that the above results do not contradict the
Expectation-Disconfirmation hypothesis. Another potential
interpretation of the findings could be that participants
reading scenarios in the D+enable condition were somehow
altering their expectation for the outcome after reading the
enabling event. This would explain why surprise ratings for
the unexpected event were lower in this condition than they
were when the disconfirming event was presented in isolation
(as in D). For instance, participants reading the scenario in
Table 1 should have expected the alarm clock to go off at the
appointed time. However, when judging the possibility that
“there was a power-cut during the night and the alarm clock
failed to ring at 7am”, they may have based their surprise
ratings for the unexpected outcome (“the alarm clock failed to
ring”) in the context of the enabling event (“there was a
power cut during the night”). In other words, participants
might have viewed this enabling factor as a given and only
rated surprise for the unexpected event in light of this. If this
were true, the intended expectation would have been
invalidated in the D+enable condition (i.e. given a power cut,
a radio alarm clock is not likely to function).
In the following experiment, we investigated this possibility
with the aim of refuting the argument. If participants in

Table 2: Sample scenario from Experiment 2. Participants all
read scenario body and additional sentence where appropriate
(these are shown in brackets within the scenario body).
Scenario body
Anna has a very important job interview in the morning.
She has to get up far earlier than usual, so she makes sure
to set her alarm clock radio for 7am. [There was a powercut during the night.*] [She had a quiet, good night’s
sleep.**]
*only presented in D(enable known) condition
** only presented in D(control known) condition
The alarm clock failed to ring at 7am
D, D(enable known), D(control known)
There was a power-cut during the night and the alarm clock
failed to ring at 7am
D+enable

In this experiment, we compared surprise ratings for the
original D and D+enable conditions, along with a novel
condition, D(enable known), in which the enabling event was
presented within the scenario body. An appropriate control
condition was also included which contained an irrelevant
event in the scenario body, D(control known). For both of
these conditions we wished to see how surprising participants
would find the ‘disconfirming’ event on its own. This
contrasts with the D+enable condition, where participants
must rate surprise for the enabling event and the
disconfirming event together. Table 2 displays a sample
scenario elucidating these various conditions.
The alternative account of the results from Experiment 1
predicts the following ordering for the three disconfirming
conditions: D+enable = D(enable known) < D. Conversely,
the Representation-Fit account predicts that surprise ratings
will differ across all three conditions, with the condition

1768

where the enabling factor is in the scenario body being the
least surprising: D(enable known) < D+enable < D.

the D+enable condition and a high surprise rating for the D
and D(control known) conditions.

Method

5.5

Participants Fifty-seven undergraduate computer science
students from University College Dublin voluntarily took part
in this experiment. All were native English speakers. Data
from two of these participants were discarded prior to
analysis due to a failure to complete the experiment.

Surprise Rating

5

Materials, Procedure & Design. The 16 event sequences
from Experiment 1 were modified for the purposes of this
experiment. Four versions of the scenarios were generated
according to the four conditions as outlined above (see
sample scenario in Table 2). The procedure and design were
identical to those in Experiment 1. Each participant thus rated
four scenarios from each condition.

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5

D (enable D+enable
known)

D

D (control
known)

Figure 1: Mean surprise ratings for the conditions in Exp 2

Results & Discussion
The mean surprise ratings for the four conditions are
displayed in Figure 1. These results are in line with our
predictions, in that events in the D(enable known) condition
were judged as the least surprising (M = 3.58, SD = 1.85),
followed by those in the D+enable condition (M = 4.19, SD =
1.62), and lastly by those in the D (M = 4.91, SD = 1.68) and
D(control known) conditions (M = 4.99, SD = 1.68). A oneway ANOVA, repeated measures revealed a significant
difference in surprise ratings across these conditions, both by
participants, F1(3,162) = 38.125, p < 0.0001, MSe = .638, and
by materials, F2(3,45) = 19.802, p < 0.0001, MSe = .364.
Post-hoc analysis using Bonferroni adjustments (all ps <
0.0083) showed that surprise ratings for the D(enable known)
condition were significantly lower than the ratings in the
other three conditions. As predicted by the Representation-Fit
theory, these results clearly demonstrate that when the
enabling event forms part of the existing representation,
surprise is lower. The results also undermine the possibility
that participants’ expectations were influenced by the
enabling event in the D+enable condition, since items in this
condition were rated as reliably more surprising than those in
the D(enable known) condition. However, ratings for the
D+enable condition were significantly lower than those in the
D and the D(control known) conditions which replicates the
findings from Experiment 1. This reinforces the claim that the
inclusion of an enabling factor decreases surprise for a
disconfirming event. The D(control known) condition was not
reliably different to its matching D condition.
A Page’s L confirmed the trend in surprise ratings predicted
by the Representation-Fit account of D(enable known) <
D+enable < D, across participants, L(2) = 728.5, p < 0.0001,
and materials, L(2) = 216, p < 0.0001. A chi-square analysis
examining the frequencies of the surprise rating categories
(low, medium and high) within the four conditions was also
significant, χ2(6, N = 873) = 105.038, p < 0.0001.
Standardised residuals revealed that participants were most
likely to give a low surprise rating for scenarios in the
D(enable known) condition, a mid surprise rating for those in

In sum, the results of this experiment are consistent with
those of Experiment 1 and vindicate our original experimental
paradigm by showing that the availability of explanatory
factors for a surprising event can greatly facilitate
representational integration. This again indicates that the
assessment of surprise involves more than mere expectationdisconfirmation or schema discrepancy.

General Discussion
In this paper we have investigated the claim that
disconfirmed expectations, or schema-discrepant events, lead
to a consistently high level of surprise (e.g. Meyer et al,
1997; Teigen & Keren, 2003). While this is an appealing
theory, results from two novel experiments suggest that the
ease of integration, or what we have termed RepresentationFit, may offer a more accurate perspective from which to
consider this phenomenon. These experiments showed that
people will judge an unexpected event as less surprising
when a potential enabling factor for that event is made
available. This effect can be observed even when events
deviate significantly from a dominant schema by conflicting
strongly with an expected sequence of events. In this section,
we will discuss the implications of these results for our
understanding of surprise, before outlining a cognitive model
designed to explain the phenomenon.
An important motivation for these experiments was to see
whether the experience of surprise could be related to that of
expectation. These two concepts are frequently used
interchangeably but they may not be analogous (see GrimesMaguire & Keane, 2005a, 2005b). While our theory of
Representation-Fit does not see surprise as being dependent
on a person’s level of expectation, this variable can obviously
play a role in surprise judgements. Evidently for example, if a
certain outcome is expected, that event will be effortlessly
integrated into a person’s representation and will
consequently be perceived as very unsurprising. However, as
we have shown here, if an event goes against an expectation,
surprise can be lowered if some rationalisation for that event

1769

is either provided or detected. By this token, an unexpected
event should no longer seem so surprising when the reasons
for it are understood. It is not clear whether theories such as
that proposed by Meyer et al (1997) can adequately explain
this effect.
At first glance, the results of our experiments bear much
resemblance to Tversky and Kahneman’s (1983) notion of
representativeness, which is the idea that two events will
appear more likely than one event on its own if those two
events are perceived to be more representative of some norm.
However, we have already mentioned that surprise cannot
simply be defined as a function of such subjective
probabilities since it is a retrospective judgement rather than
an estimation of likelihood. Teigen and Keren (2003) also
demonstrated that these two variables often yield differential
judgements by people. In light of this, while Tversky and
Kahneman (1983) found that event sequences appear more
probable when they converge on the norm, we claim that
event sequences seem less surprising when people are
presented with a means of adjusting their norm.

Cognitive model of surprise judgements
Maguire, Costello and Keane (2006) have devised a model of
surprise judgements that is in line with the theory of
Representation-Fit. Sharing some similarities with a model of
plausibility judgements proposed by Connell and Keane
(2006), the computational instantiation of our theory outputs
a surprise rating for the final event in a number of short
scenarios by means of two distinct phases. Firstly, the
Integration phase entails building a coherent representation
of the scenario. During this phase, the objective is to integrate
any incoming events into the discourse representation in the
easiest way possible. The Analysis phase follows when the
model assesses level of surprise for a particular event. This is
done by ascertaining the degree of representation-fit between
the outcome and the events in the prior discourse
representation. Recent simulations have revealed a strong
correspondence between human data and outputted surprise
ratings. One important assumption of the model has been
supported by the current experiments – that people actively
search for consistent information or enabling factors when
assessing surprise for a certain event.

Conclusion
Despite being a subject of investigation for some time, there
is still much to be discovered about the cognitive basis of
surprise. In this article, we have demonstrated that subjective
surprise is not a straightforward function of the degree of
contrast between an observed and an expected outcome. We
have illustrated that it is not the extent of schema discrepancy
which determines the level of surprise, but rather the ease
with which the discrepant event can be rationalised and
subsequently integrated into the discourse representation.
Existing theories of surprise may need to be refined to
acknowledge this representational influence.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Irish
Research Council for Science, Engineering and Technology.

References
Connell, L. & Keane, M.T. (2006). A model of plausibility.
Cognitive Science, 30(1), 95-120.
Darwin, C. (1872). The Expression of Emotion in Man and
Animals. London: J. Murray.
Ekman, P. (1972). Emotion in the Human Face: Guidelines
for research and an integration of findings. New York:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Fisk, J.E. (2002). Judgments under uncertainty:
Representativeness or potential surprise? British Journal of
Psychology, 93, 431-449.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Grimes-Maguire, R. & Keane, M.T. (2005a). Expecting a
surprise? The effect of expectations in perceived surprise in
stories. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Grimes-Maguire, R. & Keane, M.T. (2005b). A cognitive
model of surprise in narrative. Kogwis: Proceedings of the
Seventh Biannual Meeting of the German Cognitive
Science Society.
Hawkins, S. A. & Hastie, R. (1990). Hindsight: Biased
judgements of past events after the outcome events are
known. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 311-327.
Linderholm, T., Virtue, S., van den Broek, P., & Tzeng, Y.
(2004). Fluctuations in the availability of information
during reading: Capturing cognitive processes using the
landscape model. Discourse Processes, 37(2), 165-186.
Maguire, R., Costello, F. & Keane, M. T. (2006). A cognitive
model of surprise judgements. Proceedings of the 28th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Meyer, W.U., Reisenzein, R. & Schützwohl, A. (1997).
Towards a process analysis of emotions: The case of
surprise. Motivation and Emotion, 21(3), 251-274.
Schützwohl, A. & Reisenzein, R. (1999). Children's and
adults' reactions to a schema-discrepant event: A
developmental analysis of surprise. International Journal
of Behavioral Development, 23, 37-62.
Shackle, G.L.S (1969). Decisions, order and time in human
affairs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Teigen, K.H., & Keren, G. (2003). Surprises: Low
probabilities or high contrasts? Cognition, 87, 55-71.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional vs.
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 293-3l5.
Zwaan, R.A. & Radvansky, G.A. (1998). Situation Models in
Language Comprehension and Memory. Psychological
Bulletin, 123 (2), 162-185.

1770

