UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
That Sounds Unlikely: Syntactic Probabilities Affect Pronunciation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1h9879s9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Fisher, Cynthia
Gahl, Susanne
Garnsey, Susan M.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

“That Sounds Unlikely”: Syntactic Probabilities Affect Pronunciation
Susanne Gahl (gahl@uchicago.edu)
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, 405 N. Mathews Ave
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Susan M. Garnsey (sgarnsey@psych.uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel St
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Cynthia Fisher (clfishe@uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel St
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Laura Matzen (lmatzen@psych.uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel St
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Abstract
The probability of encountering a particular syntactic
configuration, given a particular verb (i.e. “verb bias” or
“subcategorization
preference”)
affects
language
comprehension (Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Kello, 1993). A
recent study (Gahl & Garnsey 2004) of sentences with
temporary direct object / sentential complement ambiguities
shows that such probabilities also affect language production,
specifically pronunciation. In this paper, we extend that
finding to a new sentence type – sentences with initial
subordinate clauses with temporary closure ambiguities, such
as If the tenants beg [, the landlord will let them stay | the
landlord, he will let them stay]. We show systematic
differences in the pronunciation of sentences with high vs.
low probability structures, given their verbs. We briefly
discuss the implications of this finding for research on
sentence comprehension and pronunciation variation.
Keywords: Probability; pronunciation; prosody; verb bias;
subcategorization; closure ambiguities; early closure; late
closure; variation; probabilistic parsing; language production.

Introduction
The probability of encountering a particular syntactic
configuration, given a particular verb is often referred to as
“verb bias” or “subcategorization preference” and has been
shown to affect language comprehension (Trueswell et al.,
1993). Verb biases are normally thought of as
generalizations over usage. Do such probabilities affect the
language production system during the production of
individual utterances? A recent study shows that they do:
Examining sentences with temporary direct object /
sentential complement (DO/SC) ambiguities, such as The
divorce lawyer argued the issue [was irrelevant | with her
colleague], Gahl and Garnsey (2004) found systematic
differences in the pronunciation of sentences with high vs.
low probability structures, given their verbs.

The only other studies, to our knowledge, to check for
effects of verb bias on pronunciation (Blodgett, 2004;
Kjelgaard & Speer, 1999) did not find such effects. This
discrepancy could be due to the sentence types examined in
those studies, viz. sentences with initial transitive or
intransitive subordinate clauses, such as When Roger leaves
[the house is empty | the house, it’s empty]. Such sentences –
sometimes referred to as “Closure sentences” – are typically
pronounced with a prosodic boundary at the end of the
subordinate clause. This boundary tends to be more salient
than boundaries in DO/SC sentences. Warren (1985), for
example, reports that the duration of verbs at clause
boundaries is lengthened, on average, by a factor of 1.08 in
DO/SC sentences, but by a factor of 1.51 in Closure
sentences. Perhaps the salient boundaries in Closure
sentences eclipse microvariation of the sort described in
Gahl and Garnsey (2004). On the other hand, the absence of
probability-based variation in Kjelgaard and Speer’s and
Blodgett’s materials may be due to the fact that these studies
used recordings made by a trained speaker intentionally
producing particular boundary types in the ToBI standard
(Beckman & Hirschberg, 1994; Beckman, Hirschberg, &
Shattuck-Hufnagel, 2005; Silverman et al., 1992). Such
deliberate, tightly controlled pronunciation may not show
the same range of variation found in naïve productions.
Perhaps less controlled pronunciation of Closure sentences
does reflect structural probabilities.
Many more verbs participate in transitivity alternations
than in the DO/SC alternation (cf. Levin, 1993). Therefore,
closure sentences allow us to study the workings of a larger
part of the lexicon than do DO/SC sentences, as well as to
examine pronunciation variation in strongly marked
prosodic boundaries.
How might structural probabilities affect the
pronunciation of Closure sentences? Gahl and Garnsey
(2004) predicted that phonetic characteristics of boundaries

1334

would tend to be exaggerated for low-probability
boundaries, and minimized for high-probability boundaries.
This prediction was confirmed. Thus, Gahl and Garnsey
found greater degrees of pre-pausal lengthening near lowprobability clause boundaries than near high-probability
clause boundaries.1 These predictions were motivated by
earlier findings that high lexical frequency and high lexical
transitional probability – the probability of a word given a
neighboring word - promote phonetic reduction (Bell et al.,
2003; Gregory, Raymond, Bell, Fosler-Lussier, & Jurafsky,
1999; Jurafsky, Bell, Gregory, & Raymond, 2001).
Clause boundaries in Closure sentences occur either
immediately following the verb (Early Closure, i.e.
intransitive: When Roger leaves, # the house is empty), or
following the direct object (Late Closure, i.e. transitive:
When Roger leaves the house, # it is empty). In both cases,
speakers tend to insert pauses at the boundary and lengthen
the words immediately before the boundary (the verb in
Early Closure sentences, the direct object in Late Closure
sentences), compared to its baseline duration (Kjelgaard &
Speer, 1999; Schafer, Speer, Warren, & White, 2000;
Warren, 1985; Warren, Grabe, & Nolan, 1995). If structural
probabilities have similar effects in these sentences as in
DO/SC sentences, we should expect words near lowprobability boundaries to be lengthened more than those
near high-probability boundaries.
In this paper, we offer evidence showing that this is the
case. Our results support the notion that verb biases affect
language production, as well as comprehension. Our results
have implications for research on sentence processing and
probabilistic pronunciation variation.

Method
Participants
Twenty undergraduate students (ten male, ten female) at the
University of Illinois participated in the experiment for
payment. All were native speakers of English without
reported hearing problems.

18.8, p < 001.). Each of the verbs appeared in two
sentences, one with Early Closure and one with Late
Closure, e.g. When the python escaped, the zoo had to be
closed to the public and When the python escaped the zoo, it
had to be closed to the public. The complete set of sentences
appears in Table 1. All participants read all sentences.
To prevent confounds due to presentation order, two
presentation lists were constructed, each with two blocks of
twenty sentences. On List 1, half the verbs of each bias type
appeared in their bias-conforming syntactic context in block
1, and in their bias-violating context in block 2, while for
the other half of the verbs, the opposite order was used. On
List 2, the relative order of bias-conforming and biasviolating environments was reversed. Within blocks, the
order of sentences was randomized. The same random order
of sentences was used in each block, thus maximizing the
distance between sentences containing the same verb. The
participants were randomly assigned to two groups, one
receiving List 1, the other List 2.
The subject noun phrases were different for each verb, but
were the same for the two sentences each verb appeared in.
The nouns used in the subject noun phrases for the two sets
of verbs did not differ significantly in frequency, length in
letters, phonemes, or syllables (all t(18) < 1.6, p > .15), or in
plausibility as subjects for the verbs they appeared with, as
estimated by the method described in (Keller, Lapata, &
Ourioupina, 2002).
The ambiguous noun phrases (e.g. The python escaped the
zoo…) did not differ in frequency, length in letters,
phonemes, or syllables, or in estimated plausibility as
objects of the verbs they appeared with (all t(18) <1.5, p >
.15).
The forty experimental sentences were pseudorandomly
interleaved with 177 filler sentences of various syntactic
structures, which represented stimuli for two other
experiments.

Materials and design

Procedure

The materials consisted of Early/Late Closure sentence
pairs, such as When the python escaped the zoo (it) had to
be closed to the public, some of which were based on the
sentences in Kjelgaard and Speer (1999). The main
consideration in selecting the verbs for the subordinate
clause was strong verb bias, either towards transitive (Late
Closure) or intransitive (Early Closure). Estimates of verb
bias were based on corpus counts (Gahl, Jurafsky, &
Roland, 2004). Ten Transitive Bias verbs and ten
Intransitive Bias verbs were selected.
The two sets of verbs did not differ significantly in
frequency or length in letters, phonemes, or syllables (all
t(18) < 1, p > .5), but did differ in transitivity bias (t (18) =
1

Strictly speaking, the probability estimates are based on
frequencies of syntactic patterns, such as clauses or direct objects,
whereas the boundaries in question are prosodic, not syntactic.
1335

Sentences were recorded in a sound booth as 16-bit digital
sound files at a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz and resampled to
22.1 kHz. Participants were told to read each sentence
silently first, until they felt confident that they understood it
and could say it without difficulty. They were also told that
there was no limit on the amount of time they could take to
read and record the sentences, and that the recordings would
be used as stimuli in a comprehension experiment. If
participants felt that they had not said a sentence in a natural
manner, they were asked to repeat it. When speakers
misspoke or hesitated or used a noticeably exaggerated
pronunciation after recovering from a garden-path (“oh, I
get it,… When the python escaped THE ZOO, it…”), the
experimenter asked them to repeat the sentence in question.
All measurements were performed using the Praat
software package (Boersma & Weenik, 2002-2005), based
on listening and on visual inspection of the waveform and
spectrogram. All durations were measured by a group of
three Psychology undergraduate students and one

Table 1: Verb transitivity biases (from Gahl et al., 2004) and stimulus sentences.

Transitive

Intransitive

Bias

Verb
beg
continue
dance
escape
help
accept
attack
lose
pay
perform

Trans
.-bias
.13
.7
.7
.27
.15
.94
.95
.96
.81
.85

Sentence
If the tenants beg [,] the landlord [, he] is going to let them stay another month.
Although the storyteller continued [,] the story [, it] had lost its appeal.
When the radiant ballerina danced [,] the role [, it] became world-famous.
When the python escaped [,] the zoo [, it] had to be closed to the public.
Because the teacher helped [,] the children [, they] enjoyed the lessons.
Soon after the candidate accepted [,] the money [, it] was found to be illegal.
When the warriors attacked [,] the city [, it] was nearly destroyed.
Even though the team lost [,] the match [, it] meant a big success for the new coach.
When home-owners pay [,] the tax [, it] benefits local public schools.
Whenever the group performs [,] the show [, it] is sold out.

Linguistics graduate student and checked by the first author.
All measurements were condition-blind.
We measured the duration of the verb, the silence
following the verb, and the ambiguous noun phrase from its
beginning up to the beginning of the next word. The
duration of each region was measured from the release of
the initial stop for words that started with stops, and from
the onset of the initial segment for all other words. When a
region began with a stop, the stop’s closure was included as
part of the preceding silence, since it would have been
impossible to identify the beginning of the closure portion
of a stop in a period of silence. For analogous reasons, we
treated the closure of a region-final stop as the endpoint of
that region. This means that the postverbal silence includes
the closure portion of any verb-final stops.
All measures were submitted to repeated measures
analyses of variance (ANOVA) with speakers (F1) and
verbs (F2) as random factors and List (randomly assigned
presentation list 1 or 2), Item-group (randomly assigned
verb group 1 or 2), Bias (Transitive or Intransitive) and
Syntax (Early or Late Closure) as factors. Nonsignificant
effects that were of no theoretical interest are not reported
here. Effects are reported as significant when at or below the
.05 level of significance.
Participants were free to choose which parts of the
sentences they wished to accent. Inspection of the data
revealed that there were regularities in the location of
accent: Speakers tended to accent the subject of the
subordinate clause if that subject was a personal name (for
example, When TIM cooks…); otherwise, they tended to
accent either the verb (in Early-closure sentences) or the
following noun phrase (in Late-closure sentences)2. Half of
the subjects of the subordinate clauses in our materials were
personal names. As Schafer and Jun (2001) note, the

presence of focal accent on subject noun phrases affects
variation in verb durations and might therefore mask the
effect under investigation here. We therefore decided to
remove sentences with personal names from the analysis.
This left a total of 20 sentences, 5 in each combination of
verb bias and syntactic structure. This subset of the
materials also did not differ significantly in frequency,
length, or plausibility of the verbs and their NP arguments
across the Transitive Bias and Intransitive Bias items (all p
> .15).

Predictions
If structural probabilities have similar effects in these
sentences as in DO/SC sentences, we should expect words
near low-probability boundaries to be lengthened more than
those near high-probability boundaries. We therefore make
two specific predictions: (1) Intransitive tokens of Transitive
Bias verbs (i.e. in Early Closure sentences) will be
lengthened more than intransitive tokens of Intransitive Bias
verbs; (2) Direct objects of Intransitive Bias verbs (i.e. in
Late-closure sentences) will be lengthened more than those
of Transitive Bias verbs.

Results
The results of the duration measurements are summarized in
Table 2, collapsing across lists and item-groups.
Table 2: Average durations (in milliseconds) of verbs,
postverbal silences and postverbal noun phrases in Closure
sentences.
Syntax
Early
Closure
Late
Closure

2

Accent placement was judged independently by three coders. We
did not attempt to distinguish between focal accent and contrastive
accent (Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg, 1990). In cases of coder
disagreement, we listened to the recordings again; if no consensus
could be reached, that sentence was excluded from the analysis of
stress placement.

Bias

Verb

Silence

NP

Intransitive
Transitive

381
467

243
200

414
381

Intransitive
Transitive

290
329

54
32

704
626

1336

Consistent with earlier studies, the pronunciation of
sentences with Early Closure (If the tenants beg, the

(F1(1,19) < 1, F2(1,8) <1, n.s.). In sum, the pattern of
durations was consistent with our hypotheses about the
duration of verbs and ambiguous noun phrases.
Postverbal NP lengthening in late closure
sentences
L en g th en in g in m s,
relative to early clo su re

landlord is going to…) and Late Closure (If the tenants beg
the landlord, he is going to…) differed, yielding a main
effect of Syntax: Intransitive verb tokens and any postverbal
pauses were longer than transitive ones (424 vs. 310 ms,
F1(1,19) = 345.3, p < .001, F2 (1,8) = 239.6, p <.001 for the
verb; 222 vs. 43 ms, F1(1,19) = 34.0, p < .001, F2 (1,8) =
149.0, p <.001 for the postverbal pause). Noun phrases
representing direct objects (If the tenants beg the landlord,
he…) were longer than main clause subjects (If the tenants
beg, the landlord might…) (665 vs. 398 ms, F1(1,19) =
260.4, p < .001, F2(1,8) = 215.6, p <.001). These patterns
are similar to those reported elsewhere (e.g. Warren, 1985).
The Bias x Syntax interaction was crucial to evaluating
our specific predictions. Consistent with our predictions,
Transitive Bias verbs in Early Closure sentences were
lengthened more, compared to their duration in Late Closure
sentences (by 138 ms), than Intransitive Bias verbs in the
same contexts (by 91 ms), yielding a significant interaction
of Syntax by Bias (F1(1,19) = 26.3, p < .001, F2(1,8) = 9.3,
p <.02). Figure 1 shows the amount of verb lengthening
observed in early closure sentences for intransitive-bias and
transitive bias verbs, compared to the durations of the same
verbs in late-closure sentences. For the postverbal silence,
the Bias x Syntax interaction did not reach significance
(F1(1,19) = 2.3, n.s.; F2(1,8) < 1, n.s.).

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

intr-bias
tr-bias

1
Verb type

Figure 2: Lengthening of postverbal noun phrases in Late
Closure sentences, relative to the duration of those phrases
in Early Closure sentences, following intransitive-bias verbs
and transitive-bias verbs.

Discussion
The probability of encountering a particular syntactic
structure given a verb (or “verb bias”), has long been known
to affect language comprehension. In addition, a recent
paper (Gahl & Garnsey, 2004) showed that the probability
of a verb’s taking a direct object vs. a sentential complement
also affects language production. In this report, we extended
the investigation to a different syntactic pattern, namely
sentences with initial subordinate clauses. We found that the
pronunciation of high-probability (bias-matching) sentences
differed from that of low-probability (bias-violating)
sentences, in a pattern similar to that observed by Gahl and
Garnsey (2004).
Since accent placement affects duration, could regularities
in accent placement have given rise to the observed effects?
It is certainly the case that the overall differences between
Early Closure and Late Closure sentences in part reflect
accent. In our data, intransitive verb tokens tended to be
accented, as were noun phrases representing direct objects, a
pattern that would reinforce the characteristic lengthening of
intransitive verb tokens and direct objects. However, accent
placement did not depend on verb bias or on the interaction
of bias with syntax: Transitive Bias and Intransitive Bias
verbs were accented in 86 and 85 of the 100 intransitive
clauses with those verbs; direct objects were accented 69
times (out of a possible 100) following Transitive Bias
verbs and 64 times following Intransitive Bias verbs. Thus,
accent placement did not vary as a function of bias and
therefore cannot explain the observed effects of verb bias.
However, the relationship between stress and verb bias
merits further investigation. Some conditions that license
intransitive uses of certain heavily Transitive Bias verbs

Lengthening in ms,
relative to late closure

Verb lengthening in early closure
sentences
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

intr-bias
tr-bias

1
Verb type

Figure 1: Verb lengthening in Early Closure sentences,
relative to verb duration in Late Closure sentences, for
intransitive-bias verbs and transitive-bias verbs.
Also consistent with our predictions, noun phrases
representing direct objects of Intransitive Bias verbs were
lengthened more, compared to their duration as subject noun
phrases (by 290 ms), than noun phrases representing direct
objects of Transitive Bias verbs (by 245 ms), yielding an
interaction of Syntax by Bias that was significant in the
analysis by subjects, but not by items (F1(1,19) = 6.1, p <
.05, F2(1,8) = 2.6, p = .14). Figure 2 shows the amount of
NP lengthening observed in late closure sentences with
intransitive-bias and transitive bias verbs, compared to the
durations of the same NPs in early-closure sentences. The
postverbal silences did not yield a significant interaction
1337

(Goldberg, 2001) also tend to shift focal accent onto those
verbs; hence, accent could reflect verb bias, although it did
not do so in our data.
The present findings are subject to limitations: Our
analysis was based on only ten verbs. We are currently
conducting a follow-up study with full noun phrases (no
proper names) and a greater number of verbs. However, the
generalizability of our results is supported by the fact that
Gahl and Garnsey (2004) found similar effects with a larger
number of verbs and sentences of a different type. A second
limitation stems from the fact that our findings are based on
read speech, whose prosody is known to differ from
spontaneous speech (Schafer et al., 2000). It remains to be
seen whether the patterns we observed in read speech can
also be observed in spontaneous speech.
Our findings have implications for research on
pronunciation variation and sentence processing. Research
on probabilistic pronunciation variation has until now
focused on effects of n-gram probabilities (lexical
frequencies and word-to-word transitional probabilities)
(Bell et al., 2002; Gregory et al., 1999; Jurafsky et al.,
2001). Our findings show that pronunciation also reflects
probabilities of syntactic constructs, replicating and
extending results reported by Gahl and Garnsey (2004).
Research on sentence comprehension has shown that,
generally speaking, bias-violating sentences induce longer
processing times and higher error rates than biasconforming sentences (Garnsey, Pearlmutter, Myers, &
Lotocky, 1997; Trueswell et al., 1993). The bulk of this
evidence has come from reading. Studies of effects of verb
biases on auditory comprehension have shown that prosody
and verb biases jointly affect comprehension (Blodgett,
2004). If verb biases themselves affect the production of
prosody, it is possible that listeners take this fact into
account, such that, for example, strong prosodic cues may
facilitate the comprehension of bias-violating sentences. We
are currently investigating this possibility. A related
possibility is that, if bias-violating sentences are
characterized by salient prosodic patterns, prosody may
serve as a cue for bias.
A contentious question has been at what point in the
comprehension process verb bias comes into play (e.g.
Pickering & Traxler, 2003). Given that biases affect
production as well as comprehension, it is plausible, in our
opinion, to suppose that structural probabilities are part and
parcel of speakers’ knowledge of their lexicon and syntax,
which underlies both comprehension and production and
affects both immediately. This point is discussed further in
Gahl and Garnsey (2004).
Our work illustrates that studies of language
comprehension and production can inform each other,
which we consider a promising direction for future research.

Anthi Diavastou, Yoko Ieuji, Russell Hellin, and Dora Lu
for help with the duration measurements. This work was
supported by NIH grant HD044458 to the University of
Illinois.

References

Acknowledgments

Beckman, M. E., & Hirschberg, J. (1994). The ToBI
annotation conventions, [Online ms]. Available:
http://www.ling.ohiostate.edu/~tobi/ame_tobi/annotation_conventions.html.
Beckman, M. E., Hirschberg, J., & Shattuck-Hufnagel, S.
(2005). The original ToBI system and the evolution of the
ToBI framework. In S.-A. Jun (Ed.), Prosodic typology:
The phonology of intonation and phrasing. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bell, A., Gregory, M. L., Brenier, J., Jurafsky, D., Ikeno, A.,
& Girand, C. (2002, September 14-15, 2002). Which
predictability measures affect content word duration?
Paper presented at the Pronunciation Modeling and
Lexicon Adaptation for Spoken Language Technology
Workshop, Estes Park, CO
Bell, A., Jurafsky, D., Fosler-Lussier, E., Girand, C.,
Gregory, M. L., & Gildea, D. (2003). Effects of
disfluencies, predictability, and utterance position on word
form variation in English conversation. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 113, 1001-1024.
Blodgett, A. (2004). The interaction of prosodic phrasing,
verb bias, and plausibility during spoken sentence
comprehension. The Ohio State University.
Boersma, P., & Weenik, D. (2002-2005). Praat: doing
phonetics by computer (Version 4.3.04) (Version 4.0.26).
Amsterdam.
Gahl, S., & Garnsey, S. M. (2004). Knowledge Of
Grammar, Knowledge Of Usage: Syntactic Probabilities
Affect Pronunciation Variation. Language, 80(4), 748775.
Gahl, S., Jurafsky, D., & Roland, D. (2004). Verb
subcategorization frequencies: American English corpus
data, methodological studies, and cross-corpus
comparisons. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 36(3), 432-443.
Garnsey, S. M., Pearlmutter, N. J., Myers, E., & Lotocky,
M. A. (1997). The contributions of verb bias and
plausibility to the comprehension of temporarily
ambiguous sentences. Journal of Memory & Language,
37(1), 58-93.
Goldberg, A. (2001). Patient Arguments of Causative Verbs
Can Be Omitted: The Role of Information Structure in
Argument Distribution. Language Sciences, 23(4-5), 503524.
Gregory, M. L., Raymond, W. D., Bell, A., Fosler-Lussier,
E., & Jurafsky, D. (1999). The effects of collocational
strength and contextual probability in lexical production.
Chicago Linguistic Society, 35, 151-166.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., & Raymond, W. D.
(2001). Probabilistic relations between words: Evidence
from reduction in lexical production. [References], Bybee,

We are grateful to our colleagues at the Beckman Institute
for useful feedback. We would also like to thank Sandra
Chavarría-Klahn for help with the stress judgment task and

1338

Joan (Ed); Hopper, Paul. (2001). Frequency and the
emergence of linguistic structure. Typological studies in
language, vol. 45. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Keller, F., Lapata, M., & Ourioupina, O. (2002). Using the
web to overcome data sparseness. Paper presented at the
Paper presented at the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, Philadelphia
Kjelgaard, M. M., & Speer, S. R. (1999). Prosodic
facilitation and interference in the resolution of temporary
syntactic closure ambiguity. Journal of Memory &
Language. Vol, 40(2), 153-194.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and
alternations.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pickering, M. J., & Traxler, M. J. (2003). Evidence against
the use of subcategorisation frequency in the processing of
unbounded dependencies. Language & Cognitive
Processes. Vol, 18(4), 469-503.
Pierrehumbert, J., & Hirschberg, J. (1990). The meaning of
intonation in the interpretation of discourse. In P. R.
Cohen & J. Morgan & M. E. Pollack (Eds.), Intentions in
Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schafer, A., & Jun, S.-A. (2001). Effects of focus on
prosodic reflections of phrase structure in American
English. Paper presented at the The Prosody in

Processing Workshop, Utrecht University, Utrecht,
Netherlands.
Schafer, A. J., Speer, S. R., Warren, P., & White, S. (2000).
Intonational disambiguation in sentence production and
comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research.
Vol, 29(2), 169-182.
Silverman, K., Beckman, M. E., Pitrelli, J., Ostendorf, M.,
Wightman, C., Price, P., Pierrehumbert, J., & Hirschberg,
J. (1992). ToBI: A standard for labeling English prosody.
Paper presented at the International Conference on
Spoken Language Processing, Banff, Canada (pp.867870).
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Kello, C. (1993).
Verb-specific constraints in sentence processing:
Separating effects of lexical preference from garden-paths.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition. Vol, 19(3), 528-553.
Warren, P. (1985). The temporal organization and
perception of speech. University of Cambridge,
Cambridge.
Warren, P., Grabe, E., & Nolan, F. (1995). Prosody,
phonology and parsing in closure ambiguities. Language
& Cognitive Processes. Vol, 10(5), 457-486.

1339

