UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Delivery Method on Conceptual and Strategy Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7v43z72s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Kaczmarczyk, Lisa C.
Last, Mary Z.
Miikkulainen, Risto

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Delivery Method on Conceptual and Strategy Development
Lisa C. Kaczmarczyk ∗ , Mary Z. Last ∗∗ , Risto Miikkulainen ∗∗∗
∗

kaczmarc@rose-hulman.edu

Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering CM4007, The Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
5500 Wabash Avenue, Terre Haute, Indiana 47803 USA
∗∗

mlast@umhb.edu

Department of Computer Information Systems, The University of Mary Hardin-Baylor
900 College Street, Belton, Texas 76513 USA
∗∗∗

risto@cs.utexas.edu

Department of Computer Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station C0500, Austin, Texas 78712 USA
Abstract

Background

In order to develop intellectual expertise, the student needs
to learn how to perform sophisticated pattern identification,
and how to employ effective study and test taking strategies.
These cognitive requirements are complex and analytical, and
formal instruction operates under challenging constraints. In
order to help students succeed in their chosen field, we need
to understand better how instruction can help develop these
meta-cognitive skills. This paper reports the results of a study
in which novices attempted to categorize calculus integration
problems in one of three delivery methods (Drill and Test,
Fully Integrated, Incremental Learning). The results demonstrate that Incremental Learners develop the most effective
study and test-taking strategies, have the best conceptual development, and have the most positive reactions to learning.
The results, together with a previously reported computational
study, support the hypothesis that Incremental Learners develop more effective concepts and strategies.

It is well established that in order to learn expertise, it is critical to develop successful schemas. A schema is “a construct
that allows problem solvers to group problems into categories
in which the problems in each category require similar solutions” (Cooper and Sweller, 1987). Successful learners develop problem schemas by categorizing problems according
to structural features, whereas less successful learners rely on
surface features (Chi, Feltovich, and Glaser, 1981; Schoenfeld and Herrmann, 1982). As schemas develop more fully,
categorization ability improves; Experts can categorize problems without solving them (Robinson and Hayes, 1978). This
process of acquiring schemas is inductive (Cummins, 1992).
Once a learner has accurate schemas, she or he is able to
eventually recognize effective solution strategies (Cummins,
1992; Owen and Sweller, 1989).
Prior studies of schema acquisition in instructional settings
have often focused on identifying best-case learning environments, based upon an understanding of how experts behave.
For example, it is commonly accepted that expertise results
from long-term practice (Hayes, 1989) and strategy choices
that are consciously goal-directed, self-monitoring, and selfadjusting within the setting of each particular task (Ericsson,
Krampe, and Tesch-Römer, 1993). These results imply that
instruction should relax time limits, be individualized, and
provide regular formative feedback. Unfortunately, university settings operate under restrictive constraints that challenge these pedagogical ideals directly. One of the biggest
constraints on classroom learning is time. The semester system forces all students to attempt to learn at the same pace,
and there is a fixed start and end to the entire learning experience. In addition, all learners receive the same material in
the same sequence, and time and workload pressures often
prevent instructors from providing timely feedback. These
factors leave little room for individualized instruction.
To understand better how to help students become experts, there is a need to investigate what delivery methods encourage the best conceptual and strategy development within
these constraints. How can we help learners to acquire effective schemas in an environment such as a university classroom? There are two promising areas where instruction can
be adjusted. The first is sequencing. In formal classroom
settings an important pedagogical issue is how to sequence
the material. Posner and Strike (1976) propose a framework
for analyzing and describing different content sequences. For
example, a “concept-related sequence” structures delivery so
that material is presented consistently with how the concepts

Introduction
It is important to understand how expertise develops for two
reasons. Cognitive scientists want to know how people become experts in order to understand human cognition at its
most effective. Professional educators want to help students
acquire the ability to become experts in their chosen field.
Thus cognitive science and educational researchers share a
common goal: to better understand how people think and acquire intellectual expertise. However, while cognitive science
has made progress in understanding human development, we
do not yet understand enough about how adult learners acquire complex concepts in response to different instructional
methods. Learners’ intellectual tasks are often extremely
complex, and classroom environments are hard to study because they pose unique learning constraints.
The primary goal of this paper is to increase understanding of how pedagogical delivery methods can initiate the development of cognitive behaviors seen in experts. This paper presents results from a study in which novices studied
calculus integration problems, and attempted to categorize
them by solution strategy. The study focuses on how different pedagogical sequencing affects study and test-taking
strategies, and conceptual development. The results provide
insight into the role of complexity in instructional design. In
particular, this study supports the prediction of a previously
reported computational model (Kaczmarczyk and Miikkulainen, 2004), a backprop neural network, which demonstrated
that an Incremental Learning delivery method produced the
best learning compared to Drill and Test or Fully Integrated
learning.
1569

protocols, known to the researcher as Drill and Test (DT),
Fully Integrated (FI), Incremental Learning (IL).
Forty-five calculus integration problems were written individually as equations on 4x6 inch index cards. The problems
were equally divided between three categories, labeled A, B,
C. Alphabetic category labels were used in order to ensure
that the participants would not attribute meaning to the category labels. The three category labels corresponded to the
solution strategies Simple Integration, U-Substitution, and Integration by Parts. Integration problems were collected from
college level calculus textbooks (Lang, 1986; Stewart, 1995).
The solution strategy for each problem was determined by
the textbook and confirmed by a calculus expert (mathematics faculty or TA). Scrap paper and a pencil were provided. A
set of 4 examinations was created for each of the three protocols (12 examinations total). The examinations contained
calculus integration problems that were not part of the study
set. The integration equations were used according to the procedure described in the next section.

themselves relate to one another. They cite traditional deductive mathematics instruction as an example of a conceptrelated sequencing. However, traditional mathematics instruction often assumes that a “logic of inquiry sequencing”
will take place: the learner will be able to generalize fundamental principles inductively from exposure to many examples. Thus traditional instruction in mathematics embodies a
possible conflict between the actual concept-related presentation and desired inductive learning.
The second promising area is in encouraging learners to
focus on structural analysis of problems. Learners are more
likely to focus on the structural attributes of problems, and
improve their schema induction, when forced to compare
problems to one another without solving them (Cummins,
1992). Learners are also more likely to focus their attention on structural analysis when “goal-free” problems are presented to them. Goal-free instruction groups multiple problem examples of the same category type with different surface
features; problems with similar surface features are spread
across different category types (Quilici and Mayer, 1996).
The study presented in this paper provides learners with
goal-free problems in three sequencing modes. Drill and Test
proceeds in a blocked sequence. At the other extreme, in a
Fully Integrated sequence, content presentation is mixed. The
third presentation sequence is Incremental Learning, which
presents content incrementally. The study presented in this
paper presents a comparison of conceptual and strategy development between these three sequencing modes. The experiment tests the hypothesis that Incremental Learning initiates
better conceptual and strategy development than Drill and
Test or Fully Integrated learning. This study differs from previous studies in several ways. First, it is motivated by a computational model of human expertise learning that illustrates
the effect on learning and performance of the three delivery
methods (Kaczmarczyk and Miikkulainen, 2004). Second,
the current study explicitly acknowledges key limitations inherent to formal instructional environments and conducts an
experiment to explore how schema development can be encouraged under these adverse conditions. Third, it incorporates goal-free problem presentation of mathematical expressions (previous work on goal-free problem solving has focused on statistical word problems; Quilici and Mayer (1996).
The results support the hypothesis that Incremental Learners
develop more effective concepts and strategize more effectively than either Drill and Test or Fully Integrated learners.

Procedure
The first part was a categorization task. Each volunteer was
given an identical instruction sheet. The instructions told the
participant that they would be given index cards with one integration problem written on the front of each card, and one
of three categories written on the back of each card. Their
task was to study the problems and try to identify common
properties for each category. The instructions also informed
the participant that there would be four timed study periods,
each followed by a test; the tests would contain additional
problems to categorize.
The length of the study sessions was the same for participants in all three protocols. The length of the first three study
sessions was determined using pilot studies and achieved an
optimal balance between applying time pressure, and allowing time to rapidly assess the situation and make an initial
strategic decision. An important goal in selecting study times
was to encourage the subjects to react instinctively to each
delivery method. The first three study sessions were 2, 3, and
3 minutes long. The fourth session was only 1 minute long
and simulated a “cram session”.
The delivery protocol determined the order in which the
calculus problems were presented to the volunteers in each
study session. The DT protocol received one category of
problems only in each study session: Simple Integration, then
U-Substitution, then Integration by Parts. In the cram session they received all three types of problems for study. The
FI protocol received all three categories of problems during
every study session. The IL protocol received first Simple
problems, then Simple and U-Substitution, then Simple, USubstitution and Integration by Parts problems in the third,
and again during the cram session.
The fourth examination was identical in each set and consisted of 15 problems from all three categories of problem.
The first three examinations varied as follows: for the DT
protocol, the first examination contained only Simple Integration problems, the second examination contained only USubstitution problems, the third examination contained only
Integration by Parts problems. For the FI protocol, all three
of the examinations contained problems from all categories.

Human Subject Study - Method
Subjects and Materials
Fifteen volunteers (age 19-51, m = 35 years of age) took part
in a one-hour exploratory learning study. All of the volunteers
were undergraduate or graduate students at the University of
Texas at Austin. Participants came from thirteen different
academic departments including natural sciences, liberal arts
and education. Volunteers responded to advertisements looking for people with an interest in either analytical thinking or
mathematics, but who did not know calculus integration. Selected volunteers had all successfully completed pre-calculus
and were screened to eliminate those with mathematics anxiety. Volunteers were not compensated for participating in the
study. Each volunteer was randomly assigned to one of three
1570

Table 1: Initial Codes - Interview Analysis
Conceptual Development
C-Category Development
C-Focus on Complexity
C-Lack of Understanding
Strategy Development
S-Desire to Solve
S-Looking for Rules
S-Comparing Group Items S-Reliance on Instinct
S-Looking for Patterns
S-Reliance on Memory
S-Analytical Planning

Table 2: Emergent Codes - Interview Analysis
Affective Reactions
A-Discomfort
A-Positive Feelings

The problems were the same on each test, but the presentation order was changed. For the IL protocol, the first test contained Simple Integration problems, the second test retained
the Simple problems and added U-Substitution problems, and
the third test retained the Simple and U-Substitution problems
and added Integration by Parts problems.
The second part of the study gathered data via structured
interviews. The interviews immediately followed the categorization task. Every participant was asked the same 14
questions about their behavior and experiences. Each question elicited information about strategy use, reasoning and
conceptual development. Follow-up questions were permitted if they clarified previous responses. The interviews were
tape-recorded and later transcribed verbatim. Each interview
lasted approximately 30 minutes.
The interviews were analyzed both qualitatively and quantitatively. The qualitative analysis used a thematic approach
(Kvale, 1996), focusing on three dimensions: strategy development, conceptual development, and affective issues.
Potential analytical bias was addressed as follows (Chi,
1997):
(1) All of the interviews were selected for coding in order
to avoid bias in selection.
(2) Prior to analysis, an initial coding scheme and operational definitions for codes was developed (Table 1). The general code categories were thematic, and derived from the hypothesis being tested: Strategy Development and Conceptual
Development. Those verbal units that described actions taken
by the participants, and that were intended to help them study
or take the tests, were coded as Strategic. Coded as Conceptual Development were those verbal units that described a
cognitive state of understanding in regards to their task. An
additional category for Affective Reactions emerged during
analysis (Table 2). When analysis was complete, there were
12 codes.
(3) Each individual interview was read and analyzed independently by two researchers: the principle investigator who
conducted the study and the second author.

(4) The two researchers compared their coding decisions
and thematic analyses. When there were divergent findings,
only those codings and themes were retained in which both
researchers could agree. An inter-rater reliability rating of
90% was achieved.
The quantitative analysis followed guidelines for quantifying verbal data laid out by Chi (1997). Statistical analysis
using ANOVA was performed upon the coded data to confirm or disconfirm any reliable differences between the DT,
FI and IL protocols. As an additional validity check of the
results, final test performance was analyzed. Final score distributions were evaluated, and patterns of errors studied, to
look for learning trends.

Results - Qualitative Analyses
Drill and Test
The Drill and Test participants’ actions were characterized
by extreme nervousness. All participants in this group expressed discomfort and anxiety throughout the course of the
study. This discomfort was expressed through behavior and
language. For example, two of the students nervously asked
the experimenter if she was going to use her masking tape “on
them” (the tape was for hanging a Do Not Disturb sign on the
door). During the interviews, most students were so anxious
that they frequently had trouble expressing themselves:
Student: “and again, I’m, I’m not, I’m a little shaky even
on how you, separate them into, these problems, how you
separate, what’s, you know, where do you put the [making
swooping figures with her hands]”
Interviewer: “Parenthesis? That’s what you are doing with
your fingers there?”
Student: “yeah, yeah”(DT-05)
DT participants lacked organized strategies for studying
the categorized problems. Instead, they relied on memorybased strategies, which they were aware were ineffective:
Student: “I never feel like I had really committed the entire
category to visual memory...then I was trying to memorize,
you know, what the different sets, because within each category it seemed like there were similar cards, sets. So then I
was just trying to remember...”(DT-06)
In reflecting during the interviews on the failure of their
strategies, three participants were convinced that they must
have misinterpreted the instructions, one wondered if she was
being tricked, and another complained that the task was unfair. In taking the tests, DT participants took one of two approaches: they either gave up and guessed randomly, or they
chose all the same answer on each test. This same answer
was the most recently studied concept.
The analysis revealed that DT participants lacked an understanding of how to categorize the integration problems.
All DT participants said that they were unsuccessful at learning how to categorize problems; three of them said that they
guessed, and had little confidence, on all the tests. One participant acknowledged her lack of understanding as follows:
Student: “I’m aware that my criterion, my criteria are very
superficial, and not, I’m, I mean I can tell that they don’t work
appropriately. Like when I did the test I can tell that it’s just,
it’s not the right criteria.” (DT-02)
In summary, all of the members of the Drill and Test group
displayed strong negative reactions to the task, relied upon
1571

at first. However, in contrast to the deteriorating attitudes of
the DT group, the IL subjects’ attitudes improved rapidly.
When asked how well they felt they performed on the final examination, four students in the IL group replied with
a positive numerical estimate (e.g. 75%). This response is in
marked contrast to the DT and FI groups in which all but one
participant gave negative verbal estimates (e.g. “pretty bad”).
The IL subjects spent the bulk of their interviews confidently
describing detailed analytic strategies that they employed to
tackle the categorization task. Even when they were not confident that they had succeeded, they were generally confident
that they had made solid progress and that given time they
would be able to figure out how to categorize the problems.
For example:
Student: “The first one [test], I was completely lost...and
then [second study session], I was able to compare it and
make the correlation...just understand how they were different from one another...the third test, it was insightful, it was a
learning experience, I figured out that I still understood A and
B...And so I knew, in the final study session...I knew I needed
to focus on group C.”(IL-01)
As the above quote demonstrates, study and test-taking
strategies in the Incremental Learning group were highly organized and efficient. The participants developed individualized systems that identified sub-sets of problems on which
to focus. They adjusted these sub-sets in response to new information and insights, or in order to focus on some features
they were less sure about. Two participants systematically
moved back and forth between comparing within a group and
comparing between groups. They used this process to test and
clarify understanding and to reinforce previous conclusions.
A third subject devised a system in which she started analyzing the outer edges and general symbols of each problem and
moved step by step into the center of the problem and more
complex feature combinations. A fourth subject systematically chose two groups at a time to compare, removing from
her sight those cards she wished to ignore.
One IL subject differed from the four participants just described, by choosing several successive strategies which relied on memorization and speed. In the interview, this student reported that she knew her strategies were not working.
She claimed however, to be noticing some regularities on the
tests, although she was unable to explain what she saw.
Analysis of the interviews revealed that the four “successful” incremental learners were gradually forming a deeper
understanding of the integration problems. One student described her progress as follows:
“As we got deeper and deeper into what’s a category B
versus a category C, it started getting clear.” (IL-02)
Another subject said that her understanding was “a little
better...[then] a little better...”(IL-03). A third participant felt
that she was on the cusp of a breakthrough: “I was looking for
[describes features]...but I couldn’t quite find that.” (IL-01)
Another subject gave an example of her categorization
when she described how to categorize a sample problem:
Student: “I would definitely put that in a C [Interviewer:
why?] Because C was the ones that had e’s in them. And,
and besides, this is also a more complex of an equation, with
both the co-efficient and the exponent. So, the one thing I was
noticing about C, was at least to me, Cs had the e’s and , and,

ineffective memory strategies, and developed superficial understandings of the categories.

Fully Integrated
The Fully Integrated participants’ actions were characterized
by nervousness initially, with some decrease in anxiety over
time. When the study began, all the subjects were extremely
frustrated and overwhelmed. At the end of the first study session, one student burst out into hysterical laughter, one yelled
that the task was “impossible! disaster! hopeless!” (FI-01).
Another student froze during the first test; she simply sat and
waited for the experimenter to return (because the tests were
not timed, it was close to 15 minutes before the experimenter
went to check on her). Another participant had this reaction:
Student: “[My] impulse, on the first test was to choose all
As, because, partly out of frustration...I ended up just going
across aesthetically A,B,C,B,A, making a zig-zag.” (FI-02)
The analysis of the interviews revealed that three FI subjects gradually evolved a deliberate strategy to look for similarities within groups. Their strategies began to develop
sometime after their initial anxiety had partially abated in the
second or third study session. The other two FI participants
had no specific strategy other than to “just look at them and
see if there is anything like a pattern.” (FI-05)
All FI participants reported that they mostly guessed on the
tests, and predicted that they were not performing well. They
did not believe that they understood the categorization task
very well. However, four of them were confident that given a
lot more time, they could learn to distinguish the categories.
In light of their reported success, four members of the FI
group demonstrated an increasing awareness of how the integration problems were categorized. Analysis of the interviews revealed that this understanding was more implicit than
explicit. For example, one subject reported that by the end of
the study, she was noting regularities on the tests, although
she was unsure what to do with this awareness. Another subject showed the beginning of intuitive understanding:
Student: “I noticed...sometimes with the cards, I was having some luck, like I would, after I sort through them all...by
the third [study session] I would look at it and I would say
“ok I think this is going to be an A: and it WOULD be, you
know...but when I looked at the test...I didn’t feel confident
that I was able to identify those.”(FI-03)
In summary, all members of the Fully Integrated group
found the task frustrating, by the final study session three
of them had developed search strategies, and four of them
showed signs of increased understanding of the categories.

Incremental Learning
The actions of the Incremental Learning group were characterized by confidence and focus on the task. During both
the study sessions and the interview, IL learners made few
emotional comments. There was no evidence of fear or anxiety, expressed directly or indirectly through tone or body
language. They described the study with words such as “insightful”, “fun” (IL-01), “amused” and “stress-free” (IL-03).
When pressed by the interviewer, IL participants admitted to
being nervous at the start of the study, but reported that these
feelings rapidly diminished. The IL group and the DT group
shared the same first study session (Simple integration problems only), so it is reasonable that both groups were stressed
1572

nificant difference between expressions of positive feelings
between DT and FI subjects. These results support the results
from the qualitative analyses that the IL delivery strategy produces a better environment for learning difficult concepts than
DT or FI delivery strategies.

any, like if you were raising it to a tan, like if the exponent
was a tangent or something. Anything that started getting
even more complex dealing with e’s especially, I would put
that in a C. For those reasons.” (IL-02)
In summary, all members of the Incremental Learning
group had a positive reaction to the categorization task, and
all but one of them demonstrated a non-superficial understanding of the categorization. The successful group members employed highly efficient and analytical strategies which
reduced the cognitive demands of the task.

Performance Results

Results - Quantitative Analyses

An analysis of score distribution on the final examination
confirmed that IL subjects were making greater cognitive
progress than DT or FI subjects. Although all of the final scores were somewhat low, the median final examination
score for IL learners was highest (IL median score 53.33%
compared to 46.67% FI and 40.00% DT). Median and IQR
are reported because the data was slightly negatively skewed,
and these statistics are the best index of typical performance
under these conditions. Overall the IL learners performed
more consistently than FI learners, as reflected in the interquartile range (IQR) of 30.00 for IL learners compared to
36.66 for FI learners. DT learners had not only the lowest
median score (40.00%), but the smallest interquartile range
(19.99), reflecting the homogeneous poor nature of their performance.
A frequency analysis of patterns of error made on the final examination provided additional confirmation that IL subjects were learning better than DT or FI subjects. There was
no discernible pattern to type of error made by the DT subjects. This lack of pattern confirms their assertions that they
were guessing randomly. Errors made by FI subjects confirmed their claims that they could identify most of the A category (Simple problems). Most of the errors made by the FI
subjects were confusions between the more complex problems: U-Substitution and Integration by Parts (categories B
and C). However, FI subjects often appeared to be fooled
by the length of a problem. They often assumed incorrectly
that longer problems had to be more complex. Finally, errors
made by IL learners were spread fairly evenly across problem types. IL subjects were somewhat less likely than DT
or FI subjects to be fooled by the length of a problem. This
finding in particular indicates that the IL learners were beginning to acquire a deeper understanding of the structure of
the problems. The final scores were low because the study
sessions were short; however, the IL learners showed a clear
trend towards starting to study and learn more effectively.
These performance results complement the learning results,
and support the hypothesis that IL learners are acquiring the
best meta-cognitive skills for learning complex concepts.

Learning Results
As expected, subjects in the Drill and Test (DT) and the Fully
Integrated (FI) protocols made less cognitive progress than
subjects in the Incremental Learning (IL) protocol. Subjects
in the IL protocol showed statistically significant differences
on several measures of Strategy Development, Conceptual
Development and Affective Reactions. A One-Way ANOVA
was conducted to examine the differences between the three
delivery methods on each of the codes measured in the Qualitative Analyses. Mean values of analytical planning differed
significantly between delivery method (F(2,12) = 9.33, p <
.01). Post hoc Tukey HSD tests indicated that IL subjects had
a statistically greater number of analytic strategies than either
DT (p < .01) or FI subjects (p < .01). There was no significant difference between number of analytic strategies used
by the DT and FI subjects. These results support the hypothesis that learners in an IL learning environment develop better
meta-cognitive planning skills than either DT or FI learners.
Mean values of focusing on complexity differed significantly between delivery method (F(2,12) = 4.56, p < .05).
Post hoc Tukey HSD tests indicated that subjects in the IL
protocol reported a significantly greater number of conceptual descriptions that relied on complexity analysis than DT
(p < .05) and FI users (p < .05). There was no significant
difference in the use of complexity between DT and FI subjects. Mean values for lack of understanding differed significantly between delivery method (F(2,12) = 11.03, p < .002).
Post hoc Tukey HSD tests indicated that subjects in the DT
and FI protocols mentioned significantly far more times that
they did not understand the problem than did IL subjects (p
< .05). These results support the hypothesis that the IL delivery protocol supports cognitive development of complex
concepts better than the DT or FI protocol.
Mean values of discomfort differed significantly between
delivery method (F(2,12) = 13.44, p < .001). Post hoc Tukey
HSD tests indicated that subjects in the DT and FI protocols
showed significantly more expressions of discomfort (p <
.01) (p < .01) than subjects in the IL protocol. There was
no significant difference between expressions of discomfort
between DT and FI subjects. These results support the results from the qualitative analyses that the DT and FI delivery techniques are highly stressful for learners, whereas the
IL delivery technique is not.
Mean values of positive feelings differed significantly between delivery method (F(2,12) = 5.57, p < .01). Post hoc
Tukey HSD tests indicated that subjects in the IL protocols
showed significantly more positive reactions than subjects in
the DT (p < .05) or FI protocol (p < .05). There was no sig-

Discussion

1573

This study supports the hypothesis that Incremental Learning initiates better conceptual and strategy development than
either Drill and Test or Fully Integrated learning. Perhaps
the most important result is that under adverse learning conditions, an incremental sequencing of material appears to be
correlated with the best schema development. Verbal data
and statistical analysis show that IL learners analyze problems in terms of their structure, whereas DT and FI learners
focus on surface level features. DT and FI learners are much
more likely to admit that they do not understand the concepts.
On examinations, DT and FI learners are more likely than IL
learners to make random errors or to be fooled by surface-

level features such as the length of a problem. This evidence
of more advanced structural understanding implies that IL
learners have the most well-developed problem schemas.
The IL learners develop the most sophisticated study and
test-taking strategies as well. Incremental learners follow
more individualized and successful learning paths than either
Drill and Test or Fully Integrated learners. The IL learners
are more self-aware and meta-cognitive than either the DT or
FI learners. The IL learners develop analytical strategies for
study and test-taking. IL learners make comparisons based
upon the structural complexity of problems. They adjust
these plans as they acquire more data. These strategies benefit performance because the IL learners are the only learners
who improve by the end of the study. They also enjoy their
learning experience, in spite of the adverse learning conditions. This result is important and supports the proposal by
Tennyson and Nielsen (1998) that the role of affect should be
explicitly included in studies of instructional sequencing and
cognitive development.
Drill and Test learning appears to correlate with ineffective short term memory strategies. The Drill and Test learners have problems keeping more than one concept at a time
in their memory. This result suggests that complex learning
tasks such as college-level mathematics should avoid instructional sequencing that encourages students to rely on short
term memory. In other words, the results reported in this paper support ceasing to teach using Drill and Test.
Fully Integrated learners initially experience cognitive
overload. They are frustrated with the categorization task.
Over time, there are signs of improvement: The subjects become more aware of feature differences, and become more
comfortable with the material. These findings have implications for the college classroom. The high drop-out rates seen
in many introductory mathematics and science courses may
be due to students being overwhelmed with new concepts. If
so, instructional delivery should avoid sequencing that mixes
too many complex concepts. In other words, the results reported in this paper support not teaching with full immersion.
In the context of the literature on schema development
and expertise learning, the appearance of improved strategies
followed by improved performance, supports the claim that
IL learners acquire more advanced categorization schemas
(Cummins, 1992; Owen and Sweller, 1989). The IL learners
are developing conceptual understanding and study strategies
that should enable them to become successful at the categorization task, even under less than ideal learning conditions.
Once these cognitive attributes are in place, they should continue to be successful learners even after formal instruction
has ended.

Conclusion
The results reported in this paper provide new insight into
how people learn complex cognitive tasks. In particular, they
provide new insight into how instructional delivery method
can affect initial strategy development, conceptual understanding, and emotional perceptions while learning. This
empirical evidence supports the hypothesis that Incremental Learning initiates more effective conceptual and strategy
development than either Drill and Test or Fully Integrated
learning. These data provide cognitive scientists with ad-

ditional knowledge about how cognition can be affected in
complex learning environments. Professional educators now
have greater knowledge about how they can help students to
acquire the meta-cognitive skills necessary to be highly successful learners.

References
Chi, M., Feltovich, P., and Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization
and representation of physics problems by experts and
novices. Cognitive Science, 5:121–152.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of
verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 6:271–315.
Cooper, G., and Sweller, J. (1987). Effects of schema acquisition and rule automation on mathematical problemsolving transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology,
79(4):347–362.
Cummins, D. (1992). Role of analogical reasoning in the
induction of problem categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition,
18(5):1103–1124.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R., and Tesch-Römer, C. (1993).
The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100:363–406.
Hayes, J. R. (1989). The Complete Problem Solver. Hillsdale,
NJ: LEA.
Kaczmarczyk, L. C., and Miikkulainen, R. (2004). The acquisition of intellectual expertise: A computational model.
In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Kvale, S. (1996). Interviews: An Introduction to Qualitative
Research Inquiry. CA: Sage.
Lang, S. (1986). A First Course in Calculus. Berlin: Springer.
Fifth edition.
Owen, E., and Sweller, J. (1989). Should problem solving
be used as a learning device in mathematics? JRME,
20(3):322–328.
Posner, G. J., and Strike, K. A. (1976). A categorization
scheme for principles of sequencing content. Review of
Educational Research, 46(4):665–690.
Quilici, J. L., and Mayer, R. E. (1996). Role of examples
in how students learn to categorize statistics word problems. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(1):144–
161.
Robinson, C. S., and Hayes, J. R. (1978). Making inferences
about relevance in understanding problems. In Revlin,
R., and Mayer, R. E., editors, Human Reasoning. Washington, DC: V.H. Winston and Sons.
Schoenfeld, A. H., and Herrmann, D. (1982). Problem perception and knowledge structure in expert and novice
mathematical problem solvers. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, Cognition, 8:484–494.
Stewart, J. (1995). Calculus. Brooks Cole. Third edition.
Tennyson, R. D., and Nielsen, M. (1998). Complexity theory:
Inclusion of the affective domain in an interactive learning model for instructional design. Educational Technology, November-December:7–12.

1574

