UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Slippery Slope Argument – Probability, Utility &amp; Category Reappraisal

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4m59x3cq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Corner, Adam
Hahn, Ulrike
Oaksford, Mike

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Slippery Slope Argument – Probability, Utility & Category Reappraisal
Adam Corner (corneraj@cardiff.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building, Park Place,
Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK

Ulrike Hahn (hahnu@cardiff.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building, Park Place,
Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK

Mike Oaksford (m.oaksford@psychology.bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Birkbeck, University of London, Malet Street,
London, WC1E 7HX, UK
Abstract
The slippery slope argument (SSA) is generally treated as a fallacy
by both traditional and contemporary theories of argumentation,
but is frequently used and widely accepted in applied reasoning
domains. Experiment 1 tests the hypothesis that SSAs are not
perceived as universally weak arguments. The results provide the
first empirical demonstration that SSAs vary predictably in their
subjective acceptability. Experiment 2 identifies an empirical
mechanism on which successful SSAs may be predicated, namely
the process of category boundary reappraisal.

Introduction
The “slippery slope” is an intuitive metaphor that is used
to refer to a class of arguments with a distinctive form.
Classified as a fallacy of reason by most critical thinking
textbooks (e.g. Woods, Irvine & Walton, 2000), dismissed
as an obstacle to co-operative conversation by an influential
socio-linguistic theory of argumentation (van Eemeren &
Grootendorst, 2004), yet frequently used and widely
accepted in applied domains such as politics (van Der Burg,
1991), law (Lode, 1999) and bioethics (Launis, 2002), the
slippery slope argument remains a controversial topic in the
field of argumentation. Correspondingly, the argument
possesses the somewhat undignified status of “wrong but
persuasive”, and therefore fits neatly into the category of
arguments that argumentation theorists call fallacies.
The slippery slope is a particular breed of consequentialist
argument (Hahn & Oaksford, in press; for extended analysis
of slippery slope arguments see Walton, 1992; for recent
experimental work on other forms of consequential
conditional see Bonnefon & Hilton, 2004; Thompson,
Evans & Handley, 2005). A dissuasive consequentialist
argument (or deterrent) warns against a particular course of
action on the grounds that it will lead to an undesirable
outcome, or consequence. A slippery slope argument (SSA),
however, posits not only a negative outcome but the idea
that this outcome might in the future be re-evaluated as
positive, if an initial proposal goes ahead.
A general consequentialist argument, for example, might
oppose the legalisation of cannabis because it would lead to
an increase in smoking related respiratory problems. A
slippery slope argument would oppose legalisation on the

grounds that attitudes towards harder drugs might become
more positive in the process, and in the future a substance
like cocaine might also become legal. The slippery slope has
four distinct components:
1. An initial proposal (A)
2. An undesirable outcome (B)
3. The belief that allowing (A) will lead to a re-evaluation of
(B) in the future
4. The rejection of (A) based on this belief
The alleged danger lurking on the slippery slope is,
therefore, the fear that a presently unacceptable proposal (B)
will (by any number of psychological processes – see, e.g.
Volokh, 2003) in the future be re-evaluated as acceptable. If
we withhold the right of free speech from a neo-Nazi
organisation, what will prevent us from censoring legitimate
political dissent in the future? The proponent of this
argument is inherently appealing to the malleability of
public opinion to reject an otherwise appealing course of
action. The uncertainty of the future is such that any
reasoning about it is at best presumptive. Yet SSAs trade on
the uncertainty of the future, and appear to be acceptable in
a number of contexts (see, e.g. Volokh, 2003; Lode, 1999).
In light of the fact that there has been no empirical
investigation of the slippery slope, a pressing task is to
examine if, when and how SSAs are successfully employed.
In keeping with the probabilistic approach to
understanding human reasoning and rationality (see
Oaksford & Chater, 2001), we seek to explain argument
strength by invoking Bayesian principles (Howson &
Urbach, 1996) that interpret reasoning patterns as
probabilistic changes in subjective degrees of belief. An
argument’s strength is a function of an individual’s initial
level of belief in the claim, the availability and observation
of confirmatory (or disconfirmatory) evidence, and the
existence and perceived strength of competing hypotheses
(Oaksford & Hahn, 2004; Hahn, Oaksford & Corner, 2005;
Hahn & Oaksford, in press; see also Korb, 2004). An
individual’s belief in an argumentative claim can vary from
0 (no conviction) – 1 (total conviction), and is constantly
being updated by (relevant) incoming information.
Reformulated in Bayesian terms, a fallacy is simply a

1145

probabilistically weak inductive argument (Oaksford &
Hahn, 2004; Hahn & Oaksford, in press). Furthermore, there
is no expectation that all instantiations of an argument type
should be treated as equally strong by a Bayesian analysis.
The context, but more importantly the content of the
argument and the beliefs of the arguer themselves will
dictate the probabilistic value of an argumentative claim
(Hahn & Oaksford, in press). Essentially, Bayes’ Theorem
provides a consistent and rational model of the
incorporation of new information to an existing knowledge
state following argumentation, and offers a normative model
for assessing argument strength.
Using a Bayesian model of argument strength, an SSA is
convincing to the extent that its consequences seem
probable given the available evidence. In one sense,
therefore, an SSA can be analysed as a simple conditional
probability – i.e. what is the chance of (B) occurring given
(A)?Consequently, we should expect SSAs whereby the
initial proposal is likely to bring about the feared outcome to
be stronger than ones where that probability is low.
An account of SSA strength would be incomplete,
however, if the utilities of the components involved were
ignored. In particular, philosophers interested in applied
domains such as law or bio-ethics where SSAs are popular
have implicitly recognised that probabilistic and utilitarian
concerns are crucial determinants of consequential and
slippery slope argument acceptability (e.g. Holtug, 1993;
Lode, 1999). This distinguishes SSAs from most other
fallacies of argumentation (for overviews of the traditional
catalogue of fallacies see e.g., Woods et al. 2004). This
distinction stems from the fact that SSAs advocate decisions
and as such are not just arguments about factual claims as
most (so-called) fallacies are. Bayesian decision theory
provides a normative framework for decision-making in
situations where outcomes are uncertain, based on the
probabilities and utilities involved; it can provide the
normative framework that philosophical analyses of SSAs
within the argumentation literature have lacked. According
to decision theory, agents should maximize subjective
expected utility in their choice (see, e.g. Savage, 1954;
Keeney & Raiffa, 1976). One consequence of this is that we
might even choose to avoid an action with only a low
probability outcome, as long as that outcome is catastrophic
enough. Whilst the ability of a normative account of utility
to accurately model the intricacies of decision making is not
without its detractors, it should minimally be the case that
“the more probable the causal connection is, and the more
we want to avoid (B), the stronger the argument” (Holtug,
1993, p404). Our first experiment seeks to show that these
intuitions voiced by some philosophical analysts of slippery
slope arguments, and encapsulated in Bayesian decision
theory, are indeed widely shared.

1. The experiment was designed to demonstrate
experimentally that slippery slope arguments vary in
convincingness, and that this variation can be predicted by
manipulating (i) the conditional probability, and (ii) the
utility of the predicted future outcome.
Regarding (i), an argument where the probability of the
outcome (B) given the initial proposal (A) is high should be
more convincing than an argument where P(B|A) is low. In
the present experiment, the conditional probabilities
presented to participants were varied by describing either a
probable or an improbable mechanism by which the
proposed outcome of the argument could occur.
Regarding (ii), a predicted outcome is a necessary
component of slippery slope argumentation, but predicted
outcomes that are perceived to have a moderately negative
expected utility will not be “feared” or avoided as much as
outcomes with very negative expected utility. Predicted
outcomes with very negative utilities will provide a stronger
argument against the proposed course of action. In the
present experiment, the outcome utilities of the arguments
presented to participants were set as either moderately
negative or very negative. Figure 1 shows an example
scenario as seen by participants. In this example, the
probability of the outcome (B) given the initial proposal (A)
is high (because of the alleged difficulty of formulating
clear medical guidelines), whilst the utility of the predicted
outcome is very negative (in the form of an increase in
involuntary euthanasia). The information in parenthesis
relates to the opposing low probability and moderately
negative utility experimental condition for this topic.
Whilst flicking through a copy of Ethics magazine, you come across an
article on the thorny issue of euthanasia. Despite almost unanimous
agreement (from both the medical profession and terminally ill individuals)
on the acceptability of helping some patients to end their suffering,
opponents claim that the legalisation of voluntary euthanasia will lead to
an increase in cases of involuntary euthanasia – or “medical murder”
(other hospital patients feeling that their lives are not as worthwhile).
The British Medical Association has warned that once voluntary euthanasia
is permitted in some cases, it will be difficult to formulate clear
guidelines about when doctors can euthanize patients (the British
Medical Association has indicated that most hospital patients are
unconcerned by the thought of voluntary euthanasia in hospitals) . The
article ends with the view of the author about the future of euthanasia
legislation;
“We should oppose the legalisation of euthanasia in the UK, as it will lead
to an increase in the number of instances of ‘medical murder’”.
Please indicate below how convincing the author’s view is:

Experiment 1

0
1
2
Unconvincing

Participants in Experiment 1 were required to read several
short scenarios containing slippery slope arguments, and
provide a rating of argument strength as illustrated in Figure
1146

3

4

5

6

7

8
9
10
Very Convincing

Figure 1: An example scenario from Experiment 1. Probability
and utility information is highlighted in bold.

Method

Materials & Procedure
Each participant received an experimental booklet
containing four slippery slope arguments on different topics
(see Figure 1 for an example scenario). The topics were (i)
the introduction of I.D. Cards, (ii) the distribution of
newspapers to a small General Store, (iii) the legalisation of
voluntary euthanasia, and (iv) the cessation of postal
deliveries to houses where vicious dogs live.

Results & Discussion
Figure 2 shows the mean ratings of argument strength by
condition.
To statistically analyse data from Latin Square
Confounded designs, subject effects within the ratings are
factored out and the analyses are conducted on the residuals
(Kirk, 1995). An ANOVA revealed that the probability
manipulation had a significant effect on ratings of argument
strength, F (1,239) = 22.26, p < .001, as did the utility
manipulation, F (1,239) = 28.71, p < .001. These main
effects suggest that both probability and utility are important
factors in determining SSA strength, as predicted by
Bayesian decision theory. The interaction between these two
factors (which is also predicted by Bayesian decision
theory) failed to reach statistical significance. Having found
evidence for the existence of such an interaction in
subsequent work, we suspect that lack of power is to blame.
Two planned comparisons indicated that the ordinal
predictions made by Bayesian decision theory about
argument strength were clearly supported. Ratings of
argument strength were highest in the High
Probability/Very Negative Utility condition, and lowest in
the Low Probability/Moderately Negative Utility condition.
This difference was confirmed as significant with a t-test, t
(119) = 7.48, p < .001. As expected, ratings of argument
strength in the two mixed conditions, where the effects of
the variables were expected to work in opposition, were not
significantly different from each other.

1147

7

6

Argument Strength

Participants
Sixty undergraduate psychology students from Cardiff
University participated in Exp. 1 for course credit.
Design
Both experimental variables were manipulated at two
levels (probable/improbable mechanism, moderately/very
negative utility) across four different argument topics,
creating a total of sixteen distinct arguments and a 2 x 2
factorial design. All participants were presented with four
slippery slope arguments, each concerning a different topic,
and were required to provide a rating of argument strength
for each argument. Each participant saw only one argument
from each topic, and participated once in each experimental
condition (i.e. a Latin Square Confounded design - Kirk,
1995). The topics of the arguments and the order they were
presented in were randomised for each participant.

5

4

3

2

1

0

Prob+/Util- Prob+/Util+ Prob-/Util- Prob-/Util+
Experim ental Condition

Figure 2: Mean ratings of argument strength from Exp. 1.
Prob+ refers to the condition where the outcome is made to
seem probable, Prob- refers to the condition where it is less
likely. Util- indicates that the consequence is very
undesirable, Util+ that it is less so.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 indicate that SSAs are
differentially convincing. The higher the probability of the
consequent event, and the more negative the utility
associated with it, the more acceptable the arguments
appear. Given, furthermore, that Bayesian decision theory
provides a normative framework whereby it is rational to
incorporate these factors into decisions about actions, it
cannot be maintained that SSAs are universally weak
arguments. People seem to find some SSAs acceptable and
there are circumstances, according to Bayesian decision
theory, whereby such a view is subjectively rational.
However, the ultimate rejection of the “wrong but
persuasive” tag would be provided by a demonstration that
the differential convincingness of SSAs has some objective,
empirical basis. In addition to identifying and manipulating
the factors that dictate subjective SSA strength, therefore, it
is equally important to ask whether people have good reason
to be persuaded by at least some slippery slope arguments.
Is there reason to believe that 'slippage' occurs in the real
world?
It is often claimed by those authors that have been
positive about SSAs that conceptual vagueness (e.g. the
difficulty of providing a precise definition of “terminally
ill”) and a fear of constructing arbitrary distinctions (e.g.
deciding which terminally ill patients’ lives are
“worthwhile”) provides the rationale for many SSAs (e.g.
Lode, 1999, p1499). Govier (1982) suggests that the process
of psychological assimilation acts as a catalyst for slippery
slope arguments, and the ancient philosophical paradox of
Sorites provides an example:

It is morally wrong to kill a sentient being, and a foetus
at the time of birth (T) is a sentient being.
A foetus at one second (T-1) before the time of birth is
also a sentient being, as the addition or subtraction of
one second cannot affect a being’s sentience.
Therefore, a foetus at (T-2) is also a sentient being.
Therefore, a foetus at (T-n) is also a sentient being; a
foetus at the moment of conception is a sentient being.

The Sorites argument plays on the vagueness of the
predicate “sentient”, and the inevitability of modus ponens
to achieve paradox, but the idea that certain SSAs might be
based on some kind of category boundary reappraisal
mechanism has been articulated implicitly by many authors
– indeed, the notion that a slippery slope might exist
between an ostensibly positive proposal and a negative
outcome directly implies an extension process of some kind.
The message to unwary reasoners is that the majority of
the concepts that pervade our everyday argumentation are
indeterminate. When advances in gene therapy are
discussed, therefore, the spectre of Nazi Eugenics is raised
because the concept of pro-social genetic engineering is
vague (Holtug, 1993), and membership of the category
“acceptable practice” is a dynamic and fluctuating process.
Because our everyday concepts lack necessary and
sufficient features and do not, as a consequence, have clear
cut boundaries (for references see e.g., Pothos & Hahn,
2000), classification is heavily dependent on the set of
instances to which the category label has been applied.
Though very different accounts of the nature of conceptual
structure exist, theorists are agreed that there is a systematic
relationship between the items that have been classified as
belonging to a category and subsequent classification
behavior. It is a fundamental of a wide range of current
theories of conceptual structure, that encountering instances
of the category at the category boundary will extend that
boundary for subsequent classifications. Furthermore, there
is a range of empirical evidence which is consistent with
these assumptions. In particular, there are numerous
experimental demonstrations of so-called exemplar effects,
that is, effects of exposure to particular instances and their
consequences for subsequent classification behavior (e.g.,
Nosofsky, 1986, 1988a, 1988b; Lamberts, 1995). For
example, observing that a dog that weighs 10kg is
considered underweight invites the conclusion that a dog
that weighs 10.5kg is also underweight. With only the
information that a 5kg dog is underweight, and a 15kg dog
is overweight, however, one might not be so compelled to
draw this conclusion.
There is then a feedback loop inherent in the classification
of new data into an existing category, whereby that
classification alters the category itself (see also e.g. Lakoff,
1987). In appropriate circumstances this extends the
category boundary in a way that could naturally give rise to
slippery slope arguments (Hahn & Oaksford, in press).
Experiment 2 was designed to demonstrate
experimentally the link between category boundary
reappraisal and slippery slope arguments. If SSAs have an

objective basis in category expansion driven by exemplar
effects, there should be agreement between the perception of
an SSA’s strength and corresponding categorisation
decisions, given identical data to evaluate.
Participants were given a fictitious scenario describing a
debate between the Finnish Government and the Finnish
Housing Association concerning the allocation of
Outstanding Natural Beauty status to candidate areas of
Finnish land. The Government was allocated the role of
preserving as much Finnish countryside as possible, while
the Housing Association was portrayed as being primarily
concerned with providing affordable housing space.
Participants were informed that land was awarded
Outstanding Natural Beauty status if it contained an
“unusually high number of large animal species”, and that if
this status was conferred, no further housing development
was permitted in that location. Using these materials, we
sought to demonstrate an exemplar effect that would
influence both ratings of SSA strength and categorization
decisions.

Method
Participants
Sixty undergraduate psychology students from Cardiff
University participated in Exp. 2 for course credit.
Design
A single variable (the numerical value of the exemplar
provided for evaluation) was manipulated between the
groups of participants, and two experimental measures
(either a categorisation decision or a rating of argument
strength) were recorded, creating a total of four
experimental groups. Figure 3 represents a summary of the
information given to participants in the categorisation
groups.

Location I OR Location I

Exemplar Location

Eligible

Ineligible
218 OR 194
Animal species

Location
C
259
Animal
species

Location
D
224
Animal
species

Location X
179 Animal species
????????????????

Location
B
149
Animal
species

Location
A
114
Animal
species

Figure 3: A schematic representation of the information
provided to participants in Exp. 2. Depicted are different
locations and their eligibility for ‘Outstanding Natural
Beauty Status’. An exemplar effect concerning the target
location, Location X, is induced by manipulating the
information associated with Location I. One group of
participants is told that eligible Location I has 218 animal
species, the other group is told it has 194. This should
systematically affect both categorization and argument
strength ratings focused on Location X.
The experimental variable was manipulated by altering
the number of large species of animal contained in the

1148

exemplar location (Location I), which participants were
informed was eligible for Outstanding Natural Beauty
status: either 194, or 218.
Participants were asked to make a categorisation decision
of their own, based on the information they had just read:
whether a further location (Location X, containing 179
animal species) was eligible for Outstanding Natural Beauty
status.
The exemplar manipulation for Location I was expected
to differentially influence categorisation decisions between
the two groups. Participants who were told that Location I
contained 194 animal species should be more likely to
categorise Location X as eligible for Outstanding Natural
Beauty status, as they should perceive Location X as closest
in resemblance to the Location I (already designated as
eligible for Outstanding Natural Beauty status). When
Location I contained 218 animal species, however,
participants should perceive Location X as closest in
resemblance to the ineligible locations.
Argument strength was assessed by presenting Location I
as part of a slippery slope argument. Instead of being
informed that Location I was eligible for Outstanding
Natural Beauty status, participants were told that while the
Finnish Housing Association were not too concerned about
Location I being awarded Outstanding Natural Beauty
status, this would lead to a further location (Location X) also
receiving Outstanding Natural Beauty status, which the
Finnish Housing Association viewed as problematic. It was
predicted that participants who viewed this argument when
Location I contained 194 animals would provide a higher
rating of argument strength, as they should perceive
Location X as sufficiently close to the existing category
boundary to be vulnerable to a slippery slope style
reappraisal (mirroring the exemplar effect predicted in the
categorisation groups).

Location I contained 218 animals (M = 2.6), t (28) = 2.1, p
< .05.
These results provide empirical support for the
philosophical analysis of slippery slope arguments by
authors such as Govier (1982) and Volokh (2003) by
demonstrating, in a tightly coupled design, how slippery
slopes may rest on a category boundary extension process.

Materials & Procedure
Each participant received an experimental booklet
containing a brief description of the fictitious scenario and a
list of locations that had already been adjudicated, followed
by either the categorization decision or the argument
strength rating as an experimental task.

Results & Discussion
The yes/no data obtained from the categorisation groups
were analysed using a ranked sign test. Participants who had
been told that Location I contained 194 animals categorised
the new location as deserving of Outstanding Natural
Beauty status on 11 of 15 occasions. Participants who had
been told that Location I contained 218 animals categorised
the new location as deserving of Outstanding Natural
Beauty status on 0 of 15 occasions. This difference was
significant at p <.01.
The argument rating data were analysed using a t-test.
Participants who had been told that Location I contained
194 animals rated the arguments as significantly more
convincing (M = 4) than participants who had been told that

1149

General Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 are the first empirical
demonstration that SSAs vary predictably in their
acceptability, and that this variation is broadly captured by a
Bayesian account of argument strength. With regard to
argumentation theory and the study of the fallacies in
general, this is of interest because variation in strength for
arguments of identical structure has typically been
problematic for existing theories of fallacy (e.g. van
Eemeren & Grootendorst, 2004), but the idea that argument
strength is a graded concept is a central tenet of the
Bayesian account. In this respect the results mirror those
recently obtained for other fallacies such as the ‘argument
from ignorance’ (Oaksford & Hahn, 2004; Hahn, Oaksford
& Bayindir, 2005).
With regard to the philosophical debate about slippery
slope arguments specifically, our results suggest that the
credibility (some) slippery slope arguments possess in
applied domains such as law or medical ethics can be
justified. The clear implication of the data obtained in
Experiment 1 is that SSAs are differentially persuasive. That
they are not simply ‘persuasive but wrong’ follows from the
fact that the key variables involved in their evaluation –
probability and utility- have a normative basis in Bayesian
decision theory. Moreover, there can be an objective, nonzero probability that the slippage on which SSAs are
predicated can, in fact occur. Experiment 2 demonstrates
this by linking experimentally categorization and slippery
slope argument acceptability. Exemplar effects provide the
kind of empirical mechanism that the fear of outcome reevaluation inherent in slippery slope arguments requires.
Other mechanisms of real world slippery slopes have also
been suggested. The legal philosopher Volokh, for example,
points to the possibility of multi-peaked voter preferences
that could bring about slippery slopes (Volokh, 2003).
Taking the currently debated topic of I.D. card introduction
in Britain as an example, it might be the case that the
introduction of voluntary I.D. cards will hasten the
introduction of compulsory I.D. cards, not because
individuals alter their attitudes to them, but because some
voters, though preferring no I.D. Cards to compulsory I.D.
Cards, would prefer compulsory I.D. to the woolly and
costly compromise of semi-compulsory I.D. Cards, thereby
making probable the direct move from no I.D. to
compulsory I.D. (Volokh, 2003).
Future work will be directed at addressing the existence
of other such processes of slope facilitation. In some ways
the most important contribution of the present studies is the
demonstration that experimental investigation of slippery

slope arguments and their underlying mechanisms is
feasible. This adds a new tool for the argumentation theorist,
as argumentation studies have been dominated by textual
analysis on the one hand, and –to a lesser extent- the
development of logics for argumentation and computational
argument systems. However, it is not just argumentation
theory for which slippery slope arguments are of interest.
Cognitive psychology has a long research tradition
concerned with how we reason with conditionals (see e.g.
Evans & Over, 2004; Oaksford & Chater, 1998). Yet this
research has focused on an extremely narrow set of
conditional statements and only very recent experimental
work has sought to branch out and investigate
systematically different kinds of conditional statement
(Bonnefon & Hilton, 2004; Thompson et al. 2005). Slippery
slope arguments provide another, distinct form of
conditional with its own characteristics to add to this
developing set. Finally, with their emphasis on values, and
their real-world importance, slippery slope arguments also
link to social psychological research on attitude and attitude
change under the header of expectancy value theory (e.g.,
Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). This body of work currently
stands separate both from the cognitive psychological work
on conditionals and from argumentation theory. Slippery
slope arguments would seem an ideal focal point for a much
needed interdisciplinary integration.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Todd Bailey for advice about
experimental design and analysis, and Tom Beesley for
helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.

References
Bonnefon, J.F. & Hilton, D.J. (2004). Consequential
Conditionals: Invited and Suppressed Inferences From
Valued Outcomes. Journal of Experimental Psychology;
Learning, Memory & Cognition 30 (1) 28-39.
Der Burg, W. van. (1991). The Slippery Slope Argument.
Ethics 102, 42-45.
Eemeren, F.H. van. & Grootendorst, R. (2004). A systematic
theory of argumentation – the pragma-dialectical
approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Evans, J. St. B.T. & Over, D. (2004). If. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Fishbein, M. & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention,
and behavior: An introduction to theory and research.
Addison-Wesley: Reading, MASS.
Govier, T. (1982). What’s wrong with slippery slope
arguments. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 12, 303-316.
Hahn, U. & Oaksford, M. (in press). A Bayesian Approach
to Informal Reasoning Fallacies. Synthese.
Hahn, U, Oaksford, M. & Bayindir, H. (2005). How
convinced should we be by negative evidence?
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Hahn, U, Oaksford, M. & Corner, A. (2005) Circular
arguments, begging the question and the formalization of

argument strength. Proceedings of AMKCL05 –Adaptive
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. Helsinki.
Holtug, N. (1993). Human Gene Therapy: Down the
Slippery Slope. Bioethics 7, 402-419.
Howson, C. & Urbach, P. (1996). Scientific Reasoning: The
Bayesian Approach (2nd Ed). Chicago: Open Court.
Keeney, R.L. & Raiffa, H. (1976). Decisions with multiple
objectives: Preferences and value tradeoffs. New York:
Wiley.
Kirk, R.E. (1995). Experimental Design – Procedures for
the Behavioural Sciences. London: Brooks/Cole.
Korb, K. (2004). Bayesian Informal Logic and Fallacy.
Informal Logic, 24, 41-70.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Cognitive Models and Prototype Theory.
In, Neisser, U. (Ed). Concepts and conceptual
development: Ecological and Intellectual Factors.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lamberts, K. (1995). Categorization under time pressure.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 161180.
Launis, V. (2002). Human Gene Therapy & the Slippery
Slope Argument. Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy
5, 169-179.
Lode, E. (1999). Slippery Slope Arguments and legal
Reasoning. California Law Review 87, 1468-1543.
Nosofsky, R.M. (1986) Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Nosofsky, R.M. (1988a). Exemplar-based accounts of the
relations between classification, recognition, and
typicality. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14, 700-708.
Nosofsky, R.M. (1988b). Similarity, frequency and category
representation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 54-65.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (2001). The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 5 (8), 349-357.
Oaksford, M., & Hahn, U. (2004). A Bayesian approach to
the argument from ignorance. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58, 75-85.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (1998). Rationality in an
uncertain world : essays on the cognitive science of
human reasoning. Hove: Psychology Press.
Pothos, E. & Hahn, U. (2000). So concepts aren't
definitions, but do they have necessary or sufficient
features? British Journal of Psychology, 91, 439-450.
Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. John
Wiley: New York.
Thompson, V.A, Evans J. St. B.T. & Handley, S.J. (2005).
Persuading and dissuading by conditional argument.
Journal of Memory & Language 53, 238-257.
Volokh, E. (2003). The Mechanisms of The Slippery Slope.
Harvard Law Review 116, 1026-1137.
Walton, D. (1992). Slippery Slope Arguments. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Woods, J, Irvine, A. & Walton, D. (2004). Critical
Thinking, Logic & The Fallacies. Toronto: Prentice Hall.

1150

