UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Fit of the Implicit Cognition Paradigm to Science Education Research: An Exploratory
Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h52t34z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Campbell, Gwendolyn E.
Chin, Simone L.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Fit of the Implicit Cognition Paradigm to Science Education Research:
An Exploratory Analysis
Gwendolyn E. Campbell (Gwendolyn.Campbell@navy.mil)
NAVAIR Orlando TSD, Code 4651, 12350 Research Parkway
Orlando, FL 32826-3275

Simone L. Chin (Simone.Chin.CTR@navy.mil)
Kaegan Corporation 12000 Research Parkway, Suite 164
Orlando, FL 32826-3275
(or scientific misconceptions) and the construct of implicit
knowledge in cognitive science, there appears to be limited
cross-fertilization between the two fields (for an exception,
see Kozhevnikov & Hegarty, 2001). The goal of this paper
is to demonstrate that science education research could
benefit by the incorporation of theory and methods from the
implicit cognition paradigm. We hope to support this claim
by providing an illustration through the context of a
prototypical science education experiment.

Abstract
In this paper we propose that cross-fertilization between
science education research and implicit cognition research
could be mutually beneficial. In particular, we detail
hypotheses about the nature and prevalence of
misconceptions in different scientific domains that could be
generated from an implicit cognition perspective and describe
methodological guidance that could be derived from this
same perspective. Next, we present our study, which
involved collecting data from 80 participants who completed
a pre-test, a computer-based lesson, hands-on activities and a
post-test, after being randomly assigned to a scientific domain
(classical mechanics or circuits) and teaching technique
(traditional or conceptual change). Finally, we show that our
data support the theoretically driven hypotheses and that the
methodological techniques increased the power and
sensitivity of our analyses, lending credence to our claim that
more interaction between these two communities could be
fruitful.

The implicit cognition paradigm
At the core of any paradigm is a set of phenomena believed
to be meaningful, worthy of study and in need of
explanation. Research in implicit cognition focuses on the
many instances in which some aspect of a person’s behavior
demonstrates predictable regularities, and yet the person is
either unaware of or unable to articulate the guiding forces
that produced this behavior. For example, most native
speakers of American English can easily distinguish
between sentences in which the adjectives are in the “right”
order (“The cute, little, blonde-haired boy…”) and sentences
in which the adjectives are not (“The blond-haired, little,
cute boy…”). Few, however, can produce the complex set
of more than a dozen linguistic rules that dictate “correct”
adjective order in this language. Dissociations between
behavior and conscious knowledge such as this are not
restricted to normal populations, but are also found in
populations with neurological disorders such as amnesia and
prosopagnosia.
For example, people suffering from
prosopagnosia, the inability to recognize faces, show a
galvanic skin response to photographs of familiar faces,
even when they cannot pick the name of the familiar person
from a set of choices at a level better than chance (Bauer,
1984).
While there are many areas of active research and
contention within the community, there is a generally
accepted belief in 2 separate cognitive systems associated
with learning, representation and/or processing. The typical
characterizations of the system labeled “implicit” include
perceptually learned, rapid processing capacity, best
represented in a connectionist framework, and cognitively
impenetrable. In contrast, the typical characterizations of
the system labeled “explicit” include slow and serial
processing, under volitional control, best represented

Introduction
For decades, researchers in the field of science education
have been working to characterize both naïve and expert
scientific knowledge and reasoning, and trying to identify
instructional techniques that facilitate the development of
scientific expertise. As within any research community, a
paradigm, complete with constructs, theories and methods
has emerged over time, and this paradigm simultaneously
facilitates some aspects of investigation and limits others.
Some of the most robust findings to emerge from this body
of research include: (a) people of all ages have conceptual
understandings of the physical world that are considered
inaccurate by the scientific community (e.g., Champagne,
Klopfer & Anderson, 1980; Clement, 1982; diSessa, 1982;
McDermott, 1984; Nakhleh, 1992; Nussbaum, 1985;
Shipstone, 1985), (b) these “naïve” or “intuitive”
conceptions appear to form “unconsciously” through a
person’s experiences interacting with the real world
(Clement, 1982; diSessa, 1982; Eylon & Linn, 1988; Linn,
1986), and (c) these conceptions are highly resistant to
change in a traditional classroom environment (Champagne,
Klopfer & Anderson, 1980; Eylon & Linn, 1988; Linn,
1986; McDermott, 1984).
Despite the strong resemblance between this
characterization of naïve or intuitive scientific knowledge
136

symbolically and available for introspective study and
verbal report.

education literature: the conceptual change method. This
teaching approach is often credited to Posner and colleagues
(Posner, Strike, Hewson & Gertzog, 1982) who identified a
series of conditions that they posited must be met before a
student would be willing to replace an existing
conceptualization with a new one. Those conditions are: (a)
the new conceptualization must be intelligible to the student,
(b) the new conceptualization must be plausible to the
student, (c) the student must experience significant
dissatisfaction with his/her current conceptualization, and
(d) the student must be convinced of the fruitfulness of the
new conceptualization, especially in regards to the area in
which the dissatisfaction with the original conceptualization
has occurred. Based on this perspective, the conceptual
change instructional technique attempts to induce
dissatisfaction by eliciting the current conceptualization and
then having the student complete one or more activities
designed to demonstrate the failure of that perspective and
the fruitfulness of an alternative conceptualization.
Of course, many science classes include laboratory
activities that demonstrate outcomes and provide the
accepted explanations for those outcomes. The presumed
crux of the conceptual change method of instruction is the
induction of dissonance through the elicitation of seemingly
relevant but inaccurate intuitive conceptions before
beginning an activity. In other words, the conceptual
change instructional technique is hypothesized to be
effective at overcoming implicit but inaccurate knowledge
in scientific domains because it includes steps for making
the implicit knowledge explicit before attempting to counter
that knowledge.
Interestingly, research in child development and learning
conducted within the implicit cognition paradigm thinks
about the transition from implicit to explicit knowledge
differently. Clements, Rustin and McCallum (2000) studied
the development, with instruction (in the form of feedback
and explanation), of children’s understanding of the concept
of “false belief”. Their conclusion was that this learning
proceeded predictably through a multi-stage process. First,
children implicitly picked up on regularities in the
environment that were consistent with the false belief
concept. Only after this implicit learning had taken place,
did children appear to be ready to learn from the explicit
feedback provided, and bring their explicit answers in line
with the false belief concept. Finally, it was only after their
explicit answers were accurate that they appeared able to
learn from the explicit explanations that were provided
during training. Thus, this theoretical perspective might
well predict that an explicit attack on misconceptions is only
likely to be successful after a change has taken place at the
implicit level, bringing implicit knowledge more closely
into alignment with accepted scientific knowledge, and that
it is the exposure to experiences with a different set of
regularities than those observed in every day life that
promotes the necessary implicit learning.
These two different perspectives, ‘implicit knowledge can
be affected if it is forced into explicitness and addressed

Theory-based contributions
Our first contention is that theories about the nature and
development of implicit and explicit knowledge will help
address many of the common findings and problems in
science education. For example, Kozhevnikov and Hegarty
(2001) show how adopting a theoretical perspective from
the study of implicit cognition can help to determine (a) the
circumstances under which intuitive scientific theories are
likely to be correct or incorrect, as well as (b) the contextual
and/or environmental variables that are likely to dictate
whether a person’s response will be most strongly
influenced by explicitly learned and officially sanctioned
scientific knowledge or an intuitive theory.
Similarly, a theoretical perspective of implicit learning is
able to account for the relative prevalence and strength of
intuitive conceptions across different scientific domains, by
referencing the extent to which opportunities for observing
patterns of regularities in each domain are present in a
person’s natural environment.
To illustrate this, we
compare misconception data from two well-studied
scientific domains, classical mechanics and circuits. In both
domains, a number of common misconceptions have been
identified in previous research literature1 and measurement
instruments have been developed (e.g., Halloun & Hestenes,
1985; Sokoloff, 1996). However, an implicit learning
theoretical perspective would suggest that humans are more
likely to learn implicitly in the area of classical mechanics
than in the domain of circuits, because our natural
environment provides a wider variety of opportunities to
experience regularities across the many facets of object
motion (e.g., lifting, pushing, pulling, carrying, dropping,
and throwing objects of all shapes and sizes) than in the area
of circuits, in which most people typically have limited and
impoverished experiences (e.g., turning on and off
electronic devices, replacing batteries and fuses). Thus, in
the following study, we test the hypotheses that a
comparison of the prevalence and nature of common
misconceptions in classical mechanics and circuits will
show that (a) the classical mechanics misconceptions are
more prevalent and (b) the circuits misconceptions are held
at a more explicit level.
The potential contribution of this theoretical perspective
goes beyond explaining how and why intuitive
misconceptions are formed, and can also provide guidance
regarding instructional techniques that are likely to
overcome these misconceptions. For example, consider an
instructional technique commonly promoted in the science
1

For example, research in classical mechanics has shown that
many people believe that when two objects collide, the object with
the largest mass exerts the largest force. Similarly, research in
circuits has shown that many people believe that a battery provides
a source of current that is progressively weakened as it travels
through each light bulb in a circuit.
137

directly’ versus ‘explicit intervention will only be effective
after implicit changes have occurred’, yield different
predictions about the effectiveness of the conceptual change
technique. Specifically, science education researchers are
likely to hypothesize that the conceptual change technique
should work in all domains, while researchers applying an
implicit cognition theoretical perspective are likely to
hypothesize that the method is not likely to be effective at
changing misconceptions that are held implicitly. If, in fact,
our previously stated hypotheses (that misconceptions will
be more prevalent and more implicitly held in classical
mechanics than in circuits) are supported, then our current
study will also provide the opportunity for an exploratory
investigation contrasting these two predictions about the
effectiveness of the conceptual change technique.

Method
Participants
A total of 80 undergraduate students from a Florida
university participated in the experiment. There were 26
males and 54 females, and the average age of the
participants was 21 years (SD=4.0). Students received extra
credit points, payment, or some combination of the two in
exchange for their participation.

Design
There were two independent, between-subjects variables:
domain (classical mechanics versus circuits) and type of
instruction (traditional versus conceptual change). For
logistical reasons, all of the participants in the D. C. circuit’s
condition were run first. However, within each domain,
participants were randomly assigned to an instructional
condition.

Method-based contributions
In addition to providing a theoretical framework to predict
and explain findings in science education research, the
implicit cognition paradigm may also provide new
operational definitions, experimental designs and
assessment techniques.
Consider assessment techniques. It is almost always the
case in science education research that “direct” tests are
used to assess knowledge and learning (for an exception, see
Pittinger, 1991). In the implicit cognition community,
“indirect” tests are believed to be best at capturing implicit
knowledge, while direct tests are thought to mostly reflect
explicit knowledge (e.g., Cleeremans, Destrebecqz & Boyer,
1998; Dienes & Perner, 1999; Kozhevnikov & Hegarty,
2001). So, adopting this paradigm immediately expands the
pool of available assessment techniques for researchers in
the science education field.
Of course, many implicit cognition researchers also
acknowledge that implicit knowledge may “bleed over” into
answers on direct tests and explicit knowledge may
influence performance on indirect tests (Cleeremans, et al.,
1998; Dienes & Perner, 1999). As an alternative, Dienes
and Perner (1999) propose that explicitness be treated as a
graded characteristic (rather than dichotomous) and suggest
that different types (or levels) of responding on a direct
(multiple-choice) test may indicate knowledge held at
different levels of explicitness (see Table 2, p. 747). We
believe that this assessment approach provides for a finegrained examination of science education study results,
potentially providing more insight into the impact,
capabilities and limitations of various instructional
techniques than the standard change score (# correct on
post-test minus # correct on pre-test) approach. Thus, we
adopted this methodological approach in our current study,
in order to demonstrate its usefulness to the science
education research community.

Materials
Toolbook© was used to create two self-paced, computerbased lessons. The lesson on circuits covered fundamental
topics such as voltage, current, resistance and power, Ohm’s
Law, conservation of current, and series and parallel circuit
configurations. The lesson on classical mechanics covered
Newton’s first three laws of motion.
For each topic, pre- and post- tests were developed to
assess a participant’s knowledge of the material covered in
the lesson. The tests consisted of multiple-choice questions,
with distracter items carefully written to reflect common
misconceptions in each domain (as identified in previous
literature). The tests were implemented in Toolbook© as
well, so that they were computer-administered. In addition
to selecting an answer from among the available choices,
participants were prompted to explain their selection by
typing into a text box after most of the questions.
Finally, hands-on activities and associated worksheets
were developed for each domain. Across both domains, the
activities
were
designed
to
address
common
misconceptions.
The four circuits activities involved
building series and parallel circuits with batteries, small
light bulbs, switches and alligator clips and measuring
voltage with a voltmeter and current with a compass. The
two classical mechanics activities involved experimenting
with object motion on an air hockey table and comparing
the speed of different designs of wind-sail cars.
Three handouts were created for each activity. First was
the primary activity worksheet, which provided detailed
written instructions for conducting the activity, illustrations
when appropriate, and places to record the outcomes of the
various manipulations being conducted. Second was the
explanation sheet, which described the outcomes of the
activity (when done correctly) and explained those
outcomes in terms of the concepts presented in the lesson.
All participants received these worksheets, regardless of
condition. Finally, a prediction worksheet was also created

138

selecting those distracters by random chance. A higher cutoff was deemed inappropriate, because misconceptions
competed within each question, and while it is possible for a
participant to hold both misconceptions, the participant was
only allowed to select one distracter.)
In the second stage, we focused on the written explanations
given by each participant for the majority of the questions.
Each written answer was categorized on the extent to which
it provided a clear explanation of the specific misconception
underlying the chosen distracter. One author developed the
categorization rules and trained two coders to complete this
task. As in stage 1, we used a ratio to judge the extent to
which a misconception was held explicitly.
A
misconception was said to be held explicitly if clear and
appropriate explanations were provided at least 85% of the
time that distracters representing a particular misconception
were chosen.
To summarize, common misconceptions identified in the
literature were represented in distracters repeatedly
throughout the test. If a participant only selected distracters
representing one misconception sporadically, we determined
that the participant probably did not hold that
misconception. If a participant routinely chose distracters
representing a specific misconception, but was not able to
consistently provide clear and appropriate explanations for
these choices, then we concluded that the participant held
this misconception, but at a low level of explicitness.
Finally, if a participant routinely chose distracters
representing a specific misconception, and consistently
provided clear and appropriate explanations for these
choices, then we concluded that the participant held this
misconception at a highly explicit level.

for each activity. This brief worksheet asked the participant
to predict the outcome of the activity before conducting it
and explain the rationale behind the prediction. Only
participants in the conceptual change condition received the
prediction worksheets for the activities.

Procedure
After listening to the experimenter read a scripted
introduction and completing the informed consent
paperwork, a participant completed a series of surveys,
including a brief demographic questionnaire, the NEO fivefactor personality inventory (form S), and measures of locus
of control and goal orientation. Next, the participant took
the computer-based pre-test. Following this test and a short
break, the participant worked through the computer-based
lesson on the selected domain (classical mechanics or
circuits).
The hands-on activities were introduced after the
completion of the computer-based lesson and another short
break. In the traditional condition, a participant followed
the instructions on an activity worksheet to complete the
activity, recorded the results of the activity, and then read an
explanation sheet that tied the activity outcome to the
concepts presented in the lesson.
In the conceptual change condition, there were two
modifications to this procedure.
First, after being
introduced to the planned activity, the participant was asked
to predict the outcome of the activity and record both the
prediction and a justification for that prediction on a
separate worksheet. Second, after completing the activity
but before being provided with the explanation sheet, the
participant was asked to record both whether or not the
outcome was consistent with the prediction and an
explanation if the two were not consistent.
Finally, after the last scheduled break, the participant took
the computer-based post-test, completed a reaction
questionnaire, and was debriefed. Regardless of the domain
or instructional condition, most participants were able to
complete this procedure in approximately 3 hours.

Hypothesis testing
Our first hypothesis was that participants would come to the
experiment with a higher prevalence of misconceptions in
the mechanics domain than in the circuit’s domain. Each
participant was assigned a prevalence score by dividing the
number of misconceptions held at pre-test by the total
number of misconceptions assessed in our tests. As
predicted, the average prevalence score in the mechanics
domain (M = .481, SD = .222), was significantly higher than
average prevalence score in the circuits domain (M = .378,
SD = .131), t(78) = 2.51, p = .014.
Our second hypothesis was that, when present, circuit’s
misconceptions were more likely to be held explicitly than
mechanics misconceptions. Each participant was assigned
an explicitness score by dividing the sum of misconceptions
held explicitly by the total number of misconceptions held.
As predicted, the average explicitness score in the circuits
domain (M = .684, SD = .327) was significantly higher than
the average explicitness score in the mechanics domain (M
= .456, SD = .391), t(76) = 2.78, p = .007.

Results
Pre- and post-test assessment
A scoring system was developed for the multiple-choice
answers and explanations on the pre- and post-tests for both
domains. The goal of this system was to identify which
misconceptions a participant appeared to hold, and the
extent to which each misconception was held explicitly. In
order to accomplish this, we applied a two stage scoring
system. In the first stage we focused on the multiple-choice
answers selected by each participant. As described earlier,
the majority of the distracters were designed to represent
commonly held misconceptions in that domain.
A
participant was labeled as possessing the misconception if
that participant selected distracters representing that
misconception at least 35% of the times that they were
available. (A lower cut-off corresponded too closely to

Exploratory analyses
The previous analyses provide evidence that the scientific
domains of mechanics and circuits differ in the extent to
139

Next, consider our interpretation of the participants’
written explanations. As described earlier, the presence or
absence of clear and appropriate written explanations
provided in conjunction with multiple choice selections was
interpreted as evidence regarding the extent to which a
misconception was held explicitly. One possible alternative
explanation for the variance found in this variable is some
form of individual differences in our participants. The small
battery of measures given to each participant at the
beginning of the experiment was considered, and the
“conscientiousness” score on the NEO five-factor
personality inventory was selected as the most likely
candidate to account for this variance. However, a
correlational analysis showed no relationship between a
participant’s conscientiousness score and the extent to
which the participant provided clear and appropriate written
explanations in conjunction with his or her multiple choice
selections r(76) = .09, p > .05.

which intuitive misconceptions are held at an implicit level.
Recall that the science education literature proposes that the
conceptual change instructional technique is an effective
method for overcoming any intuitive misconception. On the
other hand, an implicit cognition perspective suggests that
this technique is less likely to be effective when
misconceptions are held implicitly. Thus, our third set of
analyses explores this contrast by assessing the effectiveness
of this specialized instructional technique in each domain.
As described earlier, each misconception could be
classified as (a) not held, (b) held with high explicitness or
(c) held with low explicitness on each test. This produced a
total of 9 possible combinations for each misconception and
for each participant. Three combinations were assessed as
showing improvement – a high-explicit misconception at
pre-test becoming not held at post-test, a low-explicit
misconception at pre-test becoming not held at post-test and
a low-explicit misconception at pre-test becoming a highexplicit misconception at post-test. An improvement score
was calculated for each participant by taking the ratio of
misconceptions showing improvement to the total number
of misconceptions held by that participant at pre- and/or
post-test. (Note that misconceptions that were not held at
either pre- or post-test were not included in this calculation.)
In the circuits domain, the average improvement score in
the conceptual change condition (M = .754, SD = .232) was
significantly higher than the average improvement score in
the traditional instruction condition (M = .512, SD = .324),
t(38) = 2.69, p = .010. However, in the mechanics domain,
the average improvement score in the conceptual change
condition (M = .531, SD = .276) was not significantly
different from the average improvement score in the
traditional instruction condition (M = .491, SD = .318), t(36)
= .409, p = .684.

Discussion
Our objective in this paper was to propose that the implicit
cognition paradigm is highly appropriate for research being
conducted in science education, and to illustrate, using a
prototypical science education study, some of the potential
benefits that could be realized if there was more crossfertilization between these two fields.
From a theoretical perspective, we showed how a
developmental theory of implicit knowledge supported an
accurate prediction of the relative prevalence and nature of
misconceptions in two different scientific domains. More
specifically, we were able to hypothesize that common
misconceptions in classical mechanics would be more
prevalent and held less explicitly than common
misconceptions in circuits, and, in fact, our data supported
both of those hypotheses.
Beyond providing insight into the nature of scientific
misconceptions, the implicit cognition paradigm also
appears to have promise for generating candidate
instructional techniques to overcome misconceptions. In
this paper, we described how the paradigm would predict
that the effectiveness of the conceptual change technique
would be limited to those domains in which misconceptions
were held explicitly, rather than implicitly, and, once again,
our exploratory analyses were consistent with this
prediction.
Methodologically, it should be pointed out that neither of
our hypotheses could have been tested using the standard
change score. Both hypotheses required a comparison
between domains, and it would not be appropriate to
compare either raw or percentage change scores on different
tests from different domains. The problem with using a
change score is that it isn’t possible to disambiguate domain
effects (e.g., the circuits group showed a larger gain score
than the mechanics group because circuits is an easier topic
to learn than mechanics) from test effects such as the
selection and wording of individual questions (e.g., the
circuits group showed a larger gain score than the

Supplemental analyses of alternative explanations
Two of our findings could be challenged with commonly
acknowledged alternative explanations.
First, an
omnipresent concern in research comparing different
instructional techniques is that two techniques often vary
along two dimensions, the nature of the processing activities
and the amount of time required to complete the activities.
To test for this alternative explanation in our data, we
compared the average amount of time spent on the activities
between our conceptual change and traditional groups for
the circuits domain (the only domain for which conceptual
change appeared to be more effective). There was no
statistically significant difference in the amount of time
spent on the activities in the conceptual change condition (M
= 82 minutes, SD = 22 minutes) and the traditional
condition (M = 80 minutes, SD = 19 minutes), t(38) = 0.26,
p = 0.79. This result increases our confidence that the
improvement associated with the conceptual change
condition is due to the nature of the processing activities
rather than the amount of time spent working with the
material.

140

Clement, J.
(1982).
Students' preconceptions in
introductory mechanics. American Journal of Physics,
50, 66-71.
Clements, W. A., Rustin, C. & McCallum, S. (2000).
Promoting the transition from implicit to explicit
understanding: A training study of false belief.
Developmental Science, 3, 81-92.
Dienes, Z. & Perner, J. (1999). A theory of implicit and
explicit knowledge. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22,
735-808.
diSessa, A. A. (1982). Unlearning Aristotelian physics: A
study of knowledge-based learning. Cognitive Science, 6,
37-75.
Eylon, B.-S. & Linn, M. C. (1988). Learning and
instruction: An examination of four research perspectives
in science education. Review of Educational Research,
58, 251-301.
Halloun, I. & Hestenes, D. (1985). The initial knowledge
state of college physics students. American Journal of
Physics, 53, 1043-1055.
Kozhevnikov, M. & Hegarty (2001). Impetus beliefs as
default heuristics: Dissocation between explicit and
implicit knowledge about motion. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 8(3), 439-453.
Linn, M. C. (1986). Science. In R. F. Dillon & R. J.
Sternberg (Eds.) Cognition and Instruction (pp. 155-204).
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
McDermott, L. C. (1984). Research on conceptual
understanding in mechanics. Physics Today, 37, 24-32.
Nakhleh, M. B. (1992). Why some students don’t learn
chemistry: Chemical misconceptions.
Journal of
Chemical Education, 69(3), 191-196.
Nussbaum, J. (1985). The earth as a cosmic body. In R.
Driver, E. Guesne & A. Tiberghien (Eds.) Children's
ideas in science (pp. 170-192). Philadelphia, PA: Open
University Press.
Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W. & Gertzog, W.
A. (1982). Accomodation of a scientific conception:
Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science
Education,66(2), 211-227.
Pittinger, J. B. (1991). Cognitive physics and event
perception: Two approaches to the assessment of people’s
knowledge of physics. In R. R. Hoffman & D. S. Palermo
(Eds.) Cognition and the Symbolic Processes (pp. 233254). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shipstone, D. (1985). Electricity in simple circuits. In R.
Driver, E. Guesene & A. Tiberghien (Eds.) Children’s
Ideas in Science (pp. 33-51.) Philadelphia, PA: Open
University Press.
Sokoloff, D. R. (1996). Teaching electric circuit concepts
using microcomputer-based current and voltage probes. In
R. F. Tinker (Ed.), Microcomputer-based labs:
Educational research and standards, Series F: Computer
and systems sciences (pp. 129-146). Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Verlag.

mechanics group because most of the questions in the
mechanics test, but not the circuits test, focused on difficult
concepts in that domain). By focusing our analyses at the
level of individual misconceptions, applying the exact same
criteria in each domain to determine if a misconception is
held or not, and never relying on a single question to draw a
conclusion, we can leverage the fact that each test was
designed to cover the major misconceptions in its domain,
and thus make reasonable between-domain comparisons.
In addition, the second hypothesis referred to the level of
explicitness with which various misconceptions were held,
and percent correct on a multiple-choice exam doesn’t give
any insight into that variable.
Of course, it would be inappropriate to draw strong
conclusions from this particular illustration. The real point
is that the implicit cognition paradigm made different
predictions and brought different operational definitions and
methods to the table, opening up the possibility of gaining
new and different insights into the questions that the science
education research community has been working on.
While we have chosen in this paper to emphasize the
potential contributions of the implicit cognition paradigm to
the field of science education research, the benefits of crossfertilization between the two domains would obviously be
reciprocal. At the very least, the field of science education
offers a rich and challenging real world environment for
implicit cognition researchers as they move beyond
laboratory tasks in memory and artificial grammar learning.
This is clearly a preliminary and somewhat exploratory
investigation, however we hope we have provided some
insight into the potentially beneficial relationship that could
be established between researchers in these two areas. We
certainly plan to continue to investigate our current data set
and plan future science education studies in the light of the
implicit cognition paradigm.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Lisa Durrance, Cheryl
Johnson, Kimberlie St. Louis and Sherry Yelland for help
with the data collection and analysis, and Dr. Susan
Chipman of the Office of Naval Research for sponsoring
this work.

References
Bauer, R. M. (1984). Autonomic recognition of names and
faces in prosopagnosia: A neurophysiological application
of the guilty knowledge test. Neurophyschologia, 22,
457-469.
Champagne, A. B., Klopfer, L. E. & Anderson, J. H.
(1980). Factors influencing the learning of classical
mechanics. American Journal of Physics, 48, 1074-1079.
Cleeremans, A., Destrebecqz, A. & Boyer, M. (1998).
Implicit learning: news from the front. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 2(10). 406-416.

141

