UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Ambiguity in the Interpretation of Noun-Noun Compounds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8q44w43g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Cater, Arthur W.S.
Maguire, Phil
Wisniewski, Edward J.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Ambiguity in the Interpretation of Noun-Noun Compounds
Phil Maguire (phil.maguire@ucd.ie)
Arthur W.S. Cater (arthur.cater@ucd.ie)
School of Computer Science and Informatics
University College Dublin, Ireland

Edward J. Wisniewski (edw@uncg.edu)
Department of Psychology,
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, USA

Abstract
Gagné and Shoben (1997) proposed that people are aware of
how concepts are typically used to modify other concepts and
that this modifier relation frequency influences the ease with
which concepts can be combined. However, Wisniewski and
Murphy (2005) suggested that Gagné and Shoben’s
conditions of relation frequency were confounded with
plausibility. We conducted an experiment which investigated
whether ratings of plausibility respond to relation frequency, a
possibility that has been suggested by Gagné and Spalding (in
press). We found that, when participants were provided with
full descriptions of the combinations’ referents, differences in
plausibility between conditions of modifier relation frequency
disappeared. A second experiment investigated why this
should be the case. We found that many combinations were
interpreted with a variety of relations, contrary to assumptions
made by Gagné and Shoben (1997). Correlation analyses
revealed strong associations between combination plausibility
and measures of objective and subjective ambiguity,
suggesting that the differences observed in Experiment 1 were
most likely due to differences in combination ambiguity. We
discuss the influence of ambiguity and the implications for
Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) CARIN theory.
Keywords: Conceptual combination; noun-noun compounds;
plausibility ratings; ambiguity; CARIN theory.

Introduction
Concept combination is a ubiquitous phenomenon, as
evidenced by the volume of lexicalized compounds entering
the English language (e.g. soccer mom, beer gut) and the
frequent spontaneous use of such phrases in reference to
novel concepts or ideas (e.g. peasant dance, penguin film).
Not only can people understand concepts like chocolate or
rabbit in isolation, they can also understand them in
combination (i.e. chocolate rabbit). Recently, the area of
conceptual combination has attracted much attention in
cognitive science because of its potential to further our
understanding of conceptual representation as well as
language production and comprehension in general.
In their Competition Among Relations in Nominals
(CARIN) theory, Gagné and Shoben (1997) proposed that
the interpretation of a noun-noun combination occurs when
a relation linking the two concepts is identified. According
to this theory, the ease of interpretation of a combination is
principally influenced by the relative frequency with which

the appropriate relation has been previously used with the
modifier noun. For example, since combinations involving
the modifier mountain frequently use the <LOCATED>
relation, then it should be easy to interpret a combination
like mountain goat while mountain magazine (a magazine
<ABOUT> mountains) should be more difficult. As support
for their theory, Gagné and Shoben (1997) demonstrated
that when participants made speeded sensicality judgments
for a set of combinations, those involving low modifier
frequency relations took longer to interpret than those
involving high modifier frequency relations, while the head
noun’s relation frequency had no discernible effect.
Wisniewski and Murphy (2005) challenged the reliability
of these results by suggesting that the observed patterns in
response time were primarily due to differences in the
familiarity and plausibility of the stimuli. When they asked
participants to rate the plausibility and familiarity of Gagné
and Shoben’s combinations, they found that low relation
frequency items were rated as reliably less plausible and less
familiar than the high frequency ones. Furthermore, these
variables accounted for a far greater portion of the variance
in sensicality judgment response time than did modifier
relation frequency.
Gagné and Spalding (in press) countered this argument.
They demonstrated that subjective familiarity can be
influenced by relation frequency and that relation strength
emerges as a significant predictor variable in multiple
regressions involving measures of objective familiarity.
Similarly, they defended the confounding of relation
frequency and plausibility by interpreting the latter as a
dependent variable. According to their view, plausibility is
what theories of conceptual combination should seek to
explain and therefore, on the pain of circularity, it should
not be conceived of as an explanatory variable. As an
explanation for why low frequency items were rated as less
plausible, Gagné and Spalding suggested that plausibility
might be responding to modifier relation frequency.
However, we believe that plausibility is very much an
independent variable, and one which should intuitively
influence ease of interpretation. The combination plastic toy
is plausible by virtue of the fact that many toys are made of
plastic. In contrast, cooking treatment is less plausible since
the action of cooking does not suggest how it might be used
as a treatment. Because this combination is unsupported by
world knowledge it is more elusive and consequently, less
plausible.

1771

Experiment 1
In the following experiment we investigated whether
subjective plausibility is influenced by modifier relation
frequency. In order to evaluate this hypothesis, we
compared plausibility ratings for Gagné and Shoben’s
(1997) stimuli in combination form with plausibility ratings
for fully expanded paraphrases indexing the same referents.
Since the paraphrases included an overt reference to the
appropriate relation, this mitigated the influence of any
factors relating to relation availability. Our hypothesis was
that the differences in plausibility observed by Wisniewski
and Murphy (2005) would remain after the influence of
modifier relation frequency had been controlled for, thereby
ruling it out as a possible influence.

Murphy’s (2005) experimental paradigm, a rating of 1
indicated that the concept was “very weird” and 7 indicated
that it was “very plausible”.

Results and Discussion
For the combination condition, the average plausibility
ratings for the HH, HL, LH and filler conditions were 5.1,
4.8, 4.3 and 2.2 respectively. For the paraphrase condition,
the corresponding values were 5.8, 5.6, 5.6 and 2.0. These
results are illustrated in Figure 1. Our combination
plausibility ratings were consistent with those of
Wisniewski and Murphy (2005), r = 0.88, p < .01. The most
plausible combination was student magazine (6.91) and the
least plausible was water money (1.74). The most plausible
paraphrase was “a toy made of plastic” (6.78) and the least
plausible was “ a crisis involving plastic” (3.96).
Plausibility Rating

Since the plausibility of any concept, combined or
otherwise, is determined by its semantic content, then this
measure should not be influenced by the manner in which
the concept is expressed. Given that modifier relation
frequency is a factor which relates solely to interpretation
and not to meaning, then logically it should not influence
the subjective plausibility of a combined concept.
Wisniewski and Murphy (2005) asked participants to rate
the plausibility of “the thing referred to by the combination”
as opposed to the plausibility of the phrase itself, and hence
these ratings should not have been contaminated by
modifier relation frequency as suggested by Gagné and
Spalding (in press).

6
5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5

Combination
Paraphrase

HH

HL

LH
Conditions

Filler

Figure 1. Average plausibility ratings for combinations and
phrases in each condition of modifier relation frequency

Method
Participants Forty-six first-year undergraduate students
from University College Dublin participated in the study.
All were native English speakers.
Materials In a stimulus pre-test we asked six participants to
generate interpretations for the 57 experimental items from
Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) Experiment 1. These comprised
19 combinations for three separate conditions of relation
frequency, namely HH, HL and LH. Here, H and L refer to
the frequency of the appropriate relation (i.e. High and
Low), with the first and second letters denoting how
frequently that relation is associated with the modifier and
head noun respectively. Given that all of these combinations
were designed to be sensible, we also included 19
implausible filler items so as to ensure that the full range of
the plausibility scale would be used.
The dominant interpretation generated for each
combination was used to generate its equivalent paraphrase.
Each of these consisted of the original constituent nouns
linked by the appropriate relation. In this way, the
combination water money was reconstituted as “money for
buying water” and college magazine became “a magazine
about college”.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to either
the combination condition or the paraphrase condition. All
were presented with a random ordering of the 76 concepts in
the relevant form and asked to rate the plausibility of each
concept on a scale of 1 to 7. Following Wisniewski and

Results were analyzed with participants as a random
variable and not with items as a random variable. The
reason for this was because we wished to determine whether
modifier relation frequency affected the subjective
plausibility of the items in question rather than drawing an
inference from this set to a larger population. For the
combination condition, a within-subjects analysis of
variance revealed statistically reliable differences among the
three conditions of relation frequency, F(2, 44) = 45.82, p <
.01, MSE = .10. A planned comparison revealed that
combinations in the low modifier relation frequency
condition (LH) were rated as significantly less plausible
than those in the high modifier relation frequency conditions
(HH and HL), F(1, 44) = 78.92, p < .01, MSE = .09. For the
paraphrase condition, a separate within-subjects analysis of
variance also revealed statistically reliable differences
among the three conditions of relation frequency, F(2, 44) =
4.43, p = .02, MSE = .068. Contrary to hypothesis, a planned
comparison revealed that the difference between the low
and high modifier relation frequency conditions was not
significant, F(1, 44) = 2.07, p = .21, MSE = .08. This
challenges the view that Gagné and Shoben’s (1997)
conditions of modifier relation frequency were confounded
with plausibility, since differences for the paraphrases were
not evident.
The two sets of plausibility ratings were closely
correlated, r = .64, p < .01. We compared how well
combination plausibility versus paraphrase plausibility

1772

predicted Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) sensicality judgment
response times for the stimuli. The correlation between
combination plausibility and response time was significant,
r = -.67, p < .01. However, a two-tailed z-test revealed that
the corresponding correlation involving paraphrase
plausibility, r = -.31, p = .02, was significantly weaker, z =
2.55, p = .01. This implies that ratings of combination
plausibility were influenced by factors relating to
interpretation and not just the plausibility of the referent
concept per se.
Wisniewski and Murphy (2005) found that when they
entered plausibility and modifier relation frequency into a
multiple regression, the latter did not emerge as a significant
predictor variable of response time. While their ratings of
plausibility were potentially contaminated by relation
frequency, our paraphrase ratings could not have been.
Accordingly, we performed two separate multiple
regressions, one involving combination plausibility and the
other involving paraphrase plausibility, both having
response time as the criterion variable. For the regression
involving combination plausibility, the multiple correlation
was .69 (R2 of .47) and the standardized regression weights
were -.62 for plausibility (p < .01) and -.19 for modifier
relation frequency (p = .07). The fact that relation frequency
did not emerge as a significant predictor variable replicates
Wisniewski and Murphy’s finding. However, for the
regression involving paraphrase plausibility, the multiple
correlation was .46 (R2 of .21) and the standardized
regression weights were -.31 for plausibility (p = .02) and .34 for modifier relation frequency (p < .01). This finding
supports the possibility that combination plausibility ratings
were affected by modifier relation frequency.
If differences between combination and paraphrase
plausibility are due in part to the mitigation of modifier
relation frequency in the latter condition, then we would
expect such differences to be correlated with relation
frequency: low modifier relation frequency combinations
should benefit the most from having their relation made
explicit. Indeed, this correlation proved to be significant, r
= -.32, p = .02. The average increase in plausibility for the
low modifier relation frequency items was 1.3 whereas that
for the high frequency items was only 0.7.
These results lend credence to Gagné and Spalding’s (in
press) assertion that plausibility ratings for combinations are
affected by factors relating to interpretation, one of which
includes modifier relation frequency. Combinations with
low modifier relation frequency were rated as significantly
less plausible than those with high modifier relation
frequency. Yet, when the same concepts were presented
along with the appropriate relation, both types were rated
equally plausible. Thus, it would appear that the influence of
modifier relation frequency on relation availability may
have influenced plausibility ratings in the combination
condition.
We noticed from our stimulus pretest that the
interpretations provided for some combinations were very
consistent, whereas others varied widely. For example,
plastic toy was always interpreted as “a toy made of plastic”
while wood money was interpreted as “money derived from
the wood trade”, “money for buying wood” and “money

made of wood”. Crucially, the LH combinations appeared to
be more ambiguous than those in the other conditions. This
suggested to us that plausibility ratings might somehow
have been influenced by combination ambiguity.
Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) measure of relation
frequency assumes that combinations will always be
interpreted with one particular relation. If combinations can
be interpreted using several different relations then this
invalidates the basis for relation frequency. For example,
“money <DERIVED FROM> wood” uses a low frequency
relation but “money <MADE OF> wood” uses a high
frequency relation; if participants generate both
interpretations, then the combination cannot be successfully
categorized.
We suspected that differences in plausibility may have
arisen because participants rating combinations did not
generate the intended interpretation. The following
experiment examined this possibility.

Experiment 2
This experiment was designed to investigate whether the
plausibility ratings in Experiment 1 might have been
influenced by the inherent ambiguity of the combined
concepts in combination form. For instance, the referent of
wood money intended by Gagné and Shoben (1997) was
“money derived from wood”. Although ratings for our
paraphrases reflected the plausibility of this specific
concept, participants viewing the combination might not
necessarily have generated the same interpretation. Some
participants may have interpreted wood money as meaning
“money made out of wood” or “money for buying wood”
and therefore rated these as very implausible. Others may
have been unable to generate any satisfactory interpretation.
In short, plausibility ratings for combinations could not be
guaranteed to reflect the plausibility of the intended referent
if not all participants interpreted them in the intended
manner. In the following experiment we investigated the
consistency with which Gagné and Shoben’s experimental
stimuli were interpreted. The same 57 experimental items
used in Experiment 1 were presented as combinations and
participants were asked to provide the interpretation which
they felt was most probable, and to give a rating of how
likely it was to be the intended one.

Method
Participants Sixty first-year undergraduate students
participated in the experiment. All were native English
speakers. The data from 12 participants were excluded for
either not following instructions or for failing to complete
the task.
Materials The 57 experimental stimuli used in Gagné and
Shoben’s (1997) Experiment 1 were presented in
combination form.

1773

Procedure and Design The 57 items were counterbalanced
across participants, with each participant viewing 19 items.
One combination was presented for each of the 19 modifier

nouns, this set constituting a distribution of HH, HL and LH
items. Participants were informed that the combinations
were genuine and were asked to provide an interpretation
for each one. After writing down this interpretation, they
were also required to provide a rating from 1 to 7 which
reflected how likely they thought it was that their
interpretation was the intended one. A rating of 1 indicated
that this was “very unlikely” while 7 indicated that it was
“very likely”.
For demonstration purposes, several
examples were provided along with interpretations and
likelihood ratings. These included very specific
combinations (e.g. kitchen door) and very ambiguous
combinations (e.g. shovel bird).

Results and Discussion
For each combination, we obtained a set of 16
interpretations and 16 associated likelihood ratings. We
clustered interpretations garnered for each combination into
distinct categories which we felt reflected the different types
of interpretation. Any disagreement in classification was
resolved through discussion. A total of 183 interpretations
were identified for the 57 stimuli, with an average of 3.2
different interpretations per item.
We conceived of the two measures in our experiment as
constituting approximate measures of objective ambiguity
(number of different interpretations produced) and also of
subjective ambiguity (participants’ confidence that their
interpretation was the intended one). Both measures varied
considerably by-item. Fourteen combinations resulted in a
single interpretation, whereas cooking treatment produced
10. Similarly, confidence in interpretations ranged from a
low of 2.2 for gas antiques to a high of 6.7 for plastic toy.
Out of the total of 16 participants that viewed each
combination, the number that rated their confidence above
the midpoint varied from a low of 1 for gas antiques to a
full complement of 16 for gas crisis, student magazine and
plastic toy.
In order to assess the implications of ambiguity for
measures of relation frequency, we divided interpretations
into those that involved Gagné and Shoben’s (1997)
intended relation versus those that did not. Although they
reported no statistics of this nature for their first experiment,
Gagné and Shoben conducted a similar analysis for the
interpretations given in Experiment 3 of their study. For this
analysis, eight participants provided interpretations of the
combinations involved. Gagné and Shoben (1997) found
that the interpretations generated included the intended
relation 82% of the time. They also reported that on a
participant-by-participant basis, the percentage of agreement
ranged from 71% to 90% and described this level of
agreement as “encouraging” (p. 79). We conducted the same
analysis using the interpretations given in the present study,
and obtained a similar figure: the overall proportion of
combinations which were interpreted using the relation
intended by Gagné and Shoben was 73.6%. However, closer
inspection revealed that the by-participant analysis was

1774

extremely misleading: variance in agreement was primarily
manifested at the item and not at the participant level.
For 20 of the 57 stimuli, 100% of participants interpreted
the combination using Gagné and Shoben’s intended
relation (e.g. financial crisis, plastic toy). On the other hand,
only a single participant interpreted the combinations floral
language and floral toy using the relations <USES> and
<IN> respectively; all other participants used alternative
relations. For 15 of the stimuli, the number of participants
using the correct relation were in the minority. Furthermore,
the average level of agreement varied across conditions: the
figures for the HH, HL and LH conditions were 85%, 69%
and 67% respectively.
A correlation between intended relation frequency and
use of the intended relation proved significant, r = .31, p =
.02. Thus, the lower the intended relation frequency, the
more likely it was that participants used a different relation
which was potentially not be a low frequency one.
Interestingly, the correlation between Gagné and Shoben’s
(1997) response times and use of the intended relation was
also significant, r = .50, p < .01. The longer the average
response time, the more likely participants were not to use
the intended relation.
The substantial by-item variance in ambiguity deals a
serious blow to the CARIN perspective on combination
interpretation. Gagné and Shoben (1997) derived values for
their hypothetical variable of relation strength by assuming
that participants were largely using the same relation, the
one they theMSElves selected. However, we have shown
that while some materials were reliably interpreted using
this relation, others were rarely interpreted so. As a result,
the relation frequencies used by Gagné and Shoben were in
many cases inaccurate and furthermore, the extent of this
inaccuracy was confounded with the variable under
investigation: low frequency items were more likely not to
be interpreted using that low frequency relation. In many
cases, those combinations intended as low frequency were
actually interpreted with high frequency relations, often the
same ones as those used in the high modifier relation
frequency conditions. For example, Gagné and Shoben
intended winter book as “a book about winter”, the
<ABOUT> relation representing a low frequency relation
for winter. However, half of our participants interpreted this
combination as “a book one reads during winter”, with the
<DURING> relation being the intended relation for winter
in both the HH and the HL conditions (i.e. winter cloud,
winter town). In another case, wood money was intended as
“money derived from wood”. However, 38% of participants
interpreted it with the high frequency <MADE OF> relation
from the HL condition (i.e. “money made of wood”) and
another 13% interpreted it with the high frequency <FOR>
relation from the HH condition (i.e. “money for buying
wood”). Because of this, many of Gagné and Shoben’s
(1997) relation strength values would have been
inappropriate.
We attempted to compensate for this inaccuracy by only
considering the 42 items for which the majority of

participants used the intended relation. Gagné and Shoben
reported a significant correlation of r = .44 between relation
strength and response time when all 57 combinations were
included. We performed the same analysis but used an
appropriate nonparametric correlation and included only the
42 less ambiguous combinations. The correlation was not
significant, Spearman’s ρ = .187, p = .24.
Not only does this undermine the empirical evidence
supporting the CARIN theory, it also brings into question
the validity of that theory’s approach to conceptual
combination in general. Modifier relation frequency cannot
be used to model the interpretation process when no
agreement on the appropriate relation exists. We have
shown that multiple relations can be used with many of
Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) combinations, with some being
interpreted using both high frequency and low frequency
relations. Since CARIN is founded on the assumption that
relations compete based on their availability, it therefore
cannot explain why relations of varying availability should
be selected for the same combination.
Influence of Ambiguity
Given that many of Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) stimuli can
be interpreted using different relations, the use of modifier
relation frequency is not appropriate for explaining
differences in the ease of interpretation or plausibility of
those combinations. We investigated whether combination
ambiguity might constitute a more appropriate predictor
variable. The correlation between Gagné and Shoben’s
(1997) sensicality judgment response times and the number
of different interpretations generated was significant, r =
.43, p < .01. The correlation between response time and
participants’ average confidence rating was also significant,
r = -.62, p < .01. A further set of correlations examined
whether ambiguity was associated with plausibility. We
found that combination plausibility was significantly
correlated with both number of interpretations, r = -.52, p <
.01, and with confidence ratings, r = .82, p < .01.
Furthermore, the average differences between combination
and paraphrase plausibility were significantly correlated
with both number of interpretations, r = .27, p = .04, and
confidence ratings, r = .54, p < .01. These results suggest
that the differences in plausibility observed in Experiment 1
can be better explained by differences in ambiguity rather
than differences in modifier relation frequency.
The fact that differences between combination and
paraphrase plausibility ratings were associated with
differences in ambiguity suggests two possible explanations.
Firstly, participants may have been less likely to find the
intended referent of ambiguous combinations and
consequently, may have generated less plausible
interpretations. A second possibility is that ratings were
influenced by the ambiguity of the combination as well as
the plausibility of the referent concept. Thus, ambiguous
compounds may have been rated as less plausible even
when participants were able to generate the intended
interpretation.

The principles of pragmatics maintain that words, whether
in combination or otherwise, are used to convey meaning,
and this meaning is what renders their use sensical. Since
the ambiguity of a combination is inextricably linked to its
success as a communicative expression, this factor is likely
to influence its subjective plausibility: any combination
which inadequately constrains the interpretation process will
be viewed as unacceptable. A significant correlation
between our subjective and objective measures of ambiguity
(r = -.64, p < .01) reveals that participants were able to
make reliable estimates regarding combination ambiguity.
Hence, participants may have rated ambiguous
combinations as less plausible because they seemed less
meaningful.
Differences in ambiguity can also explain differences in
sensicality judgment response time. Firstly, the ambiguity of
a combination will no doubt influence the length of time
needed to interpret it. When high levels of agreement exist,
it is usually because the range of interpretation is highly
constrained. Such overt constraints are likely to guide
people quickly to the intended referent. In contrast,
ambiguous combinations will be less constrained,
necessitating a broader search in order to identify an
appropriate interpretation. People may also be tempted to
continue searching for a potentially superior interpretation
in cases where an initial interpretation seems unconvincing.
In addition, the interpretation process must be followed
by some form of decision process, as interpretation alone is
not sufficient evidence for sensicality. Gagné and Shoben’s
(1997) view of sensicality as being equivalent to successful
interpretation is unrealistic. Given sufficient motivation and
imagination, virtually any combination of nouns can be
connected in some way and the challenge therefore lies in
observing some threshold of acceptability (e.g. metal cloud,
fish legs, and mountain whale can all be interpreted, yet are
clearly not sensical). With combinations located along a
continuum of sensicality, judgments will no doubt be
influenced by their proximity to the threshold of
acceptability. Combinations that are clearly sensical or
clearly non-sensical will be easy to judge. Conversely, those
that are not so clear will be more difficult to judge and the
process will take longer. Since ambiguity is likely to lower
the perceived sensicality of a combination, Gagné and
Shoben’s (1997) ambiguous stimuli were inevitably more
difficult to judge than those that were overtly meaningful.

General Discussion

1775

In Experiment 1 we investigated whether subjective
plausibility ratings for combinations are influenced by
modifier relation frequency. Our results appeared to suggest
that this was the case: differences in plausibility ratings
between conditions of modifier relation frequency
disappeared when the relation was made explicit. However,
in Experiment 2 we showed that modifier relation frequency
could not explain differences in plausibility. Given that
some combinations were interpreted with both low and high
frequency relations, a single frequency categorization could

not be applied. On the other hand, we found that measures
of objective and subjective ambiguity were closely
correlated with both plausibility and ease of interpretation.
Therefore, although the referents of Gagné and Shoben’s
(1997) combinations were not confounded with plausibility,
many of their stimuli were ambiguous, thereby invalidating
the relevance of relation frequency.
One might counter that ambiguity itself is unlikely to be
an independent variable and hence combinations in the LH
condition might have appeared more ambiguous because
they were associated with low frequency relations.
However, this perspective is illogical. A combination is
ambiguous by virtue of the fact that it can be interpreted
using a variety of different relations, all of which have
different relation frequencies. Clearly then, the assumption
of a single interpretation cannot be applied to explain
differences in ambiguity. As a result, modifier relation
frequency cannot explain the differences in plausibility and
ease of interpretation observed for the combinations in
Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) study.
The ambiguity of a combination is likely to be determined
by multiple factors. Firstly, familiarity is likely to play a
large role in guiding interpretation. For example, the
lexicalized term palm tree is associated with one dominant
interpretation which overrides the need for a combinatorial
process. In other cases, context is the crucial element in
constraining possible meanings. Given this clue, an
otherwise ambiguous combination can be interpreted with
certainty. Finally, world knowledge combined with personal
experience will have a large effect on ambiguity:
combinations that can be interpreted in a way that is
consistent with world knowledge will appear more
convincing and hence less ambiguous.
Although it may be the case that ambiguity is affected by
some factor akin to relation bias, we stress that this bias is
likely to be based on the interaction of both the modifier and
the head noun. For example, the modifier mountain has a
preference for the <LOCATED> relation, yet this bias is
only relevant when it can be supported by the head. Thus, a
combination like mountain height does not suggest the
<LOCATED> relation, since height cannot have a location.
Similarly, the head noun soup is often biased toward the
<MADE OF> relation, but only when the modifier denotes a
food substance (see Maguire & Cater, 2005).

relevant context was not available. However, to state that
this combination is implausible or even less plausible than
other combinations is misleading because in its original
context, it makes perfect sense (i.e. “Germany’s energy
headache will dominate next week’s cabinet meeting”, Irish
Times, January 14th 2006). Therefore, a more accurate
description would be to say that the interpretation of energy
headache is context dependent.
The ambiguity revealed in Experiment 2 was undoubtedly
due to the dependence of some combinations on a suitable
context for meaningfulness. Combinations like wood money
and cooking treatment were presented in isolation despite
the fact that they could not be reliably or consistently
interpreted under these circumstances. As noun-noun
compounds are typically only used in situations where they
can be reliably interpreted, this raises serious questions
about the validity of analyzing response times for contextdependent combinations presented in isolation.
A
sensicality judgment task involving such stimuli is unlikely
to reveal anything other than the extent to which they are
dependent on context for their meaning.

Conclusion
Although we have found that Gagné and Shoben’s (1997)
conditions of modifier relation frequency were not
confounded with plausibility, we have shown that many
combinations were ambiguous.
This undermines the
empirical support for the CARIN theory. Firstly, many of
the relation frequencies used by Gagné and Shoben were not
appropriate because participants interpreted combinations
using many different relations. Secondly, when we
eliminated those combinations which the majority
interpreted using a different relation, we found no
significant correlation between response time and relation
strength. Future study investigating the influence of
modifier relation frequency should ensure that combinations
can be reliably interpreted given the level of context in
which they are presented.

References

Judgments of Plausibility
It may be misleading to consider the plausibility of a
combination as absolute. Combined concepts are only
generally used in situations where they make sense. Upon
encountering a compound phrase, it is not logical to
entertain the possibility that it might be implausible: either
one understands it or one does not, but either way the
combination is almost certainly intended to be plausible.
Intuitively, combinations will only appear implausible in
cases where they are interpreted in the absence of the
context which motivated and justified their use. For
instance, the intended referent of a combination like energy
headache might prove elusive to someone for whom the

Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 71-87.
Gagné, C. L. & Spalding T. L. (in press). Relation
availability was not confounded with familiarity in Gagné
and Shoben (1997): Comment on Wisniewski and
Murphy (2005). Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Maguire, P. & Cater, A. (2005). Turnip soup: Head noun
influence in the comprehension of novel compounds.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Murphy, G. L. (2005). Frequency of
Relation Type as a Determinant of Conceptual
Combination: A Reanalysis Journal of Exp. Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 169-174.

1776

