UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Verb Mutability Effect: Noun and Verb Semantics in English and Japanese

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gr4c2dt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Asmuth, Jennifer A.
Fausey, Caitlin M.
Gentner, Dedre
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Verb Mutability Effect: Noun and Verb Semantics in English and Japanese
Caitlin M. Fausey (cmfausey@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Mall, Bldg 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Hanako Yoshida (hayoshid@indiana.edu)
Department of Brain and Psychological Sciences, 1101 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Jennifer Asmuth (asmuth@northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2100 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60201 USA
Verbs are more difficult to translate between languages than
are nouns; (f) Verbs are less often borrowed across
languages than nouns; and (g) Verbs are slower to be
acquired by children (and in second-language learning) than
nouns.
Gentner (1981) theorized that the first three phenomena
are connected via differential adjustability. If verbs are
more likely to undergo meaning adjustment during
comprehension, they will of course be more mutable under
semantic strain. This leads to poorer memory for verbs than
nouns, because verb meanings as encoded have been
contextually altered to suit the noun (Kersten & Earles,
2004). Finally, to the extent that similar verb adjustments
occur repeatedly, verbs will accrue more meaning senses
than nouns.
In this research, we asked whether the processing pattern
of greater mutability for verbs than for nouns might be a
semantic universal. As discussed below, a plausible case can
be made in either direction: i.e., for a universal processing
pattern, or for an English-specific pattern. Japanese is an
interesting language to contrast with English with respect to
the mutability of verbs, because there is reason to believe
that verbs are more central in Japanese than in English. If
indeed verbs are more central, we might expect them to be
less mutable.
Arguments for verb centrality in Japanese. There are
typological differences between Japanese and English that
may render verbs more salient in Japanese than in English.
For example, Japanese word order is SOV, placing the verb
in the salient sentence-final position (Slobin, 1973), in
contrast to the SVO order of English (which places the verb
in a low-salience middle position). Another typological
factor that may increase verb salience in Japanese is prodrop: that is, the ability of a language to omit pronouns
when the reference has been established or is obvious from
context. In Japanese, for example, instead of saying
"Watashi wa byōki desu" ("I am sick"), one can simply say
"Byōki desu" ("Am/Is/Are sick"). Thus, a single verb can
constitute a complete sentence: e.g., “Yatta!” "(I /we/ they)
did (it!)". Researchers have theorized that speakers of prodrop languages may experience verbs as more central (Choi

Abstract
To what extent are the processing patterns for nouns and
verbs universal across languages? Under conditions of
semantic strain, English speakers tend to adapt the meaning of
the verb to fit the noun in the sentence. We asked Japanese
and English speakers to paraphrase simple sentences of the
form “The noun verbed,” varying in semantic strain (e.g.,
“The blender talked”). We then assessed the degree to which
speakers adjusted the default word meanings in their
paraphrases by asking a new group of speakers to read the
paraphrases and to guess (“retrace”) which word had occurred
in the original sentence. As predicted, English speakers
retraced more nouns than verbs, suggesting that verb
meanings were adjusted to a greater degree than noun
meanings in the paraphrases. However, the results for
Japanese speakers did not differ between nouns and verbs. We
discuss implications for the universality of a noun−verb
mutability difference.

Introduction
Research has revealed important psychological differences
in the acquisition and processing of nouns and verbs. This
has been taken to be evidence of deep semantic differences
between the two. But how universal are these differences?
Languages appear to vary significantly in the salience and
emphasis that verbs are given relative to nouns, and it is
possible that the psychological noun-verb differences will
also vary by language. This paper examines these issues,
exploring cross-linguistic differences in noun-verb
processing patterns.
Synthesizing linguistic and psychological research,
Gentner (1981; 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001) has
argued for a deep semantic distinction between nouns and
verbs. Gentner has emphasized the following: (a) Verbs are
more mutable than nouns, in that their meanings are
adjusted more than noun meanings under semantic strain;
(b) Verbs are poorer in memory—more difficult to recall
and recognize—than nouns; (c) Verbs are more polysemous
than nouns: at all frequency levels, verbs have a greater
number of word senses than do nouns; (d) Verb meanings
differ more cross-linguistically than do noun meanings; (e)
214

significantly more often than the original verbs. Further, the
greatest difference occurred for the semantically strained
sentences, suggesting that verbs change meaning most when
under high semantic strain (as opposed to simply having
vague meanings). These findings suggest that the chief
locus of meaning adjustment in noun-verb conceptual
combination is the verb, rather than the noun, and that
meaning adjustment is orderly, changing most in the most
strained conditions.
Before embarking on the cross-linguistic comparison, we
note an important qualification. The verb mutability studies
to date have used primarily concrete nouns. In our recent
research we have investigated a class of nouns we call
“relational” nouns (e.g., mother, barrier), which have
meanings centered around extrinsic relations with other
concepts. Relational nouns are similar to verbs in that they
can take arguments and assign a thematic role (e.g., barrier
implies three arguments, a figure, something that blocks
access, and a goal). Relational nouns have a rather “verby”
quality, and indeed in English we have found evidence that
relational nouns are more mutable than nouns referring to
concrete entities (Asmuth & Gentner, 2005). In the present
research we used concrete nouns in both languages.
Verb Mutability: A Universal Pattern? In this research we
extend the above paraphrase methodology to ask whether
the verb mutability effect holds cross-linguistically. There
are reasons to speculate that this pattern might be universal.
First, Gentner and France speculated that the verb
mutability pattern may stem in part from the fact that verbs
have a predicating function within the sentence, whereas
nouns act as arguments of the predicate. Thus the verb’s role
requires that it provide a relational structure that links the
nouns of a sentence. A second line of reasoning in support
of verb mutability as a universal arises from language
acquisition research. If, as Gentner and Boroditsky (2001)
claimed, nouns pick out highly coherent, easily individuated
entities (and are therefore learned earliest across
languages),1 it might follow that nouns would be more
stable than verbs in adult combinatorial semantics.
To test the possibility that the verb mutability effect is
universal requires taking into account variations in the
typological and input features of different languages. An
obviously plausible alternative possibility is that the verb
mutability effect varies cross-linguistically according to the
degree to which a language is verb-salient. To investigate
this possibility, we extended Gentner and France’s (1988)
exploration of combinatorial semantics to speakers of
Japanese.

& Gopnik, 1995; Tardif, 1996). Further, cross-cultural
variation in sensitivity to the context of utterances, as well
as sensitivity to context more generally (e.g., Kitayama &
Ishii, 2002), could lead to adult usage patterns in which
nouns and verbs are treated differently across languages.
Consistent with these ideas, child language researchers
have found that caregiver-to-child speech in Mandarin,
Korean and Japanese includes more verb types and tokens
than such speech in English (e.g., Au, Dapretto & Song,
1994; Ogura, 2001; Tardif, 1996). Snedeker, Li, and Yuan
(2003) suggested that the information available in
extralinguistic contexts may support nouns and verbs equally
for learners of Mandarin, but favor nouns for learners of
English. Finally, Fernald and Morikawa (1993) found that
Japanese mothers use fewer nouns than do American mothers
in caregiver-to-child speech. In sum, verbs may be more
important, and thus perhaps less mutable, to speakers of
Japanese than to speakers of English.
The Verb Mutability Effect. We adapted a technique used
by Gentner and France (1988) to study the combinatorial
semantics of nouns and verbs. Gentner and France (1988)
explored the phenomenon of meaning adjustment under
semantic strain in English speakers. They asked English
speakers to paraphrase simple noun-verb sentences, some of
which were semantically strained (e.g., “The lizard
worshipped”), while others were not (e.g., “The politician
worshipped”). Not surprisingly, participants were able to
paraphrase the low strain sentences without deviating far
from the default meanings of the words. The question of
interest was what people would do in response to a
semantically strained sentence such as “The lizard
worshipped.” Specifically, the question was whether the
noun would be altered to fit the verb, as in “The hypocritical
person went to church” or the verb to fit the noun, as in
“The chameleon stared at the sun in a daze.”
Because directly rating the degree of meaning change
across form class is problematic, Gentner and France used
two indirect methods: a double paraphrase task and a
retrace task. In the double-paraphrase task, a new group of
English speakers was given the paraphrases generated in the
paraphrase task and was asked to paraphrase them. The
resulting double paraphrases were examined for the
reappearance of original nouns (e.g., “lizard”) and original
verbs (e.g., “worshipped”). Gentner and France found that
19% of original nouns, but only 4% of original verbs,
appeared in the double paraphrases, suggesting that the
original participants had altered the meanings of the verbs
more than the meanings of nouns.
The second task used to assess change of meaning was a
retrace task. Two new groups of participants were given the
paraphrases generated by a set of original participants. One
group was also given a list of the initial nouns (that is, the
nouns of the stimulus sentences that the initial participants
had paraphrased). The other group received the initial verbs.
Their task was to guess which word had occurred in the
original sentence. Gentner and France found that people
correctly selected (“retraced”) the original nouns

Present Study
Our goal was to test whether the verb mutability effect
would hold for Japanese speakers (and also whether the
effect would be replicated with new materials in English). A
1

Note that Ogura et al. (2006) reported that despite the increased
proportion of verbs in Japanese caregiver-to-child speech, children
still produced more nouns than verbs in early one-word utterances.

215

Table 1: Example stimuli.

demonstration of verb mutability in Japanese would support
the possibility that universal semantic differences hold
between nouns and verbs in adult processing (as appears to
be the case in language acquisition). Other possible patterns
of results for adult Japanese speakers include: (a) Japanese
speakers might show the reverse pattern from English
speakers: a “noun mutability effect,” such that the locus of
meaning adjustment is the noun (consistent with the verbsalience noted above); (b) Japanese speakers might show the
same qualitative verb mutability effect as English speakers,
but to a lesser degree. This possibility would argue for a
universal noun-verb semantics that is moderated by
language-specific factors; or (c) Japanese speakers might
treat nouns and verbs similarly in a combinatorial semantics
task. If Japanese speakers do not show the verb mutability
effect, this will be evidence against the universality of nounverb differences in adult processing. In addition, such a
finding will call for theories that take into account the role
of typological variation and extralinguistic contexts in
meaning adjustment strategies.

talk
kick
stop

mother
The mother
talked.
The mother
kicked.
The mother
stopped.

pony
The pony
talked.
The pony
kicked.
The pony
stopped.

blender
The blender
talked.
The blender
kicked.
The blender
stopped.

English and Japanese stimuli. All English and Japanese
nouns, verbs and sentences were direct translations of each
other. Stimuli were prepared iteratively by the authors (who
enlisted the intuitions of other native English-speaking and
Japanese-speaking informants).
Design. The full 24-noun by 24-verb matrix was divided
into four 6-noun by 6-verb matrices. Each of the 6x6
matrices consisted of two nouns and two verbs in each of
three categories: human, animate non-human, and artifact
(see Table 1). From these four 6x6 matrices, six sentence
sets were constructed: Each set consisted of six sentences
from each matrix, making a set of 24 sentences in which
each noun and each verb appeared once and only once. Each
sentence set contained an equal distribution of matched,
overmatched, and undermatched sentences. Each participant
received a randomized order of 24 sentences from one set.
An equal number of participants received each of the
sentence sets.

Materials and Design
Noun and Verb Matrix. In Part A, participants paraphrased
sentences of the form, “The noun verbed.” Sentences were
composed using all possible pairs of 24 nouns and 24 verbs.
Of the 24 nouns, 8 were human, 8 were animate non-human,
and 8 were artifacts. Similarly, 24 verbs were divided so
that 8 selected each type of subject noun (see Table 1 for
examples).
The nouns and verbs of these sentences varied in
compatibility with each other so that some sentences were
easily understood while others were semantically strained.
For example, the verb “talk” prefers a human subject, and so
the sentence, “The mother talked” is acceptable. When
paired with an artifact subject, as in, “The blender talked,”
the sentence is semantically strained. Sentences belonged to
one of three groups: (a) Matched, where the noun matched
the argument specification of the verb (e.g., “The mother
talked”), (b) Overmatched, where the noun exceeded the
argument specification of the verb (e.g., “The mother
kicked”; “kick” requires only that its subject be animate,
and not necessarily human), and (c) Undermatched, where
the noun failed to meet the argument specification of the
verb (e.g., “The blender talked”). The undermatched
sentences were semantically strained, required the greatest
meaning adjustment in paraphrase, and provided a test for
differential adjustment of nouns versus verbs in
paraphrasing strategies.
Selection of Nouns and Verbs. The selection of noun and
verb stimuli were guided by the following criteria: (a)
Within each noun category (human, animate non-human,
artifact), all verbs should accept all nouns as subjects, (b)
All nouns and verbs should be low in ambiguity in English
and in Japanese, (c) Each noun and verb should have similar
meanings in English and in Japanese. Importantly, each
noun and verb must fall in the same category (human,
animate non-human, artifact) in English and in Japanese.

Part A: Paraphrase
Participants 24 English speakers and 24 Japanese speakers
volunteered or received course credit for their participation.
All participants were university students. In 5 cases,
participants violated instructions by producing more than
two paraphrases that included repetitions of original words,
leaving more than two paraphrases blank, and/or writing
patently silly responses. These participants were removed,
and additional participants were recruited to replace these
sentence sets.
Procedure Participants were asked to paraphrase a set of
24 sentences—that is, to restate the meaning of each
sentence in their own words. They were told to imagine that
they had overheard the sentence in passing and were trying
to determine what a sensible person could have meant by it.
Participants were told to avoid simply mechanically
replacing each word in the sentence with a similar word
without taking into account the meaning of the sentence as a
whole; rather, they were asked to imagine a situation in
which someone might have said the sentence, and come up
with the most natural interpretation possible. Participants
were instructed not to use pronouns in their paraphrases and
not to repeat any content words from the original sentences.
Pilot testing revealed that Japanese participants
sometimes produced paraphrases that did not restate the
meaning of the sentence, but rather described the context in
which someone might have said the sentence, while English

216

Table 3: Retrace packet examples. Here, the original
sentence is “The blender talked.” The paraphrase is shown
along with the set of nouns and/or verbs provided to raters.

speakers sometimes took the route of replacing each word
by a synonym. To minimize differences in interpretation of
the paraphrase task, Japanese speakers were provided with
several good and bad paraphrases that illustrated many of
the misunderstandings revealed by piloting; English
speakers were provided with an example of mechanistic
synonym replacing (of both the noun and the verb) and were
told not to approach the task in this way. With the exception
of number of examples, the instructions were equivalent in
English and in Japanese.
The paraphrases served as materials in the subsequent
retrace task (see Table 2 for examples). The retrace
dependent measure assessed the degree to which
participants changed the meaning of nouns and the meaning
of verbs in their paraphrasing strategies.

Noun Packet
The juice spilled out of the mixer.
blender car
teacher bracelet
Verb Packet

vase
artist

pilot
panda

bird
boy

mouse
turtle

The juice spilled out of the mixer.
floated talked doubted moved decided endured
laughed stopped strayed helped listened drank
Paraphrases of any particular original sentence (e.g., “The
mother talked”) never appeared more than once in a retrace
packet. Of the 96 paraphrases in each packet, 48 were
generated in response to sentences that had been constructed
from two of the four 6x6 matrices, and the other 48 were
generated in response to sentences from the other two. The
order of matrix pairs was counterbalanced across
participants, and the order of the paraphrases within a
matrix-pair block was randomized for each participant.
The 12 word choices placed beneath each paraphrase
corresponded to the matrix pair from which the paraphrases
had been generated. The order of original nouns and original
verbs within each 12-word set was randomized once and
used for all participants.

Table 2: Sample paraphrases of an undermatched sentence.
Original Sentence: The vase laughed. / 花瓶が笑った。
English paraphrases
The piece of crystal sparkled.
The piece of glass used to hold flowers giggled.
Japanese paraphrases
きれいな女の人がデートに誘った。
(A beautiful lady asked for a date.)
花が曲がった。
(A flower bent.)

Part B: Retrace
In the retrace task, a new group of participants saw the
paraphrases along with sets of original nouns or original
verbs and tried to guess which word had occurred in the
original sentence. To the extent that noun meaning is less
altered than verb meaning in the paraphrases, it is easier to
recover the original noun than the original verb in this
retrace task.

Procedure Participants were told that the sentences they
would read were paraphrases generated by other participants
and that their job was to figure out which words had been
used in the original sentences. Participants were told that a
set of words would appear below each paraphrase and were
asked to circle the word that was most likely to have been in
the original sentence. The instructions emphasized that there
were no restrictions on the number of times they could
select a particular word and that they might feel that some
words go with many of the paraphrases whereas others go
with none. These instructions, plus the large number of
sentences, were intended to prevent participants from
adopting strategies (e.g., process of elimination) that might
inflate or otherwise distort their accuracy in the retrace task.

Participants An additional 24 English speakers and 24
Japanese speakers volunteered or received course credit for
their participation. All participants were university students.
Materials Retrace packets consisted of sentences, each
accompanied by 12 word choices.
Sentences were
paraphrases generated by participants in the initial
paraphrase task. Word choice sets consisted of a subset of
nouns or verbs from the original matrices.

Results
The dependent measure of meaning preservation was the
proportion of correct selections of the original noun or verb;
that is, the proportion of correct retraces. All reported
effects were significant at the p < .05 level, and unreported
effects were not significant. Results for matched and
overmatched noun−verb pairs were collapsed to compare
performance differences between the semantically strained
undermatched pairs and semantically unstrained pairs.
Overall analysis. A 2 (Form Class: Noun, Verb) by 2
(Semantic Strain: Strained, Unstrained) by 2 (Language:
English, Japanese) Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), in

Design Packets of 96 paraphrases, each consisting of 24
paraphrases from each of four participants in the initial
paraphrase task, were constructed. Half the retrace
participants were given noun packets, in which a set of 12
nouns was placed beneath each paraphrase. The other half
were given verb packets, in which a set of 12 verbs was
placed beneath each paraphrase (see Table 3 for examples).

217

Proportion Retraced

which language and form class varied between-subjects and
semantic strain varied within-subjects, revealed three
significant main effects as well as the three-way interaction.
Overall, English speakers retraced a greater proportion of
words (M = 72.9%, SE = 2.0%) than did Japanese speakers
(M = 44.7%, SE = 2.0%), F(1,44) = 103.58. Note that
Japanese speakers performed well above chance (8.3%), and
that this main effect is best interpreted in light of other
patterns reported below (as discussed below).
Overall, nouns (M = 62.8%, SE = 2.0%) were retraced
better than verbs (M = 54.7%, SE = 2.0%), F(1,44) = 8.54.
Also, words from unstrained sentences (M = 64.6%, SE =
1.2%) were retraced better than words from strained
sentences (M = 52.9%, SE = 1.9%), F(1,44) = 62.39.
The two-way interaction between form class and
language, F(1,44) = 4.92, as well as the three-way
interaction among strain, form class and language, F(1,44) =
4.37, were significant, and so post-hoc analyses of only
English speakers and only Japanese speakers were
conducted.
English. A 2 (Form Class: Noun, Verb) by 2 (Semantic
Strain: Strained, Unstrained) ANOVA, in which form class
varied between-subjects and semantic strain varied withinsubjects, revealed a significant main effect of form class,
such that English speakers retraced a greater proportion of
nouns (M = 80.0%, SE = 2.9%) than verbs (M = 65.8%, SE
= 2.9%), F(1,22) = 11.81.
This analysis also revealed a main effect of semantic
strain, such that English speakers retraced more words in the
unstrained (M = 78.3%, SE = 1.7%) than in the strained
condition (M = 67.4%, SE = 2.9%), F(1,22) = 22.63.
The interaction between form class and strain reached
significance, F(1,22) = 5.86. Planned comparison t-tests
revealed that English speakers correctly retraced
significantly more nouns than verbs at both levels of
semantic strain (Unstrained: t(22) = 2.61, Strained: t(22) =
3.41), and this difference was particularly pronounced in the
strained condition (see Figure 1).
Japanese. An identical analysis of retrace behavior of
Japanese speakers revealed a significant main effect of
semantic strain, such that Japanese speakers retraced more
words in the unstrained (M = 50.9%, SE = 1.8% ) than in the
strained condition (M = 38.4% , SE = 2.3%), F(1,22) =
44.24, and no other main effects or interactions (see Figure
2).

0.75
Nouns
Verbs

0.55

0.35
Undermatched

Matched

Overmatched

Semantic Strain

Proportion Retraced

Figure 1: English retrace performance.

Nouns
Verbs

0.75

0.55

0.35
Undermatched

Matched

Overmatched

Semantic Strain
Figure 2: Japanese retrace performance.
In this semantically strained condition, the relative ease of
correctly retracing nouns over correctly retracing verbs was
especially pronounced. Japanese speakers did not show this
verb mutability effect and instead correctly retraced
approximately the same proportion of nouns and of verbs at
all levels of semantic strain.
Interestingly, English speakers were better able to identify
the words from which paraphrases had been generated than
were Japanese speakers.

General Discussion
Nouns and verbs in English differ in many striking ways.
Among other differences, nouns are less mutable, more
memorable, and more easily acquired than verb meanings
(Gentner, 1981). To what extent are these deep differences
between nouns and verbs universal across languages?
The present study focused on mutability. We examined
meaning adjustment strategies of English and Japanese
speakers. Our results bear out previous findings for English:
under semantic strain, speakers adjusted verb meanings
more than noun meanings, suggesting that the verb was
adapted to fit the nouns. In contrast, Japanese speakers
showed no difference between nouns and verbs in degree of
adjustment. These results suggest that the strength (and
perhaps the very existence) of the verb mutability effect
varies across languages.

Discussion
English speakers correctly retraced a greater proportion of
nouns than verbs. This finding is consistent with prior
findings (Gentner & France, 1988; Reyna, 1980), and
suggests that when English speakers interpret and
paraphrase noun-verb conceptual combinations, they
preserve noun meaning to a greater extent than verb
meaning. Further, English speakers found it most difficult to
correctly retrace nouns and verbs in paraphrases generated
from semantically strained sentences (the undermatched
condition).

218

Choi, S. & Gopnik, A. (1995). Early acquisition of verbs in
Korean: a cross-linguistic study. Journal of Child
Language, 22, 497-529.
Fernald, A. & Morikawa, H. (1993). Common themes and
cultural variations in Japanese and American mothers’
speech to infants. Child Development, 64, 637-56.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
verbs and nouns. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4 (2), 161178.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.
Kuczaj II (Ed.), Language development, Volume 2:
Language, thought and culture. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity, and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Gentner, D. & France, I.M. (1988). The verb mutability
effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of nouns
and verbs. In S.L. Small, G.W. Cotrell, & M.K.
Tanenhaus (Eds.), Lexical ambiguity resolution in the
comprehension of human language. Los Altos, CA:
Morgan Kaufman.
Kersten, A.W. & Earles, J.L. (2004). Semantic context
influences memory for verbs more than memory for
nouns. Memory & Cognition, 32, 198-211.
Kitayama, S., & Ishii, K. (2002). Word and voice:
Spontaneous attention to emotional utterances in two
languages. Cognition and Emotion, 16 (1), 29-59.
Ogura, T. (2001). Meishi yuui, doushi yuui ni oyobosu
hahaoya no gengo nyuryoku no kentou [Influence of
maternal input in the distribution of nouns and verbs in
early vocabulary]. Ministry of Education and Science
grant report, Kobe University, 4, 156-163.
Ogura, T., Dale, P., Yamashita, Y., Murase, T., & Mahieu,
A. (2006). The use of nouns and verbs by Japanese
children and their caregivers in book-reading and toyplaying contexts. Journal of Child Language, 33, 1-29.
Reyna, V.F. (1980). When words collide: Interpretation of
selectionally opposed nouns and verbs. Symposium on
Metaphor and Thought, University of Chicago, Center for
Cognitive Science. Chicago, IL.
Slobin, D.I. (1973). Cognitive prerequisites for the
development of grammar. In C.A. Ferguson and D.I.
Slobin (Eds.), Studies of child language development.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Snedeker, J., Li, P. & Yuan, S. (2003). Cross-Cultural
Differences in the Input to Early Word Learning.
Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Tardif, T. (1996). Nouns are not always learned before
verbs: Evidence from Mandarin speakers’ early
vocabularies. Developmental Psychology, 32 (3), 492504.

Before accepting this conclusion we should note that there
are several factors that may influence the patterns in our
data. While Japanese speakers retraced original words above
chance, and were sensitive to differences in semantic strain,
overall they were considerably less accurate in the retrace
task. This suggests that Japanese speakers may have adopted
a different meaning adjustment strategy from English
speakers. For example, our preliminary examination
suggests that the Japanese paraphrases were more abstract
than the English paraphrases, and more likely to contain
conventional metaphors, such as “old man” as a paraphrase
for “tortoise.” Another pattern suggested by the data is that
English speakers may have used more close synonyms
(especially for nouns) than did Japanese speakers. Future
analyses will investigate whether there are cross-linguistic
differences in the availability of synonyms for nouns and
verbs, such that English speakers easily access synonyms
for nouns but less so for verbs, while Japanese speakers find
few synonyms for both nouns and verbs.
There could also be cross-cultural differences in
communicative style that lead Japanese speakers to
approach the task differently. For example, Japanese
participants were more likely to describe the situation in
which the sentence might be said rather than directly
paraphrase its meaning than were English speaking
participants. Although such responses were filtered out of
our retrace task, they are indicative of different response
strategies between the two groups.
To further provide insight into adult processing of nouns
and verbs in multiple languages, future studies will aim to
more rigorously control aspects of the paraphrase-retrace
paradigm (e.g., word frequencies of translation equivalents
and existence of synonyms in the two languages), and to
employ alternative measures of semantic processing.
Investigations of linguistic universals and differences can
yield important insights into issues of semantic
representation. Despite some evidence for a universal
advantage for nouns over verbs in acquisition (e.g., Gentner
& Boroditsky, 2001), our results provide no evidence for a
universal difference in sentence processing. The verb
mutability effect may be specific to English and closely
related languages.

Acknowledgments
We thank Linda Smith, Kathleen Braun, Hisae Matsuura,
Megumi Kuwabara, and Shohei Hidaka for their
contributions to this research.

References
Asmuth, J. & Gentner, D. (2005). Context sensitivity of
relational nouns. Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Au, T.K., Dapretto, M., & Song, Y.K. (1994). Input vs.
constraints: early word acquisition in Korean and English.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 567-582.

219

