UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Cognitive Accessibility of Synesthetic Metaphors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80834044

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Beseoglu, Hakan
Fleishhauer, Jens
Werning, Markus

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Cognitive Accessibility of Synaesthetic Metaphors
Markus Werning (werning@phil.uni-duesseldorf.de)
Jens Fleischhauer (fleischhauer@phil.uni-duesseldorf.de)
Hakan Beşeoğlu (beseoglu@phil.uni-duesseldorf.de)
Department of Philosophy, Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf
Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany

Abstract

e.g., the fusiform gyrus, while the higher form is located
in higher cortical regions like the angular gyrus.
The neurological phenomenon must be distinguished
from synaesthesia as a phenomenon in natural languages.
Here it typically occurs in the context of metaphors and
is not restricted to a small proportion of the population.
According to prominent theories of metaphors (Black,
1962; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), any metaphor results
from a mapping of some concept from a source domain
(SD) onto a concept of some target domain (TD). In the
metaphorical sentence

A (strongly) synaesthetic metaphor (e.g., loud yellow ) is
a metaphor that results from a combination of a modifier and a head, where both express perceptual qualities.
Not all synaesthetic metaphors are cognitively equally
accessible. In this paper the factors that enhance or reduce the cognitive accessibility of those metaphors are
explored for the German language. The order of the
sense modalities from which the modifiers and heads
were taken turned out to be a significant factor for the
accessibility of a metaphor, although earlier claims of
a linear order of modalities could be disconfirmed. The
frequency of the overall use of a modifier in the language
and its morphological status as derived or not derived
also turned out to be a significant factor, whereas the
frequency of the head had no significant influence.

(1) The road bows down into the valley

Introduction

a concept from the source domain of bodily motion (expressed by the verb bow ) is mapped onto a concept from
some geographical target domain (expressed by the noun
road ). The reader is now forced to transform the source
concept in order to match it to the target concept. Thus
the metaphorical interpretation of the composed expression results.
In the case of synaesthetic metaphors, the source domain (SD) – in adjective-noun constructions typically
the domain of the modifier – is restricted to concepts of
perception, which make up the perceptual domain (PD).
A rough, but natural classification of the perceptual domain can be made along the five senses: color, sound,
touch, smell, and taste. This leads to a classification of
the following examples:

The phenomenon of synaesthesia has gained increasing
attention over the last ten years (Baron-Cohen & Harrison, 1997; Harrison, 2002; Cytowic, 2002). It has a
neurological as well as a linguistic aspect. The neurological phenomenon describes the abnormal interaction
of neural processes regarding different senses or modalities. According to varying estimates it occurs in about
1/20000 to 1/200 of the population (Cytowic, 1997;
Baron-Cohen, Burt, Smith-Laittan, Harrison, & Bolton,
1996; Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001). Subjects with
synaesthesia in the neurological sense, e.g., have the phenomenal impression of color when they hear a particular
tone (‘C-sharp is blue’). Martino and Marks (2001) distinguish between strong and weak synaesthesia depending on whether the abnormal interaction is cross-sensory
or simply cross-modal. According to them, subjects with
the above mentioned sound-color interaction would exemplify strong synaesthesia, whereas subjects, who, e.g.,
have a particular color impression when they see a particular grapheme (‘The 2 is yellow’) would be cases of
weak synaesthesia.
Ramachandran and Hubbard (2001) go even further
and subsume also the abnormal connection of a phenomenal quality with an abstract object under the notion of
synaesthesia. Some subjects, e.g., connect a visual impression with a day of the week (‘Monday is red’). For
Ramachandran and Hubbard those are cases of higher
synaesthesia, while they count cross-sensory and crossmodal interactions as lower synaesthesia. According to
them, the lower form is located in lower cortical regions,

2365

(2) The old woman had an open heart
(3) The rich man had a cold heart
(4) The stone statue had a cold smell
Example (2) is a metaphor, but not a synaesthetic one
because the modifier does not come from a perceptional
domain. The second and the third case pass the definition and, therefore, are synaesthetic metaphors. They
are, however, quite different with respect to their target
domain. In (4) the target domain and the source domain
both are from PD, whereas in (3) only the source domain
is. We, therefore, call the former a strongly synaesthetic
metaphor and the latter a weakly synaesthetic metaphor :
Definition (Synaesthetic Metaphor) A metaphor
is synaesthetic if and only if its source domain is perceptual. It is only weakly synaesthetic if its target is not also

perceptual, and strongly synaesthetic if its target domain,
too, is perceptual.
This definition parallels the distinctions in the neurological sphere drawn by Martino and Marks, on the one side,
and Ramachandran and Hubbard, on the other side. For
the rest of this paper, our interests lie exclusively on
strongly synaesthetic metaphors.
It has not yet been fully explained how synaesthetic
metaphors can be understood by speakers and hearers
at all. This has to do with the striking fact that synaesthetic metaphors, on the one hand, form a highly productive class of expressions, but on the other hand, they
seem to be semantically largely non-compositional; or at
least, the mechanism of semantic composition lies entirely in the dark (For the notion of compositionality
see Fodor & Lepore, 2002, and Werning, 2004). This
contradicts the widely held expectation that all cases of
linguistic productivity root in semantic compositionality
(for other counterexamples see Werning, 2005a, though).
Moreover: whereas semantic explanations of ordinary
metaphors usually recur to a certain semantic structure
of the components (Löbner, 2002), the sensual qualities
expressed by the components of synaesthetic metaphors
are apparently semantically primitive or at least very
little structured.
It also remains open if the neurological phenomenon
and the linguistic phenomenon of synaesthesia have common or, at least, related grounds, or if they are completely distinct phenomena. Ramachandran and Hubbard even see an important role for synaesthesia in the
evolution of language and argue that “[the] solution to
the riddle of language origins comes from synaesthesia”
(Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001, p. 19). Any corroborated link of the two phenomena promises to be a substantial contribution to the exploration of the neural correlate of semantic composition (Hurford, 2003; Werning,
2005b).
The central question for the empirical study presented
in this paper was why some synaesthetic metaphors are
cognitively more accessible than others. Although, it is
very obvious that there are large differences in the cognitive accessibility of synaesthetic metaphors, the empirical data sofar have been relatively poor. What are the
relevant factors that may reduce or enhance the accessibility of a synaesthetic metaphor?
Ullmann (1967), in a very early study on synaesthetic
metaphors, proposes a certain hierarchy of lower and
higher perceptual modalities (see Fig. 1). He claims that
qualities of lower senses (on the left of the hierarchy)
should preferentially occur in the source domain, while
qualities of higher senses (on the right of the hierarchy)
should be preferred in the target domain. His thesis of
directionality thus entails that a metaphor with a source
domain lower in the hierarchy of sense modalities than
the target domain (e.g., cold blue, touch – color) should
tend to be cognitively more accessible than a metaphor
with the reverse direction of domains (blue cold, color –
touch).1
In succession to Ullmann, Williams (1976) makes a
1

taste

touch

smell

sound

lower
sense

color

higher
sense

Figure 1: Directionality and the hierarchy of the senses
according to Ullmann (1967).

color

touch

taste

smell

dimen
-sion

sound

Figure 2: Directionalities according to Williams (1976,
p. 463).
more differentiated claim of directionality, in which a
similar order of sense modalities is proposed, but the
order is no longer linear. Williams, e.g., cites bright
sounds (color – sound) as an example for an accessible
metaphor that does not conform with Ullmann’s linear
order of sense modalities. Instead, Williams proposes a
somewhat more complex order (see Fig. 2).
Recently, Yu (2003) highlights cross-linguistic differences, when he makes different directionality claims for
different languages (English as compared to Chinese). In
the light of those directionality claims, Shen argues that
“poetic synesthesia systematically prefers to map terms
of lower distinctiveness onto terms of higher distinctiveness, rather than vice versa” (Shen, 1997, p. 48). His
argument grounds on an analysis of several lyric corpora
and gains support from an empirical pilot study. He
argues that, first, the directness of contact between a
sense and what is perceived and, second, the existence
of a special sense organ increases the accessibility of a
sense modality. Accordingly, sense modalities with wider
distance between the perceiver and the perceived (color
and sound as opposed to smell and taste) and a special
sense organ (ear, nose, tongue and eyes) are of higher
distinctiveness and thus at one pole in the order of directionality.
Given that some version of a directionality claim is
sweeten the sounds as accessible metaphors supporting his
directionality claim.

Ullmann (1967, p. 287) cites i.a. warm color and to

2366

true for a certain language, the choice of source and
target domain should significantly influence the accessibility of a synaesthetic metaphor. But there could also
be other factors: the overall frequency of words used as
modifiers or heads, the morphology of the words, as well
as personal factors of the interpreter, like age, gender,
and mother tongue. Our experiment performed for the
German language was designed to isolate the factors that
correlate with the cognitive accessibility of synaesthetic
metaphors and to explicitly explore the role of directionality.

touch
0.
3
.2
2

2
0.
31
0.

-0

taste

color

2

.5

-0.2
4
0.57

-0.1
6

6
0.3
4
-0.2
-0

Experiment
Method
Subjects 107 students from Düsseldorf at an age from
19 to 70 (mean 27.73) participated in the study. 65 of
them were female and 42 were male. All but 15 were
native speakers, the others still were competent in German.

sound

-0.38

smell

Design In German there are highly productive morphological rules to generate nouns from adjectives. For
example süß (‘sweet’) – die Süße (‘sweetness’) for the
modality of taste and dunkel (‘dark’) – die Dunkelheit
(darkness) in the modality of color. From the very limited number of German lexicalized adjective-noun pairs
that express the same sensual qualities a nearly exhaustive list of 57 were chosen. The Cartesian product of the
list of adjectives with the list of nouns generated a set of
strongly synaesthetic metaphors, e.g., süße Dunkelheit
(‘sweet darkness’) and dunkle Süße (‘dark sweetness’).
From this set an equal quantity was selected for each of
the 20 possible SD-TD directions.
It was taken care that for each metaphor with a certain
succession of source and target domain (XSD −YT D ) the
complementary metaphor (YSD −XT D ) was adopted. To
accomplish a broad range of metaphors, we randomly
divided the subjects into five groups with an average size
of 21.4 (min. 18, max. 24). Each group was presented
a list of 34 synaesthetic metaphors. So, altogether 170
different metaphors were tested.
Subjects were asked to assess the intuitive accessibility
of each metaphor. Possible values were −1 for ‘not accessible’ and +1 for ‘accessible’. Gender, age, and mother
tongue of the subjects were also recorded.

-0.41

x

y

Metaphors with source domain x and target domain y
tend to be cognitivly accessible

x

y

Metaphors with source domain x and target domain y
tend to be cognitivly inaccessible

Figure 3: Significant influences of directionality on accessibility. The numbers in boxes show the differences
to the expected mean value (0). Only significant results
are displayed (p < 0.05). Highly significant results are
marked with ‘*’(p < 0.01).

Results

Corpus Analysis To consider additional variables
that could effect the subjects’ answers, we analyzed the
frequencies of the adopted adjectives and nouns. The
frequencies were determined from the German version of
the CELEX corpus (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Gulikers,
1995). This corpus consists of about six million words
taken from written and spoken sources representative for
contemporary German.

Gender, age, and mother tongue did not significantly
correlate with the judgements of accessibility. However,
directionality did. A quantitative analysis for all 20 directions is shown in Fig. 4.
The null hypothesis that there would be no directionality effects on the accessibility of a metaphor would lead
to the expectation of an equipartition. Since we assigned
the value +1 to ‘accessible’ and −1 to ‘not accessible’, a
mean value of 0 should be expected for the null hypothesis. A t-test was used to calculate significant deviations
(p < 0.05) from the expected mean value. All significant
deviations from the expected mean accessibility for the
directions are shown in the diagram of Fig. 3. Directions
with non-significant deviations from the null hypothesis
are not shown. A positive value indicates a significant
enhancement for the respective SD-TD direction. I.e.,
metaphors with the respective SD-TD direction tend to
be cognitively more accessible than expected by the null
hypothesis. A negative value indicates a significant impediment for this direction, i.e., metaphors with a thus
annotated SD-TD direction tend to be cognitively less
accessible than expected by the null hypothesis.
To analyze the influence of the remaining variables, a
Pearson-correlation analysis was performed. It turned
out that the frequency of the head of a metaphor is
not significantly correlated with the accessibility of the
metaphor. However, the frequency of the modifier of a
metaphor is highly significantly correlated (correlation
coefficient 0.134, p < 0.01) with an enhancement of the

Morphological Analysis As a further variable we
considered the morphological derivation status of the
modifier adjectives. Some adjectives were genuine adjectives, e.g., warm (‘warm’), while others were morphological derived from verbs or nouns by productive
morphological rules, e.g., riechen – riechend (‘smell’ –
‘smelling’), Aroma – aromatisch (‘aroma’ – ‘aromatic’).

2367

answers [%]

accessible
not accessible

80

**
70

*

60

**

**

**

*

50

40

30

20

10

colorsmell

colortaste

colorsound

colortouch

smell taste

smellsound

smell touch

tastesound

taste touch

sound touch

answers [%]

**

80

70

**

**

**

**

soundsmell

touchsmell

**

60

50

40

30

20

10

smell color

taste color

sound color

touch color

taste smell

sound taste

touch taste

touch sound

Figure 4: Proportion of accessibility as a function of the SD-TD direction. The diagram shows the proportion of
metaphors assessed ‘accessible’ or ‘not accessible’ for each direction. Significant results (p < 0.05) are marked with
‘*’, highly significant ones with ‘**’ (p < 0.01). Reverse directions are shown one upon the other.
metaphor’s cognitive accessibility. In Fig. 5 the mean
frequencies of modifiers for the different modalities are
drawn.
The derivation status of modifier adjectives turned out
to be highly significantly correlated with cognitive accessibility, too (correlation coefficient −0.158, p < 0.01). In
general derived adjectives tend to reduce the accessibility of a metaphor as opposed to non-derived adjectives.

2368

Fig. 6 descriptively represents the average accessibility
of a metaphor as a function of the derivation status of
the modifier for each modality.

Discussion
Directionality seems to be one of three factors that significantly correlate with the cognitive accessibility of
synaesthetic metaphors. Some version of a direction-

mean
frequency

modifier not derived
modifier derived

accessibility
[%]
46
0,
0

500

41
5,
73

80

70

400
60

50

300

6,
19

18

1,

67

57

40

200

30

20
100

0,
75

10

0

color

smell

(101-1511)

(0-3)

taste

sound

(0-640) (0-838)

touch

modifier
modality

modifier
modality

0

color

(0-2167)

Figure 5: Frequencies of modifiers for each modality.
The numbers in brackets show the range of variation.

smell

taste

sound

touch

ality claim, which is more akin to Williams than to Ullmann, could be confirmed. The order of sense modalities
is not simply linear (as claimed by Ullmann), but also
not even transitive (as still held by Williams). The order of modalities turned out to be instead as complex
as shown in Fig. 7. No mapping allowed by Williams
is now forbidden, however, additional mappings are now
allowed. Contrary to Williams, the direction SD color to
TD touch enhances cognitive accessibility. The direction
SD color to TD smell as well as the reverse direction is
no longer forbidden. For, no significant reduction of accessibility could be observed. The same holds for both
directions between color and taste. Unlike Williams, we
cannot predict that both directions between color and
sound enhance accessibility. For, neither significant enhancement nor significant reduction could be observed
here.
As for Williams and even Ullmann, the modality touch
is the best source domain. The only not significantly
enhancing direction from SD touch is that to TD sound.
The modalities smell and sound seem to be relatively bad
source domains. For, the only non-reducing direction is
that to color.
Aside from directionality further variables seem to
influence the accessibility of synaesthetic metaphors,
namely frequency and morphological derivation. The
three factors might not be independent from each other,
though. For one, there seems to be a striking dependency between the frequency and the modality of a modifier. We can not decide, yet, whether this particular distribution of high and low modifier frequencies over the
modalities is restricted to German and other European
languages, or whether it is linguistically universal.

Figure 6: Total degree of the accessibility of metaphors
with morphologically derived/not derived adjectives.
The bar width expresses the proportion of derived and
not derived adjectives within each modality.

Figure 7: Directionalities according to our data. Black
arrows show significant enhancement, while dotted lines
represent not significantly impeded directions.

2369

Another important observation is that the morphological status of modifiers is not equally distributed over all
modalities. Whereas the great majority of modifiers in
the modality smell are derived, only a small minority of
modifiers in the modality of touch are non-genuine adjectives. Again, it would be interesting to explore if this
is a universal linguistic fact.
Given these dependencies, it can not be ruled out a
priori that the differences in accessibility of a metaphor
might be explained solely on the basis of frequency and
morphological status of the modifier. Another hypothesis would be that the unequal distribution of frequency
and morphological status over the modalities is not accidental, but has a deeper explanation in the neurology

of the senses and the organization of related cortical regions. A cross-linguistic comparison as well as further
neuro-scientific research might help to settle this point.
In this context, it would be especially interesting to draw
a parallel between the linguistic and the neuronal phenomenon of synaesthesia. It has to be explained why certain SD-TD directions lead to more accessible metaphors
than others.
Moreover, there seems to be evidence for the existence
of factors not yet systematically analyzed. To exemplify
this point, one may take into consideration the striking
difference in accessibility between the two metaphors:
(5) gelbe Ruhe (‘yellow silence’)
(6) blasser Klang (‘pale sound’)
All subjects assessed the first metaphor ‘not accessible’,
but for 93% the second metaphor was accessible. This is
so despite the fact that their modifiers are both morphologically not derived and the metaphors share the same
directionality (color – sound). Moreover, the frequency
of the adjective gelb (203) even exceeds the frequency of
the adjective blass (101). One hypothesis might be that
the metaphor blasser Klang might have been overused
and almost became a dead metaphor, which has lost
much of its figurative value. However, why is it that
this particular metaphor was apt to be used frequently?
One would expect that only metaphors that are cognitively accessible in the first place have the potential to
become common knowledge.
It should also be mentioned that, even though a certain directionality may generally reduce accessibility, single cases may behave differently. The metaphor
(7) stiller Geruch (‘silent smell’)
was, e.g., cognitively accessible for about 60% of our
subjects, although the SD-TD direction (sound – smell)
significantly reduces accessibility in general. In light of
those yet unaccounted cases and given the effects described in this paper, further research seems to be well
motivated.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Gerhard Schurz, Axel Bühler and
Marc Breuer for inspiring discussions. Wiebke Peterson,
Christoph Rumpf and Albert Ortmann were supportive
with respect to the corpus analysis. Research for this
paper was made possible by the grant FOR 600 of the
German Research Foundation.

References
Baayen, R., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995).
The CELEX lexical database (release 2). Philadelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium, University
of Pennsylvania. (CD-ROM)
Baron-Cohen, S., Burt, L., Smith-Laittan, F., Harrison,
J., & Bolton, P. (1996). Synaesthesia: prevalence
and familiality. Perception, 25 (9), 1073–9.

Baron-Cohen, S., & Harrison, J. E. (Eds.). (1997).
Synaesthesia: Classic and contemporary readings.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Black, M. (1962). Models and metaphor. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Cytowic, R. E. (1997). Synaesthesia: Phenomenology
and neuropsychology – a review of current knowledge. In S. Baron-Cohen & J. E. Harrison (Eds.),
Synaesthesia: Classic and contemporary readings
(pp. 97–107). Oxford: Blackwell.
Cytowic, R. E. (2002). Synaesthesia: A union of the
senses. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J., & Lepore, E. (2002). The compositionality
papers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harrison, J. (2002). Synaesthesia: The strangest thing.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hurford, J. R. (2003). The neural basis of predicateargument structure. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26, 261–83.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Löbner, S. (2002). Understanding semantics. London:
Arnold.
Martino, G., & Marks, L. E. (2001). Synaesthesia:
Strong and weak. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 10 (2), 61–65.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Hubbard, E. M. (2001). Synaesthesia a window into perception, thought and language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8 (12),
3–34.
Shen, Y. (1997). Cognitive constraints on poetic figures.
Cognitive Linguistics, 8–1, 33–71.
Ullmann, S. (1967). The principles of semantics. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Werning, M. (2004). Compositionaltity, context, categories and the indeterminacy of translation. Erkenntnis, 60, 145–78.
Werning, M. (2005a). Right and wrong reasons for
compositionality. In M. Werning, E. Machery, &
G. Schurz (Eds.), The compositionality of meaning and content (Vol. I: Foundational Issues, pp.
285–309). Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag.
Werning, M. (2005b). The temporal dimension of
thought: Cortical foundations of predicative representation. Synthese, 146 (1/2), 203–24.
Williams, J. M. (1976). Synesthetic adjectives: A possible law of semantic change. Language, 52(2), 461–
478.
Yu, N. (2003). Synesthetic metaphor: A cognitive perspective. Journal of Literary Semantics, 32(1), 19–
34.

2370

