UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Brain Implements Optimal Decision Making between Alternative Actions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3n30g8s3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bogacz, Rafal
Gurney, Kevin

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Brain Implements Optimal Decision Making between Alternative Actions
Rafal Bogacz (R.Bogacz@bristol.ac.uk)
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol
Bristol, BS8 1UB, UK

Kevin Gurney (K.Gurney@sheffield.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield
Sheffield S10 2TP, UK

also known that the Basal Ganglia (BG) may play a critical
role in the selection of alternative actions. In their quiescent
state, BG output nuclei supply tonic inhibition to midbrain
and brain stem targets (Deniau & Chevalier, 1985)
implicated in executing motor actions, thus blocking cortical
control over these actions. Actions are supposed to be
selected when neurons in the output nuclei have their
activity reduced (under control of the rest of BG) thereby
disinhibiting their targets (Deniau & Chevalier, 1985).
In sum, the research reviewed above indicates that, during
decision making among alternative actions, cortical regions
associated with the alternatives integrate evidence
supporting each one, and that BG act as a central ‘switch’
by evaluating this evidence and enabling the behavioural
request which is best supported (most salient). However,
despite extensive experimental and numerical simulation
studies demonstrating selective function (Brown, Bullock,
& Grossberg, 2004; M. J. Frank, Seeberger, & O'Reilly R,
2004; Gurney, Prescott, & Redgrave, 2001), no formal
theoretical framework exists that can fully explain why the
BG are organized in the way they are. Multiple mechanisms
supporting a selective function may be organised in a
variety of ways; is there a rationale for the specific pattern
of connectivity observed in BG?
This paper addresses this question and provides an
analytic description of function of a circuit involving cortex
and BG, by showing how an optimal abstract decision
algorithm ‘maps’ onto the anatomy and physiology of this
circuit.

Abstract
Neurophysiological studies have identified a number of brain
regions critically involved in solving the problem of ‘action
selection’ or ‘decision making’ which has been extensively
studied in cognitive psychology. In the case of highly
practiced tasks, these regions include cortical areas
hypothesized to integrate evidence supporting alternative
actions, and the basal ganglia, hypothesised to act as a central
‘switch’ in gating behavioural requests. However, despite our
relatively detailed knowledge of basal ganglia biology and its
connectivity with the cortex, and numerical simulation studies
demonstrating selective function, no formal theoretical
framework exists that supplies an algorithmic description of
these circuits, and that can fully explain why they are
organized in the specific way they are. This paper addresses
this question by showing how many aspects of the anatomy
and physiology of the circuit involving the cortex and basal
ganglia are exactly those required to implement the
computation defined by an asymptotically optimal statistical
test for decision making – the Multiple Sequential Probability
Ratio Test (MSPRT). The resulting model of basal ganglia
provides a rationale for their inter-nucleus connectivity and
the idiosyncratic properties of particular neuronal populations.
The model is consistent with data regarding the reaction times
in choice tasks, and provides a mechanistic explanation of
how they are generated in neural circuits.
Keywords: basal ganglia, decision making, action selection

Introduction
Deciding which action to select is a common and critical
element of human mental life, and hence, has been
extensively studied in cognitive psychology. Within the last
half-century, on the basis of careful analyses of reaction
time (RT) data in tasks involving a choice between two or
more alternative actions, various mathematical models have
been proposed which assume that, during the decision
process, noisy evidence supporting the alternative actions is
accumulated and an action is executed as soon as certain
criteria are met (Laming, 1968; Ratcliff, 1978; Stone, 1960;
Usher & McClelland, 2001; Vickers, 1970).
Recent neurophysiologic studies have shed light on how
the brain can implement the processes of accumulation and
criteria evaluation suggested by these psychological models.
In the case of highly practiced tasks, it has been shown that,
during the decision process, neurons in cortical areas
representing alternative actions gradually increase their
firing rate, thereby accumulating evidence supporting these
alternatives (Schall, 2001; Shadlen & Newsome, 2001). It is

Review of the neurobiology and theory of
decision making
Modelling cortical integration
The neural basis of decision making in cortex has been
studied extensively using single-cell recordings (Britten,
Shadlen, Newsome, & Movshon, 1993; Schall, 2001).
Typically, these studies have used a direction of motion
discrimination task using fields of drifting random dots,
with response via saccadic eye movements. After stimulus
onset, neurons in cortical sensory areas (e.g. area MT in the
visual motion task) respond if their receptive fields
encounter the stimulus and are appropriately ‘tuned’ to the
overall direction of motion (Britten et al., 1993). However,
the instantaneous firing rates in MT are noisy – probably
reflecting the uncertainty inherent in the stimulus and its
neural representation. Further, this noise is such that,
83

alternatives, it is more efficient to compute the difference
between the accumulated evidence supporting the two
alternatives and execute action as soon as this difference
crosses a positive or a negative decision threshold. This
procedure is known as a random walk (Laming, 1968;
Stone, 1960) or a diffusion (Ratcliff, 1978) model and it
may be shown to implement a statistical decision test known
as the Sequential Probability Ratio Test (SPRT) (Wald,
1947). The SPRT is optimal in the following sense: among
all decision methods allowing a certain probability of error,
it minimizes the decision time.
For more than two alternatives, there is no single optimal
test in the sense that SPRT is optimal for two alternatives,
but there are tests which are asymptotically optimal; that is,
they minimize decision time for a fixed probability of error
when this probability decreases to zero (Dragalin,
Tertakovsky, & Veeravalli, 1999). These tests are the socalled Multiple SPRT’s (MSPRT’s) (Baum & Veeravalli,
1994; Dragalin et al., 1999) and, for two alternatives, they
simplify to the SPRT. While it has been shown that MSPRT
may be performed in a two-layer connectionist network
(McMillen & Holmes, 2006), the required complexities in
this model mitigate against any obvious implementation in
the brain (and, in particular, the cortex).

decisions based on the activity of MT neurons at a given
moment in time would be inaccurate, because the largest
firing rate does not always indicate the direction of coherent
motion in the stimulus. Therefore, a statistical interpretation
is required. An oft-used hypothesis (Gold & Shadlen, 2001;
2002) is that populations of neurons in MT encode evidence
for a particular perceptual decision.
To formalize this, denote the evidence supporting
alternative i, provided at time t, by xi(t). Then, under the
neural encoding hypothesis, xi(t) corresponds to the total
activity of MT neurons selective for direction i at time t.
The decision making process can be defined as one of
finding which xi has the highest mean (Gold & Shadlen,
2001; 2002). To solve it, it appears that subsequent cortical
areas are invoked to accumulate evidence over time. Thus,
in the motion discrimination task, neurons in LIP and FEF
(which are implicated in the response via saccadic eye
movements) gradually increase their firing rate (Schall,
2001; Shadlen & Newsome, 2001) and could therefore be
computing
T

Yi (T ) = ∑ xi (t )

(1)

t =1

over the temporal interval [1,T]. The accumulated evidence
Yi(T) may now be used in making a decision about which xi
has the highest mean.

BG connectivity
The BG connectivity used in our study contains the major
pathways known to exist in BG anatomy and was based on
that used in the model of Gurney et al. (2001). Fig. 1a
shows this connectivity for rat in cartoon form; for reviews
of BG anatomy see (Alexander, DeLong, & Strick, 1986;
Gerfen & Wilson, 1996; Smith, Bevan, Shink, & Bolam,
1998); the description below is based on these reviews.
Cortex sends excitatory projections to the striatum and
subthalamic nucleus (STN). The striatum is divided into two
populations of projection neurons differentiated, inter alia,

Modelling the decision criterion
The above description of cortical integration leaves open a
central question: when should a neural mechanism stop the
integration and execute the action with the highest
cumulated evidence Yi(T)? A simple solution to this problem
is to execute an action as soon as any Yi(T) exceeds a certain
decision threshold, yielding the so-called race model
(Vickers, 1970). However, this model does not perform
optimally. For example, in case of decision between two

xi(t)

a

b

Cortex

cortex
yi = gSxi(t)
t

striatum (D1)

EP/SNr

STN

striatum (D2)

Sj STNj - ln( Sj STNj )

(yi - GPi)

e

striatum D1
-yi

GP

STN

GP

(yj - GPj )

SSTNj= Se
j

j

y

= ln( Se j )
j

BG output
EP/SNr
y
-yi +SSTNj = -yi + ln( Se j )
j

Inhibition

Excitation

j

Diffuse excitation

Fig. 1: Comparison of connectivity of basal ganglia and a network implementing the Multiple Sequential Probability
Ratio Test (MSPRT). a Connectivity of basal ganglia nuclei and its cortical afferents in the rat (modified from Gurney et
al., 2001a). Connections and nuclei denoted by dashed lines are not essential for the implementation of MSPRT. b
Architecture of the network implementing MSPRT. The equations show expressions calculated by each layer of neurons.
84

by their anatomical targets and preferential dopamine
receptor type. The neurons in one striatal sub-population
(associated with D1-type dopamine receptors) send focused
inhibitory projections to the BG output nuclei – the
substantia nigra pars reticulate (SNr) and entopeduncular
nucleus (EP). Neurons in the other striatal population
(associated with D2-type dopamine receptors) are also
inhibitory and send focused projections to the globus
pallidus (GP). Neurons in the STN are glutamatergic and
send diffuse excitatory projections to SNr/EP and GP
(Parent & Hazrati, 1993; 1995a). The GP sends inhibitory
connections to the output nuclei. The output nuclei send
widespread inhibitory connections to the mid-brain,
brainstem, and the thalamus.

MSPRT implies that an action should be selected as soon as
any of the Li(T) exceeds a fixed decision threshold. Eq. 2 is
the basis for mapping MSPRT onto the BG. But, before we
proceed with this process, we describe some of the intuitive
properties of MSPRT, as implemented in Eq. 2.
The right hand side of Eq. 2 includes two terms. The first
term yi(T) is simply the salience and, on its own, describes a
race model (Vickers, 1970). This term therefore
incorporates information about the absolute size of the
salience of the currently ‘winning’ alternative, w. The
second term in Eq. 2 occurs in subsequent analysis and we
denote it by S(T) where
N

S (T ) = ln ∑ exp( yi (T ))

(3)

i =1

S(T) decreases the value of all Li(T) by the same amount,
thereby increasing the minimum salience required for an
action to be selected. Its value is increased by the presence
of more actions, and by individual actions having higher
salience. It may therefore be thought of as representing
response conflict

Neuronal selectivity in the BG
Studies of awake primates in behavioural tasks have
established that all BG nuclei have somatotopic
organisation. Further, within each of the nuclei, there are
clusters of neurons responding selectively before and during
movement of individual joints (often only in single
direction) (Crutcher & DeLong, 1984; Georgopoulos,
DeLong, & Crutcher, 1983) These observations led
Alexander et al. (1986) to propose that “the motor circuit
may be composed of multiple, parallel subcircuits or
channels concerned with movement of individual body
parts”, which traverse all nuclei of BG.
The notion of channels was incorporated into the
computational model of Gurney et al. (2001) who proposed
that each action is associated anatomically with a discrete
neural population within each nucleus.

Model of action selection in the BG
We now show how the test defined by Eq. 2 may be
performed in a biologically constrained network model of
BG. For simplicity of explanation here we show how Eq. 2
maps onto a model of BG including only subset of the
known anatomical connections. We exclude the connections
marked by dotted lines in Fig. 1a. It has been proposed that
these pathways play a role in reinforcement learning (M. J.
Frank et al., 2004), a function which is not included in our
model, because we address only action selection in highly
practiced tasks. However, incorporation of these pathways
into an anatomically more complete scheme still admits a
model of BG which supports MSPRT (Bogacz & Gurney,
2006) and hence achieves the optimal performance.
The mapping between Eq. 2 and the network is shown
graphically in Fig. 1b. In our decomposition, each channel is
associated with an action i and with a term Li(T) in the
MSPRT. Hence we assume that there is a finite number N,
of available actions represented in a discrete (localist) way.
We note first that the Li(T) are always negative, since S(T)
≥ ln(exp(yi(T)) = yi(T). Hence, the Li(T) themselves cannot
be represented as firing rates in neuronal populations (since
neurons cannot have negative firing rates). This may be
overcome by assigning the network output OUTi to –Li(T):

The BG implements selection using MSPRT
In this Section we introduce the MSPRT (Baum &
Veeravalli, 1994) and demonstrate how it maps onto a
neural network possessing a number of striking similarities
to the anatomy and physiology of the BG.

The MSPRT
Consider a decision between N alternative actions, and
denote evidence supporting the alternatives at time t by
x1(t), x2(t),…, xN(t). Let the hypothesis Hi correspond to xi
having the highest mean. More precisely, we define Hi
analogously to its definition for two alternatives (Gold &
Shadlen, 2001; 2002), namely; Hi is the hypothesis that xi(t)
come from independent identically distributed (i.i.d.) normal
distributions with mean μ+ and standard deviation σ, while
xj≠i(t) come from i.i.d. normal distributions with mean μ- and
standard deviation σ, where μ+>μ-.
One of the MSPRT (Baum & Veeravalli, 1994) requires
the following computations. In each time step, N quantities
yi(T)=g*Yi(T) need to be computed, where Yi(T) is the
accumulated evidence supporting action alternative i and g*
is a constant. We will refer to yi(T) as the salience of action
i. In MSPRT at each time T the N variables Li(T) need to be
computed:

N

OUTi (T ) = − yi (T ) + ln ∑ exp( yk (T ))

The decision is now made whenever any output decreases
its activity below the threshold. Notice that this is consonant
with the supposed action of BG outputs in performing
selection by disinhibition of target structures (Deniau &
Chevalier, 1985).
As described in the Introduction, we propose, along with
others (Schall, 2001; Shadlen & Newsome, 2001), that
quantities like yi(T), representing salience, are computed in
cortical regions which project to BG. In the motion
discrimination example, yi(T) would be computed in FEF

N

Li (T ) = yi (T ) − ln ∑ exp( yk (T ))

(4)

k =1

(2)

k =1

85

channel i, GPi(T), is given by

which is known to innervate BG (Parthasarathy, Schall, &
Graybiel, 1992).
Eq. 4 implies that the salience signals yi(T) (or nonlinear
combinations therein) have to be distributed to the output so
as to yield both excitatory and inhibitory contributions. Eq.
4 includes two terms and below we propose that the first is
computed within the direct pathway from striatum to the
output nuclei, while the second term within the pathway
traversing STN and GP. The first term in Eq. 4, –yi(T), is an
inhibitory component and cannot be supplied by cortex
since its efferents are excitatory. We argue, therefore, that
one function of the population of inhibitory striatal neurons
with D1 receptors (see Fig. 1a) is to provide an ‘inhibitory
copy’ of the salience signal to the output nuclei.
Turning to the second term in Eq. 4, this is S(T) (defined
in Eq. 3) which supplies an excitatory contribution to the
output nuclei. Now, a key aspect of S(T) is that it involves
summing over channels. The source of excitation in BG is
the STN which sends diffuse projections to the BG output
nuclei (Parent & Smith, 1987). Thus, each output neuron
receives many afferents from widespread sources within
STN, and so it is plausible that they are performing a
summation over channels. In the network model this is
reflected in the fact that neurons in each channel i of the
output nuclei compute the quantity OUTi(T) = – yi(T) +
Σ(T), where:

GPi (T ) = Σ (T ) − ln (Σ (T ))

(7)
since, substituting Eq. 7 into Eq. 6, summing over i, and
solving for Σ(T) then yields Σ(T) = S(T).
In summary, an implementation of MSPRT defined by
Eq. 4-7 may be realised by a subset of BG anatomy, defined
in Fig. 1b, if the behaviour of neurons in STN and GP
follows Eq. 6 and 7.

Predicted requirements for STN and GP
physiology are validated by existing data
In this Section we compare the predictions of Eq. 6 and 7,
concerning the firing rates of STN and GP neurons as a
function of their input, with published experimental data. In
order to make this comparison, model variables (e.g. yi(T),
STNi(T), GPi(T)) are assumed to be proportional to
experimentally observed neuronal firing rates. Note,
however, that proportionality constants are not uniquely
specified by the model because a change in any such
constant for a particular nucleus can be absorbed by
rescaling the weights in projections from this nucleus to
other areas.
The forms for STN and GP functionality given in Eqs. 6
and 7 were derived on the basis of: (i) known anatomy of
basal nuclei and (ii) the assumption that the network
involving cortex and BG implements MSPRT. Since we did
not use the physiological properties of STN and GP neurons
in deriving Eq. 6 and 7, these equations represent
predictions of the model for the physiological properties of
STN and GP, thereby providing an independent means for
testing the model. These predictions are very strong; in
particular the theory implies that the firing rate of STN
neurons should be proportional to the exponent of its input.
Such a relation is highly unusual in most neural populations
and so the satisfaction of this property is very unlikely to be
a result of a chance, and thus would provide a strong
confirmation of the theory.

N

Σ (T ) = ∑ STN i (T )

(5)

i =1

The model then implements MSPRT if Σ(T) = S(T). We now
describe the input-output relations of STN and GP neurons
which give Σ(T) = S(T). First, we require that the firing rate
of neurons in STN is proportional to an exponential function
of its inputs
STN i (T ) = exp( yi (T ) − GPi (T ))
(6)
Since STN projects diffusely to GP (Parent & Hazrati,
1995b), we assume that the STN input to GP channel i is
Σ(T) rather than STNi(T). The required firing rate of GP
10

b

30

8

25
Number of spikes

Normalized STN output

a

6

4

20
15
10
5

2

0
0
0

0

0.5

1
1.5
Normalized STN input

2

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Input current [nA]

2.5

Fig. 2: Firing rates f of STN and GP neurons as a function of input current I. a STN neurons. The data are for seven
neurons taken from studies (Hallworth et al.2003; Wilson et al.2004). For each neuron, a best fit function of the form f = a
exp(b I) was found through data points (fj, Ij). The new data (fj/a,bIj) were then plotted on the same axes for all neurons. b
GP neurons. Number of spikes n produced by a GP neuron of type II (Nambu & Llinas, 1994) in a 242ms stimulation
interval using current injection I. The data used in this figure were kindly provided by Atsushi Nambu, and they come from
the same neuron which is analysed in Fig. 5g of (Nambu & Llinas, 1994).
86

The response properties of STN neurons have been
studied extensively (Hallworth et al., 2003; Wilson et al.,
2004). Typically they have, non-zero spontaneous firing,
and can achieve unusually high firing rates. Our proposed
exponential form for firing rate as a function of input (Eq. 6)
explains these features since, in the absence of input, the
model gives non-zero (unity) output and exp(.) is a rapidly
growing function yielding potentially high firing rates. In
order to test the prediction of Eq. 6 quantitatively, we fitted
exponential functions to firing rate data in the literature. Fig.
2a shows the pooled results of this exercise based on two
studies (Hallworth et al., 2003; Wilson et al., 2004). The fit
to an exponential function is a good one, consistent with the
prediction in Eq. 6.
Secondly, the theory makes predictions, defined by Eq. 7,
concerning the firing rate of GP. First, we show that the
function defined by Eq. 7 is roughly linear if we make the
reasonable assumption that N (the number of channels or
available actions) is large. Thus, since yi(T) > 0, then from
Eq. 3, S(T) is bounded below by ln(N), so that S(T) increases
with N. Now, for large S(T), S(T) >> ln(S(T)), so that the
linear term in Eq. 7 dominates, and GPi(T) becomes an
approximately linear function of its input S(T).
We therefore predict that GP neurons display a roughly
linear relation between input and firing rate, and two studies
validate this. Nambu & Llinas (1994) have established that,
for those GP neurons that are most influential on the
population firing rate, their firing rate is, indeed, well
approximated by a linear function of the injected current
(Fig. 2b), a result which is in agreement with an earlier
study by Kita & Kitai (1991).

Decision time for ER=1% [s]

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
Basal Ganglia
Usher & McClelland
Race

0.3
0.2

2

3

4 5 6
8 10 12
Number of alternatives

16 20

Fig. 3: Comparison of decision times of 3 models (see
key) with thresholds giving error rate of 1% for different
numbers of alternatives (shown on x-axis).
similar since, in this case, the latter approximates SPRT
(Bogacz et al., submitted).

Discussion
Our main result is that a circuit involving cortex and the BG
may be devoted to implementing a powerful (asymptotically
optimal) decision mechanism (MSPRT). The MSPRT
model was shown to outperform other decision mechanisms.
While the UM and race models avail themselves of simple
network implementations, the sophisticated architecture and
neural functionality of the BG appear to have evolved to
support the more powerful MSPRT, allowing the brain to
make accurate decision substantially faster than the simpler
mechanisms. The model also made several predictions about
the physiological properties of STN and GP neurons which,
while consistent with existing data, provide a challenge for
further experimental studies to test them in vitro and in vivo
with synaptic input.
A model of decision making must be consistent with the
rich body of psychological data concerning reaction times
(RT). Other psychological models are consistent with these
data (Ratcliff, Van Zandt, & McKoon, 1999; Usher &
McClelland, 2001) and consistency in this respect will
therefore not distinguish our model in favour of these
alternatives but, rather is a necessary requirement for its
psychological plausibility. Our model is, indeed, completely
consonant with the account of RT data in two alternative
choice paradigms given by the diffusion and SPRT models
(e.g. Ratcliff et al., 1999), since, under these circumstances,
MSPRT reduces to SPRT. For more than two alternatives,
it is interesting to note that the decision time of the MSPRT
model (shown in Fig. 3) is approximately proportional to the
logarithm of the number of alternatives (cf. McMillen &
Holmes, 2006), thus following the experimentally observed
Hick’s law (Teichner & Krebs, 1974) describing RT as a
function of number of choices.

Performance of MSPRT model of the BG
It is instructive to see quantitatively how the performance
for the MSPRT model compares with that of two other
standard models of decision making in the brain: the race
model (Vickers, 1970) and a model proposed by Usher and
McClelland (2001) (henceforth the UM model). To do this,
we conducted simulations for differing numbers of
competing inputs, N, for all three models, with a 1% error
rate (ER).
In the simulations, the evidence x(t) was accumulated in
time steps of δt=1ms. For the ‘correct alternative’ i,
evidence xi(t) was generated from a normal distribution with
mean μ+δt and variance σ2δt, while for other alternatives
xj(t) was generated from a normal distribution with mean μδt and variance σ2δt. Estimates of the parameters were
taken from a sample participant in experiment 1 from the
study of Bogacz et al. (submitted), i.e., μ+-μ-=1.41, σ=0.33.
For each set of parameters, a decision threshold was found
numerically that resulted in ER of 1%±0.2% (s.e.), and the
decision time was then found for this threshold.
Fig. 3 shows that the MSPRT consistently achieves lower
decision times than both the UM and race models
(especially in the more realistic large N regime). This result
is in agreement with recent work by McMillen & Holmes
(in press) (who also showed another feature in Fig. 3 - that
as N increases, the performance of UM model
asymptotically approaches that of the race model). For N =
2, the performance of the MSPRT and UM models is very

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the EPSRC grants:
EP/C516303/1 and EP/C514416/1.
87

generation in rat subthalamic nucleus neurons in vitro. J
Neurosci, 23(20), 7525-7542.
Kita, H., & Kitai, S. T. (1991). Intracellular study of rat
globus pallidus neurons: membrane properties and
responses to neostriatal, subthalamic and nigral
stimulation. Brain Res, 564(2), 296-305.
Laming, D. R. J. (1968). Information theory of choice
reaction time. New York: Wiley.
McMillen, T., & Holmes, P. (2006). The dynamics of
choice among multiple alternatives. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 50, 30-57.
Nambu, A., & Llinas, R. (1994). Electrophysiology of
globus pallidus neurons in vitro. J Neurophysiol, 72(3),
1127-1139.
Parent, A., & Hazrati, L. N. (1993). Anatomical aspects of
information processing in primate basal ganglia. Trends
Neurosci, 16(3), 111-116.
Parent, A., & Hazrati, L. N. (1995a). Functional anatomy of
the basal ganglia. I. The cortico-basal ganglia-thalamocortical loop. Brain Res Brain Res Rev, 20(1), 91-127.
Parent, A., & Hazrati, L. N. (1995b). Functional anatomy of
the basal ganglia. II. The place of subthalamic nucleus
and external pallidum in basal ganglia circuitry. Brain Res
Brain Res Rev, 20(1), 128-154.
Parent, A., & Smith, Y. (1987). Organization of efferent
projections of the subthalamic nucleus in the squirrel
monkey as revealed by retrograde labeling methods. Brain
Res, 436(2), 296-310.
Parthasarathy, H. B., Schall, J. D., & Graybiel, A. M.
(1992). Distributed but convergent ordering of
corticostriatal projections: analysis of the frontal eye field
and the supplementary eye field in the macaque monkey.
J Neurosci, 12(11), 4468-4488.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychol
Rev, 83, 59-108.
Ratcliff, R., Van Zandt, T., & McKoon, G. (1999).
Connectionist and diffusion models of reaction time.
Psychol Rev, 106, 261-300.
Schall, J. D. (2001). Neural basis of deciding, choosing and
acting. Nat Rev Neurosci, 2(1), 33-42.
Shadlen, M. N., & Newsome, W. T. (2001). Neural basis of
a perceptual decision in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of
the rhesus monkey. J Neurophysiol, 86(4), 1916-1936.
Smith, Y., Bevan, M. D., Shink, E., & Bolam, J. P. (1998).
Microcircuitry of the direct and indirect pathways of the
basal ganglia. Neuroscience, 86(2), 353-387.
Stone, M. (1960). Models for choice reaction time.
Psychometrika, 25, 251-260.
Teichner, W. H., & Krebs, M. J. (1974). Laws of visual
choice reaction time. Psychol Rev, 81, 75-98.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J. L. (2001). The time course of
perceptual choice: the leaky, competing accumulator
model. Psychol Rev, 108(3), 550-592.
Vickers, D. (1970). Evidence for an accumulator model of
psychophysical discrimination. Ergonomics, 13, 37-58.
Wald, A. (1947). Sequential Analysis. New York: Wiley.
Wilson, C. J., Weyrick, A., Terman, D., Hallworth, N. E., &
Bevan, M. D. (2004). A model of reverse spike frequency
adaptation and repetitive firing of subthalamic nucleus
neurons. J Neurophysiol, 91(5), 1963-1980.

References
Alexander, G. E., DeLong, M. R., & Strick, P. L. (1986).
Parallel organization of functionally segregated circuits
linking basal ganglia and cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci, 9,
357-381.
Baum, C. W., & Veeravalli, V. V. (1994). A sequential
procedure for multihypothesis testing. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, 40, 1996-2007.
Bogacz, R., Brown, E., Moehlis, J., Holmes, P., & Cohen, J.
D. (submitted). The physics of optimal decision making:
A formal analysis of models of performance in twoalternative forced choice tasks. Psychol Rev.
Bogacz, R., & Gurney, K. (2006). The basal ganglia and
cortex implement optimal decision making between
alternative actions. Neural Computation, submitted.
Britten, K. H., Shadlen, M. N., Newsome, W. T., &
Movshon, J. A. (1993). Responses of neurons in macaque
MT to stochastic motion signals. Vis Neurosci, 10(6),
1157-1169.
Brown, J. W., Bullock, D., & Grossberg, S. (2004). How
laminar frontal cortex and basal ganglia circuits interact to
control planned and reactive saccades. Neural Netw,
17(4), 471-510.
Crutcher, M. D., & DeLong, M. R. (1984). Single cell
studies of the primate putamen. II. Relations to direction
of movement and pattern of muscular activity. Exp Brain
Res, 53(2), 244-258.
Deniau, J. M., & Chevalier, G. (1985). Disinhibition as a
basic process in the expression of striatal functions. II.
The striato-nigral influence on thalamocortical cells of the
ventromedial thalamic nucleus. Brain Res, 334, 227-233.
Dragalin, V. P., Tertakovsky, A. G., & Veeravalli, V. V.
(1999). Multihypothesis sequential probability ratio tests
– part I: asymptotic optimality. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 45, 2448-2461.
Frank, M. J., Seeberger, L. C., & O'Reilly R, C. (2004). By
carrot or by stick: cognitive reinforcement learning in
parkinsonism. Science, 306(5703), 1940-1943.
Georgopoulos, A. P., DeLong, M. R., & Crutcher, M. D.
(1983). Relations between parameters of step-tracking
movements and single cell discharge in the globus
pallidus and subthalamic nucleus of the behaving
monkey. J Neurosci, 3(8), 1586-1598.
Gerfen, C. R., & Wilson, C. J. (1996). The basal ganglia. In
A. Bjorklund, T. Hokfelt & L. Swanson (Eds.), Handbook
of Chemical Neuroanatomy (Vol. 12, pp. 369-466).
Gold, J. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2001). Neural computations
that underlie decisions about sensory stimuli. Trends
Cogn Sci, 5(1), 10-16.
Gold, J. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2002). Banburismus and the
brain: decoding the relationship between sensory stimuli,
decisions, and reward. Neuron, 36(2), 299-308.
Gurney, K., Prescott, T. J., & Redgrave, P. (2001). A
computational model of action selection in the basal
ganglia. Biol Cybern, 84(6), 401-410.
Hallworth, N. E., Wilson, C. J., & Bevan, M. D. (2003).
Apamin-sensitive small conductance calcium-activated
potassium channels, through their selective coupling to
voltage-gated calcium channels, are critical determinants
of the precision, pace, and pattern of action potential
88

