UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of the Format of Covariation Information on Causal Inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4jx9r6k0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Payton, Teresa
Vallee-Tourangeau, Frederic

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of the Format of Covariation Information
on Causal Inferences
Teresa Payton and Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau
Psychology Research Unit, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE

t.payton / f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk
variations between the regions as well as (possibly) by the
seeding. Information was presented either on-line, where the
results of individual trials (seeding/no seeding, leading to
rain or no rain) were presented one trial at a time, or the
information was presented off-line, that is as static
frequency summaries (participants received frequency
summaries of the days clouds were and were not seeded,
and on how many days in each case it rained and did not
rain). Only 17% of the participants receiving the covariation
information one trial at a time appeared to formulate
judgments in line with the ∆P rule compared to 75% of the
participants who received summary information.

Abstract
Representational effects in a fictitious virus-disease causal
induction task were examined in three studies. In all three
studies, six different judgment conditions were created by
crossing two levels of virus-disease covariation (0, .5) with
three levels of disease base rate (.25, .5, .75). In Study 1, the
covariation information was presented as four propositions
summarising the frequencies of the four patient types, namely
patients with or without the virus who either did have or did
not have the disease. In Study 2 the same information was
presented in a 2 x 2 table with the cell frequencies represented
iconistically (the presence/absence of virus/disease was
shown as schematic faces that varied in expression and
colour). In Study 3 the covariation information was presented
in terms of a branching tree with the two main branches
representing the frequencies of patients with and without the
disease from which sprouted smaller branches showing the
frequency of those with and without the virus. Causal
judgments were poorest in Study 1, reflected significantly
improved covariation discrimination in Study 2, but were
most normative in Study 3. These results signal the presence
of important representational effects in causal induction tasks.

∆P =

Introduction
In formulating a judgment of the causal link between a
candidate cause and a target effect, information about the
frequency of the pairing of four types of events should be
considered. These four types of events refer to the pairings
of (a) the cause and the effect, (b) the cause with the
absence of the effect, (c) the effect in the absence of the
cause, and (d) the absence of both the effect and the cause.
These event frequencies are often represented in a 2 x 2
table with the columns referring to the presence or absence
of the effect and the rows the presence or absence of the
cause (see Fig. 1). The contrast between the probability of
the effect in the presence of the cause, P(E|C), and the
probability of the effect in the absence of the cause, P(E|~C)
is taken as a measure of the covariation between the
candidate cause and the effect (also referred to as ∆P).
Early research on reasoners’ appreciation of covariation
in formulating causal judgments examined how the manner
with which the covariation information was presented
influenced judgments. For example, in Ward and Jenkins
(1965), participants were asked to gauge the relationship
between seeding clouds and the occurrence of rain in
different regions. The instructions made clear that
confirming evidence (i.e., rain) was influenced by climatic
1938

E

~E

C

a

b

~C

c

d

a
c
−
= P(E | C) − P(E |~ C)
a +b c + d

Figure 1: A 2x2 contingency table. a, b,c, d are cell
frequencies; C = candidate cause, E = target effect.
Based on the information available from a 2x2 table,
Wasserman, Dorner and Kao (1990) explored the
relationship between the information participants deemed
important in order to formulate a causal judgment and the
information they actually used. Using a drug/disease
scenario, their participants either decided which of the four
categories of information would be necessary for a causal
judgement or rated the importance of each category of
information. Cell importance was ranked as cell a > cell b >
cell c > cell d in both conditions. In a second experiment,
using the same causal scenario, problems were structured in
quartets of pairs, giving the opportunity to vary the
numerical content of one cell while holding constant the
contents of the other three. This allowed Wasserman et al. to
measure the impact that increasing the frequency in a single
cell had on participants’ causal judgements. The numerical
information from a 2 x 2 table for each problem was
presented as a set of four statements. For each problem
participants ranked the value of the drug for treatment of the
disease on a scale of -10 (drug worsens disease) to +10
(drug helps cure). The importance ratings of each cell

corresponded to those in Experiment 1 (viz. cell a > cell b >
cell c > cell d). Wasserman et al. estimated that 21% of the
participants used a ∆P strategy to generate their causal
judgments, while 50% based their judgments on the
comparison between cell a and cell b.
Improvements in research methodology using on-line
causal judgment tasks unveiled a much greater sensitivity to
covariation information than was originally suggested by
Ward and Jenkins (1965, e.g., Baker, Berbrier, & ValléeTourangeau, 1989; Dickinson, Shanks, & Evenden, 1984).
Subsequent research (e.g., Vallée-Tourangeau, Murphy,
Drew, & Baker, 1998; Murphy, Vallée-Tourangeau, Msetfi,
& Baker, 2005) has documented two important features of
causal judgments using an on-line procedure: (i) reasoners
can make relatively subtle discrimination between different
levels of covariation, but that (ii) causal judgements
appeared to be influenced by the overall incidence, or base
rate, of the effect, independent of the actual level of
covariation. In other words, the higher the base rate of the
effect, the higher the estimate of the importance of the
candidate cause (e.g., Vallée-Tourangeau, Hollingsworth &
Murphy, 1998).
The dual influence of covariation and the base rate of the
effect on cause-effect judgments is illustrated in ValléeTourangeau, Murphy, Drew, and Baker (1998, Experiment
1). In that experiment, participants were invited to estimate
different types of fictitious virus-disease relationships by
sampling, for each type, 40 ‘patients’ who were either
infected with the candidate virus or not and who suffered
from the target disease or not. The covariation data was
presented one patient at a time in a simulated medical
diagnosis task. Participants were presented with six different
virus-disease relationships reflecting the factorial
combination of two levels of virus-disease covariation (0,
.5) and three levels of disease base rate (.25, .50, .75).
Causal judgments were significantly influenced by both
factors. That is, (i) participants judged more positively the
positive contingency relationships than the noncontingent
ones, and (ii) they judged the virus-disease relationships
more positively the higher the base rate of the disease,
independent of the actual virus-disease covariation.
Note that Vallée-Tourangeau et al. (1998) observed the
impact of the effect base rate using an on-line presentation
procedure, that is one in which reasoners experienced the
event pairings in ‘real’ time. Such an on-line procedure may
engage different information-processing mechanisms that
would otherwise be at play were the information presented
in terms of event-pairing summaries. For example, the
continuous presentation of event pairings may engage
associative learning mechanisms that build up the strength
of the connection between a candidate cause and the target
effect over time, and causal judgments may be a reflection
of such associative strength. In fact, associative learning
models such as Pearce’s (1987) stimulus generalisation
model, predict that, for any given level of cause-effect
covariation, stronger associative strength will accrue to a

1939

candidate cause when it is paired with an effect with a high
rather than a low base rate (see Vallée-Tourangeau et al.,
1998).

The Present Studies
The purpose of the studies reported here was two fold. The
first was to investigate the impact of the effect base rate on
causal judgments when the covariation information was
presented off-line, that is as summaries of the different
kinds of cause-effect pairings, as opposed to being
experienced in real time. The second was to investigate
whether the manner with which this frequency information
was presented modulated in any way the influence of the
effect base rate on causal judgments. In judgment under
uncertainty, the format of the information presented to
reasoners make an important difference in determining the
degree to which their judgments reflect a more normative
appreciation of the evidence (e.g., Gigerenzer & Hoffrage,
1995). Training participants in different presentation
methods (e.g., decision trees) has also been shown to
improve performance (Sedlmeier, 2002).
The same causal judgement task was used in each of three
studies. The studies differed only in the format of the
covariation information. In Study 1 the covariation
information was presented in a series of simple statements,
while in Studies 2 and 3 the covariation information was
provided in graphical formats. The statements provided
exactly the same information as the graphical formats in
order to provide the same ‘space of possibilities’ (cf.
Stenning & Oberlander, 1995) as the graphical
representations, thereby eliminating one of the differences
between linguistic and graphical representations.
The graphical formats incorporated a diagrammatical
representation of the problem with the information
presented as numbers and annotations. Numbers can be
represented externally in different ways (i.e., through
different numeration systems) and one such representational
property is dimensionality. Numbers that are represented as
quantities of some object (e.g., stones) have only one
dimension. This can be very efficient with small numbers
since the representation is proportional to the numerical
value. (However, as numbers get larger the system becomes
more unwieldy.) In Study 2 the event pairing frequencies
were presented in terms of quantities of symbols (schematic
faces specifically) that were framed in a standard 2x2
contingency table. Thus, each of the groups of patients that
made up one of the cells of the 2x2 table were represented
in terms of groups of schematic faces, each face
representing a patient. For example, cell a patients (those
with the virus and the disease) were represented as grey
frowning faces, whereas cell d patients (those without the
virus and without the disease) as white smiling faces.
The information from a 2 x 2 cell format can also be
represented in other displays. One of these is a frequency
tree. In probabilistic reasoning tasks, training in decision
trees or grids has been found to substantially improve

Table 1: Even pairing frequencies in the six experimental
conditions, along with the descriptive probabilities. The
highlighted conditions pair zero and positive covariation levels
with the same Cause-Effect and Cause-No-Effect frequencies
(BR = base rate)

covariation were presented in terms of hierarchical inverted
tree structures.

Method
Design & Procedure

Zero Covariation

Positive Covariation

.25BR .50BR .75BR

.25BR .50BR .75BR

Event Frequencies
Cause - Effect

5

10

15

10

15

Cause - No Effect

15

10

5

10

5

20
0

No Cause - Effect

5

10

15

0

5

10

No Cause - No Effect

15

10

5

20

15

10

Descriptive Probabilities
P(Effect)

0.25

0.50

0.75

0.25

0.50

0.75

P(Effect|Cause)

0.25

0.50

0.75

0.50

0.75

1.00

P(Effect|No Cause)

0.25

0.50

0.75

0.00

0.25

0.50

∆P

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.50

0.50

0.50

success rates in Bayesian reasoning problems (Sedlmeier,
2002). Thus in Study 3, the covariation information was
presented in terms of a hierarchical tree structure wherein
the top node represented the entire sample of 40 patients
which then branched into two nodes that represented the
frequencies of the patients with and without the disease.
Finally, each of these nodes branched into two new nodes
that corresponded to the presence and absence of the virus.
To sum up, the studies reported here used the factorial
design employed in Vallée-Tourangeau et al. (1998),
combining two covariation levels with different levels of the
effect base rate, producing six different cause-effect
relationships. Unlike in Vallée-Tourangeau et al., however,
the covariation information was presented off-line. In Study
1, each cause-effect relationship was summarised in terms
of four propositions describing the frequency of each of the
four types of event pairings. In Study 2, the six relationships
were presented as 2x2 tables in which symbols represented
the different number and type of patients. In Study 3, the
event frequencies that defined the level of cause-effect
N o D isease

Virus Absent

Virus Present

Disease

All three studies used a questionnaire that described six
different virus/disease relationships. These six different
relationships reflected the factorial combination of two
levels of covariation (0.0 and 0.5) and three levels of disease
base rate (0.25, 0.50 and 0.75). Viruses and diseases were
assigned fictitious labels (e.g., OHPD Type B and
Nachmose A, respectively). The assignment of labels to
conditions were counterbalanced resulting in 36 different
versions of the questionnaire in each of the three studies.
The frequencies of the four different kinds of virus-disease
pairings in each of the six conditions are presented in Table
1.
In Study 1 (Propositions) the cell frequencies that defined
the virus-disease covariation were presented as a set of four
simple statements (the order of statements was
counterbalanced across participants). For example in one
version of the questionnaires, the following four
propositions described the zero covariation relationship at
the high disease base rate of .75:
Five people with virus OHPD Type B absent in
their blood did not have the disease.
Five people with virus OHPD Type B present in
their blood did not have the disease.
Fifteen people with virus OHDP Type B present in
their blood also had the disease.
Fifteen people with virus OHDP Type B absent in
their blood had the disease.
In Study 2 (Schematic faces) the same information was
presented in a 2 x 2 table with the frequencies represented in
terms of schematic faces that coded the presence/absence of
virus/disease by colour and expression (see Fig. 2). In Study
3 the information was presented as a tree with the two main

Figure 2: Two different presentations of the same covariation condition (high base rate, zero covariation): Schematic faces
in Study 2 (left panel) and tree structure in Study 3 (right panel).

1940

branches representing the frequencies of patients with and
without the disease from which branched smaller paths
showing the frequency of those with and without the virus
(see Fig.2).
Questionnaires in the three studies were identical in all
aspects apart from the presentation of the covariation
information. Six causal judgements (one for each
covariation condition) were required in each questionnaire,
with each virus, disease and covariation condition appearing
once. The first page of the questionnaire contained the
instructions, which were identical for all three studies.
Participants were requested to make causal judgements
intuitively, making no notes. The scenario was described as
being based in a city hospital, where researchers had
identified six previously unknown diseases which they
suspect have viral origins. To develop successful
vaccination treatments it was necessary to identify the virus
causing each disease, and blood samples have been
collected. For each virus-disease pair, participant were
asked to rate the nature of the relationship using a scale
ranging from -100 to +100. The rating scale was explained
as follows:

that ratings of both positive and zero virus-disease
covariation levels increased as the prevalence of the disease
increased. A two-way repeated measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA), with two levels of covariation and three
levels of base rate, was performed on the causal ratings for
each study. There were significant main effects for both
covariation and base rate in all studies, with the interaction
being significant only in Study 1 (Propositions; see Table
3).

A positive rating indicates that patients who have
the virus tend also to have the disease. The more
positive the rating, the stronger the relationship.
Thus, if you feel the presence of a particular virus
always predicts the disease you would give it a
rating of 100. If you feel the presence of a
particular virus mostly, but not always predicts the
disease you might give it a rating of say 85.
A negative rating means that patients who have
the virus tend NOT to have the disease, that is that
particular virus somehow affords immunity against
the disease. The more negative the rating, the
greater the immunity. Thus, if you feel the presence
of a virus always predicts the disease is absent you
would give it a rating of -100. If you feel the
presence of the virus mostly, but not always predicts
the absence of the disease you might give it a rating
of say -85.
A zero rating is appropriate when the presence of
the virus in the blood does not inform you of either
the presence or absence of the disease.

A second series of analyses were conducted on a subset of
four of the six conditions. These conditions were chosen
because they permitted control of the probability of the
disease given the virus, P(D|V), across the two levels of
covariation. This subset contains two sets of 2 contingency
tables (one in each covariation condition) with identical top
rows and therefore the same probability of the disease given
the virus, P(D|V). In the first set P(D|V) = .5 and in the
second P(D|V) =.75 (see Table 1). If judgments are driven
solely from a consideration of cells a, or a and b, then
judgments should not differ across the two levels of
covariation.

Table 2: Mean causal ratings (and standard errors ) in the
six conditions for each of the three studies
(BR = base rate).
Zero Covariation

Positive Covariation

.25BR

.50BR

.75BR

.25BR

.50BR

-10.1

-0.9

10.5

-2.9

11.2

48.3

(4.13)

(2.69)

(3.99)

(5.52)

(4.31)

(5.19)

Propositions
Faces

.75BR

-36.7

10.8

21.5

6.6

43.5

49.1

(5.34)

(3.72)

(5.32)

(5.59)

(4.90)

(6.11)

Tree

-8.1

11.7

18.7

23.3

32.3

38.7

(4.38)

(3.58)

(4.06)

(5.84)

(4.50)

(4.80)

Table 3: F ratios from two-factor repeated-measures analysis of
variance including all six conditions (Overall Analysis) and
including the four conditions where covariation levels varied
over fixed values of P(D|V) (Finer Analysis).

Study 1
Propositions

F ratio
Study 2
Schematic Faces

Study 3
Decision Tree

Overall Analysis
Contingency (C)
Base Rate (BR)
C x BR

27.83**
35.65**
7.37**

41.75**
57.78**
1.80

32.19**
9.92**
1.48

Finer Analysis
Contingency (C)
Base Rate (BR)
C x BR

0.02
8.50**
0.16

2.39
25.29**
11.23**

6.10*
4.01*
0.06

Participants
Participants were a sample of 237 undergraduates (Study 1
N = 66, Study 2 N = 86, Study 3 N = 85). Over the three
studies, 79% of the participants were female and 21% male
(these proportions were approximately constant across the
three studies). The mean age of the participants was 23, and
did not differ significantly across studies.

Results

* p < .05 ** p < .01

In all three studies, overall causal ratings were generally
more positive when the virus-disease covariation was
positive than when it was zero (see Table 2). Overall ratings
also reflected the influence of the base rate of the disease in

Figure 3 plots the four means for the conditions where the
probability of the disease given the virus, P(D|V), is fixed at
either .5 or .75 across the two levels of covariation. A gap

1941

SCHEMATIC FACES

Mean Causal Rating

PROPOSITIONS

TREE

50

50

40

40

40

30

30

30

20

20

20

10

10

10

0

0

0

-10

-10

-10

50

Zero

.50

Positive

.75

.50

.75

.50

.75

Probability of the Disease given the Virus

Figure 3: Mean causal ratings in zero and positive covariation conditions when the probability of the disease given the virus is fixed
at either .50 or .75, across the three studies.

between parallel lines would suggest a robust discrimination
of the two levels of covariation for each of the values of
P(D|V). In turn, causal ratings that are more positive with
the higher value of P(D|V) indicate the influence of the base
rate of the effect in the presence of the cause. As the left
panel of Figure 3 indicates, the means for the positive
covariation condition completely overlap the means for the
zero covariation conditions in Study 1. Thus, participants in
Study 1 demonstrated little or no ability to discriminate
between positive and zero levels of covariation when cells a
and b were held constant across levels of covariation.
However, causal ratings increased as P(D|V) increased,
reflecting the influence of the disease base rate on ratings. In
Study 2 (middle panel), ratings reflected a discrimination of
the positive and zero covariation conditions only when
P(D|V) was high, suggesting an interaction between
covariation and P(D|V). As in Study 1, ratings were more
positive at the higher value of the effect base rate. Finally,
ratings in Study 3 (right panel) appeared to reflect a robust
covariation discrimination ability across the two levels of
P(D|V), although here too, the base rate of effect appeared
to have influenced ratings.
A series of two-way repeated measures ANOVAs (2
levels of covariation x 2 levels of P(D|V)) were performed
on the data from these four conditions across the three
studies (see Table 3). The main effect for P(D|V) was
significant in all three. However, confirming impressions,
the main effect for covariation was only significant for
Study 3 (Tree) and the interaction between covariation and
P(D|V) was significant only in Study 2 (Schematic faces,
see Fig. 3). A series of mixed ANOVAs were also
conducted to determine whether the pattern of means
differed significantly between the studies. Using Study as a
between-subjects factor, the three way (study x covariation
x P(D|V)) interaction was significant in the analysis
comparing Study 2 and Study 1, F (1, 150) = 4.80, p < .05,
and in the analysis comparing Study 3 and Study 2, F (1,
169) = 4.38, p < .05. These interactions suggest that
covariation discrimination was better using schematic faces

1942

to represent the covariation information than propositions,
but that in turn the best covariation discrimination was
elicited using trees.

Discussion
In the three studies reported here, participants were
presented information about the covariation between
different virus-disease pairs from which they were asked to
make a causal judgment. In all three studies the covariation
information was either positive or zero, with the disease
base rate manipulated independently. The three studies
differed in the format of the information presentation: as
propositions summarizing the frequency of each of the four
cells of a contingency table (Study 1), as sets of symbols
that represented the number and kind of patient types in a
2x2 table (Study 2), and as frequency summaries in a treelike hierarchical structure (Study 3).
In all three studies causal ratings displayed varying levels
of discrimination between the two levels of covariation but
in all three, causal ratings at both levels of covariation were
significantly affected by disease base rate, that is the higher
the base rate, the higher the causal ratings. The significant
covariation by base rate interaction in the overall analysis of
the means in Study 1 reflected very low discrimination
between levels of covariation at the lower base rates and
better discrimination at the high .75 base rate level. In
contrast, covariation discrimination was observed for all
three base rate levels in Studies 2 and 3. These results
suggest that judgments of the virus-disease relationships
were poorest when the covariation information was
provided in terms of four propositions summarising the
frequencies of the four patient types.
Results of the finer covariation discrimination analysis
when the probability of the disease given the virus, P(D|V),
was held constant across covariation levels, suggest that
judgments were best, when the covariation data were
presented in terms of trees as in Study 3. Covariation
discrimination was absent in Study 1; that is, causal ratings
when the covariation was positive were indistinguishable as

when the covariation was zero when P(D|V) was fixed.
Covariation discrimination was only observed at the high
level of P(D|V) in Study 2. In turn, the level of P(D|V)
strongly influenced causal ratings in Studies 1 and 2, but
less so in Study 3, a finding which again reinforces the
observation that judgments were most accurate with the
tree-like presentation of the covariation information.
Cross study analyses confirmed these impressions. Using
causal ratings from Studies 1 and 2, a mixed ANOVA with
study as a between-groups factor and covariation and
P(D|V) as within-participants factors, the three-way
interaction was significant confirming that genuine
covariation discrimination in Study 2 occurred only at the
highest level P(D|V). In a similar analysis using ratings
from Studies 2 and 3, the three-way interaction was also
significant, which in turn confirms that covariation
discrimination was superior in Study 3 and that the base rate
of the effect exerted the weakest influence on causal ratings
in Study 3. These results appear to indicate that the nature of
causal judgements can be significantly influenced by the
way covariation information is presented.
Taken together, the results of the three studies suggest the
presence of substantial representational effect in causal
inference tasks. The nature of the covariation data
representation influences the degree to which causal ratings
reflect the actual degree of covariation. The event
frequencies in these three studies were not designed to tease
apart the probative value attributed to each cell of a 2x2
table (cf. Wasserman et al., 1990). However, analyses of the
causal ratings across covariation levels when the probability
of the disease given the virus, P(D|V) was fixed (see Fig. 3)
indicated the weighting of the information from the different
cells was significantly influenced by the format of the
covariation data. The fact that, in Study 1, participants did
not discriminate between the two levels of covariation when
P(D|V) was held constant (i.e., the overlapping lines in the
left panel of Figure 3), implicates a substantial weighting
asymmetry in favour of cells a and b. However, because the
values of cells a and b were not held constant across the two
values of P(D|V) in Figure 3. it is impossible to determine
whether a consideration of cell a alone or cells a and b
actually anchored the causal ratings in Study 1.
Be that as it may, it is clear that the cell weighting
asymmetry observed in Study 1 was attenuated in Study 2
since, at least at the high level of P(D|V), participants rated
the positive covariation as more positive than the zero
covariation even if cells a and b were held constant across
covariation levels, t(85) = 2.91, p < .005. Furthermore, as
the right panel of Figure 3 attests, ratings in Study 3
reflected a robust discrimination of the levels of covariation
at both values of P(D|V), when cell a and b frequencies
were held constant. The causal ratings in Study 3 suggest a
considerably better balanced consideration of the
information provided by the four categories of evidence that
define the level of covariation. The results from these three
studies provide strong evidence that the format of the

1943

covariation data significantly impacted the manner with
which information from the four cells of the table was
evaluated and integrated to form a judgment.
Everyday reasoners are confronted with many problems
that involve static covariation information (e.g., regular
exhortation in the media to eat more or less of certain foods
to reduce probability of disease based on new evidence).
Further research to identify the most effective methods of
presenting covariation information could result in the
development of cognitive tools that could enhance the
layperson’s comprehension of probabilistic relationships.

References
Baker, A.G., Berbrier, M.W., & Vallée-Tourangeau (1989).
Judgements of a 2x2 contingency table: Sequential
processing and the learning curve. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 41B, 65-97.
Dickinson, A., Shanks, D., & Evenden, J. (1984).
Judgement of act-outcome contingency: The role of
selective attribution. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 36A, 29-50.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without Instruction: Frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684-704.
Murphy, R. A., Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Msetfi, R., & Baker,
A. G. (2005). Signal-outcome contingency, contiguity and
the depressive realism effect. In A. Wills (Ed.), New
directions in human associative learning (pp. 193-219).
Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Pearce, J. M. (1987). A model for stimulus generalization in
Pavlovian conditioning. Psychological Review, 94, 61–73
Sedlmeier, P. (2002). Improving statistical reasoning by
using the right representational format. Presented at The
Sixth International Conference on Teaching Statistics,
Cape Town, South Africa.
Stenning, K., & Oberlander, J. (1995). A cognitive theory of
graphical and linguistic reasoning: logic and
implementation. Cognitive Science, 19, 97-140.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Hollingsworth, L., & Murphy, R.A.
(1998). ‘Attentional Bias’ in correlation judgements?
Smedslund (1963) revisited. Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology, 39, 221-233.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Murphy, R. A., Drew, S., & Baker,
A. G. (1998) Judging the importance of constant and
variable candidate causes: A test of the power PC theory.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51A, 6584
Ward, W. C., & Jenkins, H. M. (1965). The display of
information and the judgment of contingency. Canadian
Journal of Psychology, 19, 231-241.
Wasserman, E. A., Dorner, W. W., & Kao, S. F. (1990).
Contributions of specific cell information to judgments of
interevent contingency. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 16, 509521.

