UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Neural Basis of the Object Concept in Ambiguous and Illusionary Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0qq8r7vt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Maye, Alexander
Werning, Markus

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Neural Basis of the Object Concept in Ambiguous and
Illusionary Perception
Markus Werning (werning@phil.uni-duesseldorf.de)

Department of Philosophy, Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf
Universitätsstr. 1, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany

Alexander Maye (a.maye@uke.uni-hamburg.de)

Department of Neurophysiology and Pathophysiology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Martinistraße 52, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany
resentation (Werning, 2003a).1 Those data suggest
the hypothesis that the neural basis of object concepts are oscillation functions and that the neural
basis of predicate concepts are clusters of feature
specific neurons (Werning, 2005b).
From Gestalt psychology the principles governing object concepts are well known. According to
two of the Gestalt principles, spatially proximal elements with similar features (similar color / similar
orientation) are likely to be perceived as one object
or, in other word, represented by one and the same
object concept. Most real-world objects, however,
are non-uniform in one or more of their feature dimensions, e.g., within one object illumination, edge
orientation and/or color can vary. Aside from nonuniformity there are cases of ambiguous stimuli: two
distinct objects that overlap with each other and are
alike in one or more feature dimensions, can generate the same retinal activation pattern as a single
object with non-uniform properties. Furthermore,
some stimuli as a matter of illusion arouse the perception of an object where no object really exists.
Cases of non-uniformity, ambiguity and illusionary
perception not only challenge the applicability of the
Gestalt principles, but also provide an interesting
test for our hypothesis about the neural basis of object and predicate concepts.
Using structural principles well known from the
neurophysiology of the visual cortex, we designed an
oscillator network for multidimensional feature binding and presented non-uniform, ambiguous and illusionary stimuli as input. To confirm our hypothesis,
it should be expected that, even under these challenging condition, (i) the network assigns exactly one
oscillation function (i.e., one object concept) to each
object normally perceived by human subjects and
(ii) the clusters of neurons (i.e., the predicative concepts) responsive for properties of the object show
activity that is rendered by the oscillation function
representing the object in question. We will, furthermore, take a look at the way the network manages to

Abstract
To test the hypothesis that synchronous neural oscillation constitutes the cortical representation of
objects, an oscillatory network is designed and stimulated with non-uniform, ambiguous and illusionary
objects. Alternative perceptive possibilities correspond to a multitude of eigenmodes of the network
dynamics. A semantic interpretation of the network is developed. The data support the view that
oscillation functions are the neural basis of object
concepts, while clusters of feature responsive neurons constitute the basis of predicate concepts.

Introduction
Cognition is defined over conceptual structures, (i)
which have content and (ii) are in principle (not
necessarily by the subject itself) expressible by languages with object and predicate terms. The first
condition derives from the fact that cognitive processes are epistemic in the sense that the criterion of
truth-conduciveness, which is reserved for bearers of
content, applies. The second condition grounds in
the assumption that cognition presupposes categorization. Truth-conducive processes would be practically useless and without any evolutionary benefit
if they did not subsume objects under categories. To
do so the cognitive system must dispose over object
and predicate concepts.
The role of the object concept in cognition and
perception has been of particular interest not only
in the developmental literature (reviewed by Scholl
& Leslie, 1999), but also in neural modeling. Von
der Malsburg’s (1981) supposition that the synchronous oscillation of neural responses constitutes
a mechanism that binds the responses of feature
specific neurons when these features are instantiated by the same object has been frequently applied
to explain the integration of distributed responses.
Object-related neural synchrony has been observed
in numerous cell recording experiments (reviewed by
Singer, 1999) and experiments related to attention
(Steinmetz et al., 2000), perception (Fries, Roelfsema, Engel, König, & Singer, 1997), expectation
(Riehle, Grün, & Aertsen, 1997) and mental rep-

1
In some experiments, e.g., on the perception of plaid
stimuli (Thiele & Stoner, 2003) synchronization was apparently not relevant.

876

Figure 1: a) A single oscillator. b) Synchronizing (solid) and desynchronizing (dashed) connections between neighboring oscillators. R and G denote the two color channels; the scheme has to be
applied to other neighbors and the remaining channels as well.

Figure 2: Scheme of the coupling between two feature modules. Only three connections are drawn out.
The single oscillator in module A has connections to
all oscillators in the shaded region of module B. This
schema is applied to all other oscillators and feature
modules.

represent the various, more or less likely, perceptive
possibilities. To account for the representational capabilities of the network, a formally explicit semantic interpretation will be given.

Multidimensional feature binding
(Fig. 1b). This network implements binding within
a single feature dimension and will be called a feature module. A mathematical analysis of a single
oscillator as well as of the network has been carried
out by Maye (2002).
The current work extends this model to multiple
features. Here, the network consists of several feature modules, one for each feature dimension. For
the qualitative design of the coupling between the
feature modules, two criteria were relevant: (i) The
distinctive features of a single object should synchronize the activity of oscillators activated by this object in the respective feature modules. For this reason, feature modules are coupled by synchronizing
connections that preserve the topology. (ii) No particular entailments (e.g., ‘green things are vertical’)
are specified between features of different feature
dimensions. Therefore, couplings between feature
modules are unspecific across feature layers. Fig. 2
illustrates a subset of the network.
In order to synchronize different feature modules,
the excitatory neurons of oscillators were coupled.
Quantitatively, the coupling strength LAB (i, j) between oscillator i in feature module A and oscillator
j in feature module B is given by:

Schillen and König (1994) investigate the synchronization properties of an oscillator network for a
stimulus that is uniform in one feature dimension
(orientation), but differs in two others (features
dimensions chosen are orientation, disparity and
color). It turned out that the oscillators receiving
input from the same object synchronized with each
other, while the oscillatory functions of oscillators
receiving input from two distinct objects differed by
a phase shift. This corresponds to the perception of
two distinct objects.
For an even number of feature dimensions or varying feature values in the object, the binding task can
become ambiguous. A possible solution is the simultaneous representation of multiple representational
candidates. Maye (2003) shows that the dynamics
of an oscillator network can simultaneously represent
multiple binding solutions.
We used a network of coupled oscillators to implement Gestalt-based feature binding in the temporal
domain. The subnetwork for binding a single feature
has been detailed by Maye (2003), but the general
structure will be shortly reproduced: A single oscillator consists of an excitatory and inhibitory neuron with recurrent synaptic connections (Fig. 1a).
Each model neuron is considered a representative
of a larger group (100 to 200) of spatially proximal
and physiologically similar biological neurons. Oscillators are arranged on a three-dimensional grid.
Two dimensions represent the retinotopic mapping
of the spatial domain, while the third dimension represents discrete values of a single feature. If a specific feature value is present in the receptive field,
the corresponding oscillator will be activated by an
input signal. The oscillators are locally connected
by synchronizing and desynchronizing connections

(
AB

L

(i, j) =

√ L0 e−(
2πσ 2

0

d(i,j)
2σ

2

)

if d(i, j) < r
(1)
else

The distance in geometric space between the receptive fields of both oscillators is denoted by d(i, j) and
the weight parameter is L0 . Connections emanating
from oscillator i are allowed to contact oscillators in
a surround of size r from the target oscillator j.

877

feature module received input. The dynamic equations (Maye, 2003) were then solved numerically by
a fourth order Runge-Kutta method. The activity
of the j-th oscillator is characterized mathematically
by the activity function xj (t) during a time window
[0, T ]. Activity functions are vectors in the Hilbert
space L2 [0, T ], which comprises all functions squareintegrable in the interval [0, T ]. In case of real-valued
functions, this space has the inner product
Z

T

hx(t)|y(t)i =

x(t) y(t)dt.

(2)

0

The degree of synchrony between two functions is
defined as
p
∆(x, y) = hx|yi/ hx|xihy|yi
(3)
and lies between −1 and +1. The degree of synchrony corresponds to the cosine of the angle between the Hilbert vectors x and y. The vectors are parallel (synchronous), anti-parallel (antisynchronous) and orthogonal (uncorrelated) depending on whether ∆(x, y) is +1, −1 or 0. The overall dynamics of the network is given by the Cartesian
vector x(t) = (x1 (t), ..., xk (t))T (k the number of oscillators of the network).
From synergetics it is well known that the dynamics of complex systems is often governed by a few
dominating states. These states are the eigenmodes
of the system. The corresponding eigenvalues designate how much of the variance is accounted for
by that mode. The eigenmodes e of the network
dynamics are computed as the eigenvectors of the
auto-covariance matrix C, where its components C ij
are given as4
C ij = hxi |xj i.

Figure 3: a–d) Stimuli on top. Small right bar depicts diameter of coupling range within modules.
Eigenvalues to the right. Below, the eigenmodes
with the three largest eigenvalues, from top to bottom. Each eigenmode was split into the components
for each active layer in every module. From left to
right each row displays the mode for the first (R)
and second color (G) of the color module and vertical (V) and horizontal (H) orientation of the orientation module. e–f) The characteristic functions for
stimulus c (e) and b (f), only.3

The network state at any instant is considered as a
superposition of the eigenmodes ei :
X
x(t) =
oi (t)ei ,

Non-uniform and ambiguous stimuli
For the first series of experiments two feature dimensions were used: color and orientation. In order to
investigate the binding capabilities of the network,
two types of stimuli were tested (Fig. 3a–d). The
first contained a horizontal and a vertical bar that
overlap in the center. When both bars share the
same color, this is usually perceived as a cross. This
stimulus is uniform in the color dimension, but nonuniform in the orientation dimension. If the bars
have different colors, they are non-uniform in both
feature dimensions. In the other type of stimuli two
non-overlapping bars were shown. In one case they
had the same color and were parallel so that they
might be perceived either as one object (a grating)
or as two objects. In the other case both bars were
different in color and orientation. The input to the
network was computed from these stimuli. Since the
feature values are binary in each dimension (two colors, two orientations), at most two layers of each

i

where the oi (t) are the temporally evolving superposition coefficients determined by projecting the activity x(t) into the eigenspace. oi (t) will be called
the characteristic function of the i-th eigenmode.
3
Coupling parameters: L0 = 0.1, r = 2; module parameters as defined by Maye (2003): τx = τy = 1, mx =
my = 2, θx = 2, θy = 1, I0 = 2, Lxx
= 0.6, J0 =
0
0.5, W0 = 0.1, rx = ry = 4. Parameters apply to Fig. 4
as well.
4
To compute the components of the auto-covariance
matrix, the integral was approximated by a sum over
discrete unitary time steps

hx|yi ≈

X
0<t≤T

878

x(t)y(t).

Maye (2002) demonstrates that the eigenvectors
approximate the eigenmodes of the solution of the
system of ODEs describing the network dynamics
if the time course of the superposition coefficients
is sinusoidal and if there are strong differences in
the variances of each principal direction (expressed
by the magnitude of the corresponding eigenvalues).
Under these conditions the superposition coefficients
associated with each eigenvector correspond to the
order parameters associated with each eigenmode.
The temporally evolving order parameters, i.e., the
characteristic functions, are shown in Fig. 3e–f and
eigenvalues in Fig. 3a–d.
For display purposes the eigenvectors were split
into the contributions from each activated layer and
reshaped to a matrix. To analyze the eigenmodes,
the signs of the components of each mode (visualized by light and dark shades of grey) are taken into
account. Regions with the same sign are activated
together, while regions with opposite signs are activated alternately. This shows which parts of the
stimulus are bound by synchronous activity of the
oscillators.
Considering the eigenmode with the highest eigenvalue (the first row in Fig. 3a–d), a number of interesting observations can be made. To begin with,
only oscillators that are stimulated by input in their
receptive field become activated. The activity of
spatially proximal oscillators is synchronized. The
activity of oscillators in different feature modules
activated by the same bar is synchronized as well.
Finally, if the bars have different colors, the oscillations are de-synchronized.
Applying the hypothesis that an object is represented by synchronous oscillation, the patterns of
synchrony in the first eigenmodes of the four stimulations are to be read as representing: (3a) two
objects, i.e., one R-colored V-oriented and one Gcolored H-oriented object, (3b) one R-colored and
partially V- and H-oriented object, (3c) one Rcolored and V-oriented object, (3d) one R-colored
V-oriented object and one G-colored H-oriented object.
When the same analysis is applied to the eigenmodes with the second largest eigenvalue (second
row), alternative representations are to be read from
the distribution of synchrony. This is most obvious
in the stimulus in Fig. 3b. The two, differently orientated components of the cross are now represented
as distinct objects. The stimulus of 3c in the second eigenmode is no longer represented as one, but
as two objects. The second eigenmode of stimulus
3d represents an alternative possibility to the one
in the first mode: now the two bars are bound together as one object. This perceptive possibility is
also displayed by the third eigenmode for stimulus
3a.
The eigenvalues and the time-course of the order
parameters show that the conditions under which

Figure 4: Stimulus showing a Kanisza triangle (a)
and a similar stimulus without an illusory object (b).
From left to right, the two columns in each figure display the eigenmode components of the two layers in
the color modules for white and black. The orientation module was not used. Rows show eigenmodes
with decreasing eigenvalues.
eigenvectors of the covariance matrix can be considered an approximation of the eigenmodes of the
underlying system of differential equations are fulfilled.

Illusionary stimuli
In the second series of experiments, a Kanisza triangle was presented as stimulus (Fig. 4a, top). It
generates the percept of a white triangle in front of
three black circles at the corners. The perception
of this stimulus involves integration of contours that
are induced by collinear line fragments at the corners of the illusionary triangle. This can be viewed
as an instance of the Gestalt law of good continuation. The current model, however, does not account for contour integration. Hence, edge information was omitted altogether. Extending the model
to exhibit contour integration is possible by means of
an anisotropic connection schema of the oscillators
in the orientation module as suggested by Li (1998).
Analyzing again the signs of the components of the
eigenmodes, the most prominent eigenmode (first
row in Fig. 4a) shows no distinction between the illusory figure and the background. This corresponds to
a possible perception that only groups the three circle segments, on the one hand, and the background,
on the other hand, to objects. The second eigen-

879

j-th oscillator, contributed by an eigenmode, are exactly anti-parallel, while any two, with o(t) temporally evolving components of equal signs contribute
mutually parallel activity. We may interpret this
by saying that each eigenmode represents maximally
two objects as different from one another. The representation of the first object is the positive function
+o(t) and the representation of the second object is
the negative function −o(t). Both, the positive and
the negative function can be assigned to individual
constants, a and b, respectively, and thus play the
role of object concepts. These considerations, for
every eigenmode e, justify the following evaluation
of non-identity:
(
+1 if ve (a = b) = −1,
(7)
ve (¬a = b) =
−1 if ve (a = b) > −1.

mode, however, clearly distinguishes the triangular
object from the background. Due to missing edge information the shape of the triangle is not perfectly
rendered (black, corresponding to the representation
of the triangular object, seems to “flow out” on all
three sides). Despite the vague information about
contours, the negative pattern of synchrony (black)
for the triangle in the left color layer is clearly distinguishable from the positive pattern of synchrony
(white) for the rest of the stimulus, which is distributed over both color layers.
In order to figure out in how far the eigenmodes
are due to the illusory figure a control stimulus was
tested. It had a similar structure but did not generate visual illusions (Fig. 4b top). For this stimulus
none of the eigenmodes exhibits a difference between
a foreground object in between the circles and the
background. Subsequent eigenmodes distinguish between individual circles (data not shown).

Feature clusters function as representations of properties. They can be expressed by monadic predicates. We will assume that our language has a set
of monadic predicates P red (containing, e.g., ‘red’,
‘green’, ‘vertical’, ‘horizontal’) such that each predicate denotes a property featured by some neural
feature cluster. To every predicate F ∈ P red we
now assign a diagonal matrix β(F ) ∈ Rk×k that,
by multiplication with any eigenmode e, renders the
sub-vector of the F -components, i.e., those vector
components that belong to the feature cluster expressed by F . The components of the matrix β(F )
are defined as follows:

1 if i = j and i indexes
(β(F ))ij =
(8)
an F -component,

0 else.

Semantic interpretation
The dynamics of the network can be understood in
semantic terms. We are allowed to regard oscillation functions as internal representations of individual objects, i.e., as object concepts. They may be
assigned as meanings of some of the individual terms
of a predicate language. Let Ind be the set of individual terms, then the partial function
α : Ind → L2 [0, T ]

(4)

is a constant individual assignment of the language
into the set of activity functions L2 [0, T ]. The sentence a = b (a, b ∈ Ind) – read, e.g., ‘this object is
identical with that object’ – expresses a representational state of the system to the degree the oscillation functions α(a) and α(b) of the system are synchronous. Provided that Cls is the set of sentences,
the degree to which a sentence expresses a representational state of the system, for any eigenmode e,
can be measured by the function
ve : Cls → [−1, +1].

We are, hence, justified to call β(F ) the neural intension of the predicate F , or in other words, the
(neural basis of the) predicate concept expressed by
F.
The neural intension of a predicate, for every
eigenmode, determines its neural extension, i.e., the
set of those oscillations that the neurons on the assigned feature layer, per eigenmode, contribute to
the dynamics of the network. Hence, for every predicate F its neural extension in the eigenmode e comes
to the set of activity functions

(5)

In case of identity sentences we have:
ve (a = b) = ∆(α(a), α(b)).

(6)

Most vector components of a given eigenmode are
exactly zero (illustrated by middle gray), while few
in some cases are positive (light grey) and few in
some cases are negative (dark grey). Since the contribution of an eigenmode e to the entire network
state temporally evolves according to the characteristic function o(t), any positive eigenmode component ei = +|ei | contributes to the activity of the i-th
oscillator with +|ei |o(t), while any negative component ej = −|ej | contributes with −|ej |o(t) to the
activity of the j-th oscillator. Since the ∆-function
is normalized, only the signs of the constants matter
to determine that the activities of the i-th and the

{fj |f = β(F )eo(t)},
where the fj are the vector components of f . To determine to which degree an oscillation function assigned to an individual constant a is in the neural
extension of a predicate F , we have to compute how
synchronous it maximally is with one of the oscillation functions in the neural extension. This value
then gives us the degree to which the sentence F a
(‘the object a satisfies the predicate F ’) expresses a
representational state of the system:
ve (F a) = max{∆(α(a), fj )|f = β(F )eo(t)}.

880

(9)

References

Table 1: Object concepts and the representational
states of the network expressible by a sentence φ, per
stimulus and eigenmode ei . R, G: color predicates;
H, V : predicates for orientation; a, b, c: individual
terms.
i
(3a) 1
2
3
(3b) 1
2
3
(3c) 1
2
3
(3d) 1
2
3

φ such that vei (φ) = 1
Ra ∧ V a ∧ Gb ∧ Hb ∧ ¬a = b
—
Rc ∧ V c ∧ Gc ∧ Hc
Ra ∧ V a ∧ Ha
Rb ∧ Rc ∧ V b ∧ Hc ∧ ¬b = c
—
Ra ∧ V a
Rb ∧ Rc ∧ V b ∧ V c ∧ ¬b = c
—
Ra ∧ V a ∧ Gb ∧ Hb ∧ ¬a = b
Rc ∧ V c ∧ Gc ∧ Hc
—

Fries, P., Roelfsema, P. R., Engel, A. K., König,
P., & Singer, W. (1997). Synchronization of
oscillatory responses in visual cortex correlates
with perception in interocular rivalry. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 94, 12699–704.
Hurford, J. R. (2003). The neural basis of predicateargument structure. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26, 261–83.
Li, Z. (1998). A neural model of contour integration
in the primary visual cortex. Neural Computation, 10 (4), 903–940.
Maye, A. (2002). Neuronale Synchronität, zeitliche
Bindung und Wahrnehmung. Ph.D. thesis, TU
Berlin, Berlin.
Maye, A. (2003). Correlated neuronal activity can
represent multiple binding solutions. Neurocomputing, 52–54, 73–77.
Riehle, A., Grün, S., & Aertsen, A. (1997). Spike
synchronization and rate modulation differentially involved in motor cortical functions. Science, 278, 1950–53.
Schillen, T. B., & König, P. (1994). Binding by
temporal structure in multiple feature domains
of an oscillatory neuronal network. Biological
Cybernetics, 70, 397–405.
Scholl, B., & Leslie, A. (1999). Explaining the
infants object concept: Beyond the perception/cognition dichotomy. In E. Lepore &
Z. Pylyshyn (Eds.), What is cognitive science?
(pp. 26–73). Oxford: Blackwell.
Singer, W. (1999, September). Neuronal synchrony:
A versatile code for the definition of relations?
Neuron, 24, 49–65.
Steinmetz, P. N., Roy, A., Fitzgerald, P. J., Hsiao,
S. S., Johnson, K. O., & Niebur, E. (2000). Attention modulates synchronized neuronal firing in primate somatosensory cortex. Nature,
404, 187–90.
Thiele, A., & Stoner, G. (2003). Neuronal synchrony
does not correlate with motion coherence in
cortical area MT. Nature, 421, 366–70.
von der Malsburg, C. (1981). The correlation theory
of brain function (Internal Report Nos. 81–2).
Göttingen: MPI for Biophysical Chemistry.
Werning, M. (2003a). Synchrony and composition: Toward a cognitive architecture between
classicism and connectionism. In B. Löwe,
W. Malzkorn, & T. Raesch (Eds.), Applications of mathematical logic in philosophy and
linguistics (pp. 261–78). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Werning, M. (2003b). Ventral vs. dorsal pathway:
the source of the semantic object/event and
the syntactic noun/verb distinction. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26 (3), 299–300.
Werning, M. (2005a). Neuronal synchronization,
covariation, and compositional representation.
In E. Machery, M. Werning, & G. Schurz
(Eds.), The compositionality of meaning and
content (Vols. II: Applications to Linguistics,
Philosophy and Neuroscience, pp. 283–312).
Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag.
Werning, M. (2005b). The temporal dimension of
thought: Cortical foundations of predicative
representation. Synthese, 146 (1/2), 203–24.

obj concept
α(a) = −o1 (t)
α(b) = +o1 (t)
α(c) = +o3 (t)
α(a) = +o1 (t)
α(b) = −o2 (t)
α(c) = +o2 (t)
α(a) = +o1 (t)
α(b) = +o2 (t)
α(c) = −o2 (t)
α(a) = −o1 (t)
α(b) = +o1 (t)
α(c) = +o2 (t)

Werning (2005a) extends this semantics to all logical constants of a first order predicate language and
proves that it is compositional with respect to meaning and content. The conjunction, in particular, is
evaluated by the minimum of the values of the conjuncts. Let φ, ψ be sentences of such a language,
then, for any eigenmode e, we have:
ve (φ ∧ ψ) = min{ve (φ), ve (ψ)}.

(10)

For each stimulus the network activity is governed
by a number of eigenmodes specific for that stimulus. Each eigenmode represents different perceptive
possibilities. The semantic interpretation of the network states now allows us to provide a precise analysis of the network’s representations and the object
concepts involved therein (see table 1).

Conclusion
The view on the neural basis of the object concept
we presented in this paper competes, i.a., with a
view recently proposed by Hurford (2003). He argues that object concepts and predicate concepts are
processed separately, viz. in the dorsal and the ventral stream of the visual system, respectively (for
discussion see Werning, 2003b). We, in contrast,
hold that predicate and objects concepts are processed at the same location, at the same time and
by the same mechanism. Since the generation of an
object concept is governed by the Gestalt principles,
which are formulated in terms of feature similarity,
the processing of the object concept is inseparably
intertwined with the generation of property representations. The theory of neural synchrony combined with the model of oscillatory networks takes
this interdependence into account. The simulations
reported here confirm our hypothesis that object
concepts are to be identified with neural oscillations.
Our hypothesis leads to successful predictions and
explanations even under such ambitious conditions
as non-uniform, ambiguous and illusionary stimuli.
881

