UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Problem of Metaconceptual Awareness in Theory Revision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bv8f5q1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Kyriakopoulou, Natassa
Vosniadou, Stella

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Problem of Metaconceptual Awareness in Theory Revision
Stella Vosniadou (svosniad@phs.uoa.gr)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science
National Kapodistrian University of Athens
University Campus, Ilisia 157 71 Athens – Greece

Natassa Kyriakopoulou (tonia@aueb.gr)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science
National Kapodistrian University of Athens
University Campus, Ilisia 157 71 Athens – Greece
Abstract
In this paper we report an experiment that investigated the
question of whether elementary school children have
metaconceptual awareness of theory revision processes. Fiftytwo elementary school children (grades, 1, 3 and 5) were
asked to select between phenomenological and scientific
depictions of different astronomical phenomena and indicate
which of these depictions were closer to “Reality” and which
were closer to “Appearance”. The results showed an increase
with age in the number of scientific depictions selected. They
also showed that the children who selected both
phenomenological and scientific representations of the
astronomical phenomena were not capable of deciding which
depictions best represented “Reality” and which
“Appearance”. It is argued that the task requires the ability to
understand that the same world situation can be represented in
different ways and that children have difficulty understanding
the theoretical nature of representations and thus of flexibly
manipulating multiple representations of the same physical
phenomenon.

Introduction
As children are exposed to science instruction, they
gradually revise their naive physics in ways that make it
more consistent with currently accepted scientific
explanations. The question we investigated in this paper is
the following: Are children aware of this revision process?
Or more generally, are conceptual change processes in the
learning of science under the full metaconceptual control of
the learner?
At least two alternative hypotheses can be formulated.
The first is that children are like scientists who are aware of
their theories and test them in an explicit fashion during the
process of theory building and revising. In this case they
should have full metaconceptual awareness of their
theoretical views and the difference between their views and
the scientific explanations to which they are exposed. The
other hypothesis is that children are not like scientists in this
respect. Although they are capable of interpreting new
evidence to revise theories, they are neither aware of their
theories nor do they explicitly evaluate them.
We are not the first to claim that children can revise their
theories without full metaconceptual control. KarmiloffSmith & Inhelder (1974) argued that young children are

capable of forming and revising theories without necessarily
being aware of these theories. According to Kuhn, Amsel &
O’Loughlin (1988) young children revise their theories as
their experience increases, but lack the skillful coordination
between theory and evidence of adults. According to them,
the ability to think about a theory, that means to represent it
as an object of cognition, is weak among young children.
Klahr (Klahr, 2000. Klahr, Dunbar & Fay, 2000)
investigated developmental differences in search heuristics
used in scientific reasoning. They found that children are
capable of distinguishing between theory (hypotheses) and
evidence. However, children’s performance was inferior to
that of adults when they had to distinguish between a given
implausible hypothesis and a plausible hypothesis of their
own creation. In contrast to adults, children did not
simultaneously consider the two alternative hypotheses, but
they focused on their own plausible hypothesis and tried to
find evidence to support it. Possible inconsistencies were
interpreted either as errors or failures to support the desired
outcome.
In later work, Karmiloff-Smith (1991, 1992) argued that
the changes in children’s theories are connected with
changes in representations. A way to revise theories is
through an internal process, which Karmiloff-Smith calls
“representational rediscription”. The end result of
representational rediscription is the existence in the mind of
multiple representations of similar knowledge at different
levels of detail and explicitness, which enable the learner to
appropriate this knowledge.
Vosniadou (Vosniadou, 2003. Vosniadou, Skopeliti, &
Ikospentaki, 2004, 2005) argued that the presence of
misconceptions can be used as evidence that the process of
conceptual change is not under the full metaconceptual
control of the children. Many misconceptions regarding, for
example, the shape of the earth are synthetic models that
reveal children’s attempts to assimilate scientific
information to their naïve physics. The model of the “dual
earth” is a clear example of a synthetic model, according to
which there is a spherical earth in the sky (a planet) and a
flat earth where people actually live. We believe that the
formation of synthetic models is possible precisely because
children are not metaconceptually aware of their own beliefs
or presuppositions and of the fact that these beliefs are
inconsistent with the new, scientific information to which

2329

they are exposed at school. Metaconceptual awareness in
this case requires the ability to form two representations (the
one based on phenomenal appearance and the other based
on the scientific model-the globe) in order to compare them.
DeLoache and her colleagues (DeLoache, 1989, 2000.
Marzolf, DeLoache & Kolstad, 1999) have shown that there
is a developmental trend in representational ability. In a
series of experiments in which young children were asked to
find objects hidden in a full-sized room based on
information provided to the children through their exposure
to a realistic scale model of the room, DeLoache et al.
(1999) found that 2.5 year old children cannot utilize the
information given in the scale model in order to find the
objects in the real room, but by the age of 3, they can.
DeLoache argues that children under the age of 3 may not
be able to maintain a dual orientation to a model (a dual
representation) treating it only as an object rather as a
symbol.
Our situation is of course a more complex one. As
mentioned earlier, metaconceptual awareness in our tasks
would require children to be able to simultaneously compare
two alternative representations of the same astronomical
phenomenon, a representation based on phenomenal
appearance and another based on the scientific model.
In order to investigate this question, we designed an
experiment in which we presented the children with
phenomenological and scientific depictions of six different
astronomical phenomena and asked them to select from
them the one that was closer to “Appearance” and the one
that was closer to “Reality”.
We hypothesized that the younger children would provide
mostly phenomenological responses both for the
Appearance and the Reality questions because they had not
been exposed or had not yet understood the scientific
explanations of the astronomical phenomena. In the case of
the older children we expected an increase in scientific
depictions, resulting from their greater exposure to the
scientific models.
Our second hypothesis was that, lacking metaconceptual
awareness, the children who had understood the scientific
explanations would still find it difficult to make the
distinction between “Appearance” and “Reality”, because
this distinction requires the ability to entertain dual
representations for the same world situation. We thus
expected that the children will either select only scientific
depictions for both “Appearance” and “Reality” or that they
would mix the two.

Method
Participants
Fifty-two children from two middle-class elementary
schools in Athens participated in this study. Eighteen
children attended Grade 1 (mean age 6 years and 4 months),
17 children attended Grade 3 (mean age 8 years and 9
months), and 17 children attended Grade 5 (mean age 11
years and 2 months).

Materials
The materials consisted of a Reality-Appearance Pretest and
an Astronomy Test. The Reality-Appearance Pretest was
used to ensure that all the children could make the
distinction between Reality and Appearance and was similar
to the tests developed by Flavell and his colleagues (Flavell,
Green & Flavell, 1986). Each child was presented with a
sheet of white paper (Reality), which was placed under a red
transparent plastic filter (Appearance) and had to name the
Real and the Apparent color of the paper under these
circumstances. In the process the child was explicitly told:
“As you know, the things around us are sometimes different
in reality from what they appear to be, and sometimes they
are the same”.
The Astronomy Test consisted of four different depictions
of each of the following six astronomical phenomena: Shape
of Earth, Shape of Earth and Gravity, Sun and Earth
Relative Size, Sun and Moon Relative Size, Day/Night Cycle,
and Solar System. For each astronomical phenomenon, two
of the four depictions were more consistent with scientific
representations to which students are exposed in instruction,
while the other two were closer to young children’s own
phenomenological representations, as they have been
revealed in previous studies (Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992,
1994. Vosniadou, Archontidou, Kalogiannidou, &
Ioannides, 1996).The experimenter showed the child one of
the six sets of the four cards that depicted an astronomical
phenomenon (e.g. the Shape of the Earth) at a time asking
him/her to choose the one that he/she thought was closer to
“Reality” and place it underneath a card that wrote “As it is
in Reality” and then to choose the one closer to
“Appearance” and place it underneath a card that wrote “As
it appears to our eyes”. Children’s responses were audiorecorded and were later transcribed for scoring. The
materials used in the Astronomy Test are shown in Figure 1.

Procedure
The children were tested individually in their school by one
of the experimenters. Testing time was between 20 to 30
minutes. All the children in the sample passed the RealityAppearance Pretest and proceeded to take the Astronomy
Test.

Results
According to our first hypothesis there should be an increase
in scientific depictions as a function of grade. In order to
test this hypothesis we scored children’s depiction selections
for Appearance and Reality as follows: children were given
the score of (1) if the depiction selected represented an
initial phenomenological model, the score of (2) if the
depiction
selected
represented
an
advanced
phenomenological model, the score of (3) if the depiction
selected represented an initial scientific model, and the score
of (4) if the depiction selected represented an advanced
scientific model. Given our scoring system we should
expect lower means for the Appearance question

2330

ASTRONOMICAL
PHENOMENON

INITIAL
PHENOMENOLOGICAL
(1)

ADVANCED
PHENOMENOLOGICAL
(2)

INITIAL
SCIENTIFIC
(3)

ADVANCED
SCIENTIFIC
(4)

EARTH SHAPE
EARTH SHAPE
AND
GRAVITY
SUN & EARTH
RELATIVE SIZE
SUN & MOON
RELATIVE SIZE

DAY/NIGHT
CYCLE
SOLAR SYSTEM

Figure 1: Scientific & Phenomenological Depictions of Astronomical Phenomena used in the Astronomy Test
(Phenomenological Depictions) and higher means for the
Reality question (Scientific Depictions).
A 3 way ANOVA was conducted on these scores, with
the following factors: Question Type (with two levels:
Reality and Appearance question), Grade (with three levels:
1st, 3rd and 5th grade) and Astronomical Phenomenon (with
six levels: the six astronomical phenomena which are shown
in Figure 1).
Table 1: Mean Scores for Reality and Appearance Questions
by Grade.
Grade

Reality

Appearance

Difference

1st

14.00

13.83

0.16

rd

17.17

13.23

3.94

5th

18.29

12.05

6.23

3

The results of the ANOVA also showed a main effect
for Astronomical Phenomenon (F(5, 245)=45.979; p<0.01),
which was due to the fact that the Shape of Earth and Shape
of Earth and Gravity questions had higher mean scores than
the other astronomical phenomena. The results also showed
a statistically significant interaction between Astronomical
Phenomenon and Grade (F(10, 245)=3.624;p<0.01). As
shown in Table 2, the mean score increased by grade for all
astronomical phenomena except for the Shape of Earth and
Shape of Earth and Gravity. This finding shows that
children selected the scientific depiction more often in the
case of the Shape of Earth and Shape of Earth and Gravity
questions than in the other cases.
Table 2: Mean Scores for Astronomical Phenomenon as a
Function of Grade.

The results showed that, as expected, there was a
statistically significant interaction between Question Type
and Grade (F(2, 49)=7.619;p<0.01). More specifically, we
obtained an increase by grade of the mean score for the
questions that refer to Reality (scientific) and conversely a
decrease of the mean score for the questions that refer to
Appearance (phenomenological). As shown in Table 1, the
difference between the Reality and Appearance scores is
low for the 1st grade, indicating that the younger children
selected mostly phenomenological depictions both for
Reality and Appearance. The increase in Reality and
Appearance scores with age is in accordance with our
hypothesis that there will be an increase of the scientific
depictions by age.

Astronomical
Phenomenon
Shape of Earth
Shape of Earth
and Gravity
Sun and Earth
Relative Size
Sun and Moon
Relative Size
Day /Night Cycle
Solar System

1st
Grade
6.61
6.27

3rd
Grade
6.64
5.94

5th
Grade
6.23
5.41

4.11

5.17

5.64

3.44

4.94

4.88

3.61
3.77

3.76
4.05

4.23
3.94

The above results are consistent with our hypothesis that
there will be an increase in the selection of scientific
depictions as a function of age. Thus we have evidence that
children, as they develop, solve the ontological problem.
However, these results do not provide information regarding

2331

the solution of the epistemological problem. Our hypothesis
was that the students who understood the scientific
representations would not necessarily have metaconceptual
awareness of the shift that they had made from an original
phenomenological representation (Appearance) to a
scientific one (Reality). Our prediction was that these
children were likely to commit the error of selecting only
scientific depictions for both Reality and Appearance, or
that they would mix up the two representations, often
selecting the scientific depictions for Appearance and the
phenomenological depictions for Reality.
In order to better test these two alternative hypotheses,
each child’s selection of the two depictions for Reality and
Appearance for the six astronomical phenomena were
placed in the following four categories:
1. Phenomenological Responses Only (P-P): when the
cards chosen were the initial or advanced
phenomenological depiction for both Reality and
Appearance.
2. Reversal of Phenomenological-Scientific (P-S):
when the cards chosen were the initial or advanced
phenomenological depiction for Reality and the initial
or advanced scientific depiction for Appearance.
3. Scientific Responses Only (S-S): when the cards
chosen were the initial or advanced scientific depiction
both for Reality and Appearance.
4. Correct: Scientific-Phenomenological (S-P): when
the cards chosen were the initial or advanced scientific
depiction for Reality and the initial or advanced
phenomenological depiction for Appearance.

a finding supported by the Astronomical Phenomenon x
Grade interaction, discussed earlier. However, even though
we find evidence for the solution of the ontological
problem, the 1st graders do not appear to have solved the
epistemological problem. As can be seen, most of the 1st
graders (61%) selected only the scientific depiction for both
Reality and Appearance in the case of the Earth Shape and
were split between selecting either only the scientific
depictions or the correct responses in the case of the Earth
Shape & Gravity.
Table 3b: Distribution of Responses in the four Categories
(3rd Graders)
Categories of Response
Astronomical
Phenomenon
Earth Shape
Earth Shape &
Gravity
Sun & Earth
Relative Size
Sun & Moon
Relative Size
Day/Night Cycle
Solar System

Earth Shape
Earth Shape &
Gravity
Sun & Earth
Relative Size
Sun & Moon
Relative Size
Day/Night Cycle
Solar System

P-S

S-S

S-P

-

6%

61%

33%

17%

17%

28%

38%

61%

33%

-

6%

50%

44%

-

6%

55%
66%

17%
17%

11%

28%
6%

-

S-S

S-P

-

59%

41%

6%

23%

12%

59%

18%

29%

18%

35%

12%

35%

18%

35%

53%
53%

6%
12%

6%

41%
29%

Categories of Response
Astronomical
Phenomenon

Categories of Response
P-P

P-S

Table 3c: Distribution of Responses in the four Categories
(5th Graders)

Table 3a: Distribution of Responses in the four Categories
(1st Graders)
Astronomical
Phenomenon

P-P

Earth Shape
Earth Shape &
Gravity
Sun & Earth
Relative Size
Sun & Moon
Relative Size
Day/Night Cycle
Solar System

In Tables 3a, b, c we can see the distribution of
responses in the four categories described above for the 1st,
3rd and 5th graders respectively. In Table 3a, we can see that
in most astronomical phenomena the 1st graders provided
phenomenological responses only, indicating that they had
little or no knowledge of the scientific explanations for these
phenomena. Concerning the phenomena Shape of Earth and
Shape of Earth & Gravity, the 1st grade children showed
some evidence of understanding the scientific explanations,

P-P

P-S

-

S-S

S-P

6%

41%

53%

18%

6%

6%

70%

18%

6%

35%

41%

6%

12%

18%

64%

29%
64%

12%
6%

6%

59%
24%

Looking at the distribution of responses in the case of the
3rd and 5th graders (Tables 3b & 3c) we can see that an
increasing number of children can sort out successfully the
distinction between the scientific and the phenomenological
depictions. For the phenomena Earth Shape and Earth
Shape & Gravity over 50% of these children could form the
correct distinction between the scientific and the
phenomenological depictions. Only for the phenomenon
Solar System most children continued to provide
phenomenological responses (64%). However, even though
most children seemed to be aware of the scientific model,
they continued to mix up the scientific and the

2332

phenomenological, either selecting only scientific depictions
or mixing up the scientific with the phenomenological. A
chi square goodness-of-fit analysis was performed on the
data displayed in Tables 3a, b, c. A statistical significance
with regard to the frequency of the correct answers by
grade, for the Astronomical Phenomena Relative Size of
Sun and Moon (χ2(6)=23.994;p<0.05) and Relative Size of
Sun and Earth (χ2(6)=21.798;p<0.05) was found.

Discussion
The results of the present study confirmed our first
hypothesis, namely that a) the younger children would select
mostly phenomenological depictions for both the
‘Appearance’ and ‘Reality’ questions, and b) there will be
an increase in the number of scientific depictions selected
by the older children.
The results also supported our second hypothesis
according to which even the children who selected the
scientific depictions would find it difficult to distinguish
“Reality” from “Appearance”. Indeed, for the majority of
the astronomical phenomena investigated, many of the 1st
and 3rd graders and even some of the 5th graders who
selected scientific depictions gave erroneous responses.
They either thought that scientific depictions represented
both “Appearance” and “Reality” (the S-S category) or
selected both scientific and phenomenological depictions
but could not distinguish which depiction belonged to
“Appearance” and which to “Reality” (the P-S category).
Even in the case of the Shape of Earth, where children are
exposed to the scientific model very early, some of the older
children could not make the correct distinction between the
scientific and phenomenological depictions.
The task of deciding which depictions are closer to
“Appearance” and which are closer to “Reality” requires the
ability to retain in mind and compare different
representations that depict the same situation in the world.
This task requires metacognitive abilities and more
specifically the ability to understand that representations of
situations in the world are theoretical entities, hypotheses
that can be tested, found wrong and replaced by others. It
appears that such metaconceptual abilities develop late and
are not necessary for fundamental theory revision processes
to take place.
More specifically, it seems that children start the
knowledge acquisition process with the construction of
naïve, phenomenological representations of the physical
world without metaconceptual awareness. In other words,
the children do not consider these phenomenological
representations to be hypotheses which can be subjected to
hypothesis testing and disconfirmation. At this ‘absolutist
level’ of epistemological understanding, there seems to be
only one ‘correct’ representation, and knowledge is only an
accumulation of facts (see Kuhn, 2004).
Phenomenal representations are gradually replaced,
usually in the context of school instruction, with
representations closer to the culturally accepted scientific
ones. However, it appears that even this process of theory

revision can take place without metaconceptual awareness.
The findings of the present study that many children select
only the scientific depiction to refer to both “Reality” and
“Appearance” or confuse the phenomenal and scientific
depictions indicate that understanding the scientific
representation does not necessarily entail the ability to
understand that the same world situation can be interpreted
in different ways.
The ability to understand which depiction refers to
“Reality” and which to “Appearance” seems to be related
metacognitive developments that make it possible for
children to understand the theoretical nature of their
representations and the ability to make them the very objects
of critical examination.
According to Kuhn (in press), one of the important
aspects of cognitive development and learning is the ability
to use a meta-level executive function to monitor learning.
This executive function allows learners to flexibly access
dual representations, one of their own understanding and the
other of the new information to be investigated. “In its
absence, there exists only a singular experience – of ‘the
way things are’ – as a framework for understanding the
world” (p. 8).
This possible interpretation of the results is supported by
similar findings in the domain of language development. A
series of experiments by Κarmiloff-Smith (1979, 1992) have
shown that 3-5 years old children, form two independently
stored representations of the same phonological form and
map each of them to a specific functional context. Since
children of this age exploit two independently stored
representations, they make no mistakes and they can
produce simple functions of the indefinite and definitive
article. Around the age of 5-6 years old, children’s
representations seem to change, marking explicitly the
relation between two identical forms. However, children
start to make mistakes with respect to which of the two
functions is intended in each case and they do not always
understand when the same word is used as a numeral
referent or as an indefinite one. Only later, around the age of
6-7 years old, children have a consciously accessible and
verbally stated metalinguistic knowledge and the relation
between the two representations has been stored in one
explicit form.
According to Karmiloff-Smith’s model, for the child to
conceive the different alternative interpretations of a
phonological form, a process of representational
redescription must take place. Only then, the child is
capable to produce multiple representations at different
levels. The children, who do not have such
metarepresentational capabilities, fail to recognize that the
same situation may be seen and interpreted through
multiple, different representations.
In our situation we do not have similar forms that take
different functions, but similar world situations that can take
different representations. The two situations are similar in
that they break conventional relations between a
representation and the situation to which it refers.

2333

The ability to flexibly access two different representations
reveals a developmental progress as children become
capable of understanding the difference between “seeing”
and “seeing as”, as for example in “the earth is a sphere in
reality, but it looks like a flat object”. This ability also
makes them capable of explaining the transition from one
representation to another, as for example when they can
explain that “very big spherical objects may seem flat to
anyone who is on them”.

References
DeLoache, J.S. (1989). Young children’s understanding of
the correspondence between a scale model and a larger
space. Cognitive Development, 4, 121-139.
DeLoache, J.S. (2000). Dual representation and young
children’s understanding of scale models. Child
development, 71-2, 329-338.
Flavell, J. H., Green, F.L., & Flavell, E.R. (1986).
Development of Knowledge about the AppearanceReality Distinction. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 51(1, Serial No.212).
Karmiloff-Smith,
A.
(1979).
Micro-and
Macrodevelopmental Changes in Language Acquisition
and Other Representational Systems. Cognitive Science,
3, 91-118.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1991). Beyond modularity: Innate
constraints and developmental change. In S. Carey & R.
Gelman (Eds.), The epigenesis of mind:Essays on Biology
and Cognition. Hillsdale, N.J. Erlbaum.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity. MIT
Press.
Karmiloff-Smith, A., & Inhelder, B. (1974). If you want to
get ahead, get a theory. Cognition, 3, 195-212.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring Science: The Cognition and
development of discovery processes. MIT Press.
Klahr, D., Dunbar, K., & Fay, A. (2000). Developmental
Aspects of Scientific Reasoning. In D. Klahr (Ed.),
Exploring Science: The Cognition and development of
discovery processes. MIT Press.

Kuhn, D., Amsel, E., & O’Loughlin, M. (1988). The
development of Scientific thinking skills. Academic Press.
Kuhn, D., & Dean, D. (2004). Metacognition: a bridge
between cognitive psychology and educational practice,
Theory into Practice, 43(4), pp.268-273.
Kuhn, D. (in press). Do Cognitive Changes Accompany
Developments in the Adolescent Brain?, Perspectives on
Psychological Science.
Marzolf, D., DeLoache, J., & Kolstad, V. (1999). The role
of relational similarity in young children’s use of a scale
model. Developmental Science, 2-3,296-305.
Vosniadou, S. (2003). Exploring the Relationships between
Conceptual Change and Intentional Learning. In G.M.
Sinatra, & P.R. Pintrich (Eds.), Intentional Conceptual
Change. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W.F. (1992). Mental models of
the earth: A study of conceptual change in childhood.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, pp. 535-585.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W.F. (1994). Mental models of
the day/night cycle. Cognitive Science, 18, pp. 123-183.
Vosniadou, S., Archontidou, A., Kalogiannidou, A., &
Ioannides, C. (1996). How Greek children understand the
shape of the earth: a study of conceptual change in
childhood. Psychological Issues, 7: 1, pp. 30-51(in greek).
Vosniadou, S. & Skopeliti, I. (2005). Developmental Shifts
in Children’s Categorization of the Earth, In B. G. Bara,
L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.) Proceedings of the
XXVII Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, pp. 2325-2330.
Vosniadou, S., Skopeliti, I., & Ikospentaki, K. (2004).
Modes of knowing and ways of reasoning in elementary
astronomy, Cognitive Development, 19, pp. 203-222.
Vosniadou, S., Skopeliti, I., & Ikospentaki, K. (2005).
Reconsidering the Role of Artifacts in Reasoning:
Children’s Understanding of the Globe as a Model of the
Earth, Learning and Instruction,15,pp.333-351.

2334

