UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Tools and Artefacts - Knowing 'Where-from' Affects Their Present Use

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0gm580d5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Susi, Tarja

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Tools and Artefacts - Knowing
‘Where-from’ Affects their Present Use
Tarja Susi (tarja.susi@his.se)
University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

sound, and on the social, cultural, and biological bases of
sound production, reception, and interpretation. Preoccupation
with these phenomena…has seriously skewed the study of
human behavior. Apparently, total immersion in the material
medium has blinded social scientists to the distinguishing
characteristic of their species – of their lives”. (p. 4)

Abstract
This paper focuses on how past knowledge of tools/artefacts
affect their present use. The discussion is based on
Wartofsky’s (1979) primary, secondary, and tertiary artefacts,
and Engeström’s (1990) subsequent activity theoretical
elaboration. While Engeström identifies two different kinds of
internal (mental) secondary artefacts, this paper identifies an
additional kind of tertiary artefact – ‘where-from’ artefact –
that consists of experience based knowledge of the past. The
conception of where-from, contributes to understanding, for
instance, why people handle objects the way they do. This
artefact, identified in a workplace study, also plays an
important role in the process of learning through
apprenticeship, since what novices are provided, in terms of
instructions etc., partly depends on the more knowledgeable
person’s past experiences.
Keywords: tool, artefact, artefact categories, ‘where-from’
artefacts, learning, apprenticeship

Introduction
In the era of the prevailing computer metaphor for the mind,
the role of artefacts/tools, especially in social interaction,
was mainly left unattended, while, e.g., social processes and
language have received much attention. Linguistic research,
for instance, has resulted in a large number of theories on
language development and construction, but there is nothing
comparable for tool behaviour, which is largely an
overlooked issue (Gauvain, 2001; Want & Harris, 2001). As
pointed out by Wynn (1993, p. 392), “[t]here is almost no
concern with how tools are made and used and there are no
well-developed theories of how sequences of tool-use are
constructed” (see also Preston, 1998). It is strange that the
use of artefacts and tools has been neglected to such an
extent, since, as argued by Woods (1998), one of the
fundamental findings of cognitive science is that “artefacts
shape cognition and collaboration” (p. 168) (cf. Clark, 2002;
Kirsh, 1996; Malafouris, 2004; Vygotsky, 1960/1981).
Schiffer (1999), an anthropological theorist, is
straightforward in his critique of scientists’ blindness for
artefacts:
“Might [we] not wonder how social scientists, who like all
other people spend the entirety of their time engaged with
artifacts (especially books and chairs and computers), could
be so oblivious to the medium that envelops them? People’s
lives are spent shaping and responding to this material
medium, yet social scientists cannot see it for what it is, much
less understand its pervasive influence. Instead, human
investigators lavish attention on the sounds that people
produce, on the specialized artifacts that encode or record the

2210

Although Schiffer’s critique concerns the social sciences,
the same point certainly also applies to cognitive science.
However, although Schiffer’s argument applies to much
research it would be presumptuous to claim that artefacts
have been neglected altogether. On the contrary, several
descriptions and perspectives on cognition and tool use are
available (e.g., Baber, 2003; Goodwin & Goodwin, 1996;
Engeström, 1990; Heath et al., 2000; Hutchins, 1995; Keller
& Keller, 1996; Kirsh, 1996; Norman, 1988; Salomon,
1993; Scaife & Rogers, 1996; Zhang & Norman, 1994). For
instance, the distributed cognition approach (Hutchins,
1995), places much focus on the role of tools in sociotechnical systems. Nevertheless, although attention has
shifted to consider the role of tools/artefacts in cognition,
there are few theories on the issue, and even central terms
such as tool, artefact, and tool use are often ill-defined and
we lack a coherent view on their meaning (cf. Preston,
1998; Susi, 2006).
However, neither is this paper concerned with tool use
theories or definitions of the mentioned terms. Instead, its
contribution lies in furthering our understanding of tools and
cognition by focusing on, and elaborating, a specific artefact
categorisation, formulated within the frame of the culturalhistorical school of thought (e.g., Leontiev, 1978; Vygotsky,
1978). In line with this perspective, and based on a
categorisation proposed by Wartofsky (1979), Engeström
(1990) has formulated a three-level artefact categorisation,
which comprises external as well as internal artefacts. For
some, the term ‘internal artefact’ might seem an awkward
one, especially when considering that what is mental (in the
context of cognition and tool use) is more commonly termed
internal psychological tools. However, in Wartofsky’s and
Engeström’s terminologies, the term artefact is mostly used
when referring to what is external and material, and to that
which is internal and mental, such as heuristics and (mental)
models (notably, however, Engeström uses both terms for
external objects). In the following, the existing terminology
will be followed. It should also be noted that the issues
presented in this paper are part of a larger framework
regarding the significance of tools in cognition and
cooperation (Susi, 2006).
The rest of the paper is organised in the following way.
The next section describes Wartofsky’s (1979) three-level
artefact categorisation, and its elaboration as formulated by
Engeström (1990). The following section describes a case

study which illustrates the mentioned categorisations and
also identifies an additional category, which subsequently
extends Engeström’s description. The paper ends with a
discussion.

Artefact categories
A well-known categorisation of artefacts is Wartofsky’s
(1979) primary, secondary, and tertiary artefacts. Primary
artefacts are ones used directly in production, such as axes,
needles, bowls, etc. Secondary artefacts are internal and
external representations of primary artefacts, and they are
created and used “in the preservation and transmission of
the acquired skills or modes of action or praxis by which
this production is carried out” (p. 202). As such, secondary
artefacts are representations of these modes of action.
‘Representing a mode of action’ also means that these
artefacts are related to conventions, as in rules and norms.
Tertiary artefacts are ‘imaginary’ artefacts such as art or
‘free’ play or game activity. Such artefacts have ‘lost’ their
original role of representation, since they have become
“abstracted from their use in productive praxis” and from
their “direct representational function”. Therefore they no
longer appear directly practical.
Wartofsky’s categorisation has been further elaborated,
from an activity theoretical perspective, by Engeström
(1990). In his formulation, primary artefacts are termed
what-artefacts, and they are basically the external entities
used in an activity, such as documents and marks on
computer screen (the examples used here are from
Engeström’s study in a health care centre). He further
differentiates between two types of secondary artefacts, i.e.,
how-artefacts and why-artefacts:
o How-artefacts are specific types of artefacts
(routines, procedures, etc.) that tell us how to handle
a certain object of an activity, in this case a patient,
with a corresponding primary artefact. How-artefacts
can be both external and internal. For instance,
routines for computer use may be found in a written
form, while people also have their personal internal
versions of them. These how-artefacts, then, tell how
to handle a corresponding primary artefact, for
instance, routines for how to handle computer data
on a patient.
o Why-artefacts are general types of artefacts that
inform us why the object of an activity behaves the
way it does (e.g., a patient), which justifies the
selection of some specific primary artefact. These
why-artefacts are internal, mental explanatory
models, but they can also be (although not always
easily identified) externalised in words, gestures, etc.
As described in Engeström’s health care centre
study, the explanatory model (of a patient’s illness)
held by a doctor, emerges from his/her expectations
and preconceptions, and initial data (e.g., the
patient’s medical record). On the basis of the first
impression and the patient’s own account, the doctor
constructs a meaningful pattern and “makes sense of
the accounts with the help of some more or less
consciously held explanatory model of illness”
(Engeström, 1990, p. 183). The meaningful pattern
2211

is subsequently transformed into a diagnosis. In
other words, the doctor forms a hypothesis
concerning the patient’s illness, which is
accomplished through examination and testing.
Hence, the hypothesis justifies a certain kind of
examination, which, in turn, depends on the doctor’s
knowledge and mastery of the procedures for certain
examinations and tests.
Engeström (1990) also identifies tertiary artefacts, which
he terms where-to-artefacts. These are artefacts that “go
beyond the explanatory or diagnostic ‘why’ function” (p.
194), and as such they are close to Wartofsky’s imaginary
(tertiary) artefacts. Where-to artefacts can be described as
projections into the future, or a vision of what will follow
from, e.g., demanding changes in tools. The primary
psychological importance of where-to-artefacts, we are told,
may be their power of motivation; an analysis and vision of
the future is important for motivating acceptance and
implementation of new tools. The different categories of
artefacts are summarised in Table 1.
Table 1. Summary of artefact categorisations by
Wartofsky (1979) and Engeström (1990).
Wartofsky

Engeström

Tertiary artefacts
Imaginary artefacts

‘Where-to’ artefacts
Vision of future (consequences of
new tools in organisation)

Secondary artefacts
Internal and external
representations of
primary artefacts

Primary artefacts
Directly used in
production

‘Why’ artefacts
General type, why object behaves
as it does. Justifies selection of
certain primary artefact: e.g.,
hypothesis – examination
’How’ artefacts
Specific type, how to handle object
with corresponding primary
artefact: e.g., routines for computer
use – computer data on patient
’What’ artefacts
External physical entities (marks
on computer screen, documents)

In sum, Wartofsky’s categorisation provides a general
description of three kinds of artefacts: material entities, their
(internal and external) representations, and imaginary ones
which may no longer be directly practical. This
categorisation has been further elaborated by Engeström,
and also applied to a work context. In his formulation, the
categories describe a) material entities, b) general and
specific types of internal and external artefacts, which
justify and guide the selection of corresponding material
entities, and c) visions of what will follow from changes
brought onto an activity.

collected data, is termed where-from artefact. Eventhough
the term ‘artefact’ may bring material objects into mind, it
is important to note that here the term refers to both internal
mental and external material artefacts, in accordance with
the terminology formulated by Engeström (1990).

A case study
A case study was conducted in a naturalistic setting, in the
control room of a Swedish grain silo (Lantmännen Ek.för).
The study’s duration was 3 weeks, in the course of which
data was collected through interviews, observations, and
video recordings (8 hrs in total). Six staff members
participated in the study, two women and four men, of
which 2-3 people work at the same time in two or three
shifts. Their ages varied from 19 to 60 years, and their
experience of working in silo control rooms varied from
none to 26 years; two of the workers were highly
experienced, and four were novices (the case study is
discussed in more detail in Susi, 2005; 2006).
Among the many tasks and procedures carried out by the
staff is to coordinate the off-loading and conveyance of
grain into (one of 29) different silos. Roughly, the
conveyance procedure is as follows. Upon delivery, the
grain is off-loaded into one of three pits, and for each
delivery the staff prints a number of documents which are
placed on a desk while the grain is being conveyed.
Basically, the procedure, and the whole plant, is controlled
and operated through a control panel located in the control
room. The transportation process itself is started by pushing
a sequence of 12-15 buttons on the control panel (the
number of pushes required depends, e.g., on the
machinery’s status). Which buttons to push is indicated by
lines in different colours representing transportation shafts,
along which the buttons are placed. While tracing the line
itself is easy, the timeliness of each push depends on the
underlying machinery (type of engine, its condition, etc.).
This aspect is not visible on the control panel, and instead
requires thorough knowledge of the relations between the
panel and the machinery. The conveying process is
monitored through the control panel (which indicates the
status of the machinery) and scale displays (numbers
showing the weight of the grain that has been conveyed).
Of all the tools and procedures to be learned in the control
room, the control panel requires the most effort. The
efficiency of handling work tasks related to the control
panel hinges on knowledge of how the panel (its buttons and
switches) is related to the underlying machinery it operates.
The machinery is complicated and it takes two years or
more to gain in-depth knowledge of the functional
relationships between control panel and machinery, which is
necessary in order to operate the panel properly.
Furthermore, the panel can be flexibly operated, provided a
worker has sufficient knowledge of its different options.
Novices learn the trade through a process of apprenticeship,
in which more experienced workers explain and show how
to carry out tasks. Thus, novices learn by watching, asking
questions, and through hands-on experience.
Obviously, the control panel is an important tool in this
setting, but the following paragraphs will focus on some
psychological artefacts, which play an important role when
handling material artefacts such as the control panel.
Moreover, these psychological artefacts also affect the way
experienced and less experienced workers, respectively,
operate material artefacts. Specifically, focus will be on one
of the mentioned artefact categories, and its elaboration.
This new category, which was revealed when analysing the

A new category of artefacts

2212

Applying the previously described artefact categorisation by
Engeström (1990) to the control room, a number of these
different kinds of artefacts are identifiable. Firstly, whatartefacts (primary) are the external entities used in an
activity, in this case, the process of conveying grain. These
include, for instance, documents, marks on computer
screens, and scale displays.
Secondly, there are two types of secondary artefacts, that
is, how- and why-artefacts: How-artefacts indicate how to
handle a certain object (the grain about to be transported
into a silo) with a corresponding primary artefact (the
control panel). How-artefacts can be both external and
internal. In this case, there are no external how-artefacts
such as instructions for how to operate the panel/machinery,
only (personal) internal ones for how to transport the grain.
Such internal how-artefacts are most clearly expressed in
the different ways different workers handle the machinery.
These internal how-artefacts tell the workers how to handle
the corresponding primary artefact, that is, the control panel.
Why-artefacts are general types of artefacts (internal, mental
explanatory models) that inform the workers why an object
of an activity (e.g., the grain) behaves as it does, which
justifies the selection of some specific primary artefact. If,
for instance, the flow of grain suddenly stops (indicated,
e.g., by the numbers on the scale display not changing), a
worker constructs an explanatory model of why it has
stopped (the model may be externalised in words). In line
with Engeström’s (1990) argument, it can be said that the
explanatory model emerges from the worker’s expectations
and available data (e.g., type of grain, the control panel’s
status, numbers on the scale display). Thus, from these ‘first
impressions’, he/she constructs a meaningful pattern, which
is subsequently transformed into a hypothesis concerning
why the process has stopped, e.g., that there is a break-down
in an engine. The hypothesis justifies the selection of certain
primary artefacts (e.g., a specific engine and parts of the
panel related to it), and the selection of a certain kind of
examination and testing, which, in turn, depends on the
worker’s knowledge and mastery of their procedures.
Importantly, however, the explanatory models constructed
by the workers are not necessarily correct with regard to
why an object actually behaves the way it does.
Thirdly, where-to-artefacts are described as projections
into the future, going beyond the explanations and
diagnostics of why-artefacts. These are visions of what will
follow from, for instance, demanding changes in tools. No
such artefacts were identified since there were no plans for
any changes in the control room at the time of the study.
In addition to these different kinds of artefacts, described
by Engeström, I have identified an additional category not
included in his model. This new category consists of
internal, experience based knowledge, which can be termed
where-from artefacts. As workers gain experience they

also gain knowledge of the past, i.e., how things used to be,
and the changes that have taken place (organisational, tool
implements, etc.). For instance, before the event of control
panels, every control room was equipped with a chalk board
containing a representation of the silos, used for noting the
types of grain stored in them (Figure 1). However, such
representations and the machinery for operating the silos
were not integrated at all.

“Everything is so complex … the machines, and what
we’re dealing with here are from 1967 … things have
been added to the panel and it’s been remade a
number of times ... and we have all the sources of
error following from that ...”
“... from the 50s until some ... ten years ago ...
everything was operated mechanically [in silos in
general] ... one went in and started things here and
there in the plant ... hatches were regulated by pulling
ropes ... that was the 50s, then we got engines for
opening the hatches ... [the way] many things are
operated and controlled remain from the 50s ...”

Figure 1. Chalk board of the kind that used to be in all
control rooms. It represents the different silos and was
used for marking the kind of grain stored in each silo.
With technical development, chalk boards were replaced
with control panels through which the machinery is
operated, and they also contain integrated representations of
silos and machinery (Figure 2). In addition, over a period of
some 10-15 years new technical features, and their
representations, have been increasingly added to the control
panel. While there is no chalk board in use in this specific
silo anymore 1 , it has contributed to the present ‘wherefrom’ knowledge held by the most experienced workers.
The silo was originally built at a time when there were only
four different kinds of grain to handle, and, as explained by
one of the experienced workers, it used to be easier when
grain could be put directly into one of the silos, without
having to “manipulate the machinery” too much. Today they
handle eleven different types of grain which requires a
flexible use of transportation shafts, from three different pits
to the plant’s 29 different silos. With all sorts of grain stored
in the silos, one single load often has to be conveyed
through more than one shaft before it reaches its final
destination. There is no fixed way to handle the machinery,
or the facility as such, and there is an unspoken or tacit
agreement that things can be done in different ways.
Subsequently, people have their own ways of doing things.
As one worker explained, referring to the process of drying
grain, ”it is smooth to run it this way…this is how I run it,
but somebody else may run it in a different way” 2 . The
same worker also said (his emphasis in italics and clarifying
comments in brackets):

1
In some facilities chalk boards are still in use, in parallel with
modern control panels.
2
The participants’ quotes have been translated from Swedish by
the author.

2213

Figure 2. The electronic control panel, with
integrated representations of the silos (upper left) and
the machinery, through which the plant is operated.
Workers who have experienced the changes from
manually operated machinery to electrically driven
machines operated through a control panel, and new
technical features being added to the existing machinery,
have learned how things are related to each other and how to
run the plant efficiently. Hence, due to their first-hand
knowledge of the functional relationships they know, for
instance, how the control panel functions beneath its surface
appearance. With this kind of in-depth knowledge, they
know why things appear the way they do.
This kind of knowledge is a crucial element in
understanding how the facility works, and being able to
operate it smoothly. Novices and less experienced workers
lack this kind of ‘deep’ knowledge and instead act on the
basis of their surface level knowledge, that is, what they
have been instructed to do and how they think things work.
Subsequently, novices encounter many more problems,
since they do not realise the effects of all the control panel’s
buttons and switches, and often miss when it indicates that
something is wrong. As one of the novices said, “I don’t
know what some buttons are for, but I push them anyway
because they’re supposed to be pushed’.
Due to the complexity of the control panel, errors in
handling it are common, and they ensue from both external
and internal (mental) factors. While some problems are

caused by the control panel’s complex appearance, which
provides guidance for certain actions but also leads to
errors, other problems are caused by a lack of knowledge
and understanding of the underlying machinery. Although a
more comprehensive understanding of the panel emerges
with experience gained over time, the kind of knowledge
developed by novices may also depend on the quality of the
explanations and instructions they are provided. Wherefrom artefacts are subjective and vary from one person to
another, which is reflected in individual variations and
flexibility in the way experienced workers perform their
tasks. Novices acquire their knowledge mainly from verbal
explanations and demonstrations, but also by observing how
the tools in the control room are used, and through their own
practical experience. Considering the subjective nature of
the experienced workers’ knowledge and performance, the
kind of knowledge acquired by the novices partly depends
on who is instructing them in their tasks. Hence, the
‘quality’ of their knowledge (partly) depends on the verbal
explanations and demonstrations provided by the
experienced workers, as well as the novices’ own practical
experience. This means, the novices’ learning is affected by
how skilled and knowledgeable his/her colleague is, and the
extent of that other person’s ‘where-from’ knowledge.
The kind of experience based knowledge discussed here is
an important psychological artefact, which can be termed a
where-from-artefact. Similar to Engeström’s where-to
artefacts, where-from artefacts go beyond the explanatory or
diagnostic ‘why’ function, and they are also close to
Wartofsky’s imaginary (tertiary) artefacts. Where-from
artefacts consist of knowledge constructed from past events,
providing a ‘true’ explanation and understanding of why the
object of activity behaves the way it does. As such, they are
abstracted from their use in productive practice, and have no
longer a direct representational function of primary
artefacts.
It could be argued that where-from artefacts are similar to
why-artefacts, but there are important differences. Even
though both of them concern the matter of ‘why an object
behaves the way it does’, why-artefacts are secondary
artefacts, while where-from artefacts are tertiary artefacts:
• Why-artefacts
are
internal
and
external
representations of primary artefacts. They are based
on expectations and available data which are
transformed into an explanatory model, and workers
make use of why-artefacts even without previous
experiences (in fact, most of us construct explanatory
models, even of things unfamiliar). The role of
experience in forming explanatory models is not
explicated in Wartofsky’s and Engeström’s concepts
of secondary and why-artefacts.
• Where-from artefacts, in contrast, are qualitatively
different. Although these are also internal models of
why things appear and function the way the do, they
are tertiary artefacts, that is, they are imaginary and
no longer represent primary artefacts. Where-from
artefacts are also based on previous experiences
which allow the construction of knowledge that
relates previously existing tools with new

2214

implements, and an understanding of their functional
relationships.
Considering the role of experience, it could be argued that
‘where-from artefact’ is just another label for memory.
However, these artefacts do not concern memory in general
as implied by the term itself. Instead where-from knowledge
concerns specifically tool/artefact related experiences/
knowledge that affect present tool use. Since where-from
artefacts emerge out of experience, it is plausible to assume
that they contribute to current tool use in a manner different
than do why-artefacts. Being experience based, they are
likely to provide a more ‘correct’ understanding than the
explanatory why-artefact, which is based on impressions,
available data, etc. Workers construct explanatory models
based on available ‘facts’, whether they are experienced or
not, and without in-depth knowledge, available data may not
lead to a correct understanding or, in the worst case, it might
result in mere ‘guess-work’.
In sum, besides primary (‘what’) and secondary (‘how’
and ‘why') artefacts, two different types of tertiary artefacts
can be distinguished; where-to (vision of the future) and
where-from (knowledge of the past). The different types of
artefacts are summarised in Table 2, with examples from the
control room setting.
Table 2. A three-level categorisation of artefacts
(Engeström, 1990; Wartofsky, 1979), expanded with
a new type of artefacts.

Tertiary artefacts
Imaginary artefacts

‘Where-from’ artefacts
Experience based knowledge of the
past, why objects function or
appear the way they do, e.g.,
panel/machinery
‘Where-to’ artefacts
Vision of future (consequences of
new tools in organisation)

Secondary artefacts
Internal and external
representations of
primary artefacts

Primary artefacts
Directly used in
production

‘Why’ artefacts
General type, why object behaves
as it does. Justifies selection of
certain primary artefact;
e.g.,
numbers on scale display do not
change – examine scale
’How’ artefacts
Specific type, how to handle object
with corr. primary artefact; e.g.,
internal model of process – control
panel
’What’ artefacts
External physical entities (marks
on computer screen, documents)

Discussion
Based on Wartofsky’s classification of primary,
secondary, and tertiary artefacts, Engeström (1990)

describes a three-level artefact categorisation, which
includes what, how, why, and where-to artefacts. These
comprise internal and external artefacts, and their relations
within an activity. In addition to these, a new category of
where-from artefacts has been identified. A where-from
artefact consists of knowledge of the past, that is, experience
based knowledge of why things function or appear the way
they do. This new category adds a dimension that
contributes to understanding why someone handles an
object in a certain way, that is, the effect of experience
based knowledge on a tool’s current use. Furthermore, from
the point of view of learning by apprenticeship, this
knowledge plays an important role in the learning process,
since where-from knowledge, or the lack of it, affects how
tasks and procedures are explained, and subsequently, the
kind of explanation/knowledge novices are provided.
Finally, although this specific artefact is internal, it plays an
important role in the way material tools are handled in the
tasks performed in this setting. This also points to the fact
that artefacts, whether mental or material, cannot be
considered as isolate entities; artefacts and tools, and their
use, can be understood only when considered in relation to
their users and the context of their use.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the staff at Lantmännen AB
for their participation, and Jessica Lindblom, Henrik
Svensson, and Tom Ziemke for helpful discussions and
comments.

References
Baber, C. (2003). Cognition and tool use: Forms of
engagement in human and animal forms of use of tools.
Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Clark, A. (2002). Towards a science of the bio-technical
mind. Int. J of Cognition and Technology, 1(1), 21-33.
Engeström, Y. (1990). Learning, working and imagining:
Twelwe studies in activity theory. Helsinki: OrientaKonsultit Oy.
Gauvain, M. (2001). Cultural tools, social interaction and
the development of thinking. Human Development, 44,
126-144.
Goodwin, C. & Goodwin, M.H. (1996). Seeing as a situated
activity: Formulating planes. In Y. Engeström & D.
Middleton (Eds.), Cognition and communication at work.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heath, C., Knoblauch, H. & Luff, P. (2000). Technology
and social interaction: The emergence of ‘workplace
studies’. British Journal of Sociology, 51(2), 299-320.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Keller, C.M. & Keller, J.D. (1996). Cognition and tool use.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kirsh, D. (1996). Adapting the environment instead of
oneself. Adaptive Behavior, 4(3/4), 415-452.
Leontiev, A.N. (1978). Activity, consciousness, and
personality. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall
Inc.

Malafouris, L. (2004). The cognitive basis of material
engagement: Where brain, body and culture conflate. In
E. DeMarrais, C. Gosden & C. Renfrew (Eds.),
Rethinking materiality: The engagement of mind with the
material world. Oxford, UK.: Oxbow Books.
Norman, D. (1988). The psychology of everyday things.
New York. Basic Books.
Preston, B. (1998). Cognition and tool use. Mind &
Language, 13(4), 513-547.
Salomon, G. (Ed.) (1993). Distributed cognitions.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scaife, M. & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How do
graphical representations work? Int. J. of HumanComputer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Schiffer, M.B. (1999). The material life of human beings.
London: Routledge.
Susi, T. (2005). In search of the Holy Grail: Understanding
artefact mediation in social interactions. In B.G. Bara, L.
Barsalou and M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the
27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2110-2115). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Susi, T. (2006). The puzzle of social activity – the
significance of tools in cognition and cooperation.
Doctoral dissertation. University of Linköping/University
of Skövde, Sweden.
Susi, T., Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (2003). Beyond the
bounds of cognition. In R. Alterman and D. Kirsh (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1134-1139). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1960/1981). The instrumental method in
psychology. In J.V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity
in Soviet psychology. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Want, S.C. & Harris, P.L. (2001). Learning from other
people’s mistakes: Causal understanding in learning to
use a tool. Child Development, 72(2), 431-5443.
Wartofsky, M.W. (1979). Models: representation and the
scientific understanding. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing
Company.
Woods, D.D. (1998). Designs are hypotheses about how
artifacts shape cognition and collaboration. Ergonomics,
41(2), 168-173.
Wynn, T. (1993). Layers of thinking in tool behavior. In
K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (Eds.), Tools, language and
cognition in human evolution. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Zhang, J. & Norman, D. (1994). Representations in
distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.

2215

