UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding the Role of Structure in Concept Maps

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9f74v5wq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Leake, David
Reichherzer, Thomas

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding the Role of Structure in Concept Maps
Thomas Reichherzer (treichhe@cs.indiana.edu)
David Leake (leake@cs.indiana.edu)
Computer Science Department, Indiana University
Lindley Hall 215, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA

Abstract
Concept mapping is widely used in educational settings to aid
knowledge construction, sharing, and comparison, as well as
to assess students’ understanding. However, despite this rich
range of uses, there have been few controlled studies of the
relationship between concept maps and people’s internal conceptualizations. Because concept maps represent information
as a network of concepts, an interesting question is how structural factors relate to concept importance. This paper presents
results on modeling map-builders’ assessments of concept importance in terms of structural factors. Twenty subjects were
asked to construct a concept map on a topic of interest and
subsequently to rank labels of concepts extracted from their
maps, based on the concepts’ importance in describing the
map’s topic. Analysis of the results supports that subjects rank
concepts higher if they are closer to the map’s root concept
and if they have more outgoing connections or incoming connections relative to the other concepts. Agreement between
the model’s predictions and subjects’ rankings was high, with
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients in some cases 1.0 or
close to 1.0. These results suggest that topology alone is a
sufficient indicator to extract topic-relevant information from
concept maps. This has ramifications for developing tools to
assess student concept maps and concept map authoring support systems. The results have been applied in the design of
”suggester” systems that aid domain experts in building concept maps, by using structural information to identify important concepts and search for topic-relevant information in previously built concept map libraries and on the Web.
Keywords: concept mapping; cognitive modeling; intelligent
suggesters; Web search

Introduction
Concept maps represent knowledge in a two-dimensional,
graphical representation capturing concepts—described by
labeled nodes—and their relationships, described by the links
between concepts. Each concept–link–concept triple corresponds to a simplified natural language sentence expressing
a proposition (e.g., “glaciers cause land erosion”). Concept
mapping (Novak & Gowin, 1984) has been widely used for
knowledge elicitation, for encouraging knowledge construction by students and others, and for making internal conceptualizations explicit to facilitate knowledge sharing, comparison, and assessment. However, despite this extensive use,
there has been little study of how well concept maps actually reflect people’s internal conceptualizations. As described
in the following section, this is of particular interest because
of the relationship of concept maps to the long tradition of
modeling concepts and relationships using schemes based on
graphs and networks, in both psychology and artificial intelligence (e.g., (Ausubel, 1963; Collins & Quillian, 1969; Quillian, 1968; Sowa, 1984; Tulving, 1972)). In addition, models enabling prediction of concept importance from concept
maps would be useful for interpreting the knowledge elicited
via concept mapping, for using concept maps in assessment
of students, and for developing context-sensitive systems to

2004

provide information to aid students or others in the concept
mapping process (e.g., (Leake et al., 2003)).
Because concept maps represent information as a network
of concepts, an interesting question concerns the sufficiency
of models based solely on structural information to predict
concept importance. This paper presents new studies of models of the relationship of structural factors to the appropriateness of concepts as topic descriptors, in the context of a
concept map. Previously, we presented these models and
examined their applicability to concept map understanding,
to model how concept map viewers’ judgments of concept
importance are influenced by structure (Leake, Maguitman,
& Reichherzer, 2004). This paper presents results from a
new, complementary study, focusing on concept map generation. This study examines how the naturally emerging
structure in constructed concept maps aids in predicting the
map-builders’ assessments of concept importance.
Our previous study showed that assessment of concept importance during understanding of concept maps may depend
not only on the content of the concepts and links included in
the map, but also on the map’s topology. The study considered topological and layout factors that might influence the
decisions on which concepts are most topic-relevant, such as
changes in a concept map’s number of outgoing and incoming connections, distance to the root concept, and layout differences. When provided with only the structural information from a concept map (labels were replaced with artificial
words to exclude domain knowledge about concept importance), structure influenced human assessment of concept importance, but layout did not. An important remaining question is whether topological factors can be predictive of the
concept map author’s assessment of concept importance. Addressing this question is important for assessing knowledge
captured in concept maps, as well as for our long-term goal
to build intelligent suggesters and document navigation tools,
because information about concept importance can be critical for such systems. Consequently, to address this question,
we conducted a new study, complementary to the first, whose
design and results are addressed by this paper.
The paper begins with a synopsis of concept mapping and
a brief survey of its relationship to the study of human knowledge. It then reviews the models used in the previous study
and presents our experimental design and new results. It concludes with a sketch of potential applications of the models to
build artificial intelligence tools to support the concept mapping process.

Modeling Concepts and their Relationships1

Concept mapping was developed by Joseph Novak (Novak &
Gowin, 1984), to support the process of “meaningful learn1 This

and the following section are condensed and adapted from
(Leake et al., 2004).

ing” of Ausubel’s cognitive learning theory (Ausubel, 1963),
which requires deliberate effort by learners to connect new
concepts to relevant preexisting concepts and propositions in
their own cognitive structures. The concept mapping process is designed to externalize students’ concepts and propositions, facilitating their connection with newly acquired concepts. Concept maps have been used by teachers to assess
students’ understanding, by students to compare their knowledge and collaboratively refine their understanding, and by
experts for modeling and sharing knowledge.
Concept maps are part of the tradition in cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence of modeling concepts and their
relationships using graphs or networks. Examples include
the hierarchical network model (Collins & Quillian, 1969),
semantic memory (Tulving, 1972) and conceptual structures
(Ausubel, 1963), as well as more formal approaches such as
conceptual graphs (Sowa, 1984) or semantic networks (Quillian, 1968). Because theories of knowledge organization
commonly assume that knowledge can be modeled in terms
of a set of components and their relationships, the externalization of these structures by concept mapping is appealing to
examine subjects’ knowledge (West, Park, Pomeroy, & Sandoval, 2002), and empirical studies provide support for this
approach (Aidman & Egan, 1998; Michael, 1994).
However, the role of concept map structure in revealing
subjects’ conceptualizations is still poorly understood. Some
previous work studies knowledge organization by using topological information about graphs to define measures of graph
similarity (Goldsmith & Davenport, 1990) and for concept
clustering (Esposito, 1990), under the premise that more
closely-related concepts in cognitive structure will also be
closer in the graph representation. This has been used in turn
to induce concept proximity or relatedness. Our previous and
current studies investigate complementary questions on the
influence of other structural factors.

Figure 1: A simple concept map about glaciers, annotated
with sample structural properties.
ness to the root concept and connectivity. The models are parameterized, to enable the actual contributions of hierarchical
structure and connectivity to be determined empirically.

Connectivity Root-Distance Model (CRD)
The Connectivity Root-Distance model reflects two influences on concept importance, the connectivity of the concept
to other concepts, and the distance of the concept to the root
concept. Because concepts with high connectivity participate
in many propositions, they might be expected to be important; because the root concept (typically located at the top of
a map) tends to serve as a starting point for exploration, concepts located closer might be expected to be more important
than those farther away. For a concept k with o outgoing and
i incoming connections to other concepts, d steps away from
the map’s root concept, CRD assigns the weight:
W (k) = (α · o(k) + β · i(k)) · (1/(d(k) + 1))δ

Models for Analyzing Concept Maps
Previously, we developed four candidate models of the influence of structural factors on the importance of particular
concepts to the topic of concept maps (Leake et al., 2004).
Each model represents concepts as nodes in the concept map
graph. The first three models consider the map’s topology,
while the fourth model, a baseline, disregards the topology
and considers each concept to be equally important. For this
study, we exclude the baseline model because the study examines concept rankings, which the baseline model cannot
produce because it does not distinguish between concepts.
Our design of the models started from the structural factors
identified as important in the concept mapping literature. Novak proposes that concept maps are best constructed with a
focus question in mind that drives the concept mapping process and the organization of the concept map. Generally, a
root concept serves as a starting point to explore the topic
discussed by a concept map. Concepts directly linked to the
root concept explain the root concept and its role with respect to the focus question. The directly linked concepts are
further explained with additional concepts, resulting in a hierarchical organization with cross-relationships, providing a
rich topological structure. The models reflect this structure by
weighting concept importance based on factors such as close-

2005

The model parameters α, β, and δ determine influence of the
outgoing connections, incoming connections, and distance to
the root concept. Figure 1 illustrates factors affecting the
model’s assignment of weight for the concept “masses of ice.”

Hub Authority and Root-Distance Model (HARD)
CRD performs a local analysis, only taking immediate neighbors into account. The Hub Authority and Root-Distance
(HARD) model reflects a global analysis, centering on three
different types of concepts, based on Kleinberg’s (1999) algorithm for topological analysis of graphs, used to identify important nodes in a hyperlinked environment. Weights for authorities (concepts with multiple incoming connections from
hub nodes), hubs (concepts with multiple outgoing connections to authority nodes), and upper concepts (concepts with
short distance to the root concept), are calculated following (A. Cañas, Leake, & Maguitman, 2001). In Figure 1,
“glaciers” is primarily a hub concept, due to the number of
outgoing connections relative to other concepts in the map,
and “masses of ice” is primarily an authority, due to its mostly
incoming connections relative to other concepts. The HARD
model assigns weights by:
W (k) = (φ · h(k) + ψ · a(k) + γ · u(k))

In this formula, h, a, and u are the corresponding hub, authority, and upper node weights of a concept in a map and φ, ψ,
and γ are the model parameters, which reflect the influences
of the different roles that a concept may play.

Path Counter Model (PC)
Like the CRD model, the Path Counter model reflects connectivity, but instead of considering only immediate connectivity,
it considers indirect relationships as well. PC counts all possible paths that start from the concept in question and either
(1) end on a concept with no outgoing connections, or (2)
end on a concept that has already been visited in a path. High
connectivity concepts, which participate in many paths, also
contribute to the number of paths crossing concepts indirectly
linked to them. For example, in Figure 1, the PC value for the
concept “gravity” is three, because there are three paths extending from the root concept to “gravity,” due to “masses
of ice” being well connected in the map. If n is the number of paths crossing a concept k, its weight is computed as
W (k) = n. Unlike the previous two models, this model considers only a single influence on concept weight, and consequently requires no parameters.
All three candidate models can be used to rank concepts
in a concept map according to their weight W (k) with higher
weights corresponding to more important concepts. In the
following experiment, the participants’ concept rankings are
compared to the models’, using parameter settings chosen to
maximize the ranking correlations.

Experiments and Results
We conducted a human-subjects experiment to study how two
topological factors, root distance and connectivity, predict the
map-builder’s assessment of the concept’s role as a topic descriptor. In contrast to our previous study, which examined
how subjects’ assessments of concept importance are influenced by structural factors when they see new concept maps,
this study examines how the structure of the maps they author
reflects their internal concept judgments. The study required
participants to construct their own concept maps on a topic of
their choice and then to rank concepts extracted from the map.
The experiment also studied the best fitting model parameters
for the CRD and HARD model, to assess the different roles
of the topological influences.

Method
Twenty paid subjects, including students and staff from Indiana University and others, were recruited for a one-hour experiment. The experiment was divided into (1) a training session to familiarize participants with concept maps and their
applications, (2) a concept mapping session during which participants construct a concept map on a topic of their choice,
and (3) an assessment session, which required participants
to rank concepts extracted from their maps and to answer
general questions about the study and themselves. For the
training session, participants are shown five concept maps
on different topics and with different topological structures
to ensure that participants (1) regard concept mapping as a
general-purpose knowledge capturing tool and (2) are not biased by a particular structure that a training concept map may
exhibit. Participants do not receive any instructions on how

2006

to build a concept map or organize the concepts in their map;
they are only informed about concept mapping’s application
as a tool for learning, teaching, and knowledge capture. Participants must infer any knowledge on how to build a map
from the five concept maps shown during the training session. Thus, influence on their maps’ structural organization
from conventions of the concept mapping literature is minimized. Following the training session, participants are asked
to construct a single concept map on a familiar topic (e.g.
glaciers) and to specify the topic and their focus (e.g. how
they form and glacial erosion) for the discussion in the map.
We expect the ability of the models to predict topic importance to depend on the quality of the concept map drawn, in
the following sense. If the subject’s concept map describes
an insufficient part of his or her knowledge of the selected
topic, this is likely to affect the outcome, by reducing the
structure available for analysis. Consequently, to ensure that
the concept map captures the participants’ knowledge on the
topic, after the participant prepared an initial map, five general questions were asked to stimulate further development
of the concept map. The questions were designed to encourage participants to include additional concepts and relations
in their maps, and their general nature ensured that participants had the same chance to improve their maps before the
start of the assessment task. For example, we asked participants to (1) draw additional relations between two randomly
selected concepts, (2) include additional propositions involving a randomly selected concept, (3) think of additional statements not yet included in their map, and (4) think of one or
more additional concepts related to the topic but not yet included in their map.
For the assessment task, participants ranked a total of five
different sets of concept labels extracted from their concept
maps, according to their importance to the selected topic and
focus. Each set was presented separately along with the topic
and the focus as a frame of reference to remind them about
the concept mapping session and the concepts and the propositions they included in their map. For each ranking task, between four and five concept labels were extracted; each concept differed from the others in either connectivity or distance
to the root concept or both. The ranking task forced participants to reflect on the topic and make a decision with respect
to the concept’s role. To relax the constraints on the task, participants were allowed to generate multiple rankings for the
same list, in order to provide some flexibility if two concepts
were considered equally important.
As discussed previously, it is accepted that concept maps
are best constructed with a focus and goal in mind to drive
the mapping process and constrain the map content. If the
goal and focus are unknown, participants may have difficulties deciding which concepts and propositions to include in
their maps. Similarly, the ranking of concepts’ importance
to the map’s topic will depend on the map’s goal and focus. Consequently, we asked all participants to construct their
maps for the purpose of teaching the selected topic, to ensure
that (1) the rankings are based on what participants elucidated
in their maps and (2) results from participants are comparable. We anticipated that when the focus for constructing a
map is teaching the selected topic to an audience unfamiliar
with the subject, the map will become more focused in terms

Figure 2: Sample illustrating the structure of concept map
constructed by a participant.
of the selection of concepts and relations necessary to explain
the topic. This is important for the subsequent ranking task,
when participants have to decide on a concept’s relevance to
describe the map’s topic.

Results
The ranking task performed by the participants involved, on
average, 46% of the concepts in their concept maps. Rankings among concepts involved either concepts selected with
different distances to the root concept or with different connectivities to cover the variations in topological factors being
studied. On average, the concept maps included 30 concepts
and 69 connections (or a ratio of 2.31 connections per concept) resulting in a rich structure. The structure of one subject’s concept map is illustrated in Figure 2.
Model predictions and human judgments on the importance of concepts were compared using Spearman’s ranking
correlations. Each participant’s ranking results were compared separately against the three candidate models and the
average ranking correlation was computed across participants. For each participant, additional rankings were generated, when possible, by combining one or more concept
rankings into a single, longer ranking list. This increased the
number of rankings per participant by one or two rankings
and the size of the longest ranking list to five or six concepts.
Before computing the ranking correlation between model
and human concept rankings, the parameterized CRD and
HARD models were fitted against human-judged rankings to
produce the highest ranking correlations. Data fitting was performed on the original ranking lists recorded by a participant
as well as on the ranking lists that included the combined,
longer concept rankings. The model parameters resulting in
the best fit were determined using a hill-climbing search algorithm applied to each participants’ rankings separately.
Table 1 summarizes the results of the average Spearman’s
ranking correlation (rS ) and presents representative parameters determined from the data set. The rS values in parenthesis are the average ranking correlations between best-fitting
model predictions and the set of rankings containing combined rankings in addition to the original rankings of a participant. Assuming that the rankings are performed independently across the different participants (an assumption that
holds easily because topics and the structure of maps are different), the results are statistically significant. The probability that Spearman’s ranking correlations above 0.8 (or even
0.6, the smallest correlation measured for the HARD model)

2007

occur by chance for the rankings submitted by all 20 participants is small (p < 0.01).
The results indicate that model and human judgment on
the importance of concepts are similar, suggesting the sufficiency of topology alone to make such predictions. They
also show that topological factors influencing human judgment varies across the participants. For example, for some
participants, outgoing connections or hub concepts seem to be
more important than incoming connections or authority concepts as indicated by the parameters α > β and φ > ψ. For
others, the opposite is true. Also, some treat concepts near
the root concept as relevant while concepts more distant from
the root concept are not treated as very relevant, as indicated
by δ > 1. If the parameters are preset to a fixed value for
all participants, the average Spearman’s ranking correlation
drops to 0.71 for the CRD and 0.73 for the HARD model.
The larger drop in average ranking correlation for the CRD
model shows that the CRD model tends to be more dependent on best-fitting parameters than the HARD model. This
may not be surprising, because the CRD model considers local topological influences while HARD considers the global
structure, which is less affected by small local changes and
relies more upon global interdependence between concepts.
Model
CRD

HARD

PC

Parameters for Best Fit
α/φ β/ψ δ/γ
6.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
10.0 5.0
0.88 0.0
0.25
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
-1.0
3.0
-1.0
1.0
2.0
1.0
2.5
1.0
N/A N/A N/A

average rS
0.813 (0.808)

0.825 (0.820)

0.667 (0.677)

Table 1: Summary of model parameters and the average
Spearman’s ranking correlation for 20 participants.

Discussion
For the study, participants were drawn from a subject pool
that included male and female students and staff from Indiana
University, as well as individuals from elsewhere, whose age
ranged from 25 to 38. The participants’ professional backgrounds and interests led to choices of a range of different
topics including sports, regional geography, education, law,
mathematics, environmental science, computer science, mechanical engineering, and aircraft landing. Participants expressed confidence on the subjects they discussed in their
maps. When asked to rate themselves on a 7-point Likert
scale, with 1 representing novice and 7 expert, the average
rating was 5.7. All participants reported that they had few
problems building the concept map, even though only two out
of twenty participants had prior concept mapping experience.
The structure of the resulting concept maps also underscores
participants’ ability to express their ideas on a domain via
concept maps: That participants made on average 2.31 connections between each concept pair suggests that even with

very little training and no prior experience (except in 2 cases),
subjects could build maps with a rich structure.
Two factors which could negatively affect the results of
the experiment are focus shifts during map construction and
whether the concept map adequately represents the participant’s knowledge on the subject with respect to the chosen
topic and the focus for the topic. If critical concepts and connections are missing, incomplete structure could affect the
model’s predictions. We tried to guard against this problem
by asking general questions involving the concepts in the concept maps and the topic to stimulate participants to reflect on
missing information in their concept map. In all cases, these
questions prompted participants to include several new concepts and connections. If focus shifts, but subsequent rankings are based on the original focus, the map structure which
reflects the changes would not be expected to be as useful in
identifying topic-describing concepts. Participants were frequently reminded to remain faithful to the focus they set out
to discuss at the beginning of the concept mapping session,
but in one case, a shift in focus was discovered after the participant submitted the answers in the questionnaire. However,
the results recorded in this incident did not decrease the average ranking correlations for any of the three models.
A research question not pursued in this study is how the
best-fitting parameter values may change if subjects are asked
to construct more than a single concept map on different topics. One possibility would be that concept map authors adopt
a certain structural “style”, indicated by the hierarchical organization and the occurrence of certain high connectivity
nodes, that repeats itself across different concept maps. If so,
such a structural “style” might facilitate predictions of how
specific individuals will assess the importance of concepts in
concept maps. Another possibility would be that the bestfitting parameter values would vary even within individuals.
We expect to pursue this question in subsequent research.

Potential Applications to Education
A variety of tools have been developed to assist students in
studying subjects via concept mapping. The tools analyze
the students’ concept maps to provide general suggestions on
how to improve the map or to question the student about the
information represented in the map. For example, the Reasonable Falliable Analyser (RFA) (Conlon, 2004) scores students’ concept maps to provide feedback on the quality of
their concept maps and hints on how to improve them. RFA
compares a student’s concept map with an expert concept
map to count correct concepts and propositions in addition to
missing concepts, links, and ”dubious” connections as part of
the quality assessment. The tool generates a report intended
to enable students to reflect upon their maps and make necessary adjustments (or to argue for a higher score than the tool
assigned, if they feel that their propositions reflect the meaning of the propositions in the expert map). Another tool, discussed in (Leelawong et al., 2003), employs qualitative reasoning techniques applied to concept maps to draw conclusions and to present these conclusions via an interface agent
known as Betty. The tool supports concept map construction
but requires students to use link relations from a predefined
set to enable Betty to reason about the subject without domain
knowledge on the subject. When queried, Betty gives an ex-

2008

planation of her reasoning using the information provided in
the student’s concept map. The query itself is expressed in
terms of the effects a concept may have on another concept in
the map. Betty uses forward propagation in the concept map
graph and information about the type of the link between two
concepts to derive an answer in terms of the concepts and relations used in the map.
Tools such as RFA and Betty could benefit from the topological models presented in this paper to further improve recommendations and interactions with students. For example,
the RFA tool could apply the models in its quality assessment, by giving topic concepts a higher weight in the overall
score of the comparison between student and expert concept
map. Likewise, the interface agent Betty could select topic
describing concepts in the map when generating explanations
in response to student queries.
The use of structural methods, as studied in this paper, contrasts with the prevailing approach of comparing maps based
on the labels of the concepts and relationships. In the absence of sophisticated natural language processing—which is
beyond the scope of these systems—such an approach largely
ignores the structural information, which, as our experiment
shows, carries useful information about how the map’s author
views the concepts’ roles with respect to the map’s topic.
The models presented in this paper could be applied to
other graph-based structures representing human knowledge
or design decisions. For example, graph structures generated from Unified Modeling Language (UML) class diagrams
might be analyzed to determine classes that play an important
role in the model. Similarly, graph structures generated from
OWL (Web Ontology Language) ontologies might be analyzed for classes that play an important role in the ontology.
The application of our models to a wider range of representations is a subject for future research.

Application to Systems for Aiding Concept Map
Construction and to Document Access Tools
We have applied the models ourselves, in the design of automatic ”suggester” systems integrated into the CmapTools
concept mapping software and also in the design of a document access and navigation tool on the basis of concept
maps.2 The CmapTools software is a suite of electronic tools
for constructing and sharing concept maps and was developed at the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition (A. J.
Cañas et al., 2004). One of the suggesters uses the calculated
importance values to weight keywords from concept labels
in a concept map, in order to retrieve similar prior concept
maps for comparison and to suggest propositions from those
maps. The other suggester uses the similarity weighting to
weight keywords for Web search, to derive topics for the user
to consider when starting a new concept map to broaden the
knowledge model. Similarly to the suggester, the document
navigation and access tool uses the model to select topic describing concepts to search for related documents in libraries.
For the implementation of the suggesters, we experimented
with different model parameters. The results from this experiment suggests that model parameter that take each of the
2 We are grateful to Alberto Cañas and the IHMC CmapTools
development team for giving us access to the software and for their
valuable contributions to this project.

structural factor equally into consideration are sufficient to
return good results. The project is summarized in (Leake et
al., 2003), and research continues on the document navigation
and access tool.

Conclusion
This paper reports on a study of how concept map structure
reflects the map author’s concept importance judgments. This
is complementary to our previous study of structural influences on interpretations of concept maps built by others. In
this study, two structural factors were explored, concept connectivity and distance from the root concept.
Among the three models, the HARD model, which considers the global structure of the map, achieved a slightly higher
correlation with human rankings than the CRD model. While
the previous study highlighted the importance of the concept
map’s local structure to assess concept importance, this study
shows that the global structure is equally important for predicting concept importance. In addition, the results suggest
that the HARD model is more robust as determined by the
tighter range of model parameters that achieved the best fit
between model and human prediction.
Modeling judgments of concept importance helps elucidate
the knowledge captured in concept maps. This can be useful to teachers and experts constructing concept maps and
to novices reviewing expert concept maps to learn a subject. The predictiveness of concept map structure also has
important ramifications for developing support systems, because it enables identifying important topics based on automated structural analysis, without sophisticated natural language processing. We have applied the models presented in
this paper to the design of ”suggester” systems which aid domain experts in building concept maps, by using structural information to identify important concepts and search for topicrelevant information in previously built concept map libraries
and on the Web. We expect these to lead to a new set of tools
for assisting concept map construction, as well as information
access and management.

References
Aidman, E., & Egan, G. (1998). Academic assessment through computerized concept mapping: validating a
method of implicit map reconstruction. International Journal of Instructional Media, 25(3), 277–294.
Ausubel, D. (1963). The psychology of meaningful verbal
learning. New York, NY: Grune and Stratton.
Cañas, A., Leake, D., & Maguitman, A. (2001). Combining
concept mapping with CBR: Experience-based support for
knowledge modeling. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society
Conference (p. 286–290). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Cañas, A. J., Hill, G., Carff, R., Suri, N., Lott, J., Eskridge,
T., et al. (2004). CmapTools: A knowledge modeling
and sharing environment. In A. J. Cañas, J. D. Novak, &
F. González (Eds.), Concept maps: Theory, methodology,
technology. proceedings of the first international conference on concept mapping. Pamplona, Spain: Universidad
Pública de Navarra.

2009

Collins, A. M., & Quillian, M. R. (1969). Retrieval time from
semantic memory. Journal of verbal learning and verbal
behavior, 8, 240–248.
Conlon, T. (2004). But is our concept map any “good?”:
classroom experiences with the reasonable falliable analyser. In A. J. Cañas, J. D. Novak, & F. González (Eds.),
Concept maps: Theory, methodology, technology. proceedings of the first international conference on concept mapping. Pamplona, Spain: Universidad Pública de Navarra.
Esposito, C. (1990). A graph-theoretic approach to concept
clustering. In Pathfinder associative networks: studies in
knowledge organization (p. 89-99). Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Publishing Corp.
Goldsmith, T. E., & Davenport, D. M. (1990). Assessing
structural similarity of graphs. In Pathfinder associative
networks: studies in knowledge organization (p. 75–87).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corp.
Kleinberg, J. (1999). Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked
environment. Journal of the ACM, 46(5), 604–632.
Leake, D., Maguitman, A., & Reichherzer, T. (2004). Understanding knowledge models: Modeling assessment of
concept importance in concept maps. In Proceedings of
the twenty-sixth annual conference of the cognitive science
society (p. 785–790). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Leake, D., Maguitman, A., Reichherzer, T., Cañas, A., Carvalho, M., Arguedas, M., et al. (2003). Aiding knowledge
capture by searching for extensions of knowledge models.
In Proceedings of the second international conference on
knowledge capture (K-CAP) (p. 44–53). New York: ACM
Press.
Leelawong, K., Viswanath, K., Davis, J., Biswas, G., Vye,
N., Belynne, K., et al. (2003). Teachable agents: Learning by teaching environments for science domains. In Proceedings of the fifteenth annual conference on innovative
applications of artificial intelligence (p. 109–116). Menlo
Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Michael, R. S. (1994). The validity of concept maps for assessing cognitive structure. Doctoral dissertation, Indiana
University, Bloomington, IN.
Novak, J., & Gowin, D. (1984). Learning how to learn. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Quillian, M. R. (1968). Semantic memory. In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic information processing (pp. 216–270).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sowa, J. F. (1984). Conceptual structures: Information processing in mind and machine. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In Organization of memory. New York: Academic Press.
West, D., Park, J., Pomeroy, J., & Sandoval, J. (2002). Concept mapping assessment in medical education: a comparison of two scoring systems. Medical Education, 36(9),
820–826.

