UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Use of Word Segmentation Cues in Adults: L1 Phonotactics versus L2 Transitional
Probabilities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4bv8z5fs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Finn, Amy S.
Hudson Kam, Carla L.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Use of Word Segmentation Cues in Adults: L1 Phonotactics versus L2 Transitional
Probabilities
Amy S. Finn (amyfinn@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Carla L. Hudson Kam (clhudson@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
We investigate whether adult learners’ knowledge of
phonotactic restrictions on word forms from their first
language (L1) impact their word segmentation abilities in a
new language. Adult learners were exposed to a speech
stream in which language specific and non-language specific
cues for word segmentation were pitted against one another.
English rules about possible phonetic combinations
(phonotactics) and transitional probabilities of syllables
conflicted such that predictive transitional probabilities
generated words that were phonotactically impossible in
English. A control with phonotactically viable items was also
run. At test, participants choose between words defined by
deterministic transitional probabilities and words that are
phonotactically possible in English, but have much lower
transitional probabilities. A baseline of their abilities to track
transitional probabilities in the stimuli was also collected.
Results suggest that although participants are able to track the
transitional probabilities in these stimuli, they are not using
them to segment and extract words. Control subjects,
however, do use transitional probabilities to segment words.
This pattern of results is resilient, holding up with substantial
increases in exposure and even when segmentation is
encouraged by explicitly giving participants one of the words
in the stream prior to exposure.

Introduction
A great deal of research has documented that adult language
learners do not tend to be as proficient as children. (e.g.
Johnson & Newport, 1989; Mayberry & Lock, 2003). One
possible source for adults’ difficulties is interference – their
knowledge of a previously learned language interferes with
their acquisition of features in a new language (Odlin,
1989). Typically, work on transfer and interference has
focused on how aspects of the L1’s grammar affect the
learning of the same kind of feature in a second language
(L2). For example, such features can include word order or
relative clause formation. However, interference need not be
so direct; knowledge of one aspect of a language could
interfere with a learner’s ability to acquire a different aspect
of the new language. The current work investigates this
second type of interference. In particular, we investigate the
effect of a learner’s L1 phonology—specifically
phonotactics—on word segmentation.
Finding the boundaries between words is an important
early step in language acquisition, and a great deal of recent

research in first language acquisition has been directed at
understanding how it is that infants are able to segment
words from running speech. It is now clear that infants are
able to use at least 3 cues present in their input in order to
extract words: transitional probabilities (Saffran, Aslin &
Newport, 1996), rhythm or prosody (Jusczyk, Houston &
Newsome, 1999), and phonotactics (Mattys, Jusczyk, Luce
& Morgan, 1999).
In a very well-known study, Saffran and colleagues
showed that infants are able to use transitional probabilities
to determine word boundaries (Saffran, Aslin & Newport,
1996). In these studies, syllables are presented one after
another with no pauses in between; but some syllables are
paired together 100% of the time and others are paired only
33% of the time. Words are defined as sequences of
syllables with high transitional probabilities between the
syllables, so that three syllables with transitional
probabilities of 1.0 are a word, whereas a sequence with one
high and one low transitional probability (e.g. 1.0 and .33) is
not a word. Learners are able to determine word boundaries
based on this information from very little exposure to the
stimuli.
There is also evidence that infants use language specific
cues to segment words. One such cue is rhythm or prosody.
Jusczyk, Houston & Newsome (1999) for example found
that 7.5 month old infants can parse out words that follow
the more typical stress pattern of the language, and will misparse a speech stream when it contains words with a noncanonical stress pattern. Thiessen & Saffran (2003) showed
that 9 month olds will use English prosodic cues to parse an
artificial language, showing that infants’ usage of prosodic
cues is very robust, even at this early age. Importantly, this
cue to word segmentation is language specific. In order to
use this cue, learners must have already parsed at least a few
words in their language so as to learn the typical stress
pattern. Transitional probabilities, however, can be used
without having previously segmented any units.
Another language specific cue is phonotactics, the
constraints a language places on the ordering of segments
within and between the words. These can be constraints
such as allowable word initial consonant clusters, allowable
phonetic combinations in syllable internal places, and so on.
For example –ng is not allowed syllable initially in English.
Mattys and colleagues presented infants with artificial, bisyllabic words that contained two types of consonant

1299

clusters—within-word and between-word. The former had a
high probability of occurring within the words and the latter
a high probability of occurring at word boundaries. They
found that infants are able to segment words based solely on
this information (Mattys, Jusczyk, Luce & Morgan, 1999).
Phonotactics, like transitional probabilities, are a type of cooccurrence information. However, it is co-occurrence given
a particular position within a word. Therefore, like prosody,
in order to use phonotactic information to segment words
learners must already know some words.
Not surprisingly, it appears that infants might start out
using statistical information for word segmentation, but
after they have segmented a few words—and thereby had an
opportunity to learn more about their specific language—
they move on to using more language-specific strategies. In
fact, Thiessen & Saffran (2003) showed that infants’ cue
choice changes with age: when cues conflict and either can
be used to segment a speech stream, younger infants (6
months old) use transitional probabilities, and 9 month old
infants use prosody, not transitional probabilities. Johnson
& Jusczyk (2001) have a similar finding.
It is an open question, however, as to what strategies
adults use when learning a new language. Are they like the
older infants using the language specific strategies they
already know or do they start fresh, using the statistics to
build a new set of language specific strategies?

The Current Research
In our current work, we seek to test whether adults apply
language specific strategies from their L1 in order to
segment a new language. More specifically, studies
presented here ask if adults’ previously existing phonotactic
knowledge interferes with their ability to segment and
extract words in a new language.
This is an open question of much interest because
interference, as an explanation for sensitive period effects,
cannot be taken as a given. Mayberry and colleagues, for
example, consistently show that late language learners with
no previous exposure to a language consistently perform
worse than late language learners who have an L1
(Mayberry & Lock, 2003). Nonetheless, it is still of interest
to investigate the role of interference with an eye toward
sensitive periods using a statistical learning paradigm
because (1) many studies have highlighted interference as
very important (see Oldlin, 1989 for review) and (2) the
artificial language literature, in large part, does not consider
the role of previous knowledge.

Experiment 1
In the first experiment we simply pitted two word
segmentation cues—transitional probabilities and English
phonotactic rules about word initial clusters—against one
another. If adults use transitional probabilities and ignore
phonotactic constraints from their L1, this would suggest
that they are starting fresh with each new language. If
instead, they parse the speech stream according to English
phonotactic rules, it would indicate that their prior
knowledge is interfering with the acquisition of a new
language. Crucially, we also constructed control stimuli

where word initial clusters were complex, but legal
according to English phonotactics. Since these stimuli do
not conflict, we expect participants to parse the speech
stream according to transitional probabilities.

Method
Participants All 40 participants were native speakers of
English. Experimental participants were 7 men and 13
women, ranging in age from 19 to 21 years. Control
participants were 6 men and 14 women ranging in age from
18 to 22 years. All individuals participated in partial
fulfillment of class requirement.
Materials Experimental and control stimuli each consisted
of 8 two-syllable words (CCVCV), each beginning with a
consonant cluster. For the experimental stimuli, these CC
onsets violate the word-initial phonotactic rules of English.
In the control stimuli, CC onsets are licit.
v

Experimental stimuli were /tfo-bu/, /cp-zi/, /bte-/,
/kmo-du/, /ti-sa/, /fse-lo/, /psu-ne/, and /m-re/1. These
words were presented in quasi-random order with no pauses
between them. The stimuli were created so that a word
never followed itself, and all words were equally likely to
follow all other words, yielding transitional probabilities of
100% for word internal syllable transitions and 14.2% for
word boundary syllable transitions.
Each word was generated with the text to speech program,
SoftVoice (Katz, 2005). The synthesizer produced syllables
with a monotonic F0 (fundamental frequency) of 83.62 Hz.
All vowels are the same length regardless of placement next
to particular consonants or other phonemes and there were
no co-articulation effects. We used synthesized speech
precisely because it allows better control of the above
mentioned parameters. Any natural production of speech
could provide segmentation cues through varying degrees of
co-articulation, different vowel lengths, amplitudes,
frequencies, etc. A sample stretch of input is presented here:
‘kmodutfobuvteesaabtaeguhfsaelopsunaethmaraetfobubtaeg
uhpsunaekmoduvteesaafsaelothmarae.’
Control stimuli were constructed and concatenated using
the same methods. The 8 words are /zwo-bu/, /kre-/,
/plo-du/, /bli-sa/, /re-lo/, /r-zi/, /twu-ne/, and /st-re/.
In both conditions, participants were exposed for a total of
17 minutes and 59 seconds. Each word occurred 560 times
during the presentation phase. After exposure participants
were given a forced-choice test to see whether or not they
had correctly identified the word boundaries as defined
statistically, despite the presence of the violating consonant
clusters. Test items were of two types: (1) Word vs. Nonword and (2) Word vs. Split-cluster word. Word test items
were the statistically defined words to which participants
had been exposed. Non-word test items consisted of the first
syllable from one word paired with the second syllable from
1
Some of these consonant clusters appear in natural languages,
while some do not. We will return to this point in the discussion.

1300

a completely different word, e.g. kmo-rae. Although
participants had heard each of the two syllables in the Nonword, they had never heard the two syllables in succession.
Split-cluster test items consisted of an exposure word,
minus the first consonant, and with another word’s initial
consonant at the end, giving them a CVCVC structure. We
refer to these as split cluster words because we split the
consonant cluster at the beginning of the word, making
experimental stimuli viable in English. Note that the splitcluster test items have lower transitional probabilities than
the words. For example, mo-duth does not violate English
phonotactics, but the th sound only follows du 14.2% of the
time in the exposure stimuli. By adding this sound to the
end of the word, we are actually making the forced choice
options easier for the participant: since 14.2% is a very low
transitional probability ‘duth’ should sound odd to them
even though the word as a whole is more viable in English.
There were 8 of each type of test (Word vs. Non-word
and Word vs. Split-cluster word) yielding 16 test items in
total. Test items of the two types were interleaved quasirandomly, and two different counterbalanced versions of the
test were created. Test stimuli were generated with exactly
the same procedure as exposure stimuli.
Procedure Participants were run individually in a quiet
room. They wore headphones during presentation and
testing to eliminate any outside noise. Participants were told
simply to listen to the stimuli as best they could, not to tune
it out and not to analyze or think too much about it. To
encourage this, participants engaged in a coloring task
during exposure.
Each participant was exposed to the stimuli for 17
minutes and 59 seconds after which time they completed the
test. During test, participants were asked to choose which of
two items were more likely to be words in the language they
were exposed to. Forced choice items were presented over
headphones, one after another with a 1 second pause in
between. Participants were then given 3 seconds to circle
their choice on paper; they were instructed to circle 1 if the
first one sounded better and 2 if the second one sounded
better. After the test, subjects were given a questionnaire
asking about their demographic and language backgrounds.

Results
The dependant measures are participants’ forced choice
responses on Non-word and Split-cluster test items. Data are
shown separately in Figure 1 for experimental (black bars)
and control subjects (grey bars).
Experimental condition: A t-test on the responses from
the Non-word questions showed that participants choose the
word with deterministic transitional probabilities more often
than chance t(19) = 9.19, p < .001 indicating that learners
are able to track transitional probabilities in these stimuli.
A t-test on the Split-cluster test items showed that
participants did not choose the correct word (defined by
transitional probabilities of 100%) more often than chance
t(19) = -.175, p = .863. This suggests that although learners
have access to this statistical information, it does not seem
to guide their segmentation or extraction of the words.

Control condition: A t-test on the responses from the
Non-word questions showed that participants choose Words
over Non-Words more often than chance t(19) = 16.35, p <
.001. This indicates that they are also tracking transitional
probabilities in these control stimuli. A t-test on the Splitcluster test items did however reveal a difference, showing
that participants choose Words over Split-cluster words
more often than chance t(19) = 20.38, p < .001. Therefore,
when complex CC onsets are viable in English, there does
not seem to be any interference for the word segmentation
task.

Experimental

8

Mean Correct

7

Control

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
non-words

split-cluster
words

non-words

split-cluster
words

Question Type

Figure 1: Experiment 1

Experiment 2
Results from Experiment 1 suggest that previous language
experience can interfere with adult learners’ abilities to use
statistical information to extract words from the running
speech. However, these learners were only exposed to
speech stimuli for about 18 minutes. It could be that
interference only plays a role early on but with increased
exposure, this phenomenon fades. For this reason, in
Experiment 2, we doubled exposure time.

Method
Participants were 20 native English speakers, 3 men and 17
women, ranging in age from 18 to 23 years. Individuals
participated in partial fulfillment of class requirement.
Materials The stimuli for this experiment were the same as
for the experimental condition in Experiment 1.
Participants, however, listened twice as long for a total of 36
minutes. In so doing, they heard each word a total of 1,120
times. Test items were also the same as Experiment 1.
Procedure Save for the extension of exposure time, the
procedure was exactly the same.

1301

Results
A t-test on the responses to Non-word questions showed
that participants choose the word with deterministic
transitional probabilities more often than chance t(19) =
2.38, p <.05. However, a t-test on the Split-cluster test items
showed that participants still did not choose the correct

completed the test. Sessions were always completed on
consecutive days.

word (defined by transitional probabilities of 100%) more
often than chance t(19) = .65, p = .522. Therefore, doubling
the exposure period from Experiment 1 did not alter the
pattern of results.

Results
A t-test on the responses to the Non-word questions showed,
yet again, that participants choose the word with
deterministic transitional probabilities more often than
chance t(19) = 9.45, p <.001. A t-test on the Split-cluster
test items also showed, yet again, that participants did not
choose the correct word more often than chance t(19) =
1.60, p = .126. The pattern of results from experiments 1
and 2 was not altered even when exposure time is
quadrupled and subjects are given an opportunity to sleep
between exposure periods.

7

6

Mean Correct

5

4

3

2

7

1

6

0

5
non-w ords

split-cluster w ords

Mean Correct

Question Type

Figure 2: Experiment 2

Experiment 3

4

3

2

Results from Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that previous
language experience may be interfering with learners’
abilities to use statistical information in order to segment
and extract words. This seems to be true even with
substantial exposure time. Still, 36 minutes of exposure may
not have been enough. For this reason, we decided to double
the exposure time yet again, yielding 72 minutes of
exposure total.
We chose to split the exposure period into two sessions
occurring over two days. Research suggests that learning
and memory is enhanced in adults and infants by sleep
(Plihal & Born, 1997; Gomez, Bootzin & Nadel, in press;
Stickgold & Walker, 2005). We reasoned that splitting the
exposure and allowing for a night of sleep in between
sessions might help the adult learners, and even assist them
in properly segmenting the speech stream.

Method
Participants were 20 native English speakers, 4 men and 16
women, ranging in age from 18 to 33 years old. Individuals
participated in partial fulfillment of class requirement.
Materials The stimuli and test items for this experiment
were exactly the same as in Experiments 1 and 2, except
that the total exposure time was 72 minutes—4 times that
of Experiment 1, and double Experiment 2. During
exposure, participants heard each word 2,240 times.
Procedure Save for the extension of exposure time, the
procedure was exactly the same. On day one, participants
got 36 minutes of exposure. On day two, participants
received an additional 36 minutes of exposure and

1

0
non-w ords

split-cluster w ords
Question Type

Figure 3: Experiment 3

Experiment 4
Taken together, the first three experiments strongly suggest
that previous language experience interferes with learners’
abilities to use statistical information to correctly segment
and extract words from a new language. This finding,
however, could be a product of this artificial exposure
situation. In reality, language learners do not get exposed to
completely unparsed stimuli for so long. That is, they
generally will hear at least a few words in isolation. In fact,
it has been argued that these initial words are what learners
use to make initial generalizations about the prosody and
phonotactics of their language—generalizations they later
employ to further parse the speech stream (see Werker
&Yeung, 2005). It has also been argued that having a few
initial words can provide initial anchors in the speech
stream, trimming it down and generally easing the task of
segmentation (Bortfeld, Morgan, Golinkoff & Rathbun
2005).
For these reasons, in Experiment 4 we gave participants
one of the words before exposure to see if this would
improve their segmentation performance. We decided to
give them kmo-du after an item analysis revealed that
participants got this item correct 51% of the time in
Experiments 1-3. (Some words were more likely to be

1302

segmented correctly, and others were less likely.) Since
their performance at test with this word is no different than
chance, we thought this would be a good candidate to help
them parse the speech stream.

Method
Participants were 20 native English speakers, 8 men and 12
women, ranging in age from 18 to 22 years old. Individuals
participated in partial fulfillment of class requirement.
Materials The stimuli used in this experiment were exactly
the same as stimuli used in Experiment 1 (lasting 17
minutes and 59 seconds, and consisting of 560 repetitions of
each of the 8 words). Test items were also exactly the same.
Both Non-word and Split-cluster word comparisons for
kmo-du were collected but not included in the analysis.
Procedure The procedure for experiment 4 is exactly the
same as for Experiment 1, except that participants were told
before exposure that kmo-du is a word in the language they
were about to listen to.

Results
A t-test on the responses to the Non-word questions showed
that participants choose the word with deterministic
transitional probabilities more often than chance t(19) =
4.19, p <.001. This is consistent with the previous
experiments. A t-test on the Split-cluster test items was also
consistent with previous experiments; participants still did
not choose the correct word more often than chance t(19) =
1.10, p = .286. It appears that even when participants are
given a full word before exposure, it does not help them to
override their native language’s phonotactic rule system.
This is true even though participants remembered the word
we gave them before exposure; all participants chose kmodu with 100% accuracy.

7

6

Mean Correct

5

4

3

2

1

0
non-w ords

split-cluster w ords
Question Type

Figure 4: Experiment 4

General Discussion
In all the experiments above, it is clear from the Word vs.
Non-word test items that the adult participants are tracking
some kind of transitional probabilities in the new language;
this is something that has been demonstrated in previous
studies (e.g. Saffran, Newport & Aslin, 1996). However, the
current data does not necessarily indicate what transitional
probabilities they are tracking, participants could score
above chance on the Word versus Non-word items by
computing the transitions between syllables or between
vowels in syllables, for example. Still, whatever they are
tracking, it is clear that they are learning something about
the statistics present in the input.
This brings us to the results for the Split-cluster words.
For all experiments except the control, participants were at
chance on these items. The interpretation of the control data
is straight forward: participants are using transitional
probabilities to guide their segmentation of the words.
Unfortunately, chance performance for experimental stimuli
is not as clear cut. If participants were above chance on
these items, it would indicate that they are able to override
their L1 knowledge of cues to word boundaries and use
instead the statistics present in the input. They would be
starting fresh. Alternatively, if their performance was
significantly below chance, this would indicate complete
interference of L1 phonotactics. The current data, however,
are more intermediate, suggesting a moderate amount of
interference. Although we are confident that some
interference is going on, we cannot be sure as to precisely
where they are segmenting the speech. What, if any, units
are they extracting? Future studies aim to answer precisely
this question. We plan to include a battery of more delicate
forced choice options designed to probe the nature of the
extracted units.
It is worth noting that while all participants were native
speakers of English, some were also proficient in other
languages. A close look at the grammars for all these
languages revealed that only one language of which our
sample of participants were proficient (French) allowed any
of the consonant cluster onsets in our stimuli. We only have
two speakers of French in our sample. This is too few to be
able to draw conclusions about interference from a language
other than English. We did however re-run analyses
reported in the previous experiments without these
individuals. Removing them did not alter the pattern of
results.
In additional studies, we aim to explore if this early missegmentation bleeds into other aspects of language
acquisition upstream, such as morphology. We are also
eager to see which of the consonant clusters are more and
less difficult to parse and whether this is related to how
natural or common these clusters are in languages of the
world. A related question is how these clusters are
perceived. Is there some interference on a perceptual level
or is this a question of leanabilty? Of central interest is what
infants and children do with these exact stimuli. Is it
necessary to be an infant to start fresh? Do you simply need
to be within the critical period? These are all open
questions.

1303

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank J. Morrison, O. Hemmy-Asamsama,
I. Lee, E. Cox and N. Kramer for conducting many of these
experiments. Thanks to E. Thiessen and the UC Berkeley
Phonetics Lab for advice regarding stimuli construction. We
are particularly thankful to all of the members of the UC
Berkeley language and learning lab for their ongoing help
and support during every stage of this project.

Werker, J. F., & Yeung, H. (2005). Infant speech perception
bootstraps word learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
9(11), 519-527

References
Bortfeld, H., Morgan, J. L., Golinkoff, R. M., & Rathbun.
K. (2005). Mommy and me: familiar names help launch
babies into speech-stream segmentation. Psychological
Science, 16(4), 298-304.
Gómez, R. L., Bootzin, R. R., & Nadel, L. (in press). Naps
promote abstraction in language learning infants.
Psychological Science.
Johnson, E. K., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2001). Word
segmentation by 8-month-olds: When speech cues count
more than statistics. Journal of Memory and Language,
44(4), 706-716.
Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period
effects in second language learning: The influence of
maturational state on the acquisition of English as a
second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21(1), 60-99.
Jusczyk, P.W., Houston, D. M., & Newsome, M. (1999).
The beginnings of word segmentation in English-learning
infants. Cognitive Psychology, 39(3-4), 159-207
Katz, J. (2005). SoftVoice (Demo Program) [Computer
Software]. Los Angeles, CA: SoftVoice, Inc.
Mattys, S. L., Jusczyk, P. W., Luce, P. A., & Morgan, J. L
(1999). Phonotactic and prosodic effects on word
segmentation in infants. Cognitive Psychology, 38(4),
465-494.
Mayberry, R. I., & Lock, E. (2003). Age constraints on first
versus second language acquisition: Evidence for
linguistic plasticity and epigenesis. Brain and Language,
87(3), 369-384.
Odlin, T. (1989). Language transfer: Cross-linguistic
influence in language learning. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Plihal, W., Born, J. (1997). Effects of early and late
nocturnal sleep on priming and spatial memory.
Psychophysiology, 36, 571-582.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996). Word
segmentation: the role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Stickgold, R., & Walker., M. (2005). Memory consolidation
and reconsolidation: What is the role of sleep. Trends in
Neurosciences, 28, 408-415.
Thiessen, E. D., & Saffran, J. R. (2003). When cues collide:
Use of stress and statistical cues to word boundaries by 7to 9-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology, 39(4),
706-716.

1304

