UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Coh-Metrix Temporal Indices to Predict Psychological Measures of Time

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/18p054r8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Duran, Nicholas D.
Graesser, Arthur C.
McCarthy, Phillip M.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Coh-Metrix Temporal Indices to Predict
Psychological Measures of Time
Nicholas D. Duran (nduran@memphis.edu)
Phillip M. McCarthy (pmccarthy@memphis.edu)
Arthur C. Graesser (a-graesser@memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (dsmcnamr@memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems
Department of Psychology
202 Psychology Building
Memphis, TN 38152 USA
One of the benefits of the tool has been its ability to assess
textual cohesion. Cohesion explicitly connects linguistic
constituents, propositions, conceptual themes and sub-themes,
thereby assisting the reader in generating inferences and
bridging conceptual gaps (e.g., McNamara, 2001).
Differences in cohesion within a text can be correlated with
the coherence of a reader’s interpretation of a text. In other
words, cohesion as a textual construct can be mapped onto
coherence as a psychological construct. However, while the
effects of coreference cohesion indices such as argument
overlap (Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978) and LSA (Foltz, Kintsch,
& Landauer, 1998) have been well-tested, there has not been
the same focus on whether temporal indices of cohesion are
able to distinguish relevant temporal themes and sub-themes
that contribute to coherence. The purpose of this study is to
extend the work of Coh-Metrix into the temporal aspect of
cohesion. Specifically, we analyze a corpus of narrative,
history, and science texts to ascertain the degree to which
temporal cohesion indices predict human derived
psychological measures of temporality.

Abstract
Situation model theories of text comprehension consider
temporality to be one of the critical dimensions for building a
coherent mental representation of described events. Using this
framework, three continuous scale measures were developed to
assess temporal coherence based on tense, aspect, and
adverbial relations. Experts in discourse processing evaluated
150 texts, excerpted from science, history, and literature
textbooks, to establish a gold standard of temporality. We then
demonstrated that Coh-Metrix, a computational tool that
measures textual cohesion on over 200 indices of discourse
features, could significantly reflect these human interpretations
by incorporating five indices of local, temporal cohesion. We
conclude our paper with a discussion of our current research
into developments of more sophisticated global temporal
indices.

Introduction
Three grammatical devices primarily establish temporal
relations in text: tense, aspect, and adverbial elements (Klein,
1994). These linguistic markers are not only important for the
structure of discourse, but also facilitate the mental
representations of situations described in language (Zwaan &
Radvansky, 1998). The markers function as instructions for
integrating the interaction of entities, properties, and actions
into a coherent mental model of comprehension. Temporal
cues, along with other dimensions of situation models (e.g.,
space, causation, intentionality, and protagonist), also
foreground relevant information in a reader’s interpretation of
described events (Zwaan, Langston, & Graesser, 1995).
While such research has contributed significantly to our
understanding of situation model construction, computational
limitations have restricted empirical research to relatively
short passages of manipulated text. Advances in technology,
however, now allow large corpora to be indexed to mark the
presence of grammatical and lexical features assumed to play
important roles in situation model construction.
Graesser et al. (2004) have integrated these text-based
linguistic features, as well as other indices of readability and
vocabulary, into a web-based software tool called Coh-Metrix
(for additional information, visit cohmetrix.memphis.edu).

Temporal Measures
To establish a psychological gold standard for temporal
cohesion, we developed three distinct, continuous scale
measures. The measures are motivated by theories of
situation models that propose that comprehenders make use
of linguistic cues, such as tense, aspect, and adverbs to
construct temporal dimensions within their mental models
(Graesser, McNamara, & Louwerse, 2003; Graesser, Singer,
& Trabasso, 1994; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998).
Grammatical tense, for instance, assists a reader in
organizing events along a timeline. Specifically, tense
establishes the time of occurrence for an event around a
referential point, such as time of utterance. The resulting
temporal structure, that places events and actions within the
text along a continuum, affects the activation of information
in working memory. For example, Carreiras et al. (1997)
manipulated tense to allow associations between a character
and a job description to be applied in the present (e.g., Marta
now works as an economist) or separated by a lapse in time
(e.g., Marta in the past worked as an economist). The recall

190

establishing and ordering these events (Zwaan, Madden,
Stanfield, 2001).
Measure 2 The timeline proportion measurement captures
the level of difficulty in translating the words and sentences
into a coherent flow of temporal events. This measure will
approximate a reader’s ability to distinguish a moment of
occurrence relative to its past and future occurrences. In doing
so, the measure establishes the proportion of the text that can
be easily reconstructed on any timeline structure. (Klein,
1994).
Measure 3 The iconicity measurement is the extent to which
the order of mention in the text corresponded to the
underlying order of events, as reflected in the linguistic
features of tense and aspect. When a chronological sequence
of events matches the perceptual experience of a reader, the
text should be more easily integrated into a coherent
representation (Zwaan, 1996).

of the character’s occupation was faster and more accurate
when the association was depicted in the condition with close
temporal proximity.
Whereas tense relates lexical events to a certain point in
time, the use of aspect in temporal processing conveys the
dynamics of the point itself (Klein, 1994). The use of the
present participle aspect, such as painting in the sentence Sam
is painting the house, distinguishes the content as ongoing,
whereas the use of the perfective aspect, such as the word
painted in the sentence Mary has painted the house,
distinguishes the content as completed with an effect
remaining in the present.
Magliano and Schleich (2000) emphasized the importance
of aspect as a cue for maintaining information in working
memory. Perfective events are processed as completed and
decay faster in working memory than ongoing present
participle events. Aspect cues the reader to tag information in
their current mental representation that might be relevant for
connecting subsequent discourse.
Ohtuska and Brewer (1992) have also shown that a
sequence of events is best comprehended when the order of
mention in the text corresponds to true chronological order.
This psychological default, referred to as the iconicity
assumption, is modified by grammatical temporal markers.
Verb aspect and tense cue the reader to when the iconicity
assumption should or should not be followed. A passage
written in the past perfective (i.e., had jumped in a sentence
such as Jimmy had jumped the fence) sequences the events to
fit iconicity. A present participle passage violates the
assumption by allowing different events to occur
simultaneously. Dowty (1986) argues that in order for the
iconicity assumption to be fully incorporated into a situation
model construction, events in the text must be both
concurrent and contiguous. Adverbial phrases serve the
function of modifying this representation. Temporal adverbs
and connectives convey time in language by explicitly stating
the chronological distance between events (e.g., before, after,
then). Along these lines, Zwaan (1996) found that when time
shifts were manipulated in a passage by the use of temporal
adverbs (e.g., in a moment / five minutes later / the next day),
the mental representation of events was adversely affected by
adverbs that imposed a greater gap in time.
The organizational influences of tense, aspect, and adverbs
are the crux of our measures for interpreting temporal
coherence in texts. Each measure has been implemented on
three separate scales that can be assessed for degree of
importance. We assumed this would be the most effective
approach for capturing inferential generalizations about time.
The psychological measures that act as our gold standard are
presented below.
Measure 1 The temporal marker salience measurement is the
extent to which temporal word markers (e.g., adverbials,
connectives, particles, dates) present in the text establish
possible event orders on a timeline. Events can follow,
precede, or overlap one another, jump in time (e.g.,
flashbacks and flashforwards) and have large lapses between
them. Temporal word markers assist the reader in properly

Coh-Metrix
Coh-Metrix is a computational tool that incorporates over 250
lexical and discourse indices (Graesser et al., 2004). CohMetrix harnesses the most recent developments in
computational linguistics and discourse processing, featuring
advanced syntactic parsers (Charniak, 1997), part-of-speech
taggers (Brill, 1995), and Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA,
Landauer & Dumais, 1997). Word relationship indices are
derived from the WordNet lexical database (Miller, 1990),
and psycholinguistic information from the MRC database
(Coltheart, 1981). A variety of shallow metrics such as FleshKincaid Grade Level (Klare, 1974, 1975) are also added for
purposes of comparison.
These modules are integrated into the automated
computational
tool,
Coh-Metrix,
for
generating
comprehensive cohesion profiles of text (Graesser et al.,
2004). Coh-Metrix has been involved in many research
endeavors, ranging from learning assessment to text
identification. For instance, McNamara and colleagues
examined the cohesion of textbooks and the resulting benefit
for high or low knowledge readers (Best, Ozuro, &
McNamara, 2004). Louwerse et al. (2004) investigated
cohesion in written and spoken texts, finding six dimensions
of relationships between the two modes. McCarthy, Briner et
al. (2006) used Coh-Metrix to distinguish segments of texts
by their functional relationship. And McCarthy, Lewis et al.
(2006) used Coh-Metrix to distinguish texts of different
authors even while the individual styles of the authors was
shown to significantly shift as the author’s style developed.

Temporal Indices
For the present purpose of investigating psychological,
temporal coherence measures, we focus on the
computationally derived, Coh-Metrix temporal indices. In
total, this study used nine temporal indices: six indices are
available on the current online version of Coh-Metrix, and a
further three were developed for this study. The method of
calculation for the current indices is via a density score that
measures the incidence of a particular category per 1,000
191

Table 1). In addition, all texts were assessed to guarantee that
paragraph breaks and sentences were properly located. All
captions, headings, maps, and figures were removed.
To provide confidence in the generalizabilty of our planned
statistical analysis, we ensured that a normal distribution of
general cohesion for each of the three domains was present.
This was achieved through checks of distributions of two
major measures of cohesion: argument overlap (Graesser et
al., 2004) and Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA, Landauer et
al., 1997).

words. Such indices serve a global purpose, assessing the
overall substantive content in the text as a whole (Graesser et
al. 2002).
The six indices currently available on the online version of
Coh-Metrix are delineated into three categories that are on
based on grammatical function: part of speech, connectives,
and ambiguous elements. The temporal part of speech indices
include; incidence of past participles (e.g., awoken, begun,
become), incidence of past tense (e.g., awoke, began, looked),
and incidence of present tense (e.g., look, move, talk). The
connective indices include; incidence of positive temporal
connectives (e.g., before, after, while), and incidence of
negative temporal connectives (e.g., until, from, since). The
ambiguous elements score include temporal adverbial
phrases, which consist of non-explicit linguistic features (e.g.,
at this time, sooner or later).
As mentioned above, we developed three additional
cohesion indices to be incorporated into the Coh-Metrix tool.
These additional indices broaden the scope of accounting for
the various temporal relations in a text by capturing all
explicit adverbs in a text. The first index features all explicit,
textual adverbs (e.g., now, then, yesterday), as well as
numerical dates (e.g., 1997, 435 B.C.) and nominal dates and
time periods (e.g., Monday, summer, October).
The
remaining indices are derivations of these explicit elements.
The first includes a score of combined numerical dates,
nominal dates, and time periods, and the second combines
only numerical dates and time periods. The method of
calculation is a ratio score that takes the instances of a
category divided by all words in a text. These additional
three indices are necessary to understand the relative
importance of text features that explicitly place events on a
timeline.

Table 1: Distribution of unique textbooks and text segments
for High School (10th-12th) and Junior High (7th-9th).

Unique Books
Total Texts

History
High Jr.
5
5
25
25

Narrative
High Jr.
4
5
25
25

Science
High Jr.
3
5
25
25

Both argument overlap and LSA are robust in assisting a
reader to relate ideas and fill conceptual and structural gaps
across text (Graesser et al., 2004). Specifically, argument
overlap tracks arguments and word-stems in adjacent
sentences for assessing similarity (McCarthy, Lewis, et al.
2006). LSA, on the other hand, is a high-dimensional
semantic network that represents words by their shared
contextual history in the language environment (e.g., street
and road appear in similar lexical contexts). A composite
score of words in sentences can be compared to adjacent
composite sentences and all possible combinations for
evaluating global semantic relationships. A normal
distribution of global cohesion for each domain was obtained
using these two measures.

Methods

Experimental Design

The criteria describing our psychological gold standard
measures were given to three experts working on discourse
processing at the Cognitive Science Educational Practice
(CSEP) lab at the University of Memphis. The three experts
assessed a corpus of 150 narrative and expository texts to
establish agreed upon benchmarks. The Coh-Metrix temporal
indices were then used to predict these human interpretations
of time.

Inter-rater reliability The human measurements of temporal
coherence were assessed using a Likert-type scale ranging
from 1 (minimum) to 6 (maximum). A bivariate Pearson
correlation for each question was conducted between all
possible pairs of raters’ responses. Additionally, agreement
was analyzed using Cohen’s weighted kappa statistic
(Altman, 1990). This test is beneficial in compensating for the
disagreement that is more likely to occur with a continuous
numerical scale. If any two raters were below the good
threshold (kappa < .06) established by Landis and Koch
(1977) and/or correlations were not significant at the p < .05
level, ratings were then reexamined and scores were agreed
upon by the three raters.
The initial assessment of inter-rater reliability for the
psychological gold standard measure of temporal marker
salience measurement indicates that scores ranged from
moderate to good agreement. Judgments between the three
possible pairs of raters were significantly correlated, with one
of the kappa scores above the 0.6 threshold and the other two
slightly below (see Table 2). The psychological gold standard
measure of timeline proportion measurement received
consistent scores with all pairs of raters establishing good to

Corpus Selection
A total of 150 texts, including 50 texts from each of three
prominent domains (i.e., science, history, and narrative),
were selected from an electronic corpus of academic
textbooks provided by MetaMetrics Inc. For reasons of
continuity, each text was shortened by randomly selecting
paragraph-to-paragraph slices of approximately 400 words.
Several selection constraints were applied to ensure
uniformity and representation across grade levels and
authorship: Within each representative domain, 25 texts from
the high-school grades (10th - 12th) and 25 texts from the
junior-high grades (7th - 9th) were sampled. Within each grade
level, three or more unique textbooks were sampled (see
192

very good kappa agreement, as well as significant correlations
(see Table 3). The results for the psychological gold standard
measure of iconicity measurement suggested that raters were
not as certain in interpreting texts for chronological order (see
Table 4). Though these results were lower than the previous
two measures, they remained significant.
The mean score of all three raters per text was taken as the
final gold standard rating of the 150 texts. After discussions
to correct for discrepancies, reevaluated scores resulted in
significant correlations and kappa scores that were all in good
to excellent agreement (above .6 thresholds). The final scores
constitute the empirically established benchmarks for analysis
in the linear regression.

from the new indices of explicit temporal elements. The
variable with the highest correlation to the gold standard
human measures were selected from each group as predictor
variables. Other variables were added provided they passed a
co-linearity check (Hair et al., 1998) and that they correlated
at r < .7.
As a result, the five following predictors variables were
used: temporal elements score, incidence of positive temporal
connectives, past tense parts of speech score, present tense
part of speech score, and ambiguous temporal incidence
score.

Table 2: Inter-rater reliability for the temporal marker
salience measurement.

A series of forward-entry linear regressions were conducted
with each of the three human temporal measurements as the
dependent variable. The linear regression produced a set of
unstandardized b-weights based on the five Coh-Metrix
predictor variables. Any b-weight that was not significant was
discarded.
The remaining b-weights were multiplied by their
corresponding Coh-Metrix scores in the 50-text test set and
added together with the constant to create prediction scores.
These scores were then correlated with the actual human
scores to determine the degree to which Coh-Metrix temporal
indices mirrored human performance.
For each of the three temporal benchmarks, distinct
combinations of b-weights were used to predict human scores
(see Table 5). The correlations comparing the predicted
scores and actual scores were all highly significant (see Table
6).
For the temporal marker salience measurement, the most
predictive b-weights corresponding to the Coh-Metrix
temporal indices were (in decreasing order of significance):
1) all temporal elements score, 2) present tense part of speech
score, and 3) past tense part of speech score. For the timeline
proportion measurement, the most predictive b-weights
corresponding to the Coh-Metrix temporal indices were (in
decreasing order of significance): 1) all temporal elements
score, and 2) past tense part of speech score. For the iconicity
measurement, the most predictive b-weights corresponding to
the Coh-Metrix temporal indices were (in decreasing order of
significance): 1) ambiguous temporal incidence score and 2)
past tense part of speech score. As such, the cohesion indices
that emerged from this analysis as being most indicative of
the gold standard were incidence scores for part of speech
and ambiguous elements, as well as ratio scores for explicit
elements. The two connective indices, incidence of positive
temporals and incidence of negative temporals, were not
significantly predictive.

Rater Comparison
Kappa
Rater 1
Rater 2
.744
Rater 1
Rater 3
.498
Rater 2
Rater 3
.512
*Correlation is significant at p < .001.

Results

Pearson r
.674*
.541*
.588*

Table 3: Inter-rater reliability for the timeline proportion
measurement.
Rater Comparison
Kappa
Rater 1
Rater 2
.736
Rater 1
Rater 3
.699
Rater 2
Rater 3
.758
*Correlation is significant at p < .001.

Pearson r
.754*
.700*
.783*

Table 4: Inter-rater reliability for the iconicity measurement.
Rater Comparison
Kappa
Rater 1
Rater 2
.412
Rater 1
Rater 3
.321
Rater 2
Rater 3
.439
*Correlation is significant at p < .001.

Pearson r
.363*
.342*
.383*

Prediction equation Based on the size of the current dataset,
we estimated that five indices would be the maximum
number of variables available before problems with
overfitting occurred. To provide an objective test of the
analysis, a training set of 100 randomly chosen texts (selected
from the 150 texts) was established for use in building a
prediction equation. We selected variables from the three
categories of grammatical function: part of speech,
connectives, and ambiguous elements, as well representatives

193

Table 5: b-weights of temporal coherence measurements regressed on Coh-Metrix indices for 100-text training set.
Indices
Temporal marker salience
All temporal elements score
.032**
Ambiguous temporal incidence score
.013**
Present tense part of speech score
-.023**
Past tense part of speech score
.009**
Incidence of positive temporal connectives
.002**
Constant
2.748**
*b-weight is significant at p < .05, **b-weight is significant at p < .001.

Iconicity
.002**
.066**
-.007**
.016**
-.028**
2.297**

The final avenue of interest includes cataloguing
characteristics of text domain with indices of cohesion.
McCarthy, Lightman et al. (2006) have been successful in
showing that cohesion rates in academic textbooks are
consistent with the grade level of difficulty, but vary
according to domain (e.g., science and history). Future
research will build on this approach by examining the
situational dimensions that are most relevant in different
domains. It is possible that a reader in situation
construction may be influenced not only by world
knowledge and text-based cues, but feature-specific
qualities of genre. The profiles of Coh-Metrix temporal
indices from our current study will certainly contribute to
this endeavor, as well as exploring further issues of
temporal coherence in natural language processing.
While much work remains to be done, this initial
investigation contributes to the field by demonstrating that
Coh-Metrix derived temporal indices can accurately reflect
human evaluations of temporality.

Table 6: Correlations between predicted scores
and actual scores for temporal coherence measurements.
Measurement
Temporal marker salience
Timeline proportion
Iconicity
*Correlation is significant at p < .001

Timeline proportion
.025**
.036**
-.014**
.023**
-.011**
2.143**

Correlation
0.766*
0.850*
0.495*

Discussion
The present study investigated the organization of temporal
relations in text and the influence of these relations on
interpretations of temporal coherence. The results suggest
that distinctions made by human raters can be successfully
identified by Coh-Metrix cohesion indices. Consequently,
the utility of Coh-Metrix indices address the cognitive
processing of lexical cues of temporality that, according to
Zwaan et al. (2001), have received little attention in
language comprehension. The ability of Coh-Metrix to
reflect human performance highlights the importance of
text-based cues for comprehension.
While the results of this study are significant, suggesting
that local-level cohesion cues can accurately predict human
interpretations of time, we are currently working to develop
even more sophisticated temporal indices. These new
indices will serve to capture both the grammatical mode
and global structure of cohesion. These new global indices
will provide further discriminatory power by offering
representations tense and aspect consistency across
individual paragraphs as well as the entire text. Such new
indices will be particularly beneficial to our assessment of
the iconicity assumption.
A further goal for our temporal investigations is to
address the concern that situation model dimensions are
studied in isolation while coherence is dependent on the
interaction of dimensions (Zwaan et al., 1998). Temporal
relationships, for instance, are also influenced by causal
links between events. As CohMetrix also provides a wide
variety of causal and intentional indices, we believe that
representation of temporal and causal cohesion can be
assessed simultaneously. This may provide insight
concerning the co-relevance of these dimensions for
comprehension of a text.

Acknowledgments
The research was supported by the Institute for Educational
Sciences (IES R3056020018-02). Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the IES. We would also like to thank
Stephen Briner and Erin Lightman for their contributions to
this study.

References
Best, R., Ozuru, Y., & McNamara, D. S. (2004). Selfexplaining science texts: Strategies, knowledge, and
reading skill. In Y. B. Yasmin, W. A., Sandoval, N.
Enyedy, A. S. Nixon, F. Herrera (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Sixth International Conference of the Learning
Sciences: Embracing Diversity in the Learning Sciences
(pp. 89-96). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brill., E. (1995). Transformation-based error-driven
learning and natural language processing: A case study
in part-of-speech tagging. Computational Linguistics, 21,
543-565.
Carreiras, M., Carriedo, N., Alonso, M. A., & Fernandez,
A. (1997). The role of verbal tense and verbal aspect in

194

Latent Semantic Analysis to measure the cohesion of
text structures. In: A. Kao, S. Poteet (Eds.). Natural
Language Processing and Text Mining. UK: SpringerVerlag.
McCarthy, P.M., Lewis, G.A., Dufty, D.F., & McNamara,
D.S. (2006). Analyzing writing styles with Coh-Metrix.
In Proceedings of the Florida Artificial Intelligence
Research Society International Conference (FLAIRS),
Melbourne, Florida.
McCarthy, P.M., Lightman, E.J., Dufty, D.F. &
McNamara, D. S. (submitted). Using Coh-Metrix to
assess distributions of cohesion and difficulty: An
investigation of the structure of high-school textbooks.
28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 2006.
McNamara, D. S. (2001). Reading both high and low
coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and prior
knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55, 51-62.
Miller, G. (1990). WordNet: An on-line lexical database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235-312.
Ohtuska, K., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Discourse
organization in the comprehension of temporal order in
narrative texts. Discourse Processes, 15, 317-336.
Radvansky, G. A., Zwaan, R. A., Fedrico, T., & Franklin,
N. (1998). Retrieval from temporally organized situation
models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1224-1237.
Zwaan, R. A., Madden, C. J., & Stanfield, R. A. (2001).
Time in narrative comprehension: A cognitive
perspective. In D. Schram & G. Steen (Eds.), The
Psychology
and
Sociology
of
Literature.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation
models in language comprehension and memory.
Psychological Bulletin, 123, 162-185.
Zwaan, R. A. (1996). Processing narrative time shifts.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 22, 1196-1207.
Zwaan, R. A., Langston, M. C., & Graesser, A. C. (1995).
The construction of situation models in narrative
comprehension:
An
event-indexing
model.
Psychological Science, 6, 292-297.

the foregrounding of information in reading. Memory &
Cognition, 25, 438-446.
Charniak, E. (1997). Statistical techniques for natural
language processing. AI Magazine, 18, 33-44.
Dowty, D. R., (1986). The effects of aspectual class on the
temporal structure of discourse: Semantics or
pragmatics? Linguistics and Philosophy, 9, 37-61.
Foltz, P., Kintsch, W., & Landauer, T. (1998). The
measurement of textual coherence with latent semantic
analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 285–307.
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., &
Cai, Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion
and language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
and Computers, 36, 193-202.
Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S.,& Louwerse, M.M
(2003). What do readers need to learn in order to
process coherence relations in narrative and expository
text. In A.P. Sweet and C.E. Snow (Eds.), Rethinking
Reading Comprehension (pp. 82-98). New York:
Guilford Publications.
Graesser, A.C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing inferences during narrative text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Kintsch W. & van Dijk T A. (1978). Toward a model of
text comprehension and production. Psychological
Review, 85, 363-94.
Klein, W. (1994). Time in Language. London: Routledge.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Louwerse, M.M., McCarthy, P. M., McNamara, D. S., &
Graesser, A. C. (2004). Variation in language and
cohesion across written and spoken registers. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceesings of
the 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 843-848). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Louwerse, M. M. (2002). An analytic and cognitve
parameterization of coherence relations. Cognitive
Linguistics, 12, 291-315.
Magliano, J. P., & Schleich, M. C. (2000). Verb aspect and
situation models. Discourse Processes, 29, 83-112.
McCarthy, P.M., Briner, S.W., Rus, V., & McNamara, D.S.
(2006). Textual Signatures: Identifying text-types using

195

