UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Search in Microscopy Implies High-Level Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2j6799bs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Chariker, Julia H.
Claudio, Natalie M.
Fell, Ronald D.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Search in Microscopy Implies High-Level Cognition
John R. Pani (jrpani@louisville.edu)1

Julia H. Chariker (julia.chariker@louisville.edu)1

Natalie M. Claudio (natalie.claudio@louisville.edu)1
1

2

Ronald D. Fell (rfell@louisville.edu)2

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Department of Biology, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA
Abstract

Analysis of visual search data suggests that the use of the microscope in the study of microanatomy is a high-level visuocognitive skill. Although the process of interpreting a microscope slide begins with perception and recognition, it quite often incorporates recall of anatomical knowledge and reasoning
about the slide in the context of anatomy. Due to the system of
cognitive processes in which slide interpretation takes place,
patterns of visual search do not strongly differentiate better
from poorer performers in general or for particular slide images.
Keywords: medical imaging; visual cognition; visual search;
microscopy; perception; reasoning; scientific reasoning; education.

Visual Search in a Real World Domain
Creation of visual artifacts is characteristic of human cognition, giving us pictures, diagrams (including maps), instrument readouts (e.g., radar screens), and a variety of technological displays that are characteristic of modern science and
technology (e.g., microscopes, telescopes, and radiological
images). The use of some visual displays is so deeply ingrained in the practice of formal and professional disciplines
that these displays may be considered to be part of visual
information systems (Pani, Chariker, & Fell, 2005). Study of
cognition in relation to visual information systems provides
an opportunity to study visual cognition at the highest level
of cognitive organization. In addition, it has substantial practical value, providing opportunities to improve practice and
training in numerous domains of human skill (e.g., Crowley,
Naus, Stewart, & Friedman, 2003; Hoffman, 1984; Hoffman
& Markman, 2001; Kundel, 2000; Kundel, Nodine, & Carmody, 1979; Lesgold, Rubinson, Feltovich, Glaser, Kopfer,
& Wang, 1988; Pani, Chariker, & Fell, 2005; Wolf,
Horowitz, & Kenner, 2005).
Our own recent work has focused on the interpretation
of microscope slides in histology, the microanatomy of biological tissue (Chariker, Pani, & Fell, 2004; Pani, Chariker,
& Fell, 2005). We have argued that microscopy is not solely
a process of perceptual learning and recognition of the microscope images. Certainly interpreting a microscope slide
begins with perception and at least some partial recognition.
Success in this mode, however, is surprisingly brittle, due to
variations in the tissue and its presentation in the slides. Very
often, perception and recognition are incorporated into a
goal-directed system that includes exploration of the slide,
retrieval of anatomical knowledge from memory, and reasoning about the microscope slide in relation to anatomy. The
final result is a high-level form of recognition in which the

microscope slide is understood to be a particular sample from,
or a point of view on, an instance of whole tissue. Overall,
reasoning-driven recognition is the fundamental visual skill of
the histologist.
These conclusions were based primarily on verbal protocols and structured interviews from the interpretation of microscope slides by graduates of a college course in histology.
The present paper focuses on visual search behavior during
the interpretation of the microscope slides. Data about visual
search come from video recordings of the movement of the
microscope stage -- movement that centers the object of interest in the microscope view -- during naturalistic identification
and description of tissues. We will argue that the visual
search data support the conclusions drawn from the analysis
of verbal data.
Medical imaging is an area in which there has been intensive study over recent years, with the great majority of work
directed toward cognition in x-ray radiology (see Krupinski,
Kundel, Judy, & Nodine, 1998). The cognitive task under
study typically is detection of abnormalities in tissue that is
otherwise well-defined ahead of time. Microscopy is different
in many ways from x-ray radiology, and there is a potential
for cognition in this domain to differ from what is common in
radiology. This is especially true where microscopy is used to
learn and practice a basic science, such as histology. In this
case, a large domain of conceptual knowledge is learned in
part through exploration in the microscope (Ross, Kaye, &
Pawlina, 2003). It is an empirical question just how domaingeneral learning of microanatomy and domain-specific detection of abnormalities are related (see also Crowley et al.,
2003).

The Challenge of Microscopy for Cognition
Systematic use of a domain of visual structure for purposes of
gaining information about a second, target, domain establishes
a visual information system. In such a system, there is a mapping from the objects in the target domain into the structures
in the information domain. The user must work the mapping
in reverse, going from the information domain to the target
domian. Whereas carefully designed visual information systems, such as musical notation, contain a straightforward
mapping, exploratory visual information systems, such as
those that employ x-ray machines, microscopes, and telescopes, can present a substantially greater challenge for the
user.
Certainly objects in the information domain often look
different from their counterparts in the target domain. Microscope slides are formed by taking a thin slice through the inte-

1920

rior of a structure and staining it in order to make various
structures clearly visible. With this transformation, a single
curved tube can appear in the microscope as a set of separate
circular and oval cross-sections. However, the challenges for
learning microscopy in histology go well beyond this. A
single tissue can appear in many different ways in a microscope slide, depending on the angle of cut, its position, and
the type of stain that was used in slide preparation. Moreover, there is substantial variation among instances of a single type of tissue. Compounding the problem, tissues that are
actually quite different can look the same if a single thin slice
through their interiors is all the visual information that is
given about them. Overall, the mapping from target to information domain in histology can be both one-to-many and
many-to-one, creating a substantial challenge for cognition.
An analogous set of problems occurs in x-ray radiology,
where the interpretation of an image can be quite challenging
even for practitioners with years of experience (e.g., Nodine
& Kundel, 1987).
For the present study, we treated movement of the microscope stage as analogous to eyemovements in normal
perception. The microscope is used actively in histology as a
tool for exploration, and histologists become highly skilled
with it. The slide stage is moved smoothly in a horizontal
plane with one hand using two knobs that provide continuous
control. Magnification is changed often with the other hand.
Standard practice is to gaze straight ahead into the microscope and to move the slide under the gaze. Subjectively, it
appears that the microscope is being moved over the tissue.
We explored a series of questions about visual search in
microscopy. Apart from the time at which an identification
of tissue took place, can a record of visual search differentiate easier from more difficult slides? Can a record of visual
search differentiate correct from incorrect answers? Can sets
of visual search records differentiate more from less skilled
individuals? Where cognition is driven immediately by perceptual recognition, records of visual search may provide
such differentiations. Where visual recognition is feeding
into a larger system that engages in hypothesis testing, records of visual search should have a more variable and indirect relation to success in the task.

Visual Search in the Microscope

mingled structures. However, it contains several salient diagnostic structures (e.g., hair follicles), it was a tissue that the
students had all studied in class, and the stain in this particular
slide was familiar to the students.
A section from a tendon was a simple tissue that all the
students had studied, and the stain was a familiar one. However, it was expected to be somewhat challenging to identify,
because the collagen fibers that often can be seen in a tendon
were not easy to discriminate in this slide.
A slide of the pancreas showed a tissue that the students
were familiar with, but the stain on this slide was one with
which the students were unfamiliar. The slide was moderately
complex, with several structures to identify.
The epiglottis was a complex tissue that the students hadstudied in the textbook but had not seen in a slide. The slide
contained many structures common in other parts of the body,
and the stain was one that was familiar to the students. Correct identification required knowing a configuration of structures rather than a single diagnostic characteristic.
Procedure. This study included two sessions for each participant. The first session consisted of a verbal protocol followed by a structured interview. For the verbal protocol, participants verbalized their thoughts as they viewed the four
slides under the microscope. Participants were asked to “think
aloud” as they viewed each slide. They were assured that they
were not being tested; instead, the objective was to understand
the natural process of slide reading. They were encouraged to
change focus and magnification as needed, and to follow their
own pace. After the verbal protocol was completed for all
four slides, the structured interview took place. Each slide
was viewed under the microscope a second time, and a series
of questions was asked. The majority of questions referred to
structures that had been omitted or misidentified earlier.

Results
Performance. We have previously reported basic performance data from this study (Pani et al., 2005). We present a
brief review of performance here to provide background for
an examination of visual search. Table 1 indicates which
slides were identified by which participants during the verbal
protocol.

Participants

Participant

Five undergraduate students, three females and two males,
participated in two sessions, each lasting approximately one
and one-half hours. All students were in the pre-medical or
pre-dental curricula. Four of the students had received a
grade of A in the course and one had received a grade of B.
All students had completed the undergraduate course in histology within the previous year.

Method
Materials. Four histological slides were viewed through one
head of a two-headed laboratory microscope. A slide from
the scalp was expected to be easy for the students to identify
and describe. The scalp is complex, with numerous inter-

Scalp Tendon Pancreas Epiglot.

Total

p1

1

1

0

0

2

p2

1

0

0

0

1

p3

1

1

1

0

3

p4

1

1

0

0

2

p5

1

1

1

1

4

Total

5

4

2

1

Table 1. Participant by tissue matrix. A ‘1’ in a cell indicates
successful identification.

1921

Visual Search: Transcription. Large printed images of the
microscope slides were prepared for each slide viewed by
each participant. The video recordings were viewed interactively at slow speeds. For each recording, the center of the
microscope view was transcribed onto the image of the slide
as a continuous directional path. Numbered location markers
were placed at most changes of direction, initiation and termination of stopped motion, and moderately sized intervals
along otherwise long segments. Elapsed time was associated
with each numbered location on the path, and the difference
in elapsed time was associated with each pair of adjacent
locations. With this information, rate of motion over the
slide and the location of pauses could be easily related to the
morphology of the tissue. In addition, visual search behavior
could be related to structures on the slides and to the progress
of identification and description of the tissue. Twenty visual
search records were generated for the five participants and
four microscope slides. A portion of a visual search record is
shown in Figure 1.

erse of the entire slide, movement along boundaries of the
tissue, and motions over the center and inner portions of the
tissue. Although individual global patterns of exploration
could be explained post hoc in relation to individual instances
of identification, the set of patterns could not be used systematically to differentiate the level of performance of the participants or the level of challenge of the slide.
The rate of motion of the microscope over the slide (to
use the subjective description of the motion) was strikingly
smooth and uniform across all visual search records. The rate
of motion of the microscope for the five participants viewing
the pancreas is illustrated in Figure 2. In general, participants
started out relatively rapidly and then slowed down, with a
variety of pauses along the way. The deceleration in the path
was determined in part by changes in magnification as the
participants moved from low to medium to high magnification. Even when the rate of motion was measured in terms of
changes in visual angle, however, there tended to be an overall
deceleration. The pattern of rapid movement followed by an
extended deceleration was sometimes repeated for a single
slide, suggesting that new areas of the slide were being explored. Patterns in the speed of movement over the slide or
the smoothness of the velocity gradient did not differentiate
the level of performance of the participants or the level of
challenge of the slide.

Cumulative Distance (arbitrary units)

The marginal sums indicate that there was large variation in the difficulty of interpreting the microscope slides and
large individual differences among the students. Analyses of
verbal protocol data suggested that cognition took a variety
of forms. One common form was the recognition of diagnostic features and immediate inference of the identity of the
whole tissue. Hypothesis testing was equally common.
Quite often it employed a use of negative evidence to disconfirm a hypothesis.

Participant 1
Participant 2
Participant 3
Participant 4
Participant 5

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0

50
75
100 125
Cumulative Time (seconds)

150

Figure 2. Cumulative distance in relation to cumulative
time for the slide of the pancreas for each of the five participants. Rate of motion over the slide is indicated by
the slopes of the curves. The two arrows indicate the
points at which Participants 3 and 5 identified the tissue.

Figure 1. Excerpt from a visual search record.
Global properties of motion over the slides. The global
pattern of exploration of the slides was strikingly uniform,
suggesting that the students had learned a standard form of
exploration in the lab sections of the histology course. In
particular, nearly every visual search record showed a trav-

25

Dwell Time. One of the primary measures in visual search
over natural images is dwell time, those instances when a participant stops to study a particular image feature (e.g., Nodine
& Kundel, 1987). Dwell time in the tracking of microscope
motion could be detected by graphing the time interval be-

1922

tween indexed locations against the distance between them
and looking for spikes in the graph, as illustrated in Figure 3.
There were many instances of substantial dwell time in the
visual search data, and the pattern of dwell time is very interesting, although not simple.
The verbal protocols, as well as the expert opinion of the
histologist on the research team, suggested that certain structures in the images were diagnostic of the tissue. This would
include, for example, the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. One complexity in interpreting dwell time is illustrated by the search data for pancreas from the two participants who identified it during the verbal protocol. Participant
3 showed a classic pattern of clear dwell time on the islets of
Langerhans prior to identification (see Figure 3). Participant
5, who was the highest performer of the group, did not show
such a pattern. After more than two minutes of viewing, a
single, relatively modest (11 sec.), dwell on an islets of
Langerhans occurred during identification of the tissue. The
temporal characteristics of this dwell did not differentiate this
participant from others who failed to identify the tissue. On
the other hand, this participant spent a very long time moving
slowly through a region of the slide that had a high concentration of islets of Langerhans. This exploration time was
quite large, but only when it was defined over a region of the
slide rather than a single locus.

Time in Interval (seconds)

25
Islets

20

Islets

15
Islets
10

Identification
of pancreas

Islets

5
0
1 7 13 19 25 31 37 43 49 55 61 67 73 79 85
Location Intervals

Figure 3. A graph of dwell time for Participant 3
viewing the slide of the pancreas.
A second complexity arose from the fact that participants who did not identify the tissue sometimes dwelled on
islets of Langerhans. These participants noticed the structures, considered them, and then misidentified them. Thus,
dwelling on a diagnostic feature does not necessarily equate
to correct identification (e.g., Manning, Ethell, & Donovan,
2004). However, if slow movement over a critical region
counts for dwell time (as discussed above), then it is clear
that participants who did identify pancreas spent more total
dwell time on the islets of Langerhans than those who failed
to identify it. The students who misidentified the islets of

Langerhans did not return to them, while the students who
ultimately identified them correctly returned to them on several occasions prior to final identification of the tissue.
The situation is different, however, for the epiglottis. The
pancreas was challenging because the slide was created with a
stain that is not common. The epiglottis was challenging because, although the individual structures of the epiglottis were
familiar, the tissue as a whole had been learned only from the
textbook. It had never been studied in the microscope. In the
case of the epiglottis, there were participants who clearly
dwelled on all of the diagnostic structures several times, discussed them clearly in the verbal protocol, but failed to remember that it was the epiglottis that would fit the description
of the tissue. On the other hand, the one participant who successfully identified epiglottis during the verbal protocol did it
after a single long dwell time (26 sec.) on its identifying features (elastic cartilage in conjunction with salivary glands).
Thus, the pattern of dwell time associated with success in the
pancreas was associated with failure in the epiglottis, and vice
versa.
Temporal Relation between Dwell Time and Identification. A further important issue related to the viewing of diagnostic information is the temporal relation between viewing
and identification. For easier slides, those that were identified
correctly by everyone, there was a quick recognition of features, as indicated by the verbal protocol, and a quick response. Dwell time in these cases would only be impressive
as a proportion of total elapsed time (which often was less
than 10 sec.). These identifications are driven by perceptual
recognition, typically recognition for one or more diagnostic
structures within the slide (Pani, et al., 2005).
For the more challenging slides, however, the pattern of
data was quite different. For the slides that a minority of students identified successfully, all successful identifications
took place after an extended period of time, with the minimum
time being 34 sec. (Participant 5 viewing the epiglottis). Even
a careful look at a diagnostic feature, such as the islets of
Langerhans in the pancreas, typically was not connected
closely in time with identification. Diagnostic features of the
tissue were viewed numerous times over an extended period
of time prior to identification.
Case-study examples. Because this was a small-sample
naturalistic study of microscopy, it can be useful to view the
data as a collection of case studies. Five brief descriptions of
visual search in relation to performance are presented in the
following. They are all from the pancreas, ranked in terms of
the success in identification.
Participant 5 was the most skilled microscopist of the
group. He identified the pancreas after about two minutes of
viewing (125 sec.), mentioning the islets of Langerhans as one
basis for his judgment. Participant 5 paused on islets of
Langerhans briefly during identification (11 sec.), and for a
much longer period afterward. Before identification, he spent
substantial time moving around in an area that included numerous islets of Langerhans (and which included the 11 sec.
dwell). Identification took place while viewing an islets of

1923

Langerhans, but this was not the first time that the microscope was on or near an example of this structure. Indeed,
the participant had explored the same critical region of the
slide nearly 40 seconds earlier.
Participant 3 was a skilled microscopist who also identified the pancreas. She clearly dwelled numerous times on
islets of Langerhans, and discussed them at length, but
thought that they might be glomerular capsules of the kidney.
She identified pancreas after a lengthy analysis of the slide in
relation to known features of the pancreas and kidney. During the structured interview, she reversed her decision and
decided that the slide was from a kidney.
Participant 4 did not identify pancreas during the verbal
protocol. She identified it immediately in the structured interview after an islets of Langerhans was pointed out. Her
visual search data, however, indicated that islets of Langerhans were at or near the center of view on numerous occasions. At one point, the microscope stopped quite near to an
islets for 10 seconds. Given her behavior during the structured interview, it is straightforward to infer that Participant 4
did not notice the islets of Langerhans during the verbal protocol. This can be attributed in part to their unusual look. In
addition, however, she had earlier misidentified a different
structure (adipose cells were interpreted as central veins of
the liver) and was pursuing a hypothesis (liver) inconsistent
with the presence of islets of Langerhans. Pursuit of an incorrect hypothesis easily could have contributed to her not
noticing the islets. On the whole, the absence of significant
dwell time on islets of Langerhans for this participant would
support the idea that dwell time on diagnostic features is associated with successful performance for challenging slides.
Participant 1 noticed the islets of Langerhans, in association with a substantial dwell time, but explicitly rejected
them as being islets of Langerhans. She did not offer glomerular capsules, as Participant 3 did. Rather, she searched her
memory for “what has a nodule”, ultimately remembering
that the thymus gland does. In the end, she offered no identification at all, saying that she was stumped. In comparison to
the visual search of Participants 5 and 3, Participant 1 is remarkable for only dwelling on the islets of Langerhans once.
Participant 2 also did not identify pancreas. He scanned
across islets of Langerhans on numerous occasions without
remarking on them. Eventually he did pause for a long period of time on an islets of Langerhans, but misidentified it as
a nerve bundle cut in cross-section. Again, this performance
contrasts with the more successful students in the fact that he
dwelled on islets of Langerhans only once.

Summary
The global characteristics of visual search of microscope
slides were uniform across individuals and slides. Participants traversed the entire tissue, taking care to study borders
of the tissue and interior regions. The speed of travel over
the slide was remarkably smooth, with a tendency to begin
moving relatively rapidly and then to slow down. On occasion, participants repeated this cycle for the same slide, apparently finding a new area to explore.

For the slides that were less challenging for the group of
participants, identification of tissue was rapid, often requiring
less than 10 seconds. Identification in these cases clearly was
driven by perceptual recognition. The verbal protocols indicated that this recognition was nearly always based on noticing one or more diagnostic structures in the tissue.
For the challenging slides, even when recognition of diagnostic structures led to successful identification, identification often took an extended period of time. Viewing structures generally considered to be diagnostic of tissue was necessary but not sufficient for identification; viewing of those
structures was involved in a variety of patterns of search and
levels of success over varying periods of time. This variety
included multiple excursions back to the same structures, long
periods of exploration of regions of the tissue, misidentifications of the structures, failure to notice them, and forgetting
(sometimes with eventual recall) of tissue descriptions.
In general, patterns of visual search could not be used reliably to differentiate more from less skilled participants at the
level of the whole study or at the level of individual microscope slides. This appeared to be due to the importance of
such higher level processes as retrieval of anatomical knowledge, anatomical interpretation of structures, and reasoning
about the image that was extended in time.

Discussion
Identification of tissue in a microscope slide begins with visual perception and at least a partial recognition of structures in
the tissue. In some cases, immediate recognition is all that is
required (for discussion of diagnostic features in recognition,
see Oliva & Schyns, 1997; Schyns, Goldstone, & Thibault,
1998). When processes of recognition are not definitive in
reaching the goals of the viewer, processes of recall and hypothesis testing, including evaluation of any tentative recognitions, are joined with perception and recognition (e.g., Brooks,
Norman, & Allen, 1991). In such cases, there will not be a
tight spatiotemporal coupling between perception of structures
and identification of the tissue. This was evident in the present study.
These findings are consistent with a number of studies of
medical imaging in more diagnostic settings (e.g., Crowley et
al., 2003; Nodine & Kundel, 1987). Some authors, for example, have cautioned that improving the visual display of medical images will not always improve success rates in detection,
because the limiting factors for detection are sometimes cognitive rather than sensory (Manning et al., 2004; see also
Kundel & Wright, 1969; Kundel & Nodine, 1983).
A histologist looking through a microscope is subjectively immersed in a microworld, and interpretation of the
microscope slide nearly always feels like an instance of recognition. Subjectively, the slide seems like a sample, a point
of view, as it were, that is derived from the whole tissue.
Skilled histologists smoothly integrate anatomical knowledge
and hypothesis testing with perception and recognition, so that
successful identification of tissue often is a form of reasoningdriven recognition.

1924

Immediate recognition and reasoning-driven recognition
can be related systematically in terms of the mapping between information and target domains in a visual information
system. For successful identification, the microscopist must
believe that a one-to-one mapping can be maintained between structures in the slide and structures in the known target tissue. Any structure in the slide must have a counterpart
in the understanding of the whole tissue, and any structure
known to be in the whole tissue must either be seen in the
slide or be justifiably absent. Deviations from a one-to-one
mapping must be justifiable in terms of the uniqueness of the
particular organism or the process of sampling slides from
the whole tissue. For example, a microscopist might conclude that the slice through the tissue happened to miss a
particular structure, that a particular stain does not make certain types of cell visible, or that a certain separation in the
tissue is due to the mechanical process of preparing the slide.
When a one-to-one mapping from the slide to the anatomy of the tissue can be made confidently from perception
and recognition of the slide, there is little need for reasoning.
When the look of a structure is ambiguous, or not every
structure on the slide can be mapped to knowledge, or known
structures appear to be missing, reasoning becomes involved,
either to explain how the mapping actually is adequate or to
shift cognition toward establishing a new mapping.
Describing the use of a visual information system in
terms of mappings between target and information domains
suggests that it is similar in important ways to the generation
and understanding of analogy. Mapping between structures
is central to analogical processes also (e.g., Gentner, 1983).
We believe that approaching visual information systems with
questions borrowed from the study of analogy will prove to
be fruitful (also see Gattis, 2004).

Acknowledgment
The authors were supported by grant 1 R01 LM00832301A1, Histological Reasoning: Visual Cognition in Microanatomy, from the National Library of Medicine, National
Institutes of Health, during completion of this work and
preparation of this manuscript. The second author received
support from the Grawemeyer Awards during conduct of this
research.

References

Brooks, L. R., Norman, G. R., & Allen, S. W. (1991). Role of
specific similarity in a medical diagnostic task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 120, 278-287.
Chariker, J. H., Pani, J. R., & Fell, R. D. (2004). Visual cognition in microanatomy. Talk presented at the annual
meeting of the Psychonomics Society. Minneapolis, MN.
Abstract in Abstracts of the Psychonomic Society, 9, 8.
Austin, TX: Psychonomic Society Publications.
Crowley, R. S., Naus, G. J., Stewart, J., & Friedman, C. P.
(2003). Development of visual diagnostic expertise in pathology: An information processing study. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 10, 39-51.
Gattis, M. (2004). Mapping relational structure in spatial
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.

Gentner, D. (1983). Structure mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Hoffman, R. R. (1984). Methodological preliminaries to the
development of an expert system for aerial-photo interpretation. (Technical Report, ETL-0342). The Engineer Topographic Laboratories.
Hoffman, R. R., & Markman, A. B. (Eds.). (2001). Interpreting remote sensing imagery: Human factors. New York:
Lewis Publishers.
Kundel, H. L., & Wright, D. J. (1969). The influence of prior
knowledge on visual search strategies during the viewing of
chest radiographs. Radiology, 93, 315-320.
Kundel, H. L., Nodine, C. F., & Carmody, D. (1979). Visual
scanning, pattern recognition and decision-making in pulmonary nodule detection. Investigative Radiology, 13, 175181.
Kundel, H. L., & Nodine, C. F. (1983). A visual concept
shapes image perception. Radiology, 146, 363-368.
Kundel, H. L. (2000). Disease prevalence and the index of
detectability: a survey of studies of lung cancer detection by
chest radiography. In E. A. Krupinski (Ed.), Medical imaging 2000: Image perception and performance. Proceedings
of the International Society of Optical Engineering, 3981,
135-144.
Krupinski, E. A., Kundel, H. L., Judy, P. F., & Nodine, C. F.
(1998). Key issues for image perception research. Radiology, 209, 611-612.
Lesgold, A. M., Rubinson, H., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R.,
Klopfer, D., & Wang, Y. (1988). Expertise in a complex
skill: diagnosing x-ray pictures. In M. T. H. Chi, R. Glaser,
& M. J. Farr (Eds.), The nature of expertise. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Nodine, C. F., & Kundel, H. L. (1987). The cognitive side of
visual search in radiology. In J.K. O’Regan & A. LevySchoen (Eds.), Eye movements: From physiology to cognition (pp. 573-582). North Holland: Elsevier Science Publishers B. V.
Oliva, A. & Schyns, P.G. (1997). Coarse blobs or fine edges?
Evidence that information diagnosticity changes the
perception of complex visual stimuli. Cognitive Psychology,
34, 72-107.
Manning, D. J., Ethell, S. C., & Donovan, T. (2004). Detection or decision errors? Missed lung cancer from the posteroanterior chest radiograph. The British Journal of Radiology, 77, 231-235.
Pani, J. R., Chariker, J. H., & Fell, R. D. (2005). Visual cognition in microscopy. In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M.
Bucciarelli (Eds.), Cogsci 2005: Proceedings of the XXVII
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 27,
1702-1707. Cognitive Science Society.
Ross, M. H., Kaye, G. I., & Pawlina, W. (2003). Histology: A
text and atlas (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Schyns, P. G., Goldstone, R. L., & Thibault, J-P. (1998). The
development of object features in object concepts. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 1-54.
Wolfe, J. M., Horowitz, T. S., & Kenner, N. M. (2005). Rare
items often missed in visual searches. Nature, 435, 439-440.

1925

