UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What If Chinese Had Linguistic Markers for Counterfactual Conditionals? Language and
Thought Revisited

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1t11c8t1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Feng, Gary
Yi, Li

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What if Chinese had Linguistic Markers for Counterfactual Conditionals?
Language and Thought Revisited
Gary Feng (garyfeng@duke.edu)
Department of Psychology: Social and Health Sciences, Box 90085,
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA

Li Yi (ly3@duke.edu)
Department of Psychology: Social and Health Sciences, Box 90085,
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA

these linguistic markings of CF may in turn facilitate
counterfactual reasoning.

Abstract
This study critically examines the widely held belief that the
Chinese language provides no consistent linguistic forms for
expressing counterfactual ideas (Bloom, 1981). In Study 1,
native speakers of Chinese identified counterfactual sentences
from a large corpus of Chinese texts. A number of syntactic
and/or lexical forms are found to be highly predictive of
counterfactuality. Aspect modification and other markers
emerge as potentially universal linguistic mechanisms for
counterfactual marking. Study 2 demonstrated that these
linguistic
markers
significantly
influence
readers'
interpretation of whether a sentence is factual or
counterfactual, even after semantic and pragmatic information
was controlled. Study 3 showed that the counterfactual
markers influence on-line sentence comprehension in a selfpaced reading paradigm. Taken together, the data reject
Bloom’s conjuncture regarding Chinese counterfactuals and
reveal cross-linguistic similarities and differences in linguistic
representation of counterfactual thoughts.

Bloom (1981, 1984) took this idea a step further and
entertained the possibility of a language that:
… has no distinct lexical, grammatical, or intonational
device to signal entry into the counterfactual realm, to
indicate explicitly that the events referred to have
definitely not occurred and are being discussed for the
purpose only of exploring the might-have-been or the
might-be. [Bloom, 1981, p.16]
Bloom further reasoned that because speaker of that
language
“… have not been led by their language to construct
schemas specific to counterfactual speech and thought
… they would typically do so [counterfactual
reasoning] less directly, with a greater investment of
cognitive effort and hence less naturally than their
English-speaking counterparts. [p. 22]”

Introduction
Counterfactual (CF) thinking, as hard as it might sound, is a
ubiquitous and essential part of everyday life. For instance,
regrets – wishing something hadn’t had happened – are
demonstratively automatic, irrepressible responses to
unfavorable outcomes. Other examples include children’s
pretend play, understanding false beliefs, lying, and movie
watching. While in some of these cases CF thinking is
arguably non-linguistic, language may mediate CF thoughts
and is unmistakably involved whenever a CF idea is shared
among people.
Communicating a CF idea, however, can be tricky,
because it involves two pieces of information: (a) the
message that describes a state of affair and (b) the fact that it
is false. Language should do a good job for (a), but how to
convey the meta-message regarding the fictional nature of
the message can be an interesting engineering problem.
Sometimes the context tells it all, as when we watch an
impersonation of President Bush. However, it seems more
economical achieve both (a) and (b) with language,
particularly if speakers of the language routinely
communicate CF ideas. And once accepted and formalized,

Bloom identified Chinese as a living example of such a
language, and conducted experiments to show deficiencies
in counterfactual reasoning among Chinese speakers.
Bloom’s linguistic determinism was met with strong
criticisms from linguists and philosophers. Empirical
support for Bloom’s claim is weak at the best. With the
exception of Bloom’s original studies (1981; 1984), most
studies reported similar performances between Chinese- and
English-speakers in counterfactual reasoning tasks (Au,
1983; Liu, 1985; Hsu et al., 2004; Wu, 1994; Yeh &
Gentner, 2005). Despite all these criticisms, Bloom’s work
captured the imagination of the public and scholars alike, in
part because no one can explain how Chinese speakers
could reason counterfactually without a language that
supports it.
The present study considers a different hypothetical – that
the Chinese language has consistent linguistic markers for
counterfactuals that are comparable to those in English. If
true, it explains the equal performance of Chinese- and
English-speakers. It also shifts our attentions from simple
language differences to potentially universal principles in
linguistic expressions of thoughts.

1281

Marking counterfactuals
Can a language communicate counterfactual thoughts
without ANY consistent linguistic marking? In other words,
is it possible to encode and decode the meta-message (that
the message is CF) linguistically without agreeing on a
common code book? Here we define linguistic marking as
linguistic forms that are highly predictive of a CF
interpretation. Expressed in conditional probability, the
probability of a sentence being CF is much higher in the
presence of this marker then not. It should be noted that we
are not arguing for logically necessary or sufficient markers
of CF, nor do we think they exist. From the cognitive
processing perspective, the high conditional probability
serves as a signal for the listener to disregard the literal
interpretation of the sentence and to commit to a CF one.
The decision making, however, is based on an interaction
between the CF markers and other variables such as
semantics and contexts.
We argue that the answer to the above question is
generally No, with some potential exceptions. The reason
CF marking has to be explicit and consistent is that the
meta-message is in general not available in the message
itself and cannot be computed from the linguistic message.
Try stripping out the tense and aspect marking from the
following sentence:
If you had done your homework, you wouldn't have
failed the class.
The bare bones of the sentence, “if you do your homework,
you do not fail the class,” tell nothing about the missed
homework and its consequence. This is a crucial difference
between CFs and metaphors. Although both require nonliteral interpretations, metaphors can often be understood
via featural comparisons or other local computations, and
thus can function without explicit linguistic markings.
There are, however, apparent exceptions, as in “if he has
money, I am Bill Gates.” The absurdity, and thus the CF
interpretation, of the above sentence only arise from the
shared knowledge that the speaker is (probably) not Bill
Gates. Conceptually, marking the CF-ness with intentional
violations of semantic knowledge is an example of linguistic
marking.
In principle, any linguistic devices (e.g., intonation) can
potentially be exploited to mark CF, as long as the listener
and speaker agree on a common codec. The English
expression “if pigs fly” and the Chinese equivalent “unless
the sun comes from the west” strongly signal
counterfactuality because of violations of common
semantics. Violating discourse/pragmatic principles is
another way of marking, as in Bloom’s study, “Everyone
knows X is not Y. But let’s suppose X is Y, then …” There
are obvious limitations with semantic or discourse level
markings, and they are not discussed here in the interest of
space.

Two arguably more effective strategies are lexical and
syntactic marking. Compared to the neutral “if”, words such
as “suppose” or “pretend” are strong invitations for CF
thinking. English, as well as many other languages,
primarily use syntax to differentiate regular “Open”
conditionals and CF conditionals. In English, the
subjunctive mood of the main verb strongly suggests a CF
reading. Special structures such as “had A, then B” provide
unequivocal evidence for a CF interpretation. Lexical and
syntactic marking does not depend on shared semantic or
pragmatic knowledge and thus can be used with much
greater precision and to address a broader audience.
According to Bloom, lexical and syntactic marking is not
available in the Chinese language. Bloom (1981) suggested
that Chinese speakers could reason counterfactually, but
only by engaging in an odd style of argument (“Everyone
knows X is not Y. But let’s suppose X is Y, then …”) that is
unwieldy and imprecise.
The elusive Chinese CF markers
Bloom’s assertion was based more on intuitions than serious
linguistic research. In fact, despite the popularity of the
topic, we were only able to find a handful of linguistic
inquires on this topic (e.g., Chao, 1968; Jiang, 2000; Wu,
1999). Bloom’s conjecture may “feel right” to naïve
Chinese speakers because such discussions almost certainly
arise in the context of comparing Chinese and English.
Being an isolate language, Chinese has essentially no verb
inflections that correspond to the “subjunctive mood” in
English. Focusing exclusively on syntactic marking in
Chinese is a biased approach.
Yeh and Gentner (2005) distinguished semantically
“transparent” and “non-transparent” counterfactuals. The
former contains direct contradictions with the listener’s
world knowledge (e.g., “if pigs can fly…”), whereas the
truth value of the non-transparent ones is ambiguous from
the sentence itself. The authors imply that counterfactuals
can be reliably marked by exploiting common grounding,
and world knowledge.
There are also attempts to identify lexical markers of CF
in Chinese. Chao speculated that the many “if-words” in
Chinese may serve to signal different degrees of certainty,
and some could be used exclusively for counterfactual
propositions (Chao, 1968). It is interesting to note that
Bloom himself used word equivalents of “suppose” instead
of the plain “if”. Chao’s claim, however, appeared to be
based on intuitions in classic Chinese rather than modern,
vernacular Chinese. Recently, Jiang (2000) conducted an
insightful linguistic analysis of potential markers of
counterfactuality in Chinese, only to reject all of them on
the logical ground that each form could potentially be used
in non-counterfactual contexts. In doing so, however, Jiang
(2000) might have raised the bar too high. By the same
criterion, English would not have any consistent linguistic
markers for counterfactuals because the usual marking

1282

device, the subjunctive mood, is also used in other
situations, too (Lycan, 2001).
In an interesting study by Wu (1994), she asked native
Chinese speakers to identify counterfactual sentences from
newspapers and looked for recurring linguistic forms in the
sample. Although she was able to identify some interesting
patterns, these are not markers by our definition because
Wu’s approach yields the probability of using a linguistic
form if the sentence is counterfactual, whereas we argue the
conditional probability in the opposite direction should be
used.

markers, either from an open-access Chinese text database
(Peking University) or from the internet search engines.
Two other native Chinese speakers were asked to judge
whether each sentence was a counterfactual or an open
conditional one. Extensive training was provided prior to the
work so that the coders were confident and consistent in
making the categorization.

Findings and discussion
Inter-coder reliability
The inter-coder reliability was calculated for the two raters.
They agreed with each other 86% of the time. After
controlling the agreements that would occur by chance, they
agreed with each other 73% of the time (Krippendorff’s
alpha=0.73).

Linguistic marking and cognitive performance
To summarize, we hypothesize that linguistic marking of
CF has to be explicit and consistent in order to communicate
CF ideas reliably. This marking may happened at different
levels of linguistic analysis, including but not limited to
lexical, syntactic, semantic, and discourse/pragmatic levels.
In addition, we define linguistic markers with a statistical
analogy, i.e., linguistic forms that predict the CF
interpretation. These markers play an important role in CF
sentence processing, but only in conjunction with other
sources of information.
We report three studies to test these hypotheses. Study 1
aims to establish that there are consistent linguistic markers
for CF in Chinese. To this end, we searched through a large
corpus of Chinese sentences and asked native Chinese
speakers to classify them into Open conditional and CF
conditions. It is shown that there are distinct lexical and
syntactic forms in Chinese that strongly predict the
counterfactual interpretation of a sentence. Study 2 controls
semantic/discourse factors and demonstrates that these
markers are still informative. Together, Studies 1 and 2
strongly refute Bloom’s (1981) basic premise that Chinese
does not provide linguistic signals of counterfactuality.
Study 3 asks a different question – if linguistic markers
are strongly predictive of a counterfactual interpretation of
the sentence, do readers engage in a different process as
soon as they see the markers? A self-paced reading task was
used to investigate the time course of marker processing.

Study 1: Corpus Study
The purpose of this study is to identify linguistic markers of
Chinese counterfactuals. We define a marker as a consistent
linguistic form that strongly predicts a counterfactual
interpretation of the sentence.

Methods
The study was based on a list of potential counterfactual
markers in Chinese compiled from Wu (1994) and other
prior research. They fell in several categories, see Table 1.
Using those markers as keywords, a naïve Chinese native
speaker was asked to find 200 sentences containing those

Strength of the markers
The percentage of sentences judged as counterfactual (out of
200) was calculated for each marker. Table 1 shows the
average percentages of the two raters.
Table 1: Percentages of counterfactual responses for each
marker
category
Temporal
reference
Aspect marker
Negators:

Predicates

Others

marker

% CF

早(early)

83%

了 (perfect/perfective marker)
要不是 (had it not been the
case)
没 (did not)
要不然 (had it not been the
case)
就好了(would have been great
if only)
还以为… (had thought)
原来应该 (should have been)
…的话 (in the case)
真的 (really)

21%
91%
14%
43%
55%
91%
92%
9%
10%

Several observations are in order. (1) A number of lexical
and syntactic markers are strongly associated with the CF
reading of sentences (over 90%). We do not have the
baseline statistics of the overall percentage of CF sentences
in Chinese, making it hard to interpret the ones with lower
scores. (2) As the gloss English translations suggest, each of
the markers are used in different and limited contexts. We
did not find a structure as productive as the English
subjunctive mood. (3) Except for the first two rows, the rest
markers are words or lexicalized phrases. (4) The “temporal
reference” and “aspect marker” categories (Wu, 1994) are
the only syntactic markers we were able to identify. They
are productive and are often combined with other markers
and/or semantics to mark the CF-ness. For instance, 了 is
not a strong marker by itself, but it is often obligatory at
sentence end to change the aspect to perfective.

1283

Results

Study 2: Sentence Comprehension

English: Counterfactual rating

In real language use, semantic and linguistic cues work
together. Yeh and Gentner (2005) suggest that Chinese
readers have trouble with non-transparent counterfactuals
that do not violate semantic knowledge. Study 2 examines
whether those counterfactual markers identified in Study 1
are informative above and beyond contextual effects.

Figure 1 shows the percentage of English sentences judged
to be counterfactual for each condition. Having past tense
subjunctive is a strong signal that the sentence should be
read as a counterfactual. However, the data on present tense
subjunctive (such as “If Michael did not play Basketball, he
would play tennis”) is ambiguous. One possibility is that the
syntactic form for present tense subjunctive is similar to that
of the simple past tense and readers might have confused the
two. Alternatively, like Chinese speakers, English readers
may need both the semantic cue and the subjunctive mood
cue to trigger a counterfactual reading.

Methods
Participants
The English portion of the study was conducted in the
United States. Thirty native-speaking undergraduate
students at Duke University participated in the English part
of the study, where they received course credit for
participating. The Chinese data were collected in Beijing,
China. Thirty paid undergraduate students at Peking
University participated.

% of CF responses

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
OP_present

CF_present

OP_past

CF_past

Figure 1: Percentage of judging English sentences as
counterfactual in each condition in Study 2

Similarly, unpredictive sentence frames were created in
Chinese and potential markers are inserted in the
appropriate places in the sentence. There were 6 conditions
for Chinese material: open conditional, open conditional
with marker (“吧/ba”) at the end, counterfactual with aspect
marker (“了/le”), counterfactual with temporal reference,
counterfactual with negator 1 (“要不是/yao4 bu4 shi4”),
and counterfactual with negator 2 (“没/mei2”). Sentences
were the same across conditions except for the markers.
Procedure
Participants were asked to read a sentence, and then judge
whether a statement was true or false based on their
understanding of the sentence they read before. They
identified the likelihood of the statements being true on a
scale of 0-100%..

Chinese: Counterfactual rating
Figure 2 shows the percentages of counterfactual responses
for each condition. The data are based on identical sentence
frames that only differ by the markers. Even after semantic
information was controlled, lexical (negator NG1) and
syntactic (Aspect Marker (AM) and Temporal Reference
(TR)) markers significantly increased readers’ chance to
read them as counterfactuals.

There was an additional task in the Chinese test. In this
forced choice task, participants were asked to read a dialog
with a blank in it, and then to choose one sentence from a
pair of sentences to fill in the blank. There were 2 kinds of
settings of the dialog: open setting where the correct answer
is an open conditional, and counterfactual setting where the
correct answer is a counterfactual sentence. The pair of
sentences always consisted of an open conditional and a
counterfactual conditional.

1284

100
80
60
%

Materials
48 sentence frames were made so that the antecedents and
the consequents had no logical connection. In other words,
knowing the antecedent tells nothing about the consequent..
There were 4 conditions for English material: open
conditional in present tense, counterfactual in present tense,
open conditional in past tense, and counterfactual in past
tense. Sentences are the same across conditions except for
the tense and CF markers.

80%

40
20
0
OP1

OP2

AM

TR

NG1

NG2

Figure 2: Percentage of judging Chinese sentences as
counterfactual in each condition in Study 2

Chinese: Forced-choice
As a measure of the strength of the marker, the Phi
coefficients were calculated for the data from this task. Phi
is derived from Chi-square and is a measure of the
associations between settings and sentence types. Table 2
shows phi values of each pair of comparison. Consistent
with other tasks, having a lexical marker (the negators) or a
syntactic marker (Aspect marker (AM) or Temporal
reference (TR)) in the sentence increase the readers’ CF
interpretation of the sentence.

Results

Mean word RT (ms)

English: Mean word reading time
Figure 3 shows the mean reading time of each word in
English sentences in each condition. ANOVA showed that
English speakers’ mean word reading time was significantly
longer for sentences in counterfactual condition in past tense
than in open condition in present tense ( F(3) =6.10, p<
0.05). 500

Table 2: Phi values of each pair of comparisons
comparisons
phi values
OP2-AM
0.89**
OP1-TR
0.74**
OP1-NG1
0.53**
OP1-NG2
0.31*
Note: *p< .001, *p< .0001.

400
300
200
100
0
OP_Present

CF_present

OP_past

CF_past

Figure 3. Mean reading time of each word in English
sentences by condition

Study 3 investigates the time course of the effect of
counterfactual markers on on-line sentence comprehension.
It is predicted that there is an increased cognitive load in
doing counterfactual readings reasoning, and it will take
more time.
The processing load increase may begin as soon as the
reader identifies the marker for counterfactual conditionals.
The immediacy of the effect of the marker should be a
function of the predictive strength of each marker,
particularly in the Chinese study. On the other hand, a
reader may wait until the end of the sentence to integrate
information.
A caveat with the self-paced reading paradigm is that it
may not be sensitive enough to identify a strategy change in
reading, and participants’ normal reading processes may be
altered by the one-word-at-a-time reading method.

English: Reading time by region
English sentences were divided into several regions, and the
reading time per word was averaged by region for each
condition. Figure 4 shows the mean reading time by region
in English sentences in each condition. ANOVA did not
show any significant differences.
OP_present

1200

CF_present

1000

OP_past
CF_past

800
rt (ms)

Study 3: Self-paced Reading

600
400
200
0
IF

subject1

verb1

object1

THEN

subject2

verb2

object2

PERIOD

Methods

Figure 4. Mean reading time by region for English sentences
in each condition

Participants
Thirty undergraduate students at Duke University
participated in the English part of the study. The Chinese
study was conducted in Beijing, China. Thirty
undergraduate students at Peking University participated in
the Chinese part of the study. They received payment for
participating.

Chinese: Mean word reading time
Figure 5 shows the mean reading time of each word in
Chinese sentences in each condition. ANOVA F1 analysis
showed there is no difference with mean word reading time
across conditions in Chinese.
reading time (ms)

300

Materials & procedure
The same English and Chinese material in Study 2 was used
in Study 3. Using a self-paced reading paradigm, Chinese
and English speakers were asked to read sentences word-byword on a computer screen. Reading time of each word was
recorded. Participants were asked to read a sentence with
self-paced reading paradigm, and then judge whether a
following statement was true or false according to the
meaning of that sentence.

250
200
150
100
50
0
OP1

TR

NG1

NG2

Figure 5: Mean reading time of each word in Chinese
sentences by condition

1285

Chinese: Reading time by region
Chinese sentences were divided into several regions, and the
reading time was averaged by region for each condition.
Figure 6 shows the mean reading time by region in Chinese
sentences in each condition. ANOVA F1 showed that the
time spent at the end of the sentence was significantly
longer for sentences in the counterfactual condition with
temporal reference than in the open condition (F(1,
29)=10.05 p<0.005).
640

OP1
TR
NG1
NG2

590

rt (ms)

540
490
440

linguistic, is needed to identify linguistic and cognitive
universals.
Last but not least, it is clear that counterfactual markers
affect how people understand counterfactual conditionals.
When there is no other useful information, readers of
Chinese can rely solely on the linguistic markers to solve
the problem. Message from the self-paced reading stud is
less clear-cut, but overall reading time was longer, and for
the Chinese a significant sentence-end wrap up effect is
observed. We are now in the process of conducting eye
movement experiments, where reader can move their eyes at
will and re-read sentences if necessary. The eye movement
technology is expect to yield rich information about the time
course of counterfactual processing, particularly the
immediacy of the marker effect.

390

Acknowledgments

340

This study was partially supported by a summer research
grant from the Asian/Pacific Studies Institute (APSI) at
Duke University. The authors also wish to acknowledge Dr.
Xiaolin Zhou and Dr. Xiangzhi Meng for assistance with
conducting the experiments in China.

290
240
190
subject

m123

verb1

m45

verb2

period

References
Figure 6. Mean reading time by region for Chinese
sentences in each condition

General Discussion

Au, T. K (1983) Chinese and English counterfactuals: The
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis revisited. Cognition, 15, 155-187.
Au, T. K. (1984) Counterfactuals: In reply to Alfred
Bloom,Cognition, 17, 289-302.
Bloom, A. H. (1981) The Linguistic Shaping of Thought: A
Study in the Impact of Language on Thinking in China
and the West. Hillsdale. Erlbaum Associates.
Chao, Yuen Ren. (1968). A Grammar of Spoken Chinese.
Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Jiang, Y. (2000). Counterfactual interpretations of Chinese
conditionals. [Studies and Explorations on Syntax
(Chinese)], 10, 257-279.
Liu, L. G (1985). Reasoning counterfactually in Chinese:
Are there any obstacles? Cognition, 21, 239-270.
Yeh, D. & Gentner, D. (2005). Reasoning counterfactually
in Chinese: Picking up the pieces. Proceedings of the
Twenty-seventh Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society, pp. 2410-2415.
Wu (1994) If Triangle Were Circles,…” – A Study of
Counterfactuals in Chinese and English. The Crane
Publishing Co., Ltd, TW.

Several key findings emerge form the three studies reported
here. First, it is possible to identify linguistic forms (lexical
or syntactic) that reliably predict a counterfactual reading of
a Chinese sentence. These forms are shown to be
informative in naturally occurring sentences in which they
work with contextual cues to highlight counterfactuality.
They also independently signal a counterfactual reading
when contextual information is controlled. Contrary to
Bloom’s (1981) assertion, the Chinese language provides
both lexical and syntactical devices to mark counterfactuals.
This nicely explains the puzzling finding in the past two
decades that Chinese speakers’ counterfactual reasoning
ability is on par with that of English speakers. No
substantial differences should be expected if both languages
mark counterfactuality in the language itself. For Bloom
(1981), our finding suggests that the logic of the study was
false, and the cross-language differences he reported were
most likely due to translation and other technical problems,
as pointed out by Au (1983). The criticism applies equally
to any study that accepted the false premise by Bloom.
Secondly, the study began to uncover some potential
language-universals. For example, few people would have
guessed before this study that Chinese uses the temporal
(tense) and aspect markers to signify a counterfactual
interpretation. The analogy with the English subjunctive
mood – which modifies the tense and aspect of the main
verbs – is obvious. More research, particularly cross-

1286

