UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Changes When a Large Team Becomes More Expert? Analyses of Speedup in the Mars
Exploration Rovers Science Planning Process

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5rn329g2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Tollinger, Irene V.
Schunn, Christian D.
Vera, Alonso H.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Changes When a Large Team Becomes More Expert?
Analyses of Speedup in the Mars Exploration Rovers Science Planning Process
Irene V. Tollinger
(irene.tollinger@nasa.gov)

Christian D. Schunn
(schunn@pitt.edu)

Alonso H. Vera
(alonso.vera@nasa.gov)

NASA Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA

LRDC, University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA

Carnegie Mellon & NASA Ames
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA

Abstract

successfully completing the 90 sols (Martian days) of
operations. Both rovers have continued to perform well and
are in an extended phase of operations as of the writing of
this paper (January 2006). The rovers, referred to as MER A
and MER B, can perform several hours of activity per sol
(e.g. taking photographs or driving) contingent on the
availability of limited resources such as battery power.
The MER Science Team, known as the Science
Operations Work Group (SOWG) will be the focus of
analysis in this paper. They provided science staffing for
both rovers. For each daily science shift, the team was
organized into five groups by discipline: Geology,
Mineralogy, Rock & Soil, Atmospheres, and Long Term
Planning (LTP). Groups were characterized by semi-fluid
membership. A scientist generally worked in a particular
group but could move back and forth (e.g. working a 3 to 4
day stint in Geology, taking a few days leave, spending a
stint in LTP, and returning to Geology). Groups usually
consisted of between two and eight scientists on a given
day. The entire team was led by the SOWG Chair who
worked to guide the team to ask the right questions, explore
better alternatives, and build consensus. The SOWG Chair
also had final decision authority. Team structure and
facilities were identical for both rover teams.
Each day the science team, collocated in the Science
Assessment Room at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was
tasked with generating a set of science activities that would
be processed by the engineering team and sent to the rover
to be executed the following day. This involved:
understanding the hard constraints for the day (e.g. power
levels, data volume available for transfer), forming a sense
of the type of day it would be (primarily devoted to taking a
large panorama versus deploying an array of sensing
instruments on a particular rock surface versus driving),
assessing which activities the rover successfully completed
the previous day, developing each science activity request
(e.g., take a 30 second image of the sky at x, y, z location),
and negotiating the priority of these requests among the
whole team. The process was reliant on specific hardware
and software tools; some of the tools were developed to
support collaboration, but most were not and yet all were
used collaboratively on occasion.
Because the rovers are solar powered, mission planners
decided to run nominal operations on Mars time so that they
could consistently send the rover a new plan each Martian
morning. This meant that the scientists and engineers

We present data from the Mars Exploration Rovers (MER)
’03 mission to unpack the factors that produce a speed-up of
group performance in science planning. Data was collected
from a wide variety of sources via systematic sampling
(including video, ethnographic, and in situ “tick” coding) as
well as complete coverage (including daily presentations,
reports, and rover plan files) The work examines a broad set
of hypotheses which range from selection of easier plans to
increased reuse. Though all the hypotheses were plausible,
five of the ten were found to have support including more
work done individually and decreased engineering
uncertainty. The goal is to better understand the factors that
affect group performance and to make predictions in applied
contexts.

Introduction
With increasing levels of practice, time on task drops and
gradually approaches an asymptote. This speed up is a
hallmark of expertise (Anderson, 1982; Anderson, 1993;
Logan, 1988; Newell & Rosenbloom, 1981; Newell &
Simon, 1972). Expertise has been studied in depth at the
individual level (Ericsson & Smith, 1991; Chi, Glaser, &
Farr, 1988). At the group level, expertise has also been
studied (Hutchins, 1995) but is often measured by proxies
such as productivity (Argote, 1999). We are interested in
understanding the particular factors that affect a speed up of
group performance. To this end, we present data from the
Mars Exploration Rovers (MER) ’03 mission. The analyses
to be presented will enhance understanding of the relevant
factors and improve predictions of group performance.
The paper has the following structure. The introduction
covers the mission domain and the speed up phenomenon
itself. The methods section covers data collection techniques
and is followed by the results section which covers each
hypothesis tested and associated findings in detail. The
discussion section provides a synthesis and considers the
implications of the findings for design of collaborative
tools.

Mission Domain
The purpose of the MER mission is to further Mars
exploration through the deployment of twin robotic rovers
outfitted with a payload of scientific instruments. Launched
in June of 2003, the rovers landed in January 2004 and
nominal surface operations proceeded through April 2004
840

synchronized their activities to the local time on Mars for
their rover (called Local Solar Time or LST). Mission
planners originally allotted 8.5 hours to science planning for
each sol. The science schedule included the following
elements (times reflect the original schedule):

beginning of the mission, was incredibly compressible after
90 days of practice (MER A r = .8, MER B r= .97).
The speed up phenomenon was also evaluated in regards
to the length of the daily science meetings. Meeting length
was coded from video data for both the Science Context
meeting and Science Downlink Assessment meeting. The
Science Downlink Assessment meeting shows a decrease
(MER A r= -.56, MER B r= -.48) while the Science Context
meeting (which sets the science agenda for the day at the
most general levels of planning) shows little change (MER
A r= -.24, MER B r= -.36). Perhaps planning is more
compressible than science or perhaps the more detailed
group planning is more compressible than very general
planning. Overall, though there was some compression of
meetings, it seems that much of the speed up was due to
cuts in the 5.5 hours of work time allotted between
meetings.

Science Context meeting: 11:00-11:30 LST
•
Determine which activities were or were not
executed the previous sol
•
Discuss/decide the type of sol to plan for tomorrow
(drive, panorama, etc.)
Science Downlink Assessment meeting: 16:00-17:00 LST
•
Discuss instrument and rover health
•
Assign activities to particular science theme groups
to plan
SOWG meeting: 18:00-20:00 LST
•
Refine and prioritize the requested activities in light
of resource limitations

Between the Science Context meeting and the Science
Downlink Assessment meeting (4.5 hours), the team was
provided time to look at new data products as they came in,
discuss the options for the following sol, and develop
activity requests using the Science Activity Planner
application. The hour between the Science Downlink
Assessment meeting and the SOWG meeting was provided
primarily to develop/complete activity requests.
The ~15.5 remaining hours, post science planning, were
allotted to engineering work necessary to schedule the
science requests according to resource constraints, convert
the requests into sequences the rover could execute, and
perform verification and validation. The schedule was
identical for both rovers though shifted by 12 hours as their
landing sites were on opposite sides of the planet. The
overall planning cycle was considered tight. Analogous
missions had used operations concepts with a 2-3 day
planning cycle to generate a single day’s worth of rover
commands but such a structure would have cut down
drastically on the amount of science gathered.

Figure 1. Length of science day as a function of time on
MER A and B.
It is valuable to explore and understand the factors that
contributed to this change in order to both better predict
performance of future missions and assess the nature of the
speed up (e.g. less science being done versus the same
amount of science being done faster) to potentially foster
and better support this type of speed up.

Phenomenon
Unexpectedly, a “speed up” phenomenon emerged. By
mission day 85, the science planning process on both
missions had been cut from 8.5 hours to approximately 2.5
(MER A) and 2 hours (MER B). The graph in Figure 1
represents the change in the length of the science shift (from
the beginning of the Science Context meeting to the end of
the SOWG meeting) over time. The decisions to shorten the
science shift, seen as discrete steps on the graph, represent
decisions made by relatively high-level mission people as
temporary changes to the schedule that were then made
permanent. The data comes from official daily mission
schedules.
After the end of the nominal mission (post sol 90), the
mission entered an “extended” operations phase with the
allotted time set to 2 hours for science planning for both
missions. The extreme brevity of the schedule in this phase
suggests that the science schedule, decided before the

Methods
Data collection covers the first 90 sols of the nominal
mission for each rover, via a number of data sources. For the
observational data, we used a counter-balanced sampling
design. Researchers collectively made 20 trips. Each
researcher made one early and one late trip on each of the
two rovers. A trip consisted of 3 days (~8 hours per day).
The total was ~100 hours of observation per person.
Observational data collected include: (1) video data of
science theme group areas, (2) audio data collected at
workstations, (3) in-situ tick sheet coding (# people doing
specific task/ tool) described below, and (4) ethnographic
data. In addition to the data collected in person, the authors
have mined a variety of digital data sources including:
mission staffing schedules (excel, database), documentarian
notes (MSWord), activity plan files (Rover Markup
Language), meeting presentation files (PPT), online reports
841

by engineering/science role (HTML document). Together,
these data are used to test the hypotheses presented below.
The in situ tick sheet coding was intended to
quantitatively measure what the scientists were doing in the
science theme groups during the work periods between the
daily meetings. Each minute, for fifteen minutes, a
researcher would code the number of people/tasks on paper
“tick” sheets. For example, two people are independently
using Word on a laptop and two people are jointly using the
Science Activity Planner within a science theme group.
During the 5.5 hours of work time between meetings
(given the original 8.5 hour day), a researcher would code
30 minutes per science theme group in a systematic
sampling sequence (2.5 hours of coding). As the number of
hours per day was cut down, the sampling had to be
reduced. In the end, the work yielded an N of 4053 minutes
(67.6 hours) in which a researcher observed activity and an
N of 8340 ticks.
The tick sheet coding process was pilot-tested during a
10-day operational readiness test (Field Integrated
Development and Operations) the year before the mission
began. The contents of the tick sheets were validated from
videotape and a high level of coding reliability was found.
Our statistical analysis approach is as follows. For data
collected for all 90 sols, we compute a mean measure per
sol and then look for linear correlations between sol and that
measure. For data collected less often, we created blocks of
time (e.g., early, middle, late) and then calculated the mean
measure for each block of time. All statistical results
reported as significant conform to the p <.05 level.

necessary group remains as the hours accumulate. If there
were fewer people participating in science planning, this
would change the planning task itself and could cause a
decrease in planning time simply due to fewer options being
proposed each day. While the lead science roles were
officially staffed by the mission (SOWG chair, LTP lead,
and LTP documentarian), the majority of science theme
group members followed a less formal schedule. Science
team members are generally busy researchers with external
academic affiliations who traveled to the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory in southern CA from their home institutions in
the US and abroad. In situ tick sheet data were queried for
the average number of people in the theme groups per sol
across both missions. Variability in the data due to people
temporarily flowing across groups should not pose analysis
problems given that it should be similar for all groups and
there is a large N (4053 minutes coded).
The results show that overall the number of scientists did
not decrease significantly over time (MERA r= .34, MER B
r= .12). Based on this data it appears unlikely that the
planning task was changing due to a decrease in staffing
levels.
Hypothesis 2: Amount of science planned decreased
It is possible that the science team planned fewer science
activities on average per sol in response to the decreases in
the amount of time allotted. The ‘speed up’ would then be
somewhat spurious, representing a scenario in which
planning speed is consistent but less science is
accomplished. The MER mission organized planning
requests into a two-tier hierarchy. Activities are the lower
level construct. They represent the instrument to be used
and all the necessary parameters (e.g., use the Panoramic
camera to take an image at X, Y, Z location with the red
filter). Individual activities were also grouped into
observations, a higher-level scientific construct, based on a
shared scientific goal (e.g. all the images of the really
interesting rock we called Adirondack).
The results showed that the number of observations
increased significantly for MER A but not for MER B
(MER A r= .29, MER B r= .18). The number of activities
follows the same pattern with a significant rise for MER A
but not for MER B (MER A r= .36, MER B r= .14) Based
on this data, it is unlikely that the cause of the decrease in
science planning time was associated with a decrease in the
amount of science planned. Given that the amount of
science increased, the speed up phenomena is actually
greater than the simple compression of the daily schedule.

Results
We present a wide-ranging analysis, in terms of both data
sources and hypotheses. The goal is as much to rule out
potential contributing causes as to identify the root causes of
the speed up phenomenon. The hypotheses described below
were developed based on the deep ethnographic knowledge
of the context gathered in the course of the series of
operational readiness tests leading up to the mission and the
mission data collection itself. The set of hypotheses
evaluated are presented in four groups. The first two groups
encompass hypotheses for which we did not find support,
where the observed factors stayed consistent over the
duration of the missions (or went in the opposite direction).
Each of these are further divided into those that are
essentially confounds (they explain the speedup by
assuming the task itself was changed to a simpler task, and
no real speedup occurred) and those that were considered
core potential explanations of a real speedup in planning.
The second two groups cover hypotheses for which we did
find support and are also split into confounds and core
explanations.

Potential Core Explanations Ruled Out
Hypothesis 3: Easier plans were selected
A number of problem solving theories have posited that
people are rational decision-makers, preferring efficient
choices over inefficient choices, where efficiency includes
the time spent planning and thinking and the probability of
success (e.g., Anderson, 1990; Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999;
Oaksford & Chater, 1998; Siegler, 1996). In a complex
domain like MER, it will take time for the problem solvers
to determine which kinds of activities involved significantly

Potential Confounds Ruled Out
Hypothesis 1: The number of people decreased
Important but rare and risky events tend to have many extra
people around in the beginning, and then only the core,

842

more planning time. Over time, it is possible that task
speedup occurs as the problem solvers begin favoring
activities that involve significantly less planning time.
In advance of the mission, the science team developed a
formal set of designations for the type of plan the rover
would execute at a high level. There are five such “sol
types” (in rough order from easiest to most difficult):
Panorama, Spectroscopy, Scratch and Sniff, Drive, and
Trench. Sol type was tracked in an official decision tree
document. While there is some variability within each sol
type (e.g. some drives are longer and more complex than
others), this is a reasonable approximation of complexity at
the level of the individual plan/sol.
For this analysis, the 90-sol mission is split into blocks of
10 sols each. There was little correlation between any of the
sol types and time represented as blocks—the largest
significant correlation was r= .25 for Scratch and Sniff on
MER A. As Scratch and Sniff is a relatively difficult sol
type, a growth rather than decrease in its frequency argues
strongly against this hypothesis. In fact, there is consistent
variability in sol type choice over the course of the mission.
Based on this analysis, it is unlikely that changes in sol
difficulty influenced the efficiency of the science planning
process.
Hypothesis 4: Longer term planning
In general, planning is done to improve problem solving
accuracy and efficiency (Hayes-Roth, 1979). In a similar
way, longer term planning can simplify more immediate
planning. More specifically in the MER context, longerterm plans could lead to reduced time spent in the
discussion of trade offs. For example, scientists consider the
possibility of not taking a certain reading tomorrow and
deciding to drive the following day. In such a scenario,
they’d miss a certain type of data useful in comparing
similar rocks. The knowledge of the most likely plan and its
alternatives well into the future could support more efficient
planning (e.g. the alternatives for the following day actually
were panorama or trenching so rover will be at the same
location to take the desired image).
The MER mission kept an official branching decision tree
document called a “sol tree”. It was based on the high-level
goal for each sol. The measure used is the number of days
projected ahead in the daily sol tree document. The results
show a significant increase. On MER A, the growth was
after sol 60 (r= .44). On MER B, growth was more cyclical
(r= .27). Because the pattern of growth was inconsistent or
primarily at the end of the mission, it is unlikely that this
factor played a strong role in the speedup.
Hypothesis 5: Reuse of old plans increased
A potential method for decreasing the amount of time spent
on science planning is to reuse plans from past sols. In many
domains, such as software development, people often find a
similar piece of work they’ve done, perform a “save as”
operation, and modify the original work as appropriate to
save time. In the MER context, this would involve the use
plans from previous sols. Indeed, reuse of old plans is

perhaps the most basic model of expertise: people retrieving
prior solutions (Logan, 1988; Siegler & Shipley, 1995).
The MER mission kept all plans in a large server-based
file system such that all previous plans were accessible to
members of the science team. However, the act of opening
an older plan and copy/pasting in a piece of that plan
(observation or activity) or copying/pasting within the same
plan was not logged. Therefore, the authors used an indirect
measure. Associated with each observation was a set of
free-text “intent” fields. These four fields, Notes, Purpose,
Method, and Scientific Hypothesis, were there for scientists
to fill out with a few words to a paragraph of explanation so
that their intent would be available for members of the
engineering team to reference. After the science shift is
over, engineers may have to make modifications based on
resource limitations. Thus, it is in the scientists’ interest to
convey what they are attempting to accomplish so that the
data gathered is not compromised by uninformed
modifications. The measure chosen is the provenance of
intent fields. Provenance is categorized as: reuse (copied
from an old plan), new (never seen in any previous plan,
empty (no content), or duplicate (copied from within the
plan of the current sol).
Here the results were somewhat mixed. On MER A, reuse
increases significantly (r= .25). The different fields show
different trends (Notes r= .09, Purpose r= .39, Method r=
.09, Scientific Hypothesis r= -.3). On MER B, reuse seems
to actually go down (Notes r= -.2, Purpose r= -.2, Method r=
-.1, Scientific Hypothesis r=-.2). Though there is variability
in the data between missions, the intent field data does not
provide consistent evidence that the gains in science
planning efficiency are due to reuse of plans from previous
sols.

Potential Confounds With Support
Hypothesis 6: The amount of documentation decreased
The MER mission process as designed, required the science
and engineering teams to document their work products,
rationales for requests, etc. As the science team became
more comfortable with their work, it is likely that the
amount of documentation decreased. This is almost a
“human nature” argument in that processes are followed as
designed for a period but after a certain point people start to
cut down on work that is not strictly critical path such as
documentation. The measure here comes from analysis of
intent field sources. The four intent fields, Notes, Method,
Purpose, and Scientific Hypotheses exist to capture the
science rationale and for members of the engineering team
to reference later in the planning process.
The results show that the incidence of empty fields
increases significantly for both missions (MER A r= .3,
MER B r= .34). The results show a more consistent increase
for MER B (Notes r= .46, Method r= .56, Scientific
Hypothesis r= .32) than for MER A (Notes r= .03, Method
r= .04, Scientific Hypothesis r= .31) where there is some
variability among the fields. Based on this evidence, the
amount of documentation does decrease over time though
the decrease is not equally consistent for both missions.
843

Hypothesis 7: Available resources (power) decrease
A systematic decrease in resources can affect the planning
process because fewer activities could be planned each sol,
which would take less time. Each sol the mission tracked the
projected power cost of the plan developed, the power
remaining from the previous day, and the projected power
accumulation from the solar panels.
The results show a strong correlation. Over time, the
amount of available power decreased for both missions by
approximately 35% in a fairly regular and gradual fashion
(MER A = .99, MER B = .91). Available power decreased
over the course of the mission as the seasons changed and it
became winter on Mars (shorter days, lower temperatures,
etc.). By itself this factor is somewhat inconclusive. Though
there was less power over time and this may have
contributed to the speed up in planning, the number of
activities planned did not decrease over time. One possible
interpretation could be that the number of activities did not
change but with less power each activity became simpler
(e.g. fewer filters to specify per image). It is important to
note, however, that while power was an important
constraint, it was only one of many constraints, and many
sols involved plans that did not fully use the available
power. For example, the correlation between sol and power
consumed was lower (MER A r=.36, MER B r=.56).

Figure 2. Percentage of work done collaboratively on
workstations across early, middle and late time periods.
Hypothesis 9: Less engineering uncertainty
A potential factor in the efficiency of planning is the science
team’s knowledge of the rover capabilities and resources. In
the context of MER, uncertainty is high early on in the
mission. Rover design is based on best approximations for
variables like landing site terrain, quantity of airborne dust
as it influences available solar power, temperature, etc. As
these initial values and their daily variance become better
understood, the science team and their engineering team
representatives would spend less time debating the safety
and likelihood of success for particular activity requests.
Indicators of engineering uncertainty were coded for in
the transcripts of video data collected during work periods
between formal meetings. These variables were coded blind
to sol and by research assistants unaware of the hypotheses
under evaluation. All data was double-coded and inter-rater
reliability was over 90%. We define uncertainty as not being
known, fixed, or completely certain. First, utterances were
classified as being “related to data analysis” versus “related
to planning” or off-task. Second, all the on-task utterances
were coded for psychological uncertainty (filtering out
common types of verbal filler phrases such as “uh/um”, “I
mean”, “you know”). Possible subtypes of uncertainty
included qualifying, hedging, or estimating statements.

Potential Core Explanations With Support
Hypothesis 8: More planning work was done
individually or in small groups
If more planning work was done individually, the speed up
of group performance is then simply a story of improved
individual performance. Alternatively, the groups could
have discovered that it was more efficient to work
collaboratively in smaller sub-groups over time, and smaller
subgroups may function more efficiently.
The in situ tick sheet coding provided data on the number
of people doing a task and the tool they were using as
described in the methods section. That data was split into
early, middle, and late periods of the mission.
The overall results do not show an appreciable increase in
individual work. Further analysis was performed on
collaboration around the primary technologies including
personal laptops, workstations, and a category we termed
“no technology” (printed images, notebooks, talking etc.).
The workstations housed the primary science data analysis
and planning software (Science Activity Planner). The data
shows that collaboration on workstations decreased over
time (see Figure 2).
The results also show that group size remained relatively
stable between the early and late periods of the mission. Of
all collaboration observed, over 75% was small group
collaboration (groups of 2 and 3) so there was little room for
subgroups to form. Groups of 4 and 5 account for about
20% of the overall collaboration observed and groups of 6
or more account for 5% or less. This same pattern held for
workstation use as well. Thus, the change is in the
frequency of collaboration not the form of collaboration.

Figure 3. Proportion of uncertainty speech during
planning and data analysis activities, early and late.
The data is split into early and late time periods. The
results, shown in Figure 3, reveal that for planning related
844

speech, uncertainty shows a consistent drop on both
missions. For science data analysis related speech,
uncertainty seems to be less consistent and the slight change
is negative for one mission and positive for the other. Given
that the end product of the science process is a plan for the
following sol, it seems that the data support the effect of
decreased engineering uncertainty on planning.
Hypothesis 10: Familiar roles
Practice within a given role should improve individual
performance over time. The mission decided ahead of time
that leadership positions would be staffed by a small set of
people. Individual scientists within science theme groups
did not have role-distinguished positions. The measure of
role familiarity for each sol is the number of previous sols
of experience accumulated by the person filling a given role.
Data was taken from official staffing schedules, from roles
listed in documentarian notes, and from personnel listed on
daily science meeting presentations. The analysis is
performed on the role of SOWG chair, the leader and final
decision-maker for the science team.
The results show a correlation between role familiarity
and time for both missions (MER A r= .78, MER B r=.67).
The familiar roles hypothesis seems to be supported. This
suggests two alternative interpretations. It is possible that
improving group efficiency over time is a consequence of
gradually improving leadership. Alternatively, it is possible
that, like leaders, each individual gradually improves in
his/her position, leading to overall better group
performance. Both of these effects may play a role.

The above analyses also highlight the value of applying
combined ethnographic and quantitative methods. Without
the ethnographic observation, it would have been difficult to
generate hypotheses as to the factors that affect the science
planning process. The value of the quantitative data was in
the surprising results that emerged. It is interesting that the
factors that proved relevant (less documentation, fewer
(power) resources, more work done individually, less
uncertainty, and familiar roles) are not the more individualexpertise factors that adaptive software usually supports,
such as moving common actions to the top of menus. The
application of adaptive interface technology to address
changes in individual expertise would not work here—
people didn’t just settle on certain actions, or begin to reuse
old plans with high frequency via copy/paste actions. We
have a challenge to propose what new paradigms of
adaptive software would support changing familiarity with
leadership roles and changes in uncertainty levels.
Acknowledgments
NASA’s Science Mission Directorate (SMD) supported this work.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1982). The acquisition of cognitive skill.
Psychological Review, 89, 369-403.
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The Adaptive Character of Thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Problem solving and learning. American
Psychologist, 48, 35-44.
Argote, L. (1999). Organizational Learning: creating, retaining,
and transferring knowledge. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Chi M, Glaser R, & Farr M, (eds.) (1988). The Nature of Expertise.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ericsson A, & Smith J. eds. (1991). Towards a General Theory of
Expertise: Prospects and Limits. Cambridge, U.K: Cambridge
University Press.
Gigerenzer, G. & Todd, P. M. (1999). Fast and frugal heuristics:
The adaptive toolbox. In Gigerenzer & Todd/ABC Group (Eds.),
Simple Heuristics that Make Us Smart (pp. 3–34).
Hayes-Roth, B. & Hayes-Roth, F. (1979). A cognitive model of
planning. Cognitive Science, 3, 275-310.
Hutchins E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of automatization,
Psychological Review, 95(4), 492-527.
Newell, A. & Rosenbloom, P. (1981). Mechanisms of skill
acquisition and the law of practice. In J. R. Anderson (Ed.),
Cognitive skills and their acquisition (pp. 1-55). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Newell, A. & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (1998). Rationality In An Uncertain
World: Essays on the Cognitive Science of Human Reasoning.
East Essex, UK: Psychology Press Ltd.
Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of change in
children's thinking. New York: Oxford University Press.
Siegler, R. S., & Shipley, C. (1995). Variation, selection, and
cognitive change. In G. Halford & T. Simon (Eds.), Developing
cognitive competence: New approaches to process modeling
(pp. 31-76). New York: Academic Press.

Discussion
The hypotheses tested above are a subset of the overall
hypotheses originally developed. In future work, we will
analyze the remaining hypotheses including: stronger
interpersonal relationships, more formalized decisionmaking and science discussions, larger granularity of
planning, and greater willingness to compromise and wait.
Ten hypotheses were examined here, reflecting the
complex nature of group work. A priori, it was possible that
all ten hypotheses would have received some support in our
correlational analyses, producing little real gain in our
scientific understanding of group expertise. In fact, only five
factors had evidence of change, and these factors distributed
themselves across different levels of explanation. The
mission itself changed somewhat, in that power resources
decreased consistently over time. Psychologically, the
mission also changed in that there was less engineering
uncertainty about what the rovers could do. Individuals
simplified their own tasks by engaging in less
documentation. Some core work became less collaborative.
And finally, leaders became more familiar with their
leadership roles. It is likely that most if not all of these
factors would only allow for a moderate speedup, as they
themselves changed only a moderate amount over the
mission. Thus, it is probable that their combination was
required to produce the sizeable speedup that was observed.

845

