UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Where is Causality?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3x18s71k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Guha, Amal

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Where is Causality?
Amal Guha (guha@dsi.cnrs.fr)
LIMSI, BP.133, 91403 Orsay cedex France

Abstract
It is still not known how to define causality, although its importance
has much been stressed in psychology, including text
comprehension. The example of gravitation is presented, showing
that causality has a surprisingly variable definition. The distinction
between epistemological, ontological, and psychological
questionings is proposed, in order to clarify earlier theoretical
contributions about causality. Then the way causality was considered
by works in text comprehension is briefly presented. The evolution
of the field brings forth the need to define clearly causality. Recent
works in the psychology of text comprehension, focusing on
perception, have common grounds of study with philosophical
ontology.

relations (whatever it is) is a very changing thing, and this may help
convincing us that causality is far from being captured by
psychology as a stable thing whose properties can be defined in
general (so for psychology in particular). Then three types of causal
relation are proposed, clarifying the nature of studies on causation.
Classifying this way may help to “tidy up” this huge problem: it can
be distinguished between epistemological, ontological, and
psychological causalities, although problems are almost always , by
authors who claim dealing with causality in general. This section
concludes that the main question about causation, for both
philosophy and psychology, is whether causal relations are (for what
we can know) real (objective), or mental (the result of a judgement).
We then move on to the way text comprehension theories dealt with
causality. We conclude by showing why it is an issue for psychology
to deal with the question of what causality is.

Keywords
Causality; philosophy; ontology;
epistemology; text comprehension;

causal

1. Evolution of the idea of causality

attribution;

Consider an elementary example. Let me drop (stop holding) a stone
in the air, without moving. It will surely fall to the ground. What’s
the cause of this fall? It’s likely that you’ll agree with me that
gravitation force caused the stone to fall. The stone fell because of
gravitation, when I stopped holding it. This idea seems quite
common, but it has not always been. Not only because the theory of
gravitation was not always known, but because gravitation force did
not always seem the cause of anything to intuition. Indeed, Newton
himself, in his Principia Mathematica (in 1687), asserted that his
theory said in no case what the cause of movements was. He writes:
“I have not been able to discover the cause of those properties of
gravity from the phenomena, and I frame no hypothesis”. Rather
than understanding his discoveries as causal explanations, he takes
them as descriptions of phenomena, which do not unveil their
“occult” causes: “Truth appearing to us by Phænomena, though their
Causes be not yet discover’d.” (Opticks book III, part one). The
operational value of his theory was admitted quite fast, but in a
Cartesian context, in which only movements and contacts between
material bodies were admitted as causal explanations, the principle
of gravity (or that of magnetic field) didn’t seem intelligible to
contemporary physicists (including Newton himself). Mechanics
was just liberated from the scholastic occult qualities, since Galileo
and Descartes; and any idea of a distant action seemed an
obscurantist regression. According to Liebnitz, “Gravity must be a
scholastic occult quality, or the effect of a miracle” (Henry, 1988).
Newton replies : “For these [the active principles he used] are
manifest qualities, and their causes only are occult” (Henry, 1988).
The very idea of a distant action of a body on an other one, without
intermediary contact forces, was unacceptable (for the following
generation also : on Euler, see.Wilson, 1992). Modern science
progressively included in causal comprehension the “mathematical
comprehension” of phenomena (Auroux & Weil, 1992). In other
words, the scientific commonsense, followed by the vulgar one,
finally accepted as causal or explicative a mathematical description.
Earlier in the history of science, mathematics were limited to
describing phenomena, addressing the question “how?” rather than
the question “why?”.

Introduction
Is causality an objective relation between things, or is it rather in our
heads, our judgments (as far as we can know)? The aim of this paper
is to stress and discuss this important question of philosophy. It has
become very acute in psychology, as text comprehension has moved
its focus from the question “How do we represent things? (e.g.
propositions, frames, macro- or microstructure, like in Van Dijk &
Kintsch, 1983) to the question “what are the things we represent?
(e.g. places, people, time, like in Zwaan, Langston, & Graesser,
1995, or Radvansky, Spieler, & Zacks, 1993). While reading, causal
relations is an important thing we monitor (Trabasso & Van den
Broek, 1985; Van den Broek, 1988; Zwaan, 1999; Singer & Ferreira,
1983). But their definition is still very disputed (Child, 1994)
Einhorn & Hogarth (1986) mentioned the relative independence of
various areas dealing with the topic of causality: developmental
psychology (Piaget, 1971, Lécuyer, Pêcheux, & Streri, 1994),
perception and learning (Michotte, 1958, 1962), social psychology
(Heider, 1958), including attribution (Hewstone, 1989), text
comprehension (Trabasso, Secco, & Van den Broek, 1984). They
acknowledged the fact that “the definition and meaning of cause
have been debated for centuries”.
It seems timely to prolong the very complete reviews of Einhorn &
Hogarth (1986) and of White (1990), because dealing with the nature
of things reported by text is now a subject for the field of text
comprehension, and earlier reviews presented different views on the
nature of causality and the stakes it presents for the field of text
comprehension. This matter is all the more acute since Barsalou
(1999) popularized the idea of perceptive components of the mental
representation. Causal reasonning, as mentioned by Dague, Kayser,
Levy, & Nazarenko (2004) , has deep roots in our cognitive
functioning, and defining causality is a very present problem.

The first section presents the example of Newton’s gravitation: the
history of this theory’s reception shows that what makes causal
1412

This example illustrates that our idea of causes changed a lot in
recent history. What we take as causal today depends not only on the
state of science, but also on other factors, which vary with the sociohistoric context. To this difficulty of a varying definition, one can
add the magnitude of the field of phenomena we want to explain
causally, and the variety of things for which the question “why?” can
be asked.

2. Three types of causality
This example was taken from the field of scientific truth. The issue
of defining causal relations can be clarified by considering the field
in which various authors in the past considered the question. This
issue may have different answers, whether you’re trying to define a
correct way to determine causal relations in science, or if you’re
wondering what a causal relation is in reality, or if you’re examining
the idea of causality humans have (to make mental processes
efficient) . The three fields (epistemology, ontology, and
psychology) may lead to the same answer, but not necessarily.
Although science in general can go on whatever causal relations
really are (because it’s been more than a century that J.S. Mill’s
criteria have proven efficient), it is still an issue for ontology and
psychology to localize causal relations, whether in “things” or in our
minds.
The three types of causality we suggest differ a lot from the four
kinds proposed by Aristotle : material, final, immediate, and formal.
These four kinds fully cover the field of the loci of answers to the
question “why?”. Among the four, only one kind has left the field of
causal explanation : the material cause. What the thing to explain is
made of doesn’t belong to a causal explanation anymore. Nowadays,
the final cause, which tends to explain things by their result, applies
more to the daily explanations of human behavior, to intentionality.
The efficient cause is indisputably the closest idea to our
contemporary idea what makes a cause, as shows the preceding
example. Scientific explanation has also included formal cause, since
it often associates mathematically described features of entities with
their nature: for example, the movement of a proton is described by
such and such equation, and the movement of an electron is
described by such other equation.
By contrast, the suggested distinction addresses more the relation
between the world and our mental representation. Three types of
causality can be distinguished : epistemological, ontological, and
psychological. Such a distinction would make clearer the issue of
causality, by clarifying the topic tackled by each view.
Epistemology is the field in which it was originally tried to
determine how to back a causal explanation. If one sums up Hume’s
contribution, his theory set a challenge to modern science, by
showing that a causal relation could not be proved. Scientific truth
depends on causal relations based on cooccurrence, a synthesis of
experience, joined with the unproved belief that the world will
remain working the same way. In other words, the findings of
science are not rationally proved. Such a challenge woke up Kant
from his “dogmatic sleep” (Kant, 1783/1986). Kant moved the
referential, from “the world” to our mind, asserting that the causal
relation is not inferred, but an a priori structure of our understanding,
working like a filter of our apprehension of phenomena. This
solution was summed up by Emmet (1984) : “Hume declared all
consequence to be mere sequence ; Kant, on the other hand, affirmed
that there is no other [irreversible] sequence but consequence”.
Although Kant’s idealism was an elegant philosophical solution to
Hume’s challenge, it did not provide firm criteria for science. J.S.
Mill did, with his System of Logic (1848), defining methods on
which scientific inference could rely. The focus on epistemological

issues, in the study of causality, has remained in psychology, and in
the field of causal attribution, it is examined to which extent people
behave as “lay scientists” and use statistical information to determine
causes (Hewstone, 1989), as does science.
One can also wonder what the causal relation is ontologically, in
addition to the concern for making correct inferences. In other
words, scientific knowledge must establish efficient criteria for
determining causal relations, but such epistemological criteria are
distinct from an interrogation on the nature of the causal relation.
One could think that since ontology is a matter for philosophers,
Hume’s contribution, which is a landmark of the reflection on
causality, deals with this matter. In fact, Hume placed the causal
relation in our minds rather than in the objects themselves, thus
evacuating the problem of the ontological nature of causality towards
epistemology and psychology. The ontological question still holds a
very important place, as show Donald Davidson’s (1975/1993; 1967)
contributions, who based the identity of body and mind on his
conception of what causality is. Davidson asserted that real things
and their linguistic description must not be confused. Particular
causal interactions between mental events and material events may
be true, but only in their material descriptions. An event is mental in
the sense that we have elaborated a description of this event as
mental (but there also exists a material description of this event). For
him, causality implies the existence of a causal law (that’s how he
defines a nomological regularity). There is a causal law relating
events under their material descriptions, but not necessarily under
other descriptions (e.g. as mental events). He states that things can be
causally related through causal laws (he’s a determinist), but not
under all descriptions (and founds on this idea the concept of
supervenience).
In addition to the recent developments of analytical philosophy on
the nature of causality, this nature is also a matter for psychology
since it is interested in perceptive aspects of mental representation
The perceptivist approach introduced by Barsalou (1999) moved the
focus of research on text comprehension to its perceptive
components (Zwaan, 1999). Of course, exploring the perception of
anything (and causal relations in particular) raises the need to
determine which elements of reality are perceived. White (1999) also
defends a view of perceptible causality. Perception is the mainspring
between ontology and psychology.
The psychological approach of causality is more concerned by the
idea we have of causal relations, and by their importance in some
psychological processes. In exploring our notion of causality,
psychology picked of course ideas in both fields of epistemology and
ontology. As White (1990) puts it, instead of making hypotheses on
what people think causality is, the grounds on which causal relations
they establish can be explored. It can be tried to establish whether
people determine causal relations “as if” they were statisticians, or
“as if’ they had a theory of some kind to determine causality.
Trabasso & Bartolone (2002) challenged the hypothesis of
Kahneman & Tversky (1982), who proposed that counterfactual
reasoning was used for determining causes.
The causal relation, for the ontological and psychological types,
could be described by the question “Where is causality?”. The
answers of each field to this question are interrelated. For example,
the philosopher Mackie (1974) is much cited by the psychologists
Trabasso and Van den Broek. Mackie thinks that causal relations are
objective facts ; he also wondered where our idea of a causal relation
comes from, and proposed that counterfactual reasoning was the root
of causal judgements. Kistler (2004) also defends a view according
to which causal relations are objective facts, characterized by the
transmission of something (a physical magnitude of some kind, like
energy). We can note that the philosopher Mackie (1974), to back his
claim that causal relations could be perceived, cited psychologist

1413

Michotte (1953) who claimed that his experiments proved the
perception of causality. But from a closer consideration, maybe
Michotte’s experiments can be subsumed under works on mental
semantics : he considered that causality was perceived whenever his
subjects described what they saw using a verb (e.g. “launching”) that
Michotte himself judged expressing a causal relation. That’s what he
called “perception of causality”. It can be argued that these
experiments do not concern the perception of causality, but the
relation between perception of phenomena and their verbal
description. The role of perception, in more recent theories, like that
of Barsalou (1999) is nowadays considered under a different
perspective, that of the possible analogy between mental
representations and “real” things. For dimensions like time or space,
their description is rather straightforward, and there are universally
accepted tools for describing them (meters or seconds). But causal
relations are not so straightforward. Both views remain, that causal
relations are an objective reality (e.g. Trabasso, Mackie) and that
causal relations are the result of a synthetic judgment, in the
spectator’s head (White, 1990 refers to this view as a commonplace;
Russell, 1989/1912 wrote it was the general opinion for “all people
of good faith” ).
Ontology and psychology may have different answers to the
question “Where is causality?”, but psychology needs to answer it
and determine which cues to a causal relation we currently use.

3. Causality and text comprehension theories

Van den Broek (1990) presented a complete view of the role of
causality in text comprehension : criteria for determining the causal
relation (temporal piority and operativity), and logical criteria for
determining causal force (necessity and sufficiency). However, his
criteria don’t explicitate what makes causal relations. He provides no
rules for the estimation of necessity and sufficiency.
The representation in RTN’s impacts both individual events, and the
relations between events. Van den Broek & Lorch (1993) showed
that events directly connected in the net led to a better mutual recall
(indexed recall) ; this result was replicated by Quintana 2000.
Keenan, Baillet & Brown (1984) showed that a sentence was read
faster if the event it related was more likely (by elaborating four
classes of causal relatedness of cause-consequence couples). Myers,
Shinjo & Duffy (1987), and Duffy, Shinjo & Myers (1990)
replicated this experiment, and found that cause-consequence
couples of intermediary likeliness were best memorized. This
suggests that memory is linked to the inference process linking
causally events of the text: minimal effort for very likely or very
unlikely cause-consequence couples, hence less memorization. Many
works focused on causal inferences. Singer and his collaborators
elaborated the validation model. According to this view, causal
connections are made between events thanks to the elaboration of the
knowledge missing for a syllogistic reasoning (Singer & Ferreira,
1983; Singer, Revlin & Halldorson, 1990 ; Singer, Halldorson, Lear
& Andrusiak, 1992 ; Singer, 1993; Singer & Halldorson, 1996). This
knowledge allows the validation of a causal connection of the causal
connection. There is mutual priming between the general knowledge
and the specific situation (Halldorson & Singer, 2002).
The role of causality in the temporal course of reading was also
studied by Noordman & Vonk (1992), and Noordman, Vonk &
Kempff (1992). They confirmed that reading was faster in causal
condition (see also: Haberlandt & Bingham, 1978; Zwaan,
Magliano & Graesser, 1995). They mentionned a research led by
Sanders & Noordman showing that causal relations are processed
faster than additive relations. They distinguish between integration
processes and inference processes. Integration refers to the fact that
events are causally connected (vs. linking information). They
consider the connectiion causal by default (Van den Broek, 1990b).
Other types of relations between events, like mere temporal
succession, are more costly because they are considered only after it
has been tried to connect events causally without success. This view
is coherent with that of Zacks & Tversky (2001), who indicate that
events are preferentially organized through causal organization in
mental representation, before temporal and spatial data.

Monitoring and representation of causal relations was shown to be
important in the psychology of text comprehension. Warren,
Nicholas, & Trabasso (1979) described the representation of a text as
a set of facts and relations. The relations between facts are causal, or
temporal by default. Black & Bower (1980), following Shank
(1975), formulated text comprehension as problem solving : the
problem is to relate the first and the last fact with a causal chain,
called ‘critical path’. They showed that events belonging to this path
were remembered better than events belonging to a “dead branch” of
the net. Omanson (1982) used this representation to prove that the
more central an event in this net, the more important it is judged, and
the better it is remembered. Trabasso and his colleagues extended
this “local” view of coherence to more distant relations of causality.
Trabasso an Van den Broek (1985) used the RTN (Recursive
Transition Network) for representing text informations in nets: nodes
are clauses, and relations the causal relations suggested by Warren,
Nicholas, & Trabasso 1979.
Trabasso and Van den Broek used the criterion of counterfactuality
proposed by Mackie (1974). This criterion operationnalized that of
necessity in the circumstances. The representation of text in a such
nets was shown to predict important features of text elements:
causal connectivity predicts recall (Fletcher & Bloom, 1988 ;
Trabasso & Van den Broek, 1985), the speed of recuperation
(O’Brien & Myers, 1987), importance judgements (Trabasso &
Sperry, 1985 ; Trabasso & Van den Broek,1985 ; Van den Broek,
1988), the probability of inclusion in summaries (Van den Broek &
Trabasso, 1986), and the strategy for keeping information in the
short term memory (Bloom, Fletcher, Van den Broek, Reitz &
Shapiro,1990).
Trabasso, Van den Broek & Suh (1989) also used the RTN to
differentiate four types of causal relations (physical, motivational,
psychological, and preconditions). Tapiero, Van den Broek &
Quintana (2000) confirmed the following hierarchy of judged
strenghth (from the strongest to the weakest): psychological
causality, motivation, precondition, physical causality.

Conclusion

1414

Recent developments in research on text comprehension examined
different aspects or dimensions : space, time, reference, goals,
causality. Partial comparisons between dimensions were examined :
space and reference (Radvansky & Zacks, 1991 ; Radvansky, Spieler
& Zacks, 1993), time and reference (Radvansky, Zwaan, Federico &
Franklin, 1998), space and time (Rinck & Bower, 2000), space, time
and rederence (Scott Rich & Taylor, 2000), space and causality
(Friedman & Miyake, 2000). The multiple-indexing model proposed
by Zwaan and his colleagues (Zwaan, 1999 ; Blanc & Tapiero, 2001)
showed that the five aspects were important, by considering them
together, in categorization (Zwaan, Langston & Graesser, 1995)
reading times, and memory (Zwaan, Radvansky, Hilliard & Curiel,
1998 for reading times ; Zwaan, Magliano, & Graesser, 1995 for
reading times and memory). Causality, among these dimensions, is
particular : space, time, and reference have “natural” and commonly
used descriptions in objective reality (meters, seconds, objects).

Goals, which can be subsumed under causality, is a dimension close
to reference : the relation of goal is binary (either a thing is or is not a
goal for a event). Causality describes only relations, whereas space,
time, and reference, allow also one-dimensional situation of events.
As text comprehension theories are more and more concerned with
the contents of representations, they have to determine more
precisely what causal relations are (as in ontology), and be able to
determine which method is used psychologically to identify them (as
in attribution). The methods elaborated for epistemology don’t apply
best to psychological processes. Data linked to probabilities are
useless, and completely overlooked by the problematic of
perception. The current evolution of the field of text comprehension
emphasizes the connection between psychology and philosophy.

References
Auroux, S., & Weil, S. (1992). Dictionnaire des auteurs et
des thèmes de la philosophie. Paris: Hachette éducation.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, pp. 577-660.
Black, J.B., & Bower, G. H. (1980). Story understanding as
problem solving. Poetics, 9, pp. 223-250.
Blanc, N., & Tapiero, I. (2001). Updating spatial situation
models: effects of prior knowledge and task demands.
Discourse Processes, 31, pp. 241-262.
Bloom, C. P., Fletcher, C. R., Van den Broek, P., Reitz, P., &
Shapiro, B. P. (1990). An online assessment of causal
reasoning during comprehension. Memory and Cognition,
18, pp. 65-71.
Child, W. (1994). Causality, interpretation, and the mind.
Oxford : Oxford University press.
Dague, P., Kayser, D., Lévy, F., & Nazarenko, A. (2004).
Raisonnement causal. Intellectica, 38, pp. 7-14.
Davidson, D. (1967). Causal Relations. Journal of
Philosophy, 64, pp. 691-703.
Davidson, D. (1993). Actions et événements. Traduit de
l'Américain par Pascal Engel. Paris: Presses Universitaires
de France. (original work published in 1975)
Duffy, S. A., Shinjo, M., & Myers, J. L. (1990). The effect of
encoding task on memory for sentence pairs varying in
causal relatedness. Journal of Memory and Language, 29,
pp. 27-42.
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1986). Judging probable
cause. Psychological Bulletin,
Vol. 99, N° 1, pp. 3-19
Emmet, D. (1984). The effectiveness of causes. London:
MacMillan.
Friedman, N. P., & Miyake, A. (2000). Differential roles for
visospatial and verbal working memory in situation model
construction. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 129, pp. 61-83.
Henry, J. (1988). Newton, matter, and magic. In Fauvel, J.,
Flood, R., Shortland, M., & Wilson, R. (Eds.), Let Newton
be! Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Haberlandt, K., & Bingham, G. (1978). Verbs contribute to
the coherence of brief narratives: Reading related and
unrelated sentence triples. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behaviour, 17, pp. 419-425.

Halldorson, M., & Singer, M. (2002). Inference processes:
Integrating relevant knowledge and text information.
Discourse Processes, 34, pp. 145-161.
Hewstone, M. R. C. (1989). Causal Attribution. Cambridge,
MA: Basil Blakwell.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation
heuristic. In Kahneman, D., Slovic, & Tversky, A. (Eds.),
Judgment under uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases (pp.
201-208). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kant, E. (1986). Prolégomènes à toute métaphysique future
qui pourra se présenter comme science. Trad. Louis
Guillermit. Paris: Vrin. (original work published in 1783)
Keenan, J. M., Baillet, S. D., & Brown, P. (1984). The effects
of causal cohesion on comprehension and memory. Journal
of Memory and Language, 23, pp. 115-126.
Kistler, M (2004). La causalité dans la philosophie
contemporaine. Intellectica, pp.139-145.
Lécuyer, R., Pêcheux, M.-G., & Streri, A. (1994). Le
développement cognitif du nourrisson. Paris: Nathan.
Mackie, J. L. (1974). The cement of the universe. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Michotte, A. (1953). La perception de la causalité. Louvain:
Publications universitaires de Louvain.
Michotte, A. (1962). Causalité, permanence, et réalité
phénoménales. Louvain: Publications universitaires de
Louvain.
Piaget, J. (1971). Les explications causales. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
Myers, J. L., Shinjo, M., & Duffy, S. A. (1987). Degree of
causal relatedness and memory. Journal of Memory and
Language, 26, pp. 453-465.
Noordman, L. G. M., & Vonk, W. (1998). Memory-based
processing in understanding causal information. Discourse
Processes, 26, pp. 191-212.
Noordman, L. G. M., Vonk, W., & Kempff, H.J. (1992).
Causal inferences during the reading of expository texts.
Journal of Memory and Language, 31, pp. 573-590.
O'Brien, E. J., & Myers, J. L. (1987). The role of causal
connections in the retrieval of text. Memory and Cognition,
15, pp. 419-427.
Omanson, R. C. (1982). The relation between centrality and
story category variation. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 21, pp. 326-337.
Quintana, M.-P. (2000). Influence des forces de connexion
causale sur la construction d'une représentation en mémoire
sous forme de réseau. Thèse de doctorat de l'université
Lyon 2.
Radvansky, G. A., Spieler, D. H., & Zacks, R. T. (1993).
Mental model organization. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, pp. 95114.
Radvansky, G. A., & Zacks, R. T. (1991). Mental models and
the fan effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, pp. 940-953.
Radvansky, G. A., Zwaan, R. A., Federico, T., & Franklin, N.
(1998). Retrieval from temporally organized situation
models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24, pp. 1224-1237.

1415

Rinck, M., & Bower, G. H. (2000). Temporal and spatial
distance in situation models. Memory and Cognition, 28,
pp. 1310-1320.
Scott Rich, S., & Taylor, H. A. (2000). Not all narrative shifts
function equally. Memory and Cognition, 28, pp. 12571266.
Schank, R. C. (1975). The structure of episodes in memory.
In Bobrow, D. G., & Collins, A. (Eds.), Representation and
understandingNew-York: Academic Press.
Russell, B. (1989/1912). Problèmes de philosophie. Paris:
Payot.
Scott Rich, S., & Taylor, H. A. (2000). Not all narrative shifts
function equally. Memory and Cognition, 28, pp. 12571266.
Singer, M. (1993). Causal bridging inferences: validating
consistent and inconsistent sequences. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 47, pp. 340-359.
Singer, M., & Ferreira, F. (1983). Inferring consequences in
story comprehension. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behaviour, 22, pp. 437-448.
Singer, M., & Halldorson, M. (1996). Constructing and
validating motive bridging inferences. Cognitive
Psychology, 30, pp. 1-38.
Singer, M., Halldorson, M., Lear, M., & Andrusiak, P.
(1992). Validation of causal bridging inferences. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, pp. 507-524.
Singer, M., Revlin, R., & Halldorson, M. (1990). Bridginginferences and enthymemes. In Graesser, A. C., & Bower,
G. H. (Eds.), The Psychology of learning and motivation:
Inferences and text comprehension (pp. 35-51). San Diego:
Academic Press.
Tapiero, I., Van den Broek, P., & Quintana, M.-P. (2002).
The mental representation of narrative texts as networks:
The role of necessity and sufficiency in the detection of
different types of causal relations. Discourse Processes, 34,
pp. 237-258.
Trabasso, T., & Bartolone, J. (2002). Explanation-based,
dynamic understanding and the selection of causes in
counterfactual reasoning. Oralcommunication, 12th annual
meeting of the Society for Text and Discourse, Chicago, 2730 june.
Trabasso, T., Secco, T., & Van den Broek, P. (1984). Causal
cohesion and story coherence. In Mandl, H., Stein, N. L., &
Trabasso, T. (Eds.), Learning and comprehension of text.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Trabasso, T., & Sperry, L. L. (1985). Causal relatedness and
the importance of story events. Journal of Memory and
Language, 24, pp. 595-611.
Trabasso, T., & Van den Broek, P. (1985). Causal thinking
and the representation of narrative events. Journal of
Memory and Language, 24, pp. 612-630.
Trabasso, T., Van den Broek, P., & Suh, S. Y. (1989).
Logical necessity and transitivity of causal relations in
stories. Discourse Processes, 12, pp. 1-25.
Van den Broek, P. (1988). The effects of causal relations and
hierarchical position on the importance of story statements.
Journal of Memory and Language, 27, pp. 1-22.

Van den Broek, P. (1990a). The causal inference maker:
towards a process model of inference generation in text
comprehension. In Balota, D. A., Flores d'Arcais, G. B., &
Rayner, K. (Eds.), Comprehension processes in reading.
Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Van den Broek, P. (1990b). Causal inferences and the
comprehension of narrative texts. In Graesser, A. C., &
Bower, G. H. (Eds.), The Psychology of learning and
motivation: Inferences and text comprehension (pp. 175194). San Diego: Academic Press.
Van den Broek, P., & Lorch, R. F. (1993). Network
representation of causal relations in memory for narrative
texts: Evidence from primed recognition. Discourse
Processes, 16, pp. 75-98.
Van den Broek, P., & Trabasso, T. (1986). Causal networks
versus goal hierarchies in summarizing text. Discourse
Processes, 9, pp. 1-15.
Van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of
discourse comprehension. London: Academic Press.
Warren, W. H., Nicholas, D. W., & Trabasso, T. (1979).
Event chains and inferences in understanding narratives. In
Freedle, R. O. (Ed.), Advances in discourse processes (vol
2): new directions in discourse processing.Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
White, P. A. (1990). Ideas about causation in philosophy and
psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 108, pp. 3-18.
White, P.A. (1999). Towards a causal realist theory of causal
understanding. American Journal of Psychology, 112, 605642.
Wilson, C. (1992). Euler on action-at-distance and
fundamental equations in continuum mechanics. In
Harman, P. M., & Shapiro, A. E. (Eds.), The investigation
of difficult things: essays on Newton and the history of
exact sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zacks, J. M., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in
perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin, 127, pp.
3-21.
Zwaan, R. A. (1999). Five dimensions of narrative
comprehension: the event-indexing model. In Goldman, S.
R., Graesser, A. C., & Van den Broek, P. (Eds.), Narrative
comprehension, causality and coherence: Essays in honor
of Tom Trabasso. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zwaan, R. A., Langston, M. C., & Graesser, A. C. (1995).
The construction of situation models in narrative
comprehension: An event-indexing model. Psychological
Science, 6, pp. 292-297.
Zwaan, R. A., Magliano, J. P., & Graesser, A. C. (1995).
Dimensions of situation model construction in narrative
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, pp. 386-397.
Zwaan, R. A., Radvansky, G. A., Hilliard, A.E., & Curiel, J.
M. (1998). Constructing multidimensional situation models
during reading. Scientific studies of reading, 2, pp. 199220.

1416

