2-year-olds use syntax to infer actor intentions in a rational-action paradigm
Melissa Kline (mekline@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology
Harvard University
Abstract
Verbs may refer to the means (I bumped into the lamp) or
outcome (I broke the lamp) of an action (cf. Rappaport Hovav
& Levin, 2010; Talmy, 1985). Do young children expect
language to encode this distinction? Children’s imitation
patterns suggest that they analyze nonlinguistic events in
these terms. When a head-touch is the simplest action
available, toddlers include just the outcome, not the means, in
their own imitation (Gergely, Bekkering, & Király, 2002). We
ask whether syntax influences this inference. An experimenter
with her hands occupied made a toy activate with a headtouch, using either Means-focused (I’m daxing to my toy) or
Outcome-focused language (I’m daxing my toy). Toddlers
then imitated the action. Means- but not Outcome-focus
language encouraged children to include the distinctive headtouch, overriding the standard ‘rational imitation’ effect. This
suggests that toddlers’ knowledge of argument structure
includes an understanding of a means/outcome divide in verb
meaning.
Keywords:, agents, goals, event perception, development,
argument structure, verb meaning, imitation

Introduction
Models of language acquisition have primarily focused
on two sources of information: the language input a
child receives, and the language-specific knowledge or
biases she brings to the table. A third important, but
less well understood, factor in language learning is the
role of non-linguistic knowledge (e.g. social cognition
or physical reasoning). While the semantic
representations used for language may not be identical
to those already available to the pre-linguistic child,
non-linguistic cognition provides an important scaffold
for early language. Many of the principles guiding
children’s guesses about noun meaning have parallels
in their core knowledge about objects (cf. Bloom,
2000; Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988; Xu, Dewar, &
Perfors, 2009). For instance, young children’s noun
learning is very sensitive to object shape, but this
shape bias for count noun learning operates most
strongly in cases where shape is a strong cue to
(nonlinguistic) category membership, such as for
objects that are solid rather than liquid/amorphous, or
with intentional shapes like tools or artifacts (Booth &
Waxman, 2002; Soja, Carey, & Spelke, 1991) In

contrast, there has been little research on how
children’s understanding of verb meaning and
syntactic structure is shaped by their early knowledge
about human agents and their actions and goals.
Conceptually, events can be broken down into
smaller components (e.g. agent, path, cause), some of
which can then be encoded in a sentence (e.g. I
crossed the floor, I danced, I danced across the floor.).
Curiously, many of these components of meaning are
also available to prelinguistic children in some form
(Gergely et al., 2002; Leslie, 1984; Luo, Kaufman, &
Baillargeon, 2009; Phillips & Wellman, 2005;
Woodward, 1998). Linguistic theories assume that
these pre-linguistic conceptual structures form the
basis of adult semantics (cf Csibra & Gergely, 2007;
Pinker, 2007; Tomasello, 2003). However, this
assumption has not been extensively tested: there is
very little work that systematically links early event
perception and language acquisition.
The flexibility and power of language emerges from
the combination of two components: a lexicon of
words (stable associations between concepts and
forms) and syntactic rules that govern how words are
combined into sentences. Critically, these components
must be linked, because syntactic structures constrain
the inferences we make about word, and particularly
noun, meanings (cf. Gleitman, 1990). Syntactic
structures can convey meaning even when the content
words are unknown: the sentence The gorp blicked the
dax to the wug expresses an event with three
participants that has something to do with transferring
something. Likewise, individual verbs call out for
particular kinds of sentences, clustering in meaningbased groups: We can dance/run/skip into the kitchen,
but we enter/exit/approach the kitchen (c.f. Levin,
1993). We can both push (means) or break (outcome)
a table, but broadly speaking, distinct verb meanings
yield distinct syntactic patterns (for instance, though
both break and touch transitives are grammatical, we
can say the table broke, but not *the table pushed).
Understanding these relationships has been a central

1135

goal of linguistic theory since the 1960s (c.f. Fillmore,
1968; Goldberg, 2006; Hale & Keyser, 1993).
Here, we focus on a single, very abstract distinction
that runs through the verb lexicon and applies to
predicates spanning a wide range of meanings.
Specifically, we examine the distinction between what
happens (the outcome), and how it comes about (the
means or manner). This distinction is promising
because it plays a key role in the syntactic realization
of verbs, and it appears to mirror a critical distinction
in infants’ prelinguistic understanding of goals (i.e.
outcomes) and rational action. By 12 months old,
infants know a great deal about people’s actions and
their goals: they make predictions about what an
agent’s goal is and the actions she will take to achieve
it, by reasoning about how efficient a means of action
is for reaching a particular goal (Gergely et al., 1995;
Phillips & Wellman, 2005; Woodward, 1998).
Substantial linguistic evidence suggests that there is
a broad means/outcome distinction in verb meaning: a
nonstative verb may refer to the means of action (I
bumped into the lamp) or to its outcome (I broke the
lamp), but it has been argued that a verb cannot refer
to both (Talmy, 1985; Rappaport Hovav & Levin,
2010). This division appears across languages and is
not limited to a single semantic field: verbs for means
include manners of motion, action, and instruments
(run, push, hammer), and outcome verbs include both
paths and change-of-state results (enter, break.) Often
these verbs can be expanded to a predicate that
describes both a means and an outcome, but with only
one element lexicalized in the main verb, for instance:
(1) a. I ran into the room
b. I entered the room running
(2) a. I hammered the vase into pieces
b. I broke the vase with a hammer
Levin & Rappaport Hovav (2010) propose that the
distinction between manner and result (means and
outcome) verbs is instantiated at the level of argument
structure (the semantic representation of verbs and
their arguments), with two distinct categories of verbal
roots that can be inserted in different semantic frames.
Are young children in fact aware of the distinction
between manner and result, and do they associate these
verb classes with different sentence structures?
Most prior investigations of the link between
language and conceptual representation of events have
relied on linguistic analyses, rooted in judgments of
sentence meaning and grammaticality (cf Dowty,
1991; Jackendoff, 1983; Levin & Rappaport Hovav,
2005; Talmy, 1985). The existing work on children’s
initial representations of means and outcomes for

language has focused on the motion domain (i.e.
manner-of-motion vs. path-of-motion, cf. Pulverman,
Song, Hirsh-Pasek, Pruden, & Golinkoff, 2013, though
see Bunger & Lidz, 2014). Only recently has adult
psycholinguistic research attempted to address the
question of whether motion verbs like these are related
to means/outcome verbs in other domains (such as
Change-of-State, e.g. push vs. break). Initial findings
indicate that participants trained on an outcome verb
category (e.g. change-of-state results) are more likely
to prefer outcome interpretations for verbs from a
different domain (i.e. path verbs for motion events).
Likewise people trained on manner-of-motion verb
categories show a subsequent preference for mannerof-action verbs (Geojo, 2014), suggesting an
overarching ‘means’ category. Here, we test the
hypothesis that a general conceptual distinction
between means and outcome is central for human
language, guiding infants’ initial expectations about
how syntax predicts meaning. In particular, we
establish how older infants use these event
perspectives for language by studying how they use
information provided by syntax to shift between means
and outcome perspectives on goal-directed events.
To answer these questions, we make use of existing
paradigms in cognitive development for understanding
how children represent and make inferences about
events. In a classic study of children’s early
understanding of goal-directed actions, Gergely,
Bekkering & Király (2002) presented toddlers with a
novel event – an experimenter touched a toy with her
head, making it light up. In one condition, there was an
explanation for this event (her hands were occupied.)
In the other, her hands were available. When the
experimenter could have chosen to use her hands,
children produced head-touch imitations, but when her
hands were occupied, the children touched the toy with
their hands. This finding suggests that toddlers can
analyze events in terms of theirs means and outcomes:
when the experimenter performed the simplest action
available to her, children inferred that the outcome, but
not the specific means, should be imitated. When she
freely choose a more difficult means, children inferred
that this means was important to her intention. In the
current study, we ask whether syntax influences
children’s inferences about the relevance of means and
outcomes.
In the study below, we explore infants’ expectations
for events accompanied by either Means-focus or
Outcome-focus language. The two conditions use
novel verbs in frames known to bias English-speaking
adults and children toward means (e.g. I’m daxing to

1136

the toy) or outcome (I daxed the toy) (Hohenstein,
2005; Slobin, 2006). The latter sentence is somewhat
ambiguous - we can both push the table (means) and
break the table (outcome). Critically though, there is a
strong association across languages between transitive
sentences and causal (outcome) verbs, even though
English allows for a wide range of verbs in this
sentence context (Levin & Rappaport Hovav, 2005).
This typological association suggests that a link
between transitivity and outcome semantics may be
especially robust.
Here we expect that children will begin with a
relatively simple mapping that reflects the broad
patterns present in adult language. Specifically, we test
two hypotheses about how form-to-meaning mappings
might emerge from early conceptual knowledge. First,
infants might begin with an early expectation that
syntax will mark the difference between means and
outcome verbs; this would lead them to make different
predictions about event interpretation following
different syntactic structures. On this hypothesis, we
would expect that Means-focused, but not Outcomefocused, language would encourage children to
interpret dax as a means verb and include the
distinctive head-touch, overriding the ‘rational
imitation’ effect. On the other hand, infants might
have only a general mapping between events and
verbs, focusing on simpler correspondences like events
versus objects, or between one-entity versus two-entity
events (all events in the present study have two
participants, the experimenter and the toy) (Yuan,
Fisher, & Snedeker, 2012). In this case, any
preferences about which event perspectives would
then arise from their expectations about the important
parts of events - focusing on goals rather than the
means by which they are achieved (Phillips &
Wellman, 2005; Woodward, 1998). If this is the case,
they might initially expect any novel verb to map to
event outcomes, and only learn that syntax can mark
this distinction at a later point in development.

Experiment
Methods
Participants 30 children ages 1;7-2;11 (mean age 2;2)

participated at the Boston Children’s Museum. An
additional 24 children were not included in the
analysis, because they were uncooperative or did not
finish the study (6), because of experimenter error (5),
or because they did not make any imitation attempts
(13). This high dropout/refusal rate may be due to the

Figure 1: The novel event seen by all study participants

very short session in the unfamiliar museum
environment; children had only 2-3 minutes to interact
with the experimenter before being asked to imitate
her. All children remained with their parent or
guardian throughout the session, and received a sticker
as thanks for their participation.
Stimuli In place of the ‘light up’ box used by Gergely

et al, participants interacted with a small green box
with a toy helicopter on top (see Figure 1). The
helicopter could be covertly activated (making its
propeller blades spin) by the experimenter using a
button/handle on the back side of the box. No children
discovered the true mechanism of the toy during the
experiment, although some children (or their older
siblings) found the button after the conclusion of the
experiment. The experimenter also used a blue blanket
to wrap her shoulders, arms, and hand during the
demonstration phase.
Procedures This study is based on the ‘hands-

occupied’ version of the rational-imitation study
conducted by Gergely et al. As a warmup, participants
first played a short ‘Simon Says’ game in which they
were invited to wave, clap their hands, and touch their
head. Then the experimenter claimed to be cold and
wrapped a blanket around herself, leaving her hands
occupied. She then said Watch this, I’m gonna dax to
my toy (Means-focus) or Watch this, I’m gonna dax my
toy (Outcome-focus) and leaned over to touch the toy
with her head, activating the helicopter toy on contact
(Figure 1). She then lifted her head and repeated the
description (Wow, I daxed (to) my toy!) The whole
demonstration was repeated once, including the two
sentences modeling the novel verb in the appropriate
frame. Finally, the experimenter offered the toy to the
child, saying, Now it’s your turn! Can you dax (to) the
toy? The box was passed to the child, who was
allowed to play with it and attempt the action (note

1137

We found that children in the Means-focus language
condition were significantly more likely to produce a
head-touch than children in the Outcome-focus
condition (Figure 2, Fisher’s exact test, p < 0.05)1.
When syntax supported an outcome verb interpretation
(Daxing my toy), children rarely included the headtouch. However, when syntax supported a means
interpretation (Daxing to my toy), 2-year-olds inferred
an appropriate verb meaning and reinterpreted the
experimenter’s action as relevant for their own
imitation. This finding is particularly striking given
that since the experimenter’s hands were occupied,
this unusual action could have been ‘explained away’
as the simplest means to an end, as it was in the
original (nonlinguistic) study (Gergely et al 2002).

Figure 2: Histogram of actions after Outcome-focus (Dax
my toy) and Means-focus (Dax to my toy) descriptions

Discussion

that this means that the experimenter could no longer
activate the box.) Neutral prompts like It’s your turn,
can you show me? and up to two more repetitions of
the target sentence were given until the child made
contact with the toy or indicated that they wanted to
leave the study. All sessions were recorded on video
for later analysis.
Results
In contrast to other versions of the ‘light box’ imitation
studies, we coded the infants’ initial actions only. This
was for two reasons: first, because there was no
interruption between the demonstration and the
performance of the imitation, most children quickly
performed an intentional action toward the box.
Second, because the experimenter did not actually
activate the helicopter (and because pilot testing
revealed that some children realized that they could
spin the helicopter propellers by grabbing them with
their hand and twisting), actions toward the toy after
the first action reflected new information the child had
generated about how the toy worked.
This first intentional action toward the box was
coded as to whether not it included contact between
the participant’s head and the top of the box; a simpler
‘first body-part contact’ rule was not used because
some children discovered that they could pick up the
(lightweight) box and bring it to their foreheads, which
was coded as a ‘head touch’ action. Coding was
performed by the first author or by research assistants
who where not blind to hypothesis, and then by a
second coder who was blind to condition assignment.
Inter-rater agreement was very high (97% agreement,
the single disagreement was resolved by discussion.)

This work provides significant new insight into what
toddlers know about the meanings of the verbs and
sentence structures they are just beginning to use. We
show that even from relatively early in language
acquisition, children are making rational inferences by
combining what they know about the nonlinguistic
world with what they know about the syntax of their
native language.
Prior research has largely focused separately on
toddlers’ awareness of categories and internal structure
of events, on the one hand, and their awareness of
syntax and verbs as a syntactic category on the other.
In principle, it might be the case that toddlers start out
with a very coarse mapping between these two kinds
of representations, expecting for instance that verbs
map to events rather than to objects, but not realizing
that particular verbs (with accompanying argument
structures) map to specific events or sub-event features
until later in development. In contrast, these results
suggest that 2-year-olds are aware that either means or
results may be labeled by a main verb, but that these
types of verbs tend to appear in different syntactic
contexts. Furthermore, they know that these same
semantic categories in language are linked to their rich
cognitive system for understanding goal directed
actions.
The present results are also relevant for
understanding the cognitive basis of rational imitation.
Gergely et. al (2002) interpreted their imitation finding
to mean that infants are truly thinking about a tradeoff
between goals and other actions when they see and
1
This comparison is also significant if the 13 children who
completed the session without fussing out, but who refused to
perform any actions with the toy, are included as a third ‘no action’
categorical response. There was no difference in imitation-attempt

1138

imitate the ‘strange manner’ events used in this study.
Some challenges have been offered to this
interpretation, proposing instead that these differences
in imitation result from lower-level perceptual
differences or limitations on children’s own facility
with different kinds of body-bends (Beisert et al.,
2012; Paulus, Hunnius, Vissers, & Bekkering, 2011).
However, while such alternative explanations may
play a role in the size of the effect of the main handsfree/hands-occupied difference, there are several other
studies showing that changes in the social context (i.e.
whether the action is demonstrated for the child or for
someone else) can influence which imitations children
are likely to make (Chen & Waxman, 2013; Király,
Csibra, & Gergely, 2013). The present study, as well,
adds to the body of evidence that children imitations
are not purely the result of physical limitations or
perceptual salience (all children in this study were of
equivalent age and saw identical demonstrations).
Instead, information carried by syntax alone
modulated children’s imitations in a way that is
consistent both with what is known about argument
structure semantics and with the rational-action theory
of children’s imitations.
Much work will remain to understand the role of
language in young children’s interpretation of the
social world and other people’s actions. The language
children heard in this study may be serving several
purposes – in addition to conveying semantic
information through the structure of the sentence, it
may also serve to indicate to the child that the
experimenter is knowledgeable about the toy, and that
they intend to teach something to the child, factors
which are known to influence how children imitate in
this kind of context (Bonawitz et al., 2011; Chen &
Waxman, 2013). Converging work from imitation and
other paradigms will be necessary to better understand
how children determine the meanings of new verbs,
and then integrate them with the nonlinguistic and
social contexts of those sentences.
In addition, further work remains to determine more
closely the exact inferences that young children are
making about the meaning of the verb dax in different
sentential contexts. Previous studies of young
children’s understanding of manner and path verbs (a
subset of the means/outcome distinction) have
established that infants begin to notice these event
categories at around 10-12 months old, (cf. Pulverman
et al., 2013), and that by 4 years old children’s
expectations about neutrally presented novel verb
meanings mirror the proportions found in their
different native languages (cf. Maguire et al., 2010). In

between, how do toddlers represent the meanings of
verbs and sentences? This experiment finds that when
presented with a prepositional phrase (dax to my toy),
children are more likely to consider the means of
action to be part of the intended meaning. However,
we do not know whether they simultaneously believe
that the actual outcome (the toy lighting up) is not part
of the verb’s meaning. The theory of lexical semantics
proposed by Rappaport Hovav & Levin (2010)
involves a lexicon of verbs with a complementary
distribution of meanings: a verb can either refer to a
means or an outcome, but not both2. The persistence of
infants’ attempts to light the box after it initially fails
might provide a measure of whether they believe that a
sentence meaning includes the outcome (i.e. predicting
that children who hear dax the box would persist
longer in attempting to make the outcome take place).
In future work, we hope to explore the developmental
trajectory of the finding in the present experiment, and
to discover whether children are aware that verbs label
either just the means or just the outcome.
This line of work represents an important advance
for the study of both language acquisition and early
cognition. Young children are able to draw on many
sources of information to understand goal directed
action; they can not only use language as a general
communicative signal, but also use syntax as a specific
guide to another person’s intentions. For language
learning, these results suggest that children’s early
knowledge of argument structure includes an
understanding of a fundamental means/outcome divide
in verb meaning and of how this divide is syntactically
encoded.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by an NSFGRFP and NSF
Dissertation Improvement Award to M.K., and by the
Center for Brains, Minds, & Machines and John Templeton
Foundation. We thank Laura Schulz, Susan Carey, and the
Snedeker lab group for feedback and discussion!

References
Beisert, M., Zmyj, N., Liepelt, R., Jung, F., Prinz, W., &
Daum, M. M. (2012). Rethinking “Rational Imitation” in
14-Month-Old Infants: A Perceptual Distraction
Approach. PLoS ONE, 7(3), e32563.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
2
There are a small number of proposed exceptions to this rule;
Levin & Rappaport Hovav respond that these examples are cases
of polysemy. In either case the means/outcome divide is a strong
regularity in verb lexicons if not an exception-less rule.

1139

Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D.,
Spelke, E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword
of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration
and discovery. Cognition, 120(3), 322–30.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2010.10.001
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. R. (2002). Word learning is
“smart”: evidence that conceptual information affects
preschoolers’ extension of novel words. Cognition, 84(1),
B11–B22. doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(02)00015-X
Bunger, A., & Lidz, J. (2004). Syntactic bootstrapping and
the internal structure of causative events. In Proceedings
of the 28th Annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development. Boston, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Chen, M. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2013). “Shall we blick?”:
Novel words highlight actors’ underlying intentions for
14-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology, 49(3),
426–431. doi:10.1037/a0029486
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2007). “Obsessed with goals”:
Functions and mechanisms of teleological interpretation
of actions in humans. Acta Psychologica, 124(1), 60–78.
Dowty, D. (1991). Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. Language, 67(3), 547–619.
Fillmore, C. (1968). The case for case. In E. Bach & R. T.
Harms (Eds.), Universals in Linguistic Theory (pp. 1–90).
New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston.
Geojo, A. (2014). Breaking and Entering: Verb Semantics
and Event Structure (Doctoral dissertation). Harvard U.
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Király, I. (2002).
Developmental psychology: Rational imitation in
preverbal infants. Nature, 415(6873), 755–755.
Gergely, G., Nadasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Biro, S. (1995).
Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age.
Cognition, 56, 165–193.
Gleitman, L. R. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1, 3–55.
Goldberg, A. E. (2006). Constructions at Work: The Nature
of Generalization in Language. Oxford University Press.
Hale, K., & Keyser, S. (1993). On argument structure and
the lexical expression of syntactic relations. In K. Hale &
S. Keyser (Eds.), The view from Building 20: Essays in
honor of Sylvain Bromberger. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Hohenstein, J. M. (2005). Language-Related Motion Event
Similarities in English- and Spanish-Speaking Children.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 6(3), 403–425.
Jackendoff, R. (1983). Semantics and Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Király, I., Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2013). Beyond rational
imitation: Learning arbitrary means actions from
communicative demonstrations. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 116(2), 471–486.
doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2012.12.003
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3(3), 299–321.
Leslie, A. M. (1984). Spatiotemporal continuity and the
perception of causality in infants. Perception,13,287–305.

Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A
preliminary investigation. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Levin, B., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (2005). Argument
realization. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Luo, Y., Kaufman, L., & Baillargeon, R. (2009). Young
infants’ reasoning about physical events involving inert
and self-propelled objects. Cognitive Psychology, 58(4),
441–486. doi:10.1016/j.cogpsych.2008.11.001
Maguire, M. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., Imai, M.,
Haryu, E., Vanegas, S., … Sanchez-Davis, B. (2010). A
developmental shift from similar to language-specific
strategies in verb acquisition: A comparison of English,
Spanish, and Japanese. Cognition, 114(3), 299–319.
doi:doi: DOI: 10.1016/j.cognition.2009.10.002
Paulus, M., Hunnius, S., Vissers, M., & Bekkering, H.
(2011). Imitation in infancy: rational or motor resonance?
Child Development, 82(4), 1047–1057.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01610.x
Phillips, A., & Wellman, H. (2005). Infants' understanding
of object-directed action. Cognition, 98, 137–155.
Pinker, S. (2007). The Stuff of Thought: Language as a
Window into Human Nature. London: Penguin Books.
Pulverman, R., Song, L., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Pruden, S. M., &
Golinkoff, R. M. (2013). Preverbal Infants’ Attention to
Manner and Path: Foundations for Learning Relational
Terms. Child Development, 84(1), 241–252.
Rappaport Hovav, M., & Levin, B. (2010). Reflections on
manner/result complementarity. In E. Doron, M.
Rappaport Hovav, & I. Sichel (Eds.), Syntax, Lexical
Semantics, and Event Structure (pp. 21–38). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Slobin, D. (2006). What makes manner of motion salient?
Explorations in linguistic typology, discourse, and
cognition. In M. Hickman & R. M. Stephane (Eds.),
Space in languages: Linguistic systems and cognitive
categories (pp. 59–81). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Soja, N. N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. S. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meaning: object terms and substance terms. Cognition,
38(2), 179–211.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms. Language Typology and
Syntactic Description, 3, 57–149.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language: A UsageBased Theory of Language Acquisition. Harvard
University Press.
Woodward, A. L. (1998). Infants selectively encode the goal
object of an actor’s reach. Cognition, 69, 1–34.
Xu, F., Dewar, K., & Perfors, A. (2009). Induction,
overhypotheses, and the shape bias: In B. M. Hood & L.
R. Santos (Eds.), The Origins of Object Knowledge (pp.
263–284). Oxford University Press.
Yuan, S., Fisher, C., & Snedeker, J. (2012). Counting the
nouns: Simple structural cues to verb meaning. Child
Development, 83, 1382–1399.	  	  

1140

