A computational model of bilingual semantic convergence
Shin-Yi Fang (szf4@psu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802 USA

Benjamin D. Zinszer (bzinszer@gmail.com)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

Ping Li (pul8@psu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802 USA

language spoken. Malt, Sloman, and Gennari (2003)
identified one-to-one, one-to-multiple, multiple-to-one, and
cross-cutting relationships among the lexical categories of
the three languages.
These complex mapping relationships between objects
and names pose a challenge for speakers of two languages.
Malt and Sloman (2003) studied English naming of
common household containers (e.g., plates, cups, utensils)
by 68 non-native speakers of English. Even after many
years of immersion in an English-language environment, the
participants still showed different naming patterns from
native English speakers. Ameel, Storms, Malt, and Sloman
(2005) compared adult Dutch-French simultaneous
bilinguals to monolingual Dutch and French speakers. They
found that object naming patterns by the bilingual speakers
converged toward a pattern that was different from the
naming patterns of monolinguals of each language,
suggesting that even simultaneous bilinguals do not behave
like monolinguals in lexical categorization. Bilingual lexical
representations reflect the convergence of two languages
and are not simply the sum of two separate monolingual
representations (Grosjean, 1989).
Recent investigations have focused on further
characterizing the nature of the lexical representations and
the factors that drive the particular naming patterns that
emerge. Malt, Li, Pavlenko, Zhu, and Ameel (2015)
examined Chinese-English bilinguals who arrived in an
English-speaking environment after age 15. They found that
although the bilinguals’ naming patterns differed
significantly from those of native English speakers, with
increased second language usage, changes can occur to both
L1 and L2 naming patterns. Their findings suggest that the
lexical network remains plastic even in adulthood. Zinszer,
Malt, Ameel, and Li (2014) examined variables
characterizing both language learners and the names given
to individual objects to determine conditions under which
second language learners show better or poorer mastery of
the second language name choice for objects. One factor of
interest was name agreement: the proportion of people who
agree on a name for a particular object. Name agreement has
been shown to have a significant impact on naming latency

Abstract
Patterns of object naming often differ between languages, but
bilingual speakers develop convergent naming patterns in
their two languages that are distinct from those of
monolingual speakers of each language. This convergence
appears to reflect dynamic interactions between lexical
representations for the two languages. In this study, we
present a self-organizing neural network model to simulate
semantic convergence in the bilingual lexicon and investigate
mechanisms underlying semantic convergence. Our results
demonstrate that connections between two languages can be
established through the simultaneous activations of related
words in both languages, and these connections between two
languages pull the two lexicons toward each other. These
results suggest that connections between words in the
bilingual lexicon play a major role in bilinguals’ semantic
convergence. The model provides a foundation for exploring
how various input variables will affect bilingual patterns of
output.
Keywords: object naming; lexical categories; modeling; selforganizing map; bilingual lexicon

Introduction
The relationships between objects and names are not
always consistent across languages. For example, objects
labeled as table for English speakers are divided between
two different words for Polish speakers (stolik for coffee
tables and stól for dining room tables; Wierzbicka, 1992). In
an early study, Kronenfeld, Armstrong, and Wilmoth (1985)
asked speakers of English, Hebrew, and Japanese to sort 11
drinking vessels into categories and found that (a) some
objects that were called cup by American speakers (e.g.,
paper cup, plastic cup) were named by Hebrew speakers
using cos, a word that more closely corresponds to English
glass, and (b) Japanese speakers distinguished paper cups
and metal cups with two different names, koppu and kappu,
based on the material that makes the cup. Malt, Sloman,
Gennari, Shi, and Wang (1999) further investigated lexical
categories across languages by asking speakers of American
English, Argentinean Spanish, and Mandarin Chinese to
name 60 common household containers. They found that
naming patterns differed substantially as a function of the

656

(Kremin, Hamerel, Dordain, De Wilde, & Perrier, 2000),
and lead to different profiles in event-related potential
(Cheng, Schafer, & Akyürek, 2010) and fMRI response
patterns (Kan & Thompson-Schill, 2004). Objects with high
name agreement have stronger object-name associations and
more robust representations. The same object could have a
different degree of name agreement across languages and
result in different level of robustness and entrenchment.
Zinszer et al. found that the name agreement level in both
the first and second language plays an important role in L2
naming patterns. Learner characteristics such as age of
immersion also mattered, suggesting complex dynamic
interactions underlying the acquisition of L2 patterns in
object naming.
The study of the dynamic interactions in a lexical network
lends itself naturally to connectionist representation and
computational modeling. We can think of the lexical
network in terms of a conceptual representation that
includes features, exemplars, and associations rather than
unitary concept nodes in a connectionist network. Influences
of one language on the other can be thought of in terms of
the connection weights that hold between features of the
word meaning and the word form. When a new L2 word
form is taught as a translation equivalent of an L1 word, the
network will set initial weights to match those of the L1
word. The L2 word will be activated by the same features as
the L1 word, and non-native L2 patterns of production will
result. Over time, however, these weights will be modified
by L2 experience and will move away from a uniform
pattern driven by L1. The weights may settle into a pattern
that is the convergence of L1 and L2.
Previous studies implementing a computational model to
test lexical categorization in L1 and L2 object naming have
been models of an individual at fixed state of learned
representation. To capture phenomena such as lexical
interaction, a model is needed that allows manipulating
learning conditions longitudinally. With such a model, it
will ultimately be possible to identify how important learner
characteristics such as age of exposure and proficiency in
each language affect output, as well as lexical input
variables such as frequency of input and similarities
between the lexical items. It will also be possible to
examine both the learning trajectory and the mature state,
and to see how behavior changes with shifts in the relative
degree of first and second language use.
In this study, we build a model based on self-organizing
maps (SOM) to study cross-language lexical interaction. By
building and testing this computational model against
existing data of Ameel et al., this work will provide the
foundation for further modeling studies manipulating
variables such as those just mentioned. SOM is a type of
unsupervised learning that extracts and represents input
similarities (Kohonen, 2001). It achieves this by projecting
the complex stimulus representations from a highdimensional space onto a two-dimensional space while
preserving their topographical structure. Because of this
dimensionality-reduction ability, SOM is also a powerful

Figure 1: The model is composed of three self-organizing
maps. The connection weights between SOMs were
through Hebbian learning.
tool to visualize the complex stimulus relationships in a 2D
space. Past studies have applied SOMs successfully to
model child lexical development and to simulate bilingual
language processing (see Li & Zhao, 2013 for a recent
review). As a first connectionist model of L1-L2 lexical
categorization, the goal of the present study is to identify the
computational mechanisms underlying bilingual lexical
semantic convergence.

Method
Model Architecture
Figure 1 presents a diagrammatic sketch of our model. The
model is a multi-layer SOM network, which includes three
basic SOMs (i.e., semantic, phonological, and
orthographic). As in the standard SOM architecture
(Kohonen, 2001), for each input stimulus, the SOM
identifies a node that is most similar to the input vector as
the Best Matching Unit (BMU), and adjusts the weights of
the BMU so that over time, it can best represent the input. In
addition to adjusting the weights of the BMU, the model
also adjusts the weights of the BMU’s neighbors using a
Gaussian kernel. As training progresses, the weight vectors
of the BMU and its neighboring nodes become more similar
to the input vector. As a result, similar input vectors activate
nodes that are located near one another on the SOMs. All
SOMs were implemented on a two-dimensional square grid
(Kohonen, 1982) and composed of 30 × 40 nodes. Each
node on the grid consists of a high-dimensional weight
vector. In our model, the number of dimensions is based on
an input structure defined by empirical data (see Stimuli).
The three SOMs are connected via associative links updated
by bi-directional Hebbian learning (Hebb, 1949). The three

657

names. In Ameel et al.’s study, the objects were
photographed in color against a neutral background with a
ruler included in front of each object to provide additional
size information. Figure 2 (adapted from Ameel et al., 2005)
provided 4 example pictures, which are usually named as
fles, bus, pot, and brik by Dutch monolinguals (Ameel et al.,
2005).
The semantic SOM was trained using input vectors with
weighted object features. These features are derived from
participants’ judgments of the object features (e.g., “it is
made of glass”; “it is deep and you can put something in
it”). The phonological SOM was trained using vectors
generated from PatPho, a generic phonological pattern
generator for neural networks (Li & MacWhinney, 2002).
The phonological forms of words were represented as
sequences of phonemes, obtained from dictionaries of the
two target languages (New Routledge Dutch Dictionary,
2003, for Dutch; The Oxford-Hachette French Dictionary.
2001, for French). The orthographic SOM was trained using
vectors that are based on the pixel patterns of the images of
the alphabets in a word (see Mikkulainen, 1997, for a
similar method). Each Dutch and French alphabet (the 26
alphabets and è, é, & î) was typed in 12 point, Arial font in
black on a while background measuring 90 × 90 pixels.
Each alphabetic image was divided into 9 cells (3-by-3,
each cell has 900 pixels). The proportion of black pixels in
each cell (i.e., number of black pixels / 900) was then
calculated and used to create a 9-dimension vector for each
letter within a word.

SOMs were shared between two languages. The associative
links between SOMs were distinct for each language.
In addition to the basic SOM architecture, we added
lateral connections (see Sirosh & Miikkulainen, 1994)
between languages in the model to simulate betweenlanguage interactions. The lateral connections are
implemented with the nodes that are fully connected with
each other. The connection weights are updated via the
Hebbian learning rule. Lateral connections have been shown
to play an important role in the neocortex, and
computational models of the primary visual cortex have
relied on lateral connections (Sirosh & Miikkulainen, 1994).
Zhao and Li (2013) also used lateral connections
successfully to simulate a cross-language priming effects,
and Shook and Marian (2013) used lateral connections to
simulate competition between languages in speech
comprehension. Many studies have shown that phonological
representations from both languages may be activated when
bilinguals read in only one language, due to parallel
bilingual lexical activation (Dijkstra, Grainger, & van
Heuven, 1999). Through lateral connections, lexical items
across the two languages can be linked to enter into
cooperation or competition regardless of physical distance.
In our model we assume that when an object is presented to
the semantic SOM, names of both languages will be
activated on phonological SOMs through Hebbian
connections, and the lateral connection between them is
then strengthened via the Hebbian learning rule. As a result,
object naming in the model in either L1 or L2 can be
influenced by both languages through lateral connections.

Training
Figure 3 presents the training timeline of the model: (1) the
semantic and phonological SOMs independently (without
the orthographic SOM) to simulate the learning of the
properties of objects and the pronunciation of words; (2)
Hebbian learning started after 50 epochs, which enabled the
learning of the association between object features and
phonological forms; the orthographic SOM also started at
the 50th epoch to simulate the learning of written words;
and (3) Hebbian learning between the semantic and
orthographic SOMs and between the phonological and
orthographic SOMs began at epoch 100, to simulate the
learning to read process.

Figure 2: Examples of fles, bus, pot, and brik (pictures
from 1 to 4 respectively) for Dutch monolinguals. Adapted
from Ameel et al. (2005).

Stimuli

Figure 3: Schematic representation of the training timeline. SSOM: semantic SOM. P-SOM: phonological SOM. O-SOM:
orthography SOM. S-P Hebbian: Hebbian connections
between semantic SOM and phonological SOM. S-O
Hebbian: Hebbian connections between semantic SOM and
Orthography SOM. P-O Hebbian: Hebbian connections
between phonological SOM and Orthography SOM.

As a starting point we used the monolingual naming data
from Ameel et al. (2005) as the basis of input to the model.
We trained the model on representations of pictures of 73
bottle-like objects that are typically named as bottle, jar, or
container in American English or else to have one or more
salient properties in common with objects called by those

658

Assessment of the model

4(A)

We tested each model at epoch 500. During testing, we
presented all 73 bottle-like objects to the semantic SOM and
examined their activations propagating to the phonological
SOM (simulating the name production process). In order to
distinguish specific language output (i.e., whether the name
given was Dutch or French), we labeled the phonological
BMUs by their language memberships in this process and
only examined the output of the to-be-named language in
the analysis.
We conducted three analyses to evaluate model’s
naming patterns, following the methods used in the
empirical studies of lexical categorization in Ameel et al.
(2005; 2008) and Malt et al. (1999). In the first analysis, we
used the correlation of the name distributions for each
object based on the model’s naming patterns in different
languages. The correlation indicates the extent to which the
same object would elicit same or similar name distributions
in each language (Ameel et al., 2005; Malt et al., 1999). For
this analysis, in the first step, we constructed the name
distribution for each object. The name distribution consists
of a vector of numbers to indicate the number of times a
given name was produced for each object. For example, for
one object, 11 participants called it fles, 10 called it flacon
and 4 called it pot, and none called it by any other name.
This would lead to a vector in which the dimensions for fles,
flacon, and pot are filled with values 11, 10, 4, respectively,
with all other dimensions as 0s. In the second step, given the
name distribution as calculated, we can compute the
similarity of objects with regard to name distributions
within each language, by calculating pairwise Pearson
correlations for each object against every other object. There
are n(n-1)/2 correlations, and thus 2628 correlations for 73
bottle-like objects. We can then correlate these name
similarity values between two language groups. In the last
step, the correlations of name distributions were converted
to Z-values using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation to
normalize the sampling distribution of the correlations.
In order to estimate the correspondence between
simulation and empirical data, we conducted two further
analyses to directly compare the outputs from simulations
and the empirical data. Specifically, we used the
correlations of name distributions for each object to
compare the naming patterns from the empirical data and
the simulation data. For each language group (monolingual
Dutch, monolingual French, bilingual Dutch-French), we
correlated the name similarity values (i.e., the correlation
matrices between object pairs within each language group)
between the empirical data and the simulation data.
Moreover, we compared the dominant category names for
each object between our simulations and the empirical data
from Ameel et al. (2005). Finally, to identify the effect of
lateral connections, we also constructed a model in which
there are no lateral connections between languages.

4(B)

Figure 4: Patterns of correlations between the name
distributions of the language groups. Dutch monolingual denotes
the naming pattern of the Dutch-speaking monolinguals,
Frenchmonolingual the naming pattern of the French-speaking
monolinguals, Dutchbibilngual and Frenchbilingual the Dutch
and French naming pattern of the bilinguals. (4A) the
correlation reported from Figure 5D in Ameel et al. (2005).
(4B) the correlation from our model. The circles represent
the naming patterns. The lines between the circles express
the relations between the naming patterns. The numbers
next to the lines show the correlation coefficient between
the naming patterns.
The training order of each stimulus was randomly assigned.
During training, the learning rate of the SOM, following
previous practice, was linearly decreased from 0.2 to 0.1
during the first 100 epochs and it remained at 0.1 for the rest
of the training. The learning rate for Hebbian learning was
set at 0.2. The initial radius of the neighborhood size was set
at 15, and was adjusted according to the network’s learning
outcome. We used a self-adjustable neighborhood function
according to Li, Zhao and MacWhinney (2007).
The Hebbian connections between semantic and
phonological SOMs within each language (Dutch or French)
were based on the monolingual naming data from Ameel et
al. (2005), which were also scaled according to the name
agreement scores. For example, if an object was named
81.25% as fles and 18.75% as bus in Dutch, the adjusted
connection weights were rescaled by 81.25% for fles and
18.75% for bus. To avoid uncontrolled weight growth, a
multiplicative normalization was applied to the associative
weight vectors to ensure that the largest possible connection
weight is no more than one (Miller & MacKey, 1994).

659

and bilinguals will produce fles in Dutch; whereas if the
activation of fles in Dutch is weak, the activation of bus in
Dutch may outperform fles, due to a combination of its
original activation from Dutch and the strong lateral
activation from French. In this example, the monolinguals
will produce fles, but the bilinguals will produce bus.

Results
Before reporting our simulation results, we briefly
summarize the empirical findings from Ameel et al. (2005).
Ameel et al. reported the correlations of the name
distributions between monolingual and bilingual language
groups as shown in Figure 4(A) (adapted from Figure 5D in
Ameel et al., 2005). There are four circles in the figure, one
for each language of a language group (naming in Dutch by
Dutch monolinguals, naming in French by French
monolinguals, and naming in Dutch by the bilinguals, and
naming in French by the bilinguals). The figure indicates
that the correlation between two bilingual circles is higher
than the correlation between the two monolingual circles
showing that bilinguals arrive at a convergent pattern in
object naming, distinct from monolinguals in each language.
For the first analysis, the correlations between language
groups are presented in Figure 4(B). Similar to Ameel et al.
(2005), our computational model shows higher correlation
between bilinguals’ two languages (0.97) than between two
monolingual languages (0.63), indicating that our model
simulated convergence naming patterns and captured this
aspect of bilinguals’ lexical categorization.
In the second analysis, we compared the empirical and
simulated name distributions, and found that the model that
incorporated lateral connections has higher correlations with
the empirical data than the model in which there was no
lateral connection mechanism: t(38) = 14.02, p < .001 for
Dutch, t(38) = 13.35, p < .001 for French. We also
compared the dominant names produced by the model with
the empirical data from Ameel et al. (2005). We identified
that averaged across 20 individual simulations, there were
93.22% and 92.26% dominant names that were matched in
Dutch and French. The model without lateral connections
showed 82.95% and 86.03% dominant name match in Dutch
and French. Thus, the model with lateral connections
performed significantly better than the model without lateral
connections (t(38) = 18.29, p < .001 for Dutch; t(38) =
10.47, p < .001 for French).
We further examined the model to explore what properties
in the model might have influenced the naming patterns. For
each object, its name could be determined by two sources:
(1) activation from the to-be-named language; (2) crossactivation from the other language. The level of activation is
proportional to the strength of name agreement. In the
empirical study, name agreement is reflected as the
likelihood of a name for an object. The naming pattern was
considered as the sum of both of these two sources of
activation. Our model shows that if an object elicited a
strong level of activation for a word in the to-be-named
language, the output name of the model for bilingual
naming will be the same as the name for monolingual
naming. However, if the activation level is weak in the tobe-named language and the cross-activation from the other
language is strong, the output names of the model could be
different between bilingual naming and monolingual
naming. For example, if a bottle-like object elicited strong
activation of the word fles in Dutch, both the monolinguals

Discussion
In this study, we successfully built a bilingual lexical
categorization model based on a connectionist SOM
architecture that has been previously tested in other domains
of language acquisition and bilingual processing. Our model
simulated bilingual semantic convergence in the naming of
common household objects as reported in the empirical
literature (Ameel et al., 2005).
Our simulation also showed that the strength of name
agreement is an important factor to determine lexical
naming patterns for bilinguals. If the object has high name
agreement in one language, the influence from the other
language through lateral connection cannot easily change its
name and vice versa. Such changes can occur only if the
influence from other language is very strong. This is
consistent with Zinser et al. (2014) who found that the level
of agreement can predict the native-likeness of responses.
Furthermore, our model suggested that the relatioship
between the two languages in the levels of name agreement
are competition and cooperation, as reflected in the
associative mapping between languages.
Our model with additional lateral connections also
performed significantly better than the model in which
lateral connections are not included. This is particularly
important as our model is designed to simulate the dynamic
interactions between two languages, and lateral connections
play a critical role in bilingual lexical categorization,
consistent with findings from Zhao and Li (2013). Our
results demonstrate how, for simultaneous bilinguals, the
processing of one language can be influenced by the other
language (i.e., bi-directional influences between languages).
The viability of our model paves the way to use modeling to
study a wide range of learner and object name variables that
may influence behavioral outcomes for simultaneous and
sequential bilinguals (such as variables discussed before,
including age of onset, proficiency, and frequency of input).
Our simulations also provide a mechanistic account for
the idea of retrieval-induced reconsolidation as applied to
cross-language lexical interaction, as proposed by Wolff and
Ventura (2009). The idea of retrieval-induced
reconsolidation originated from memory research (Alberini,
2005) in which consolidated memories become labile and
vulnerable to change when they are re-activated through
retrieval. During this vulnerable period, other active
information can alter or modulate the original memory.
Eventually, the activated memory will re-stabilize through
reconsolidation, but it may be different from the original
memory. Wolff and Ventura suggested that processing of
one language is affected by the other language when the one
language is activated in the labile stage. Our simulation is

660

consistent with this hypothesis and provides a concrete
instantiation of such an idea. When an object activates
names in both languages, the connections between two
languages begin to be established.

(Ed.), Directions in cognitive anthropology (pp. 91–113).
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Li, P. & MacWhinney, B. (2002). PatPho : A phonological
pattern generator for neural networks, Behavior Research
Methods Instruments and Computers, 34(3), 408–415.
Li, P., & Zhao, X. (2013). Self-organizing map models of
language acquisition. Frontiers in psychology,
4(November), 828. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00828
Li, P., Zhao, X., & MacWhinney, B. (2007). Dynamic selforganization and early lexical development in children.
Cognitive Science, 31, 581–612.
Malt, B. C., Li, P., Pavlenko, A., Zhu, H., & Ameel, E.
(2015). Bidirectional lexical interaction in late immersed
Mandarin-English bilinguals. Journal of Memory and
Language, 82, 86–104.
Malt, B. C., & Sloman, S. A. (2003). Linguistic diversity
and object naming by non-native speakers of English.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6, 47–67.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. a., & Gennari, S. P. (2003).
Universality and language specificity in object naming.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49(1), 20–42.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230–262.
Miller, K. D., & MacKay, D. J. (1994). The role of
constraints in Hebbian learning. Neural Computation,
6(1), 100-126.
Pavlenko, A., & Malt, B. C. (2010). Kitchen Russian:
Cross-linguistic differences and first-language object
naming by Russian–English bilinguals. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 14(01), 19–45.
Shook, A., & Marian, V. (2013). The bilingual language
interaction network for comprehension of speech.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16(2).
Sirosh, J., & Miikkulainen, R. (1994). Self-organizing
feature maps with lateral connections: modeling ocular
dominance. In M. C. Mozer and P. Smolensky and D. S.
Touretzky and J. L. Elman and A. S. Weigend (eds.)
Proceedings of the 1993 Connectionist Models Summer
School (CMSS-93, Boulder, CO), 31-38. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Wierzbicka, A. (1992). Semantics, culture, and cognition.
Oxford: Oxford University Press
Wolff, P., & Ventura, T. (2009). When Russians learn
English: How the semantics of causation may change.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 12(02), 153.
Zhao, X., & Li, P. (2013). Simulating cross-language
priming with a dynamic computational model of the
lexicon. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16(2),
288–303.
Zinszer, B. D., Malt, B. C., Ameel, E., & Li, P. (2014).
Native-likeness in second language lexical categorization
reflects individual language history and linguistic
community norms. Frontiers in psychology, 5(October),
1203. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01203

Conclusion
This study used a connectionist self-organizing model to
simulate object naming patterns in bilinguals and to identify
mechanisms of lexical semantic convergence. We
successfully replicated the lexical convergence patterns
reported in empirical data from Ameel et al. (2005), and we
further investigated the mechanisms and important factors
that modulate bilinguals’ naming categorization. We
demonstrated that lateral connections play an important role
in lexical convergence. Finally, we have identified the role
of name agreement strength on bilinguals’ object naming.
This study provides a first computational model that
examines the dynamic interaction between two lexicons in
the process of naming objects in monolingual or bilingual
language contexts.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the
National Science Foundation (BCS-1057855) to BCM and
PL.

References
Alberini, C. M. (2005). Mechanisms of memory
stabilization: Are consolidation and reconsolidation
similar or distinct processes? Trends in Neuroscience, 28,
51–56.
Cheng, X., Schafer, G., & Akyurek, E. (2010). Name
Agreement in Picture Naming: An ERP study.
Internatinal Journal of Psychophysiology. 76(3):130-41
Grosjean, F. (1989). Neurolinguists, beware! The bilingual
is not two monolinguals in one person. Brain and
Language, 36, 3-15.
Hebb, D. (1949). The organization of behavior: A
neuropsychological theory. New York, NY: Wiley.
Kan, I. P. & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2004). Selection from
perceptual and conceptual representations. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 4, 466-482.
Kremin, H., Hamerel, M., Dordain, M., De Wilde, M., &
Perrier, D. (2000). Age of acquisition and name
agreement as predictors of mean response latencies in
picture naming of French adults. Brain & Cognition, 43,
286-291.
Kohonen, T. (1982). Self-organized formation of
topologically correct
feature
maps.
Biological
Cybernetics, 43, 59–69.
Kohonen, T. (2001). The self-organizing maps. (3rd ed.).
Berlin: Springer.
Kronenfeld, D. B., Armstrong, J. D., & Wilmoth, S. (1985).
Exploring the internal structure of linguistic categories:
An extensionist semantic view. In J. W. D. Dougherty

661

