A Hierarchical Cognitive Threshold Model of Human Decision Making on
Different Length Optimal Stopping Problems
Maime Guan (hongyang@uci.edu)
Michael D. Lee (mdlee@uci.edu)
Joachim Vandekerckhove (joachim@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617 USA
Abstract

known optimal solution is to choose the first value that is
both currently maximal and above a certain mathematically
derived threshold for the current position in the sequence
(Gilbert & Mosteller, 1966, Table 2).
Our previous work (e.g., Guan & Lee, 2014; Lee, 2006)
found evidence that people use a series of thresholds to make
decisions, and that there are large individual differences in
thresholds, with many people using suboptimal thresholds.
In this paper, we examine decision making on two optimal
stopping tasks with different lengths. In one task, people
must choose the maximum out of 5 numbers, and in the other
they must choose the maximum out of 10 numbers. If there
are psychological components that determine the thresholds
in which people use, such as risk propensity or intelligence,
then we should expect behavior to be similar between the two
tasks. For instance, participants who use thresholds higher
than optimal in the length 5 task should also use thresholds
higher than optimal in the length 10 task. A recruiter who is
generally picky and willing to hold out until the perfect candidate comes along will have relatively high thresholds for job
applicants whether they are choosing from 5 applicants or 10.
Our goal is to develop a hierarchical threshold model for
the optimal stopping problem that can account for the deviation or bias from optimality in terms of psychological variables, and be applicable to optimal stopping problems of any
length. In the following section, we describe the experiment
and the data set we use. Next, we present a series of threshold
models leading up to a hierarchical psychological threshold
model that is applied jointly to tasks of different lengths. We
then present the results from using Bayesian methods to apply these threshold models to the behavioral data, and discuss
the implications of the results.

In optimal stopping problems, people are asked to choose the
maximum out of a sequence of values, under the constraint
that a number can only be chosen when it is presented. We
present a series of threshold models of human decision making on optimal stopping problems, including a new hierarchical
model that assumes individual differences in threshold setting
are controlled by deviations or biases from optimality associated with risk propensity, and is applicable to optimal stopping
problems of any length. Using Bayesian graphical modeling
methods, we apply the models to previous data involving 101
participants with large individual differences who completed
sets of length 5 and length 10 problems. Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of the bias-from-optimal hierarchical
model, find individual differences in thresholds that people
use, but also find that these individual differences are stable
across the two optimal stopping tasks.
Keywords: optimal stopping; secretary problem; sequential decision-making; threshold models; hierarchical Bayesian
modeling

Introduction
The optimal stopping problem, also known as the secretary
problem, is a decision-making task in which people must
choose the highest value out of a sequence of numbers, under the constraint that a number can only be chosen when it is
presented (Ferguson, 1989; Gilbert & Mosteller, 1966). Optimal stopping problems are interesting for understanding human decision making because they have two features found
in many real-world decision-making settings. The first feature is that there is no going back. Oftentimes, it is difficult
or even impossible to decline an earlier option and then return to it later. For example, in searching for jobs, it is almost
impossible to come back to a job offer that you have already
rejected. The second feature is that only the best will do. In
some real-world situations, there is only one best option and
any other option is completely and equally useless. For example, trying to find the correct key out of a set to open the
door to your house will only result in success if you find the
lone correct house key.
In the cognitive sciences, people’s decision making on a
number of different versions of optimal stopping problems
have been studied. One is the classic rank order version,
in which only the rank of the current option relative to the
options already seen is presented (e.g., Seale & Rapoport,
1997, 2000). We focus on the alternative full-information
version of the task, in which people are presented with the actual continuously-scaled values of the alternatives (e.g., Lee,
2006). In the full information optimal stopping problem, the

Burns, Lee, and Vickers (2006) Data
The optimal stopping data set we use is a subset of a larger
data set taken from Burns et al. (2006), which includes data
from various cognitive and perceptual optimization problems,
as well as various standard psychometric tests of intelligence.
The original data set includes a total of 101 participants recruited from the general community, with within-participants
data for the set of cognitive, perceptual, and psychometric
tasks. We use just the two optimal stopping tasks, which involved 40 problems of length 5 and 40 problems of length
10.
Each participant completed the two sets of optimal stop-

824

Threshold

Bias-From-Optimal Independent

risk

β,γ 5

β,γ 10

bias from optimal
thresholds

τ5

τ 10

threshold choice
data

y5

y 10

τ5

thresholds

Bias-From-Optimal Joint

τ 10

bias from optimal
thresholds

threshold choice
data

y5

y 10

β,γ

risk

τ5

τ 10

threshold choice
data

y5

y 10

Figure 1: Conceptual overview of the threshold model, bias-from-optimal model independently applied, and bias-from-optimal
model jointly applied to the optimal stopping data for problems of length 5 and length 10.

ping problems through a computer interface. All participants
completed the length 5 set first, followed by the length 10 set,
and completed the same 40 problems within each set. The order of problems within each set was randomized across participants.
Participants were instructed to pick the highest value out
of a set of dollar amounts that ranged from 0 to 100. They
were told (1) the length of the sequence, (2) that the dollar
amounts were uniformly and randomly distributed, (3) that a
value could only be chosen when it is presented, (4) that any
value that is not the maximum is completely and equally incorrect as the others, and (5) that the last value must be chosen if no values were chosen in all previous positions. Participants indicated whether or not they chose each presented
value by pressing either a “yes” or “no” button. After each
problem, participants were provided with feedback on their
response.
We removed 3 contaminant participants from the length 5
task, and 7 participants from the length 10 task, because they
choose values that were not currently maximal on more than
10% of the problems (excepting the final value, which is a
forced choice).

The first threshold model consists of a set of independent
thresholds, which are assumed to generate the data by a simple choice model that selects with high probability the first
presented value that is above the threshold, and currently
maximal. The hierarchical “bias-from-optimal” model generates thresholds based on latent psychological parameters,
representing biases of deviations from suboptimality each individual has. In the bias-from-optimal independent model,
we apply this model independently to both the length 5 and
length 10 data. In the final bias-from-optimal joint model,
however, we apply make the assumption that individual-level
bias is the same for both length problems, and apply the
model simultaneously to both sets of problems.

Threshold Model
The threshold model has independent threshold parameters
m
τm
i1 , ..., τi(m−1) for the ith participant in each of the first m − 1
positions. Since the last value in a sequence must be chosen,
the threshold τm
im for that position is always 0. These threshold
parameters are unconstrained, with the same uniform prior
m−1
probability on the subspace of 0, 1
. According to the
threshold choice model, the probability the ith participant will
choose the value they are presented in the kth position on their
jth problem is
n
o
(
m if vm > τm & vm = max vm , . . . , vm
α
i
i j1
i jk
ik
i jk
i jk
θm
i jk =
1−αm
i
otherwise
m

Overview of Models
Previous work suggests that people use threshold-based rules
to make decisions in optimal stopping problems (e.g., Guan
& Lee, 2014; Lee, 2006). In this section, we develop a set
of three threshold models that start with the simple threshold
model we have used previously, but then extend the model
hierarchically to add cognitive processes and parameters accounting for how the thresholds themselves are generated.
This theoretical progress is summarized in Figure 1, using
a schematic form of graphical model representation.

m−1 m
for the first four positions and θm
i jm = 1 − ∑k=1 θi jk for the last
position, where αm
i ∼ Uniform 0, 1 is the individual-level
“accuracy of execution” parameter that describes how often
the deterministic threshold model is followed (Guan & Lee,

825

β
β
β
β
β
β

100

Value

80

how quickly thresholds are reduced throughout the problem
sequence, relative to the optimal rate of reduction. Positive
values of γ produce thresholds that drop too slowly, while
negative values of γ produce thresholds that drop too quickly.
The middle panel of Figure 1 provides an overview of the
bias-from-optimal model. The βi and γi parameters now generate the thresholds τ m
i that the participant uses, and the same
threshold choice process is then assume to generate the observed behavioral data.

= 0, γ = 0
= 1, γ = 0
= 0, γ = 12
= 0, γ = −1
= 12 , γ = 21
= −1, γ = 0

60

40

Bias-From-Optimal Joint Model

20

The bias-from-optimal model generates thresholds for problems of any length based on the β and γ parameters. This
means it can be applied jointly to both the length 5 and length
10 tasks in our data set. The right panel in Figure 1 shows the
hierarchical graphical model that achieves this simultaneous
application. There are now single βi and γi parameters for
the ith participant that generate predictions about decisions
on both tasks
We implemented all of our models as graphical models using JAGS (Plummer, 2003), to facilitate MCMC-based computational Bayesian inference (Lee & Wagenmakers, 2013).
Figure 3 shows this final bias-from-optimal joint model in the
graphical modeling formalism. The latent parameters corresponding to the thresholds τ m
i and accuracy of execution
αm
i are represented by unshaded and circular nodes, since
they are unobserved and continuous. The values v mj presented on the jth problem, standardized to lie between 0 and
1, instead of the 0 to 100 scale used in the experiment, are
shown as a shaded node, since they are observed and continuous. Together, the parameters and problem values determine
the probabilities θm
i j for each possible decision, shown as a
double-bordered node since it is a deterministic function of
its parents in the graphical model. The decision ym
i j is shown
as a shaded and square node, since it is observed and discrete.
Encompassing plates for participants and problems indicate
independent replications of the graph structure in the model.

0
1

2

3

4

5

Position

Figure 2: The behavior of the bias-from-optimal threshold
model under different parameterizations.

2014). The threshold model is completed by the observed
data being distributed according to the choice probabilities,
so that

m
m
ym
i j ∼ Categorical θi j1 , . . . , θi j5 .

Bias-From-Optimal Independent Model

In the threshold model, the thresholds are free parameters and
can consequently take any shape across positions. The biasfrom-optimal model constrains the relationship between the
thresholds by modeling each participant’s thresholds in terms
of how they deviate from optimality.
We denote the optimal thresholds as τ̃1 , . . . , τ̃m for a problem of length m (Gilbert & Mosteller, 1966, Table 2).
The ith participant’s thresholds now depend on a parameter
βm
i ∼ Gaussian 0, 1 that determines how far above or below their threshold
is from optimal, and a parameter γm
i ∼

Gaussian 0, 1 that determines how much their bias increases
or decreases as the sequence progresses. Formally, the ith
participant’s thresholds for a problem of length m is

Modeling Results

k m
−1 m
m
τm
ik = Φ Φ (τ̃k ) + βi + γi
m

In this section, we apply all three models to all of the data
from both optimal stopping tasks. We first examine the descriptive adequacy of each model, and the thresholds they infer. We then present a generalization test of the joint model,
in which the data from one task are withheld. All of our modeling results are based on four chains of 2000 samples each,
collected after 1000 discarded burn-in samples. The chains
were verified for convergence using the standard R̂ statistic
(Brooks & Gelman, 1997).

for the first m − 1 positions, and τm
im = 0 for the last. The link
functions Φ and Φ−1 are the Gaussian CDF and inverse CDF,
respectively. The remainder of the bias-from-optimal model
is identical to the threshold model, completed by the choice
probabilities θm
i jk determined by the ith participant’s accuracy
of execution αm
i for a task of length m, and the problem values.
Figure 2 shows how the shape of threshold functions
changes with different values of β and γ. The optimal threshold corresponds to the case with β = 0 and γ = 0, and is shown
in bold. The β parameter represents a shifting bias from
this optimal curve, with positive values resulting in thresholds that are above optimal, and negative values resulting in
thresholds that are below optimal. The γ parameter represents

Descriptive Adequacy
We first measured the ability of the models to describe the behavioral data, using a standard Bayesian approach based on
posterior predictive checking (Gelman, Carlin, Stern, & Rubin, 2004). Specifically, we measured the agreement between
each model’s modal posterior prediction and the observed

826

βi

τ̃ 5

τi5

αi

βi ∼ Gaussian(0, 1)

γi

γi ∼ Gaussian(0, 1)
τi10

αi ∼ Uniform(0, 1)

τ̃ 10

m = 0
τim

vj5

5
θij

5
yij

10
θij

vj10

10
yij



m
τik
= Φ Φ−1 (τ̃km ) + βi +

m =
θijk
m
θijm
=
m
yij
∼

j problems


 αi

k
m γi


n

m > τ m & v m = max v m , . . . , v m
if vijk
ij1
ik
ijk
ijk



1−αi
m otherwise
P
m
1 − m−1
k=1 θijk
m
Categorical(θij
)

o

i subjects

Figure 3: Graphical model for the joint application of the bias-from-optimal threshold model to both length 5 and length 10
optimal stopping tasks.

decision for each participant on each problem. The posterior predictive agreement for the threshold model is 87% and
89%, for the bias-from-optimal model applied independently
it is 86% and 84%, and for the bias-from-optimal model applied jointly it is 81% and 82%, for the length 5 and length
10 problems, respectively. Given that that the base-rate or
chance level of agreement are 20% and 10%, we conclude
all three models provide reasonable accounts of participants’
behavior.

a number of important advantages. One is that it is parameterized in terms of psychologically interpretable deviations
from optimality, rather than simple thresholds. Another is
that its simplicity—coming from the stronger theoretical assumptions it formalizes—means it requires fewer data to infer
thresholds. This advantage can be seen clearly in the inferred
thresholds for the length 10 problem for the second participant in Figure 4. Because this participant used relatively low
thresholds, they rarely progressed far in problems for that
task, and there are few decisions that inform the threshold
model for later positions in the sequence. As a result, the inferences of the threshold model are much less constrained or
informed than for the bias-from-optimal model.
Figure 4 also shows close agreement between the biasfrom-optimal model applied independently and jointly to the
two tasks. This result suggests that the individual differences
across problem lengths are stable. That is, the same deviations from optimality parameterized by β and γ generate appropriate thresholds for a participant for both the length 5
and length 10 problems. This is clear in the representative
participants with, for example, the second participant using
thresholds that start low and decrease quickly for both problem lengths, while the fourth participant uses thresholds that
start high and decrease slowly.

Inferred Thresholds
Figure 4 shows the inferred thresholds, under all three models on both the length 5 and length 10 problems, for four representative participants. These participants were chosen because they span the sorts of individual differences seen across
all participants in the data set.1 The third participant, for example, has higher starting thresholds than the first participant,
but drops their threshold more quickly, consistent with a positive β and negative γ parameterization. The fourth participant
also has higher starting thresholds than the first participant but
barely drops their threshold as position increases, consistent
with positive β and γ.
Figure 4 shows close agreement between the inferred
thresholds for all three models, on both problem lengths, for
all four representative participants. The agreement between
the threshold and bias-from-optimal model indicates that the
cognitive model we developed is a useful one. The threshold model is free to find whatever thresholds are likely given
the data. The bias-from-optimal model is simpler and more
constrained, yet infers very similar thresholds for all four representative participants (and the vast majority of all participants) for both problem lengths. Given its ability to generate appropriate thresholds, the bias-from-optimal model has

Individual Differences
Figure 5 summarizes the individual differences across all participants, using the inferences of the bias-from-optimal model
applied jointly to both problem lengths. The posterior expected means of the β and γ for all participants are shown as a
scatterplot in the main panel, with their marginal distributions
shown as histograms. The dotted lines represent the no bias
values for both parameters, corresponding where they meet
to optimal thresholds. The range of individual differences is
apparent, with both β and γ varying from positive to negative

1 The results for all participants can be found at http://osf.io/
vga6n.

827

Value

100

100

100

100

80

80

80

80

60

60

60

60

40

40

40

40

20

20

20

20

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

0

Threshold
BFO Independent
BFO Joint

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Position

Figure 4: Inferred thresholds for four representative participants for both length 5 and length 10 problems, based on the threshold
model, bias-from-optimal model applied independently, and bias-from optimal model applied jointly.

has a known optimal solution to which human performance
can be compared, providing a benchmark for the study of optimality and bias. In this study, we examined performance
on optimal stopping problems on two different length optimal stopping problems. We developed a hierarchical cognitive model that conceived of individuals generating thresholds
based on two sorts of biases or deviations from optimality.
The bias parameter β reflects how far above or below an individual’s threshold strays from the optimal, the γ parameter reflects how slowly or quickly their threshold drops as position
in the sequence increases. We found that the thresholds generated by our bias-from-optimal model agreed closely with
the thresholds independently estimated in a non-hierarchical
way, suggesting it is a useful model of the cognitive process
of threshold generation. Moreover, the bias parameters were
stable across the two task, suggesting that there could be common latent psychological components that help determine the
thresholds people use. For example, we might expect that relatively high risk propensity in individuals would be reflected
in relatively greater deviation from the optimal threshold.

biases, and all four quadrants around optimality populated by
participants. There does appear to be, however, a relationship
between the two bias parameters, with negative values of β
often paired with positive values of γ, and vice versa. This
suggests that participants who bias their thresholds to be too
high also decrease them faster than is optimal. while participants who set their thresholds too low tend to decrease them
more slowly than is optimal.

Generalization Performance
In our jointly applied bias-from-optimal model, the β and γ
parameters are stable for the same person on problems of the
two different lengths. This means that observing behavior
in one task should allow the joint model to make useful predictions about behavior in the other, at the level of individual participants. To examine this possibility, we conducted
two generalization tests (Busemeyer & Wang, 2000). In the
first, we withheld the decision data of all participants from the
length 10 task. We then used the observed decisions from the
length 5 problem to predict the withheld length 10 problem
decisions, based on the mode of the posterior predictive distribution for each participant on each problem. The overall
proportion of agreement was 69%, which can be compared
to a random-choice base-rate of 10%. In the second generalization test, we withheld the decision data of all participants
from the length 5 task and used the observed decisions from
the length 10 problem to predict the withheld length 5 problem decisions. The overall proportion of agreement was 74%,
which can be compared to the base-rate of 20%. We think
both generalization tests show impressive performance, and
highlight the advantage of hierarchical models that are able
to make predictions about tasks for which they have not observed data.

A natural advantage of this hierarchical approach is that it
becomes possible to apply the model simultaneously to optimal stopping problems of any length. The use of the same
latent variables to explain observations in multiple tasks is a
hallmark of good modeling throughout the empirical sciences
(Lee, 2011), but the hierarchical use of psychological variables to make simultaneous predictions about behavior in different tasks is not widely seen in the cognitive sciences (Lee
& Sarnecka, 2011; Vandekerckhove, 2014). Our demonstration of the stability of individual differences, and the ability
to make accurate generalization predictions, provides a good
example of how hierarchical models can be tested and applied
across multiple tasks.
Natural future directions would be to understand the basis of these individual differences in bias or risk, and relate
this measure to other psychometric measures of intelligence
or personality, as well as to other decision-making tasks that
involve decision making under uncertainty.

Discussion
Optimal stopping problems are interesting in that they have
two features often found in the real world: there is no going
back, and only the best will do. The full-information version

828

2

1

γ

4
1

0
2

3

−1

−2
−2

−1

0

β

1

2

Figure 5: Joint and marginal distributions of the posterior means for the β and γ bias-from-optimal parameters over all participants. The four representative participants used in Figure 4 are highlighted.

Acknowledgments

Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 553–
558). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Lee, M. D. (2006). A hierarchical Bayesian model of human decision-making on an optimal stopping problem.
Cognitive Science, 30, 555–580.
Lee, M. D. (2011). How cognitive modeling can benefit from
hierarchical Bayesian models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 55(1), 1–7.
Lee, M. D., & Sarnecka, B. W. (2011). Number knowerlevels in young children: Insights from a Bayesian
model. Cognition, 120, 391–402.
Lee, M. D., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2013). Bayesian Cognitive Modeling: A Practical Course. Cambridge University Press.
Plummer, M. (2003). JAGS: A program for analysis of
Bayesian graphical models using Gibbs sampling. In
K. Hornik, F. Leisch, & A. Zeileis (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 3rd international workshop on distributed statistical computing. Vienna, Austria.
Seale, D. A., & Rapoport, A. (1997). Sequential decision
making with relative ranks: An experimental investigation of the “Secretary Problem”. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 69, 221–236.
Seale, D. A., & Rapoport, A. (2000). Optimal stopping behavior with relative ranks. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 13, 391–411.
Vandekerckhove, J. (2014). A cognitive latent variable model
for the simultaneous analysis of behavioral and personality data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 60,
58–71.

MG acknowledges support from the National Science
Foundation—Graduate Research Fellowship Program (grant
#DGE-1321846). JV was supported by grant #1230118
from NSF’s Methods, Measurements, and Statistics panel and
grant #48192 from the John Templeton Foundation.

References
Brooks, S. P., & Gelman, A. (1997). General methods for
monitoring convergence of iterative simulations. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 7, 434–
455.
Burns, N. R., Lee, M. D., & Vickers, D. (2006). Are individual differences in performance on perceptual and
cognitive optimization problems determined by general
intelligence? The Journal of Problem Solving, 1(1), 3.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Wang, Y. M. (2000). Model comparisons and model selections based on generalization criterion methodology. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 44(1), 171–189.
Ferguson, T. S. (1989). Who solved the secretary problem?
Statistical Science, 4, 282–296.
Gelman, A., Carlin, J. B., Stern, H. S., & Rubin, D. B. (2004).
Bayesian Data Analysis (Second ed.). Boca Raton, FL:
Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Gilbert, J. P., & Mosteller, F. (1966). Recognizing the maximum of a sequence. American Statistical Association
Journal, 61, 35–73.
Guan, M., & Lee, M. D. (2014). Threshold models of human decision making on optimal stopping problems in
different environments. In P. Bello, M. Mcshane, &
B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual

829

