A Rational Model for Individual Differences in Preference Choice
Sheeraz Ahmad (sahmad@cs.ucsd.edu)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego

Angela J. Yu (ajyu@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego
Abstract

is irrational and sub-optimal (Tversky, 1972; Kahneman et
al., 1982). More recently, it has been proposed that these
peculiarities may arise from specific idiosyncrasies in neural
architecture or dynamics in brain areas that support preference choice (Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993; Roe et al., 2001;
Usher & McClelland, 2004; Trueblood, 2012).
In contrast to a purely utility-based account of preference
choice, we recently proposed an alternative normative model
of decision-making (Shenoy & Yu, 2013), which assumed
that humans do not have fixed, perfectly known utility values assigned to options, but instead may suffer uncertainties
about how to assign utilities both within an attribution dimension and also jointly for a combination of attribute values in
a multi-attribute scenario. Consequently, observers use available options not only to make choices, as assumed by previous utility-based models of preference choice, but also to
learn about the range and distribution of attribute values generally available in the “market”, as well as some market-based
sense for how the attributes ought to be valued against each
other. By this account, the addition of a third option confers extra information about the “market” and may therefore
influence the relative preference between the two original options, with the effect expected to be particularly strong when
the decision-maker has relatively little experience with the
particular “market.” For example, in the PhD applicant example, suppose a professor is evaluating applications of students
from a foreign country (whose academic structure is not well
known to him), and he must choose between an applicant A
who has a test score of 290 and a grade of 90, and an applicant
B with a test score of 300 and a grade of 80. Based on this
data alone, he may not have a strong preference between the
applicants, but if a third applicant C comes in with a test score
of 290 and a grade of 130, the professor may strongly shift
his relative preference between A and B toward B (though
he may prefer C over both A and B), since C’s grade of 130
shows that a grade of 90 over 80 is not really much of an advantage at all. Indeed, we showed that this inferential model
was able to account for all three classical contextual effects:
attraction, compromise, and similarity (Shenoy & Yu, 2013).
This earlier model provided a normative explanation for
why contextual effects arise in rational decision-makers. It
also provided a means for modeling individual differences, by
allowing different individuals to have different prior beliefs
about the distribution of attribute values in different dimensions and how a combination of attribute values from multiple

Human preference choice suffers curious contextual effects:
the relative preference between two multi-attribute options
(e.g. cars with differing safety and economy ratings) can dramatically shift, depending on the presence/absence of additional options. This phenomenon defies any simple utilitybased account of choice, and has been taken to imply
irrationalities/sub-optimalities in human decision-making, or
reflect idiosyncrasies in neural processing. Recently, we used
a Bayesian model to show that these contextual effects are normative consequences of observers using options to learn about
the “market”. However, it had an unsavory implication that
all decision-makers asymptotically converge to the same beliefs/behavior. Here, we propose a new model that uses both
market and personal utilities to make choices. This model still
captures the contextual effects, while also allowing asymptotic
differences in individual preferences and providing a general
framework for explaining how consumption informs one’s beliefs and preferences.
Keywords: decision making; preference choice; multiattribute; contextual effects; individual differences; Bayesian
learning

Introduction
Humans are regularly faced with decisions involving a choice
between options with multiple attributes. For example, one
may have to choose between a car that has a higher safety
rating but lower mileage and another that has a lower safety
rating but higher mileage; or one may have to choose between a PhD applicant who has better grades but worse letters
and another that has worse grades but better letters. There
may not be a universal or obvious way to make these decisions, and indeed humans often exhibit inconsistencies in
their choices. One particular class of peculiarities in human
preference choice has garnered special attention in psychology research, namely a type of contextual effects whereby an
individual’s relative preference between two options can be
altered, or even reversed, when a third option (a ‘decoy’) is
introduced into the choice-set (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979;
Kahneman et al., 1982; Tversky & Simonson, 1993).
The discovery of these contextual effects has caused difficulty for traditional, utility-based accounts of preferencebased decision-making in humans. If each option has an associated scalar utility for an individual, and the probability
of choosing option A monotonically depends on the utility
of option A in comparison to the utility of option B, then
the relative preference between A and B should not change
when a third option, C, is added or removed (Luce, 1959;
Thurstone, 1954; Tversky, 1972). This contradiction has contributed to the school of thought that human decision-making

54

Consumption Model

dimensions jointly determine the utility function. However, it
makes the odd prediction that all decision-makers will eventually converge to the same beliefs about the market, given
sufficient exposure to the various options available in the market; in Bayesian parlance, this is because the iteratively updated posterior distribution will converge to the same (delta)
function regardless of the prior distribution. This prediction
flies in the face of empirical data (Malaviya & Sivakumar,
1998; Müller et al., 2012) and casual observations that different individuals often exhibit systematic and long-lasting
differences in their preference choices.
In this work, we propose an alternate Bayesian account of
preference choice, which captures the notion that each person
entertains beliefs about both the market-based utility function (learned from exposure to available options, or “window shopping”) and a personal utility function (learned from
choosing/consuming specific options), and combines the two
in making preference choices. The introduction of this personal utility function allows individuals to have persistent diversity in their preference choices. In the following, we first
describe the three classical contextual effects, then the new
Bayesian model, followed by simulation results that compare
our model against classical contextual effects and more subtle
individual differences, as well as against the previous model
(Shenoy & Yu, 2013) in the context of asymptotic learning;
we conclude with a discussion of the broader implications of
this work, relationship to related work, and potential directions for future research.

We consider an option space with two attributes, which are
combined using a Cobb-Douglas utility function (Douglas,
1976), parametrized by γ, which specifies the relative importance of the two attributes to the joint utility function. The
utility or value of an option (x, y) is v = xγ y1−γ . Note that
the two attributes nonlinearly combine to determine the utility function: this captures diminishing marginal utility, or the
idea that differential change in an already abundant attribute
contributes less to the overall utility than a similar change in
a scarce attribute (Hicks, 1932).
In our model, there are two parameters that contribute to
the attribute trade-off, in turn affecting the multi-attribute utility function. The market utility, vm = xγ y1−γ , is parametrized
by market tradeoff parameter γ, and the personal utility, v p =
xλ y1−λ , is parametrized by the personal tradeoff parameter λ.
We propose the following way to combine these towards a
net utility: v = vwm v1−w
p , since it leads to a simplified form:
ζ
1−ζ
v=x y
(ζ , wγ + (1 − w)λ), and intuitively provides an
“average” of the two utilities (in this case, a generalized geometric mean). The parameter w can be interpreted as a personality trait dictating how much an individual values uniqueness as opposed to conforming to the market. For example,
consider a consumer buying a car; even though she may be
more price-conscious herself, she might still want to buy a
trendy, more expensive car because of external considerations
like status symbol, peer pressure or resale value (w > 0.5). A
more rebellious consumer may value uniqueness more and
make a decision primarily based on her own preference, giving little consideration to market preferences (w < 0.5).

Three Contextual Effects
Three classical contextual effects have been observed when
starting from two originally equally preferable options (say
X and Y), each with two attributes: (1) attraction effect
(Fig. 1A) (Huber & Payne, 1982; Heath & Chatterjee, 1995),
where introduction of an option Z, that is close to Y and is
dominated by it on both attributes, leads to an increased preference of Y over X. (2) compromise effect (Fig. 1B) (Simonson, 1989), where introduction of an extreme option Z, that is
better than Y on one attribute and inferior on the other, as well
as is farther from X, again leads to an increased preference
of Y over X. (3) similarity effect (Fig. 1C) (Tversky, 1972),
where the introduction of an option Z, that is almost comparable to Y on both attributes, leads to an increased preference
of X over Y.

The generative model (Fig. 2A) also assumes that depending on whether the option is consumed or not (ci ∈ {0, 1}), the
individual gets different levels of satisfaction. If the option is
not consumed (ci = 0), a small level of stochastic satisfaction is received, which can be interpreted to be resulting from
mental simulation (thinking about the consumption of the option) but which yields no information about the hidden preference λ. On the other hand, if the option is consumed, the
satisfaction derived is a noisy version of the personal utility,
v p = xλ y1−λ for an option (x, y), which in turn is informative
about λ. For example, after accepting a few of the PhD applicants, the professor may decide, after all, that a student’s
grades are a better predictive of success for conducting research in her lab than recommendation letters; while another
professor may decide just the opposite.
For inference, when the options are not consumed (ci =
0 ∀ i), the node si does not depend on oi or λ, thus the directed
edges from these to si are effectively removed and the model
reduces to a simplified version of our previous model (Shenoy
& Yu, 2013) (for w = 1). More generally, the posterior belief
about λ can be updated based on the observed options (o =
{o}i ) and satisfaction (o = {o}i ) as:

Figure 1: Three classical contextual effects. Options X and Y are
equi-preferable in the absence of a third option. Arrow denotes the
direction of the preference shift when a decoy, Z, is added. (A)
Attraction effect. (B) Compromise effect. (C) Similarity effect.

55

Figure 2: (A) Graphical model showing how options (oi ) are generated in the market, based on the hidden value (vi ), market preference (γ),
individual preference (λ), weight (w) and the parameter θi . Also describes the satisfaction as a noisy representation of the personal value,
depending on the individual preference (λ) and whether the option is consumed (ci ). (B) For a particular setting of the attribute trade-off
parameter (ζ), all options lying on the same curve have the same value/utility as denoted on the curve; different curves signify different
values. (C) For a fixed value (vi ), all options lying on the same curve have the same attribute trade-off (ζ), as denoted on the curve; different
curves signify different trade-offs.

options is expected because of the residual uncertainty in the
posterior distributions of the option values (Debreu, 1958;
Blavatskyy, 2008).

P(λ|o, s) ∝ P(s|o, λ)P(o|λ)P(λ)
(
)(Z
=

∏ P(si |oi , λ; ci )
i

Results

P(γ)P(θ)P(v)P(o|v, γ, θ, λ; w)
γ,θ,v

In this section, we apply the proposed models to different multi-attribute choice tasks, in which sometimes subdγdθdv P(λ)
jects have to choose among just two options, and sometimes
(
)
among three options whereby a “decoy” is added to the two
original options (see Fig. 1). We first show how our model ac= ∏ P(si |oi , λ; ci )
counts for the three classical contextual effects; we then use
i
(Z
the model to capture several observed individual differences
 )
Z
P(γ) ∏
P(θi )P(vi )P(oi |vi , γ, θi , λ; w)dθi dvi dγ P(λ) in existing experimental literature.
γ
θi ,vi
For all simulations, the market parameters for the preferi
ence γ are a = 2 and b = 2, and for the utility/value vi , k = 20
(1)
and µ = 50. Other parameters used are, σθ = 20 and obserSimilarly, the joint posterior on the hidden values can be
vation noise σ0 = 2. Lastly, the options are X = (40, 60), Y =
updated as:
(60, 40), Z = (50, 30) for attraction, Z = (80, 20) for compromise, and Z = (65, 35) for similarity effect. Since no simple
P(v|o, s)
closed form expressions exist for the different posteriors (e.g.
(Z
Z

Eq. 1) and approximations based on discretization of continP(θi )P(oi |vi , γ, θi , λ; w)dθi
∝
P(γ)P(λ) ∏
uous variables are inexact and inefficient, we use a program
θi
γ,λ
i
called JAGS (Plummer, 2003) that uses Gibbs sampling (Ge)(
)
man & Geman, 1984) to generate samples from the posterior
[P(si |oi , λ; ci )] dγ dλ
(2)
∏ P(vi )
distribution of the desired model parameters (v, γ and λ in our
i
case).
As in our previous model, we assume that the decision polFor the simulations in Fig. 3, we assume that there is no
consumption (ci = 0), and that the individual relies solely on
icy involves sampling from the posterior P(v|o); the sample
the information from market options (w = 1). With these
v̂ is then used to choose an option: π(v̂) = argmax j v̂ j . Thus,
settings, our model reproduces all three contextual effects,
stochasticity in choice upon presentation of the same set of
)

56

Figure 3: Proportion of choices for different effects and their explanation. (A) X and Y are equi-preferable. (B) Adding an option Z inferior
to Y increases the preference for Y relative to X. (C) Adding an option Z even more extreme than Y, in relation to X, increases the preference
for Y. (D) Adding an option Z very similar to Y, but not clearly more or less preferable to Y, decreases the preference for Y relative to X. (E)
X and Y lie on the equi-preference curve which represents a fixed value; any option above this curve would be considered more valuable, and
below would be considered less valuable. (F) The attraction decoy makes Y appear better on average. (G) The compromise decoy make Y
appear better on average. (H) The valuation of Y and Z are highly correlated, such that they tend to be considered both better than X or both
worse than X, for different settings of the hidden variable γ. When they are both worse than X, X is chosen; when they are both better than
X, Y is chosen half the time (Z the other half). Thus, on average, X is chosen more often than Y, even though they are on average considered
about equally valuable.

so that even though the two options are equi-preferable by
themselves (Fig. 3A), the preference shifts towards Y when
an attraction or compromise decoy is added to the choice
set (Fig. 3B and C), and towards X when a similarity decoy is added (Fig. 3D). Next, in order to understand how the
model works for all the contextual effects, we show the resulting equi-preference curves, the locus of options that all
have the same value for a given preference γ (in other words,
all the points on the curve xγ y1−γ = v). Clearly, there are infinitely many equi-preference curves, one corresponding to
each value of v, but we only plot the ones, for visual simplicity, that always pass through the option X. When there
are only two options, such an equi-preference curve with γ
set to its posterior mean also passes through Y, making the
two options equally attractive (Fig. 3E). For the attraction effect, option Y lies above such an equi-preference curve , making it appear relatively more lucrative (Fig. 3F); however option X is still selected owing to the stochasticity in the option
values. Similar explanation holds for the compromise effect
(Fig. 3G). For the similarity effect, the equi-preference curve
with γ set to its posterior mean is not particularly informative
(Fig. 3H, blue curve), since this effect arises due to the close
correlation between the valuation of the option Y and Z in the
model. As can be seen, the two options are likely to appear
better or worse than X together (green and red curves respectively). Therefore, when they appear better, the choice gets
split between them; when they appear worse, X gets chosen,

leading to overall higher frequency of choosing X than Y.
We also investigate scenarios where individual exhibit different behavior based on their previous experience. Experiments have show that contextual effects are not always robust,
with individual differences emerging when subjects value attributes differently (Malaviya & Sivakumar, 1998; Müller et
al., 2012). To show that our model can capture such deviations, we simulate the scenario where an individual prefers
attribute y more over attribute x (λ = 0.35). Furthermore, we
assume that the individual relies equally on self and market
preference (w = 0.5). With these settings, we observe that
compromise effect becomes insignificant (Fig. 4A), which is
what has been observed for consumers who are less quality
conscious (attribute x) and more price conscious (attribute y)
when making brand choices (Müller et al., 2012).
Lastly, we show how consuming the options can help an
individual discover self-preference, and how the the process
can lead to divergence in the choice behavior of two individual who learn their preference (from consumption) along
with the market preference (from options). In the model proposed earlier (Shenoy & Yu, 2013), the only way the individuals could differ is if they have different priors over the
market preference parameter (γ). However, with increase experience, the individual beliefs would converge, consequently
leading to the same choice for all individuals who are experienced. In the simulations, we consider two individuals
starting with different priors on γ, Beta(2, 3) and Beta(3, 2),

57

Figure 4: (A) Individual difference in contextual effects. Compromise effect becomes insignificant in the consumption model for individuals
that value attribute 1 less (λ = 0.35). (B) & (C) Evolution of belief about market preference with experience for two individuals starting
with different priors, using the previous simple model and our consumption model respectively. The translucent bounded region shows the
standard deviation around the mean belief.

preferences, thus leading to diversification of individual preferences.

respectively. When both of these individuals experience the
same set of options, we note that their beliefs eventually converge (Fig. 4B). This contradicts the every day observation,
where individuals with very similar experience with a product category, can still converge on buying different brands.
Next, we consider the same two individuals and simulate their
beliefs under our consumption model. We additionally note
that individual 1 prefers attribute 2 more (λ = 0.3), whereas
individual 2 prefers attribute 1 more (λ = 0.7), both individuals giving equal weight to market-preference and selfpreference (w = 0.5). The extra parameters are ks = 100 and
µs = 5. Now the individual beliefs about joint preference diverge, in accordance with their hidden preference (Fig. 4C).
Thus, the model provides an explanation for why two individuals with the same experience may end up preferring different
options, and more generally a framework for explaining different framing effects, as well as variations thereof, based on
the individual’s experience, personality, and other causes of
individualized preferences.

However, there are some experimental findings that still
prove challenging for the new model. For example, the attraction effect has sometimes been observed to diminish for consumers with a low level of experience (Malaviya & Sivakumar, 1998), contradicting a straight-forward prediction of our
model. Another curious phenomenon is the phantom decoy effect (Pratkanis & Farquhar, 1992; Pettibone & Wedell,
2007), which is very similar to the attraction effect, except
the decoy Z is slightly better than one of the options, say Y
(rather than worse, as in the attraction effect) and that the subject is informed that this decoy is not actually available as a
choice; in that case, human observers reliably shift their preference toward Y instead of away from it, as our model would
currently predict. These more nuanced cases require further
attention and provide fruitful avenues for future research.
In the future, we also wish to investigate whether an individual has a fixed relative weight for personal and market preferences, or whether this trade-off can change either
with experience or context. One possibility is, as the individual gains more experience, the trade-off starts to favor selfpreference, thus requiring a more sophisticated model where
the trade-off parameter (w) is dependent on experience (perhaps tied to internal uncertainty/confidence). Another direction is to extend the model to allow for “vicarious satisfaction” so that the high demand of an option, with say attribute
1 as the larger attribute, would signal that attribute to be more
preferable. Such a model could provide a computational explanation to the phantom decoy effect. Lastly, humans may
actively seek which options to consume, in order to figure
out their self-preference, e.g. trying a Vietnamese restaurant
after having tried a Thai restaurant to see if a slightly different spice level would be more satisfying, and our model
can be extended to incorporate this active decision making
component. This can potentially be achieved by choosing options based on a more sophisticated criteria that takes into
account not only the immediate values or satisfaction (as is

Discussion
In this paper, we proposed a Bayesian model that takes both
individual preference as well as effects of consuming options
into account. This model reduces to a simplified version of
our previous proposed model (Shenoy & Yu, 2013) in the absence of consuming chosen options (and experiencing corresponding satisfaction levels), and can explain not only all
three contextual effects but also observed individual differences arising from experience and personal preference. Furthermore, the model relaxes an assumption we made in our
prior work that the observer needs to infer both the option
values as well as the “fair market value”. Instead, it assumes
that the observer only need to infer the relative utility (value)
of the available options, and not what constitute “fair” in
the market place in absolute terms. Therefore, our current
framework simplifies the previous model, as well as provides
a general framework for explaining how consumption combines with “window-shopping” to inform one’s beliefs and

58

done in the current formulation), but also the long term value
and informational goals as well as the cost of consuming an
option. Insights from the field of active learning (see (Settles,
2009) for a survey) can provide the foundation for such a pursuit. In summary, our work provides a novel computational
framework to account for individual differences in a variety
of observed preference choice behavior, and opens up venues
for future investigations into more sophisticated models of
preference-based decision making.

Müller, H., Vogt, B., & Kroll, E. B. (2012). To be or not
to be price consciousa segment-based analysis of compromise effects in market-like framings. Psychology & Marketing, 29(2), 107–116.
Pettibone, J. C., & Wedell, D. H. (2007). Testing alternative
explanations of phantom decoy effects. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20(3), 323–341.
Plummer, M. (2003). Jags: A program for analysis of
bayesian graphical models using gibbs sampling.
Pratkanis, A. R., & Farquhar, P. H. (1992). A brief history of
research on phantom alternatives: Evidence for seven empirical generalizations about phantoms. Basic and Applied
Social Psychology, 13(1), 103–122.
Roe, R. M., Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (2001). Multialternative decision field theory: A dynamic connectionst
model of decision making. Psychological review, 108(2),
370–392.
Settles, B. (2009). Active learning literature survey (Computer Science Technical Report No. 1648). University of
Wisconsin–Madison.
Shenoy, P., & Yu, A. (2013). Rational preference shifts in
multi-attribute choice: What is fair? In Proceedings of the
35th annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: the case of
attraction and compromise effects. Journal of Consumer
Research, 16(158-74).
Thurstone, L. (1954). The measurement of values. Psychological Review.
Trueblood, J. S. (2012, October). Multialternative context
effects obtained using an inference task. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 19(5), 962–8. doi: 10.3758/s13423-0120288-9
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: a theory of
choice. Psychological review, 79(4).
Tversky, A., & Simonson, I. (1993). Context dependent preferences. Management Science, 39, 1179–89.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Loss aversion and
inhibition in dynamical models of multialternative choice.
Psychological review, 111(3), 757.

Acknowledgments
We thank Laurence Aitchison and Peter Dayan for stimulating discussions on ideas related to the current paper. This
material is based upon work supported in part by the U. S.
Army Research Laboratory and the U. S. Army Research Office under contract/grant number W911NF1110391.

References
Blavatskyy, P. R. (2008). Stochastic utility theorem. Journal
of Mathematical Economics, 44(11), 1049–1056.
Busemeyer, J., & Townsend, J. (1993). Decision field theory: a dynamic-cognitive approach to decision making in
an uncertain environment. Psychological review, 100(3),
432–459.
Debreu, G. (1958). Stochastic choice and cardinal utility.
Econometrica, 26, 440–444.
Douglas, P. (1976). The Cobb-Douglas production function
once again: its history, its testing, and some new empirical
values. The Journal of Political Economy.
Geman, S., & Geman, D. (1984). Stochastic relaxation,
gibbs distributions, and the bayesian restoration of images.
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on(6), 721–741.
Heath, T., & Chatterjee, S. (1995). Asymmetric decoy effects on lower-quality versus higher-quality brands: Metaanalytic and experimental evidence. Journal of Consumer
Research, 22, 268–284.
Hicks, J. R. (1932). The theory of wages.
Huber, J., & Payne, J. (1982). Adding asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of Consumer Research.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982).
Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica, 47, 31327.
Luce, R. D. (1959). Individual choice behavior: A theoretical
analysis. New York: Wiley.
Malaviya, P., & Sivakumar, K. (1998). The moderating effect
of product category knowledge and attribute importance on
the attraction effect. Marketing Letters, 9(1), 93–106.

59

