Cross-Domain Influences on Creative Innovation: Preliminary Investigations
Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan Campus, Arts Building, 1147 Research Way, Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA
Nicole Carbert (nicole.carbert@alumni.ubc.ca)
School of Population and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia
Vancouver BC, V6H 3V4, CANADA
Abstract

used (e.g., in a chaotic or orderly manner) (Berlyne, 1971).
It has been shown that there are non-arbitrary mapping
between properties of vision and sound (Griscom & Palmer,
2012; Melara, 1989; Melara, & Mark, 1990; Palmer,
Schloss, Xu, & Prado-Leon, 2013; Ward, Huckstep, &
Tsakanikos, 2006). For example, the processing of visual
features, such as lightness and spatial frequency, can be
affected by auditory features such as pitch and timbre
(Marks, 1974, 1975, 1987).
In a study of cross-domain creativity that aimed to move
beyond single-dimensional mappings, composers were
asked to write music inspired by four simple line-drawn
shapes: a square, a lightning bold, a curvy shape, and a
jagged shape (Willmann, 1944). Music inspired by the same
shape was more similar than music inspired by another
shape with respect to tempo, melodic pattern, mood, and
other characteristics, and listeners could match above
chance the music to the shape that inspired it. However, the
impoverished nature of the stimuli undoubtedly limited the
scope for creative expression. Another study aimed at
investigating whether the rich emotionality of genuinely
creative works could be translated to, and recognized in, in
another domain. It demonstrated that when pieces of music
were re-interpreted as paintings, naïve participants were
able to correctly identify at significantly above chance
which piece of music inspired which painting (Ranjan,
Gabora, & O’Connor, 2014; Ranjan, 2014). Although the
medium of expression is different, something of its essence
remains sufficiently intact for an observer to detect a
resemblance between the new work and the source that
inspired it. This result lent empirical support to the largely
anecdotal evidence that cross-domain influence is a genuine
phenomenon, and suggested that, at their core, creative ideas
are less domain-dependent than they are generally assumed
to be. It did not, however, provide evidence that the
phenomenon extends beyond the artificial conditions of
such a study, nor did it indicate how prevalent it is.

This paper takes a two-pronged approach to investigate
cross-domain influence on creativity. We present a
study in which creative individuals were asked to list
influences on their creative work. More than half the
listed influences were unrelated to their creative
domain, thus demonstrating empirically that crossdomain influence is widespread. We then present a
preliminary model of exaptation, a form of crossdomain influence on creativity in which a different
context suggests a new use for an existing item, using as
an example waste recycling of petroleum byproducts.
Keywords: art, concepts; context; creative writing, crossdomain, cross-modal; creativity; exaptation; influence;
innovation; music, quantum cognition; sustainability

Introduction
The study of cross-domain thinking in cognitive science has
focused largely on analogy and metaphor, but the
phenonmenon extends further and plays a role in the
generation of artistic masterpieces and technological feats.
One indication of this is a tradition in the arts, referred to as
ekphrastic expression, of interpreting art from one medium
(e.g., acrylic painting) into another (e.g., charcoal sketch).
The goal of ekphrastic expression is to capture, and thereby
become intimate with, the underlying form or essence of a
work by translating it from one medium into another, and
thereby have a more direct impact on an audience. A related
phenomenon is cross-media style, wherein the same style is
demonstrated by works in different media; for example, the
term rococo is given to a style of painting, sculpture,
literature, and music of the 18th Century. It is thought that
works in a particular style suggest underlying abstract
archetypal forms to the artistic mind that compel the
exploration of different manifestations (Burke, 1957).
The phenomena of ekphrastic expression and cross-media
style are consistent with evidence that creative works in
different media may be similar in terms of psychophysical,
collative, and ecological properties (Hasenfus, 1978).
Aesthetic perceptions stimulated by creative works may
generate physiological, emotional, cognitive, and/or
behavioral, responses that are amenable to re-expression in
other forms. This may be due to regularities in the choice of
elements (e.g., shapes, colors, or words) and/or how they are

A Study of Cross-Domain Influence on
Creative Innovation
The goal of the present study was to provide a preliminary
assessment of the extent to which creative individuals are
influenced by stimuli and experiences that are either directly
related, indirectly related, or unrelated to their domain of
creative expression.

758

Method

Table 1: Examples from the data of each of the four
categories of influence. Top: narrow within-domain (WD-n)
and broad within-domain (WD-b) influences. Bottom:
cross-domain influences (CD) and influences categorized as
“uncertain” (U). A dash indicates that no examples of that
category were present in the data.

Participants were recruited by conducting an internet search
to locate 150 individuals who have made a significant
contribution in a creative domain. They were invited by
email to participate in the study on a voluntary basis. The
email provided a link to a questionnaire that was hosted by
SurveyMonkey. There was no remuneration for
participation. The questionnaire asked their gender, age, and
occupation, as well as the following questions:
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.

Creator
Artist - Painting
Artist - Drawing

What is the general category for the creative work for
which you are most known (e.g., art, music, drama,
science)?
What is the subcategory for the creative work for which
you are most known (e.g., painting, piano composition,
biochemistry)?
Please describe your creative outputs.
Please describe as best you can your creative process.
Describe all elements that have inspired your work
(natural or artificial, or it may be a particular event or
situation, or something not in the concrete environment,
that is, something abstract that you have been thinking
about), and with each item, if possible, put as much
identifying information as you can about the item it
inspired (e.g., my Sunlight Sonata in B Flat composed
in 2012 was inspired by going skiing in the alps with
my sister who had just recovered from pneumonia). Do
this for as many of your creative works as you can.

The first three questions were used to categorize the
creators into the following primary creative domains: art,
music, and writing. Artists were further categorized into
secondary domains: painting, drawing, photography, and
sculpture. Question four was not used in this analysis.
Responses to question five were divided into four
categories: cross-domain, within-domain narrow, withindomain broad, and uncertain. The first three categories were
created based on prior research. The influence was classified
as cross-domain if it was unrelated to its creative domain. It
was classified as within-domain narrow if it was clearly
related to its creative domain. The within-domain broad
category was used when not enough information was
provided to distinguish between within- and cross-domain.

Artist - Photography

WD-n
Galleries
Political
cartoonists
–

Artist -Sculpture

–

Musician
Writer

Band musician
collaboration
Conferences

Creator
Artist - Painting
Artist - Drawing

CD
Global warming
Comedy

Artist - Photography
Artist -Sculpture
Musician

Meditation
Computer
programming
Literature

Writer

Nature

WD-b
Spirograph
–
Books and
lectures on
subject of
“understanding
pictures”
Architectural
elements
–
–
U
Opposites
Circular
intellect
–
World
Creativity
seminar
Retreats

Table 2: Number of participants in each creative domain
(N), and the raw number (r) and percentage (%) of
influences that were cross-domain (CD), within-domain:
narrow (WD-n), within-domain: broad (WD-b, and
uncertain (U). Percentages are in brackets.
Creative
Domain
Painting
Drawing
Photography
Sculpture
Music
Writing
TOTAL

Results
Of the 150 emails sent out, 80 people responded (53.3%
response rate). 14 participants had incomplete information
so were not included in the analysis. The remaining 66
participants provided 65 influences. Examples of each
category of influence are provided in Table 1. The total
number of influences in each category is given in Table 2.
The frequency of cross-domain influences (47%) was
greater than that of within-domain influences (27%), and
this was the case even when broad as well as narrowly
construed within-domain influences were considered (35%).

N
44
8
4
5
3
2
66

r
21
2
2
3
1
2
31

CD
(%)
(48)
(25)
(50)
(60)
(33)
(100)
(47)

r
12
2
–
–
2
1
17

WD-n
(%)
(27)
(25)
–
–
(68)
(50)
(27)

WD-b U
r (%) r (%)
4 (9) 6 (14)
–
–
3 (38)
1 (25) –
–
–
–
1 (20)
–
–
1 (33)
–
–
1 (50)
5 (8) 12 (18)

Discussion
These results demonstrate that even if individuals primarily
express their creativity in a single domain, they are often
employing cross-domain thinking when they create. The
study enriches our understanding of how the creative

759

process works by adding to a growing body of evidence that
creativity is not just a matter of acquiring domain-specific
expertise. A limitation of the study is that it focused
exclusively on artistic creativity. In further investigations
along these lines we will attempt to obtain data on
individuals who are scientifically and technically creative.

behave (Aerts, 2009; Aerts, Broekaert, Gabora, & Veloz,
2012; Aerts et al., 2013; Aerts & Sozzo, 2011; Bruza, Kitto,
Ramm, & Sitbon, 2011). The amplitude term, denoted ai, is
a complex number that represents the contribution of a
component state ⎟φi〉 to the state ⎟ψ〉. Hence ⎟ψ〉 = Σiai⎟φi〉.
The square of the absolute value of the amplitude equals the
probability that the state changes to that particular
component basis state. A change of state is called a
collapse. The choice of basis states is determined by the
observable Ο to be measured, and its possible outcomes oi.
The basis states corresponding to an observable are referred
to as eigenstates. Observables are represented by selfadjoint operators on the Hilbert space. The lowest energy
state is referred to as the ground state. Upon measurement,
the state of the entity collapses from its current state
(possibly the ground state) and is projected onto one of the
eigenstates.
Now consider two entities A and B with Hilbert spaces HA
and HB. We denote amplitudes associated with the first and
second as ai and bj respectively. The Hilbert space of the
composite of these entities is given by the tensor product HA
⊗ HB. We may define a basis ⎟e〉i for HA and a basis ⎟f〉j for
HB. The most general state in HA ⊗ HB has the form

A Quantum Model of Cross-Domain Influence
on Creative Innovation
An interesting form of cross-domain influence is exaptation,
wherein a trait that originally came about to solve one
problem is co-opted for another use. The concept of
exaptation comes from biology but has been shown to play a
pivotal role in economics (Dew, Sarasvathy, &
Ventakaraman, 2004). A preliminary attempt has been made
to develop a mathematical model of exaptation that can be
applied across disciplines (Gabora, Scott, & Kauffman,
2013). Here we use it to model cross-domain influence on
creative innovation. Waste recycling is a particularly
interesting form of cross-domain influence on innovation
because of its applications to sustainability efforts. An item
that is a wasteful byproduct in one context is found to be
useful in a different context.
The model we use is a generalization of the formalism of
quantum mechanics adapted for application in a
psychological context (Aerts & Gabora, 2005; Aerts,
Gabora, & Sozzo, 2013; Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012; Pothos
& Busemeyer, 2013).1 Quantum probability models in
psychology have been compared side-by-side with classical
models (Busemeyer, Pothos, Franco, & Trueblood, 2011).
According to classic probability, all events are subsets of a
common sample space; that is, they are based on a common
set of elementary events. An important advantage of a
quantum model over a classical model such as a Bayesian
one is that it uses variables and spaces that are defined
specifically with respect to a particular context, which is
necessary to capture certain aspects of how concepts behave
(Aerts & Gabora, 2005; Gabora & Aerts, 2002; Kitto,
Ramm, Sitbon, & Bruza, 2011). The state ⎟ψ〉 of an entity is
written as a linear superposition of a set of basis states
{⎟φi〉} of a Hilbert space H, which is a complex vector space
with an inner product.2 Another advantage of a quantum
model over a classical one is that it uses amplitudes, which
though directly related to probabilities, can exhibit
interference, superposition, and entanglement, which are
also needed to capture certain aspects of how concepts
1

2

⎟ψ〉AB = Σi,j cij ⎟e〉i ⊗⎟f〉j

(1)

where cij is the amplitude corresponding to the composite
entity.
The phenomenon of entanglement was conceived to deal
with situations of non-separability where different entities
form a composite entity. The state ⎟ψ〉AB is separable if for
the amplitudes cij amplitudes ai and bj can be found such
that cij = ai bj. It is inseparable, and therefore an entangled
state, if this is not possible, hence if the amplitudes
describing the state of the composite entity are not of a
product form.3 Entangled states are non-compositional
because they may exhibit emergent properties not inherited
from their constituent components.
The quantum formalism is not general enough to model
all concept combinations but generalizations of it have been
developed that are quantum-like. In quantum inspired
models of concepts, a context plays the role of a
measurement. A set of basis states related to a context
represents instances of a concept. A context can exert either
a deterministic or probabilistic influence on the state of a
concept. If there is no uncertainty or choice involved then
the change of state is deterministic and this is represented by
a linear operator, which may be a unitary operator, a
projection operator, or an operator of a more general nature,

This approach is unrelated to quantum models of consciousness
(Hammeroff, 1998) or memory (Pribram, 1993), and makes no
assumption that phenomena at the quantum level affect the brain;
it draws solely on abstract formal structures that, as it happens,
found their first application in quantum mechanics.
It is slightly more complex but more accurate to define a Hilbert
space as a real or complex inner product space that is also a
complete metric space with respect to the distance function
induced by the inner product. The inner product allows one to
define the length of a vector and the angle between two vectors,
as well as orthogonality between vectors (zero inner product).

3

760

In some applications the procedure for describing entanglement is
more complicated than what is described here. For example, it
has been argued that quantum field theory, which uses Fock
space to describe multiple entities, gives an internal structure that
is superior to the tensor product for modeling concept
combination (Aerts, 2009). Fock space is the direct sum of tensor
products of Hilbert spaces, so it is also a Hilbert space.

depending on the type of contextual influence. If there is
uncertainty or choice involved then the change of state is
probabilistic. Different possible outcomes can occur, each
with a certain probability, and the effect of context is
represented by a self-adjoint operator.
In one generalized quantum formalism, namely the State
Context Property (SCOP) theory of concepts, a concept is
defined in terms of (1) its set of states Σ (including both
exemplars and ground states changed under the influence of
a context), a set L of relevant properties, (3) a set M of
contexts in which the concept may be relevant, (4) a
function ν that gives the applicability or weight of a certain
property for a particular state and context, and (5) a function
µ that gives the probability of transition from one state to
another under the influence of a particular context. We
might represent the state of a chair by a vector |p〉 of length
equal to 1 in a complex Hilbert space H. From a different
context this state |p〉 could actualize as another state. For
example, in the context office it may actualize as the state
OFFICE CHAIR, while in the context kitchen it may
actualize as the state KITCHEN CHAIR. These are
deterministic changes of state.
More interesting is a probabilistic change of state in
which there are two or more possible outcomes. For
example, consider the reconceptualization of what to do
with excess petroleum byproducts post World War II. The
concept PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS in peoples’ minds
could change probabilistically from |p〉 to one of two states:
|u〉, the state in which it is viewed as useful (e.g., they invent
a new use for it), and |w〉, the state in which it is viewed as
waste. The state of PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS prior to
being conceived of as useful or waste is modeled as a
superposition of these two possibilities. The vectors |u〉 and
|w〉 form the basis of a complex Hilbert space. Thus state |p〉
of PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS can be written as a
superposition of |u〉 and |w〉, i.e.,
|p〉 = a0|u〉 + a1|w〉

the likelihood of them being viewed as useful or waste.
Activation of the set L of properties of plastic—which
includes for example ‘moldable’ and ‘unbreakable’, denoted
f1 and f2 respectively—causes activation of other concepts
for which these properties are relevant. Contexts for which
some of these properties are relevant become candidate
members of the set M of relevant contexts. One such context
is the making of kitchenware and utensils, denoted kitchen.
Recall that states are represented by unit vectors, and all
vectors of a decomposition such as |u〉 and |w〉 have unit
length, are mutually orthogonal, and generate the whole
vector space; thus |a0|2 + |a1|2 = 1. This means that the
change in the probability that petroleum byproducts are
viewed as useful if one considers them from a different
context can be modeled using a Pythagorean argument, as in
Figure 1.

|wk〉

|w〉
|pk〉
a1

|p〉
|uk〉
b0

Δ
b1
a0

|u〉

Figure 4: Graphical depiction of a vector |p〉 representing
the state of PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS. In the default
context it is likely to collapse to the default projection
vector |w〉 which represents that it is waste. This can be seen
by the fact that subspace a0 is smaller than subspace a1.
Thinking more creatively one might consider turning about
petroleum byproducts into useful plastic objects such as
unbreakable dishes. Thus in the context of kitchen (shown
in gray), the state of PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS is
likely to collapse to the orthogonal projection vector |u〉
which represents that it is useful, as shown by the fact that
b0 is larger than b1. Also shown is the projection vector after
renormalization (the vertical arrow).

(2)

where a0 and a1 are complex numbers that give the
amplitudes of |u〉 and |w〉 respectively. More concretely, the
probability that |p〉 is viewed as useful equals |a0|2, the
square of the absolute value of a0. The probability it is
viewed as waste equals |a1|2, the square of the absolute value
of a1. If it were to be decided that PETROLEUM
BYPRODUCTS are useful or waste the state would change
probabilistically from |p〉 to |u〉 or |w〉. The states |u〉 and |w〉
are thus eigenstates of PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS in a
default, generic context. In different individuals a0 and a1
may have different values (as epitomized in the saying, “one
person’s trash is another person’s treasure”). PETROLEUM
BYPRODUCTS may also be conceived differently by the
same person in different modes of thought. Divergent
thinking may facilitate the process of viewing
PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS in a new context, such as
converting them into useful plastic objects, which changes

Given the context kitchen, denoted k, some creative states
of PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS are to use it to make
plastic cookware (e.g., pots or casserole dishes) or dishware
(e.g., plates and bowls). Let us show that the formalism is
capable of incorporating these states. This will not be
possible in the Hilbert space formed by the two states |u〉
and |w〉 because it has only two dimensions. The
restructured conception of PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS
in the context kitchen, denoted |pk〉, is given by
|pk〉 = a3Puk |pk〉/|| Puk |pk〉|| + a4|wk〉

761

(3)

formalism of quantum theory, PLASTIC DISHES is a state
that can actualize new properties, i.e., properties that are not
properties
of
PETROLEUM
BYPRODUCTS
or
DISHWARE, such as the properties “bright color” or
“cartoon decal” since they are targeted at children.

where Puk is an orthogonal projection operator. We
substitute in the mathematical formalism of Hilbert space
for the unit vector whenever what physicists call
‘degeneration’ is involved, meaning that several orthogonal
states can give rise to the same property, here the property
useful. Note that ||Puk |pk〉|| is the length of Puk |pk〉. We need
to divide the vector Puk |pk〉 by ||Puk |pk〉|| for it to become a
unit vector, and hence represent a state. Let us specify these
states of usefulness to make the mathematical description
complete. Since we want to consider creative useful states,
specifically COOKWARE and DISHWARE, we introduce
the states |c〉 and |d〉 respectively. In the context kitchen
they are denoted |ck〉 and |dk〉. |bk〉 denotes the possibility that
even in the context kitchen petroleum byproducts are
viewed as useful just as they are (however unlikely this may
be), and |bkck〉 and |bkdk〉 denote the possibility that in this
context petroleum byproducts are turned into plastic to
make cookware and dishes, respectively. We write the
projector as the sum of the partial projectors on the states.
Hence we have
Pug = |bk〉〈bk| + |bk ck〉〈bk ck| + |bk dk〉〈bk dk|

Discussion
This example is simple; there is much work to be done to
model the complex ways in which new situations influence
the process by which one “puts a new spin” on an existing
product or idea. Nonetheless, the example shows that it is
possible to model the creative restructuring of a concept
(e.g., PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS) in a new context
(e.g., kitchen) when it is considered from another
perspective. The approach provides a formal model of what
Rothberg (2015) calls Janusian thinking. It is consistent
with theories of creativity (e.g., Gabora, 2000), and
experimental data on how people use concepts (e.g., Aerts,
2009; Aerts, Aerts, & Gabora, 2009), and it has been
expanded to incorporate larger conceptual structures
(Gabora & Aerts, 2009), as well as how the same concepts
are conceived of differently in divergent versus convergent
modes of thought (Veloz, Gabora, Eyjolfson, & Aerts,
2011). Note how, in the quantum representation, probability
is treated as arising not from a lack of information per se,
but from the limitations of any context (even a ‘default’
context). Note also that prior to the realization that plastic
dishware though lacking in elegance might be particularly
appropriate for children, it is not true that this idea existed,
nor did it not exist. Thus it is not appropriate to describe the
creator’s cognitive state as a collection of discrete
possibilities some of which incorporate the existence of this
idea. We cannot describe cognitive states of this type with
conventional theories of creativity because they do not
incorporate states of potentiality.

(4)

where |bk〉〈bk|, |bk ck〉〈bk ck| and |bk dsk〉〈bk dk| are the one
dimensional orthogonal projection operators on the vectors
|bk〉, |bk ck〉 and |bk dk〉 respectively. By considering
petroleum byproducts in different contexts, the perceived
probability that they are useful has increased, i.e., |a3|2 > |a0|2
because the state Puk |pk〉/|| Puk |pk〉|| incorporates
possibilities of being used as cookware or dishware.
The set of properties of COOKWARE includes
‘temperature resistant’ because it is placed in or on a stove.
This property is denoted f3. Since plastic can burn, it is not
temperature resistant, so ν(p, f3) << ν(c, f3). Writing the unit
vector Puk |pk〉/|| Puk |pk〉|| again as a superposition of vectors
|bk〉, |bk ck〉 and |lk dk〉 we have:
Puk |pk〉/|| Puk |pk〉|| = a5|bk〉 + a6|bk ck〉 + a7|bk dk〉

General Discussion and Conclusions
This paper outlined a multi-faceted initial attempt to
investigate the phenomenon of cross-domain influence on
creative innovation. First we showed empirically that the
phenomenon is indeed widespread. Second we made a
preliminary attempt to model a relatively simple form of
cross-domain creative influence, exaptation, wherein a
product from one domain is seen to possess new affordances
when it is imported to another domain.
It is hoped that these two complimentary directions pave
the way to a deeper understanding of how the complex
richness of the world influences the creative processes by
which that complex richness is amplified.

(5)

Because plastic can burn, |a6|2 is small. However, plastic
would be particularly useful for making children’s dishes
because it has the property f2 of not breaking easily, so ν(p,
f2) ≈ ν(d, f2). Therefore, |a7|2 is large, and µ(d, k, p) >> µ(c,
k, p). Thus in the context kitchen, the concept
PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS has a high probability of
collapsing to PLASTIC DISHWARE.
We can model the emergence of new properties using the
notion of entanglement. Although the state PLASTIC
DISHES was modeled by pk dk〉 as one of the sub-states of
PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS, the quantum formalism
can also be used to derive this state as a combined state of
PETROLEUM BYPRODUCTS and DISHWARE. It has
been shown experimentally that such a combined state is in
general not a product state but an entangled state (Aerts et
al., 2013; Aerts & Sozzo, 2011). Thus, following the

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for funding to the first author from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada.

762

References

Hammeroff, S. R. (1998). Quantum computation in brain
microtubles? The Penrose - Hameroff “Orch OR” model
of consiousness. Philosophical Transactions Royal
Society London (A), 356, 1869−1896.
Hasenfus, N. (1978). Cross-media style: A psychological
approach. Poetics, 7, 207–216.
Kitto, K., Ramm, B., Sitbon, L., & Bruza, P. D. (2011).
Quantum theory beyond the physical: information in
context. Axiomathes, 21, 331–345.
Marks, L. E. (1974). On associations of light and sound:
The mediation of brightness, pitch, and loudness. The
American Journal of Psychology, 87, 173–188.
Marks, L. E. (1975). On colored-hearing synesthesia: crossmodal translations of sensory dimensions. Psychological
Bulletin, 82, 303–331.
Marks, L. E. (1987). On cross-modal similarity: auditoryvisual interactions in speeded discrimination. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 13, 384–394.
Melara, R. D. (1989). Dimensional interaction between
color and pitch. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 15, 69–79.
Melara, R. D., & Marks, L. E. (1990). Perceptual primacy of
dimensions: Support for a model of dimensional
interaction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 16, 398–414.
Palmer, S. E., Schloss, K. B., Xu, Z., & Prado-Leon, L.
(2013). Music-color associations are mediated by
emotion. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 110, 8836–8841.
Pribram, K. (1993). Rethinking neural networks: Quantum
fields and biological data: Erlbaum.
Pothos E. M., & Busemeyer J. R. (2013). Can quantum
probability provide a new direction for cognitive
modeling? Behavioral and Brain Science, 36, 255–274.
Ranjan, A. (2014). Understanding the creative process:
Personal signatures and cross-domain interpretations of
ideas. Ph.D. Thesis, University of British Columbia,
Canada.
Ranjan, A., Gabora, L., & O'Connor, B. (2013). The crossdomain re-interpretation of artistic ideas. Proceedings of
35th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
3251–3256). Houston TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Rothenberg, A. (2015). Flight from wonder: An
investigation of scientific creativity. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Veloz, T., Gabora, L., Eyjolfson, M., & Aerts, D. (2011). A
model of the shifting relationship between concepts and
contexts in different modes of thought. Proceedings of the
fifth international symposium on quantum interaction (pp.
25–34). Berlin: Springer.
Ward, J., Huckstep, B., & Tsakanikos, E. (2006). Soundcolor synesthesia: To what extent does it use cross-modal
mechanisms common to us all? Cortex, 42, 264–280.
Willmann, R. R. (1944). An Experimental Investigation of
the Creative Process in Music. Psychological
Monographs, 57, 1–76.

Aerts, D. (2009). Quantum structure in cognition. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 53, 314−348.
Aerts, D., Broekaert, J. Gabora, L., & Veloz, T. (2012). The
guppy effect as interference. Lecture notes in computer
science 7620: Proceedings sixth international symposium
on quantum interaction (pp. 36−47). Berlin: Springer.
Aerts, D., & Gabora, L. (2005). A state-context-property
model of concepts and their combinations II: A Hilbert
space representation. Kybernetes, 34, 192−221.
Aerts, D., Gabora, L., & Sozzo, S. (2013). How concepts
combine: A quantum theoretical model. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 5, 737–772.
Aerts, D., & Sozzo, S. (2011). Quantum structure in
cognition. Why and how concepts are entangled. Lecture
notes in computer science 7052: Proceedings of the fifth
international symposium on quantum interaction (pp.
116−127). Berlin: Springer.
Baer, J., & Kaufman, J. C., Eds. (2014). Creativity across
domains: Faces of the muse. New York: Taylor &
Francis.
Berlyne, D. E. (1971). Aesthetics and psychobiology. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Bruza, P., Kitto, K., Ramm, B., & Sitbon, L. (2011).
Quantum-like non-separability of concept combinations,
emergent associates and abduction. Logic Journal of the
IGPL, 20, 445–457.
Burke, K. (1957). Counter-statement. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Busemeyer, J., & Bruza, P. D. (2012). Quantum models of
cognition and decision. Cambridge UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Busemeyer, J. R., Pothos, E. M., Franco, R., & Trueblood,
J. S. (2011). A quantum theoretical explanation for
probability judgment errors. Psychological Review, 118,
193–218.
Dew N, Sarasvathy S, Ventakaraman S. (2004). The
economic implications of exaptation. Journal of
Evolutionary Economics, 14, 69–84.
Gabora, L. (2000). Toward a theory of creative inklings. In
(R. Ascott, Ed.) Art, Technology, and Consciousness (pp.
159-164). Intellect Press, Bristol, UK.
Gabora, L., & Aerts, D. (2002). Contextualizing concepts
using a mathematical generalization of the quantum
formalism. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 14, 327–358.
Gabora, L. & Aerts, D. (2009). A mathematical model of the
emergence of an integrated worldview. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 53, 434–451.
Gabora, L., Scott, E., & Kauffman, S. (2013). A quantum
model of exaptation: Incorporating potentiality into
biological theory. Progress in Biophysics & Molecular
Biology, 113, 108–116.
Griscom, W. S., & Palmer, S. E. (2012). The color of
musical sounds: Color associates of harmony and timbre
in non-synesthetes. Journal of Vision 12, 74.

763

