Action-Oriented Representations in the Motor Control
Hsi-wen Daniel Liu (hwliu@pu.edu.tw)
Center for General Education, Providence University
Shalu, Taichung, Taiwan

representation: the aforementioned structural isomorphism
and effectivity-achieving, the former being based on
referring-to (or, standing-in-for) relation, while the latter
not, but instead on goal-fulfillment. The former way of
representation, typically manifest in forward internal models,
explains some control functions, including prediction and
estimation. Such models are internal on the basis of the
mimicking relation. The latter explains some others,
including planning and feedback correction. Such models
are internal, not based on mimicking, and accordingly the
relating representation is non-referring-based.
Section two discusses the representational status of nonreferring-based representations, the application of which
will be discussed in the following two sections, on mirror
neurons, and body schema, respectively. The last section
characterizes representations of motor actions.

Abstract
Pezzulo (2008, 2011) and Grush (2004) contend for embodied
cognitive science but interpret representations of motor
behaviors as grounded on predictive internal models; those
representations are referring-based. By contrast, the present
paper contends that the motor control is ground on both
referring-based representation (as manifest in forward models)
and non-referring-based representation (as manifest in inverse
models); the latter is pragmatic representation with the
following six characteristics: perspective, changing
perspectives, normativity of the goal, planning, coordination,
and motor learning by refining inverse models. This is an
internal version of the action-oriented representation.
Keywords: inverse internal model; action-oriented
representations; forward internal model; motor control; goal.

Introduction
The studies of embodiment and anticipatory behaviors have
been over one and a half decades, while the embodied
cognitive science is in sharp contrast to cognitivism.
However, Pezzulo (2008, 2011) and Grush (2004) regard
motor behaviors as anticipatory insofar as their architectures
are based on internal models (e.g. emulators, which are
(closed-looped) forward models), without which motor
behaviors would be `merely adaptive’, as they consider.
Motor emulators, simulating motor effectors and
environmental conditions, can operate on-line or off-line,
and consequently are decouplable from the actual
environmental conditions (Grush, 2004); because of that
simulation, the relation between emulators, on the one hand,
and bodily and environmental conditions, on the other, can
be put in terms of structural isomorphism (Ramsey, 2007).
As internal models operate ahead of the motor effectors, the
motor system becomes significantly more efficient,
compared to the control based on sensory feedbacks (Grush,
2004; Desmurget and Grafton, 2000).
Apart from that, Pezzulo considers that all cognitive
phenomena are grounded on “anticipation of sensorimotor
interaction” (Pezzulo, 2011, p. 80). Together, as Pezzulo
gathers, cognitive phenomena are embodied, and embodied
representations, in turn, are grounded on internal models.
What is it, then, that makes such internal models
representational? If it is structural isomorphism, then, such
a perspective of representation is indeed a foundation of
cognitivism, against which the embodied cognitive science
aims to challenge. By contrast, if it is not structural
isomorphism, then, what indeed is it?
The present paper will inquire into the nature of internal
models concerning the motor control, arguing that they are
internal in two ways, while each has its pertinent way of

Two Ways of Representation in Internal
Models
The study of motor control is fundamentally concerned with
transformation between sensory signals and motor
commands, transformation which involves the coupling of
two internal models: forward internal models and inverse
internal models (Wolpert and Ghahramani, 2000). Forward
models simulate how the musculoskeletal system, given
certain motor commands, would operate in response to
environmental conditions, by predicting both the would-be
(reafferent) sensory signals of resulting motor movements
and consequent errors between those sensory states and the
goal-state.
Inverse models, by contrast, maintain the
opposite way of transformation, from desired motor states
(i.e., the goal) to motor commands. Those models are not
mimicking-based. Yet, they remain internal because with
them the CNS (Central Nervous System) is regarded as
modeling the system of sensorimotor transformation
(Wolpert and Ghahramani, 2000; Wolpert et al., 1995).
What is such a way of modeling based on, if not mimicking?
Despite their being commonly internal, inverse models
and forward models are internal in different ways. Forward
models, as aforementioned, simulate how the sensorimotor
system and sensory receptors operate under environmental
conditions. That simulation maintains predicting activities
on grounds of the relation that forward models refer to
(shortly later) states of the sensorimotor system, given a
certain end-state of the sensorimotor system as its goal and
certain motor commands readily available for achieving that
the goal. The simulation, predication, and the consequent
representation, can thereby be regarded as referring-based;
this is a relation, in turn, based on structural isomorphism

1410

between forward models, on the one hand, and environment
conditions and the sensorimotor system, including sensory
receptors and given goals, on the other. The prediction that
forward models make is anticipation with reported error
signals. Such errors are measured under the referring-based
relation through comparison between the resulting state and
the goal-state. Errors and the consequent anticipation can
be evaluated with the value of truth; consequently, misrepresentation is considered with truth-conditions of the
anticipation. Because of the involving truth-conditions,
forward models consist of epistemic representations.
By contrast, inverse models are internal in a different way.
Although there may be a sense of internal
modeling/representation, in which the CNS provides
information of how the sensorimotor system operates, this is
not modeling/representation to be measured with the truthvalue.
As sensorimotor transformation is determined
within the CNS (Wolpert and Ghahramani, 2000), that
system largely resides in the CNS, apart from processing
extended to the peripheral. Given a sensory state as the
goal-state, a generated motor command would instead be
measured with the value of satisfaction (Mandik, 2005),
measuring whether the sensorimotor system would
effectively achieve the goal; hence, the representation can
be regarded as an effectivity-achieving relation. Because
that satisfaction-value, representations in inverse models are
non-referring-based. What is concerned in the effectivityachieving relation is not the epistemic knowledge, but
instead the pragmatic knowledge, regarding how effective is
the process of sensorimotor transformation heading toward
achievement of the goal.
Representations in inverse models are action-oriented
representations as they involve both sensory states and
motor commands. Despite its being based on a nonreferring relation, inverse models remain consisting of
representations in good standing, representing in the sense
of directing something toward a goal (directing relation, for
short); this is a three-position relation among an agent (an
acting subject), a goal, and a body part to be directed toward
that goal. Such a relation operates in two contexts as its
background: the musculoskeletal system and the
environment, the former being full of noise and the latter
being largely uncertain. Besides, the directing relation
presumes primitive (non-detailed) epistemic knowledge of
the world/environment, knowledge on which the pragmatic
knowledge unfolds. The primitive epistemic knowledge, in
the motor control, is typically manifest in the sensory or
proprioceptive states of body parts concerning the goal of
motor movements, the current state, and the resulting state
after a motor movement. The sensory or proprioceptive
information, on the one hand, and information for
controlling motor movement, on the other, interact in a way
that they stand in mutual coordination, which is firstly
conceived in the thesis of pushmi-pullyou representations
(Millikan, 2005). The directing relation is characterized
with the following four properties together: perspective,
changing perspective, normativity of the goal, and planning.

1. Perspective.
Inverse models maintain the
sensorimotor transformation, which generates motor
commands that are required for achieving a goal, which is
registered with its sensory state. The way in which the
sensorimotor transformation operates can be understood
with basis functions that transform sensory coordinates of
the goal-state, undergoing serial changes of a variety of
coordinates, into coordinates of the envisaged motor
commands (Pouget and Snyder, 2000). Each pair of
coordinates, as a note, has an origin at which two
coordinates intersect with each other. The origin of a pair
coordinates is a standing point on which a body part acts,
where body parts may be a hand, an arm, a shoulder, the
neck, the head, or an eye. Sensorimotor information in a
coordinate system is perspectival, like that the sensory
information at the retina of an eye is perspectival in the
sense of seeing from an eye with egocentric representations.
The information of a motor command is also perspectival, in
the sense, for example, that the hand sets out to reach an
object from the standing point of the original hand-position.
Perspective is a characteristic of cognitive representations,
as opposed to mechanical codes.
2. Changing perspectives. Representations in an inverse
model are cognitive representations in good standing, as
changing coordinates involves changing perspectives, which
is remarkable in human thinking, and by no means merely a
mechanic transformation.
3. Normativity of the goal. An end-state of a motor
movement is considered to be a goal-state, including
velocity or position as its parameters. A goal-state is a
target state for the ending condition of the motor control.
Furthermore, a goal-state is also an end-state for comparison
between a current state and the goal-state, with the resulting
error signals to be reduced by setting up a new motor
command that brings about a new motor state. Because it is
recognized as a goal-state, an end-state is assigned a
normative significance for directing motor movements
toward that goal-state. To put it metaphorically, a goal is
set-up cognitively as a ‘desired’ target for further pursuit.
Because of that normative significance, an end-state of
motor movements becomes a goal-to-be achieved for
pragmatic representations, as opposed to epistemic ones.
The goal-state is regarded as a reference point, in
comparison with which currents states of hands and limbs
are evaluated and the discrepancy is to be reduced. This is
the process of feedback correction, with which the motor
control heads toward the reference point. In the nutshell,
the goal-state is taken normatively as a target to be achieved
with the motor control.
4. Planning. Inverse models operate in the course of
planning, which manages reverse engineering when given a
sensory goal-state and expecting to generate a motor
command that can be used to achieve that goal-state
(Wolpert and Ghahramani, 2000). The reverse engineering
maintained by inverse models cannot be a biomechanically
causal process, because the course of planning operates
purely internally (in the CNS) without being executed in the

1411

way of driving muscles, 1 and because the management of
reverse engineering aims to ‘reverse’ the causal chain from
motor commands to the goal-state and consequently does
not fall in that causal chain. More importantly, it is because
the determination of a motor command for achieving a goal
basically can be managed in many different ways. A motor
command is selected with the optimal control, control which
operates with a number of principles, such as minimizing
energy used by muscles, smoothness with minimum-jerk,
and minimum variance (Todorov, 2004). In inverse models,
selection with principles is a matter of computation, as
Wolpert and Ghahramani (2000) conceive. The optimal
control starts with a cost that defines the task goal (Todorov,
2004), cost which evaluates how far it is away from the goal,
evaluating for the relating computation.
We can
accordingly grant codes of inverse models the status of
representation for their being the vehicle of computation.
As is worth noting, although inverse models are internal
models, the optimal control cannot run as decouplable
models with perfect accuracy. According to Todorov
(2004), open-loop optimalization preconceives “what the
control schemes the sensorimotor system might use” and
consequently approximate the average behavior of motor
movements (pp. 910-1). By contrast, only closed-loop
optimalization can incorporate sensory and motor noise in
the biomechanical model and receive feedbacks from the
environment. That is, it is the closed-loop optimization that
manages the on-line sensorimotor transformation, which
responds to real information of the motor system in its
immediate environment.
Thus, inverse models are
embodied and situated because of the on-line computation
of the sensorimotor transformation managed by the inverse
models.
Above, when inquiring into vehicle of inverse models, we
see four characteristics of the motor representation in the
sense of directing toward goal-achievement. It is contrasted
to referring-based representation in forward models.
A system of the directing relation is representational in
the action-oriented sense. The control of actions has goalstates. Motor control, for example, is the determination of
actions in order to achieve a goal-state. Commands in the
motor control can be considered in the context of actionoriented representations: action-oriented representations are
those that “include in their contents commands for certain
behaviors (Mandik, 2005, p. 285).” In addition, actionoriented representations are “representations that
simultaneously describe aspects of the world and prescribe
possible actions, and are poised between pure control
structures and passive representations of external reality
(Clark, 1997, p. 49; emphasis added).” Millikan’s (1995,
1

The ideomotor action is initiated with an idea or imagery
(Koch et al., 2004), which specifically initiates the generation of
motor commands for being further executed in driving muscles.
The inverse models for generating those motor commands are
internal models, not in the sense that they mimic motor activities,
but that they manage planning that provide the motor commands
needed for achieving the goal at stake.

2005) thesis of pushmi-pullyou representations, an early
version of action-oriented representations thesis, explains
the representational status of association between
description and prescription.
Such an association is
representational because of its function of coordination
between various aspects of living experiences, coordinating
between what is sensed and what is to be done. Such
coordination ranges from animal behaviors (e.g. a food call
of hens), Gibsonian affordances (e.g. environmental layouts
for opportunities of action; e.g. grasping the handle of a
cup), to common norm (e.g. driving on the right) and social
role (e.g. waiting in orderly queues). It is representational,
as Millikan argues, because of its proper function that
contributes to survival, for example, eye-brink has the
proper function of preventing foreign matter entering the
eye.

Mirror Neurons
Motor actions are anticipatory, not simply because motor
control is for achieving goals but intrinsically because motor
acts are implicitly embedded in goal-oriented actions. This
is indicated in Rozzi et al.’s (2012) research on mirror
neurons.
The F5 neurons in the brain are subdivided into groups for
various motor acts, such as grasping, holding, tearing, and
manipulating,
which
are
anticipatory
behaviors.
Experiments with monkeys show the existence of mirror
neurons. Such neurons fire differently while executing the
grasping act, depending on different final goals of the action,
e.g. grasping the food to eat, or grasping it and placing it
into a container. In an experiment that requires grasping
with pliers as a tool, a monkey is trained to get an object
with normal pliers. The pliers are open and should be
closed in order to get an object. When the monkey is given
‘reverse’ pliers, the pliers are in a condition of closure; to
get an object, the hand should open pliers. The result is
that most F5 neurons fire depending on the completion of
the final goal-state, that is, holding the given object, but
independent of the hand movement itself (opening or
closing) (Umiltà et al., 2008). The lesson is that a motor act
is represented as a goal-oriented action. As Rozzi et al.
(2012) put it, “the neuronal selectivity for the action goal
during grasping observation represents a prediction of the
action outcome (p. 182).” A movement of motor movement,
say, hand opening with the tool of ‘reverse’ pliers, is
incomplete without incorporating a final state of goalachievement, namely, getting the given object firmly.
Mirror neurons “predict the action goal with contextual
cues” (ibid.).
Putting in terms of action-oriented
representations, prescription of action is incomplete without
incorporating description of the goal-state. The motor
movement is integrated with goals, in a way that
coordination appears between prescriptive and descriptive
information. Representation of motor action is indicated in
characterization of a goal and the prescription of motor
actions, which is goal-oriented and non-referring-based.

1412

Prescription (of actions) is connected to description (of
states) in another sense: the body representation is used for
generating actions, as discussed in the theme of body
schema.

Body Schema
The body schema is the information of visual and bodily
sensations tightly coupled with information available for
generating motor actions. It can be considered in the
context of action-oriented representations, with the focus on
description-prescription association, as discussed below.
The manipulation of actions, which is anticipatory, requires
spatial knowledge of bodily parts, which is knowledge
poised for use in processes of motor control from the
controller’s point of view, as opposed to the observers’.
That knowledge is the body schema, as discussed by
Christensen (2012). That would likely be knowledge,
generally speaking, put in an egocentric spatial framework,
which is put in a way that can be immediately taken into
account in determination of motor commands. That
egocentric spatial framework is highly detailed with various
reciprocal relations, as indicated by Christensen as follows.
A bodily part thus encoded in space is, at least, one that is
posited in relation to external objects and simultaneously
one in relation to other bodily parts. For example, when I
grasp a cup in front of me around a desktop computer, the
arm is positioned in relation to the keyboard and the cup that
I intend to reach, and the arm is positioned in a further
relation to the hand and other limbs connecting to it. The
egocentric spatial framework includes somatosensory
information (the sensation of touch, signals received from
the skin) and proprioceptive information (sensory
information received from muscles, tendons and joints,
information concerning the stretch and load of muscles).
In Christensen’s (2012) research, the body schema is
contrasted with the body image in the following three
respects; in general, the description-prescription connection
is manifest in the use of body schema for controlling actions.
Firstly, body schema is body representations for use in
actions, while body image is body representations available
in perception. Secondly, the body schema is unconscious
knowledge, while the body image is information available
for generating consciousness. Thirdly, the body schema is
changeable along with the time when an action proceeds,
while the body image is comparatively “more static” (ibid.
285). The body schema is more complicated, as we can
understand, because various sensations are made available
for use and consequently is constrained in use, as manifest
in the following two properties of the body schema.
First of all, stimuli of sensation are coded in a spatial
reference frame that is basically used for representing the
external world, yet representations of actions and the goal
are involved. When I feel itching on one foot, I remain in a
position to scratch it accurately in the correct foot. Even
when I cross my legs, it remains the case, yet the processing
time needs to be longer, indicating that things are getting
more complicated concerning any further action pointing to

a specific position. The lesson, as can be interpreted, is that
sensations in the body schema arise in an egocentric space
that is not independent from the actual motor processes, but
instead using the egocentric space in the actual management
of motor processes. The way in which motor processes
proceed, in other words, would affect the sensations in the
body schema. The body schema consists of sensations that
are tightly involving in, rather than independent from,
processes of motor actions.
More important, such
sensations arise in the egocentric space that intrinsically
takes shape with the management of motor actions. As
arguably, representations of such sensations involve the
aforementioned directing relation, which is action-oriented
with non-referring-based characters such as changing
perspectives, planning and normativity of the goal for action.
Secondly, the body schema is put in modular
representations, modular in both perspectives of sensation
and action. As signified in the modularity, fingers are part
of the hand, and in turn part of the arm. For representations
in a module are independent from those outside it, apraxia
patients may have difficulties in grasping a spoon, while
they can reach the food with the spoon easily (by moving
the arm without using the hand). That is, the damage in
processes of controlling the hand, because of modularity,
does not affect those of controlling the arm (Sirigu et al.,
1995; cited from Christensen, 2012, p. 285). When
sensations are modularized, their relating processes for
action are modularized in a concordant way, which
manifests a way of description-prescription connection.
The above discussions concern how sensations of motor
actions are organized, which are actually organized in
relation to processes of motor actions. A further question
regarding body schema concerns its cause. Namely, what is
it that initiates sensations of movement: Is it motor
commands of the movement in the central neural system
(CNS), or muscular structures that carry out the motor
movement? The answer is muscular structures; such an
answer indicates the tight coupling between sensations and
motor actions, which takes place not at the level of motor
commands at the CNS but down at the level of muscular
structures.
Ellaway et al. (2004) organize an experiment that elicits
finger movements, twitches, happen nearly simultaneously
at the left and the right hands, and further identifies which
movement is sensed earlier. Specificially, the twitch at the
left hand fingers is elicited with electrical stimulation of
forearm muscles, while that at the right is initiated with
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) functioning in the
human motor cortex. The TMS stimulation, as is suspected,
brings about an efferent copy of the motor command, a copy
which initiates sensations of the twitch at the right hand
fingers. If this is true, then the right hand twitch would be
sensed earlier, as the route of signal transduction in the
brain is certainly shorter than a sensory feedback from the
peripheral. Yet, it is not the case; the sense of twitch at the
right, elicited with the TMS, is actually later that sensed at
the left, with electrical stimulation. As Ellaway et al. (2004)

1413

discuss, there is no evidence that TMS takes an early
efferent copy. The early sensations are directly initiated by
synchronous volleys of action potentials in muscular
afferents. Eventually, those volleys at the left are sensed
earlier than the afferent responses to the muscle twitch at the
right. In the nutshell, those muscular volleys arise at the
onset of the left twitch, while sensory feedback of muscular
twitch at the right turns up at the end of the twitch.
The body schema as discussed above, to conclude this
subsection, can be considered in the context of actionoriented representations. During the course of a motor
action, first of all, locations of bodily parts should be
represented in a way that is readily available for use in that
action. As discussed above, the body schema is information
of sensations that are tightly coupled with information for
generating motor actions. Such sensations are actionoriented as they are structured in egocentric spatial
framework and objects and bodily parts in that framework
are mutually related responding to a way that is easy for use.

Cognitive Representations
In the motor control discussed above, motor systems are
qualified as representational manly in three senses together:
directing relation, coordination, and the basis for
developing/learning new motor skills through practice.
Firstly, the relation of directing something toward the goal,
as previously discussed, manifest a novel sense of
representation—non-referring-based
representation—in
inverse models of the motor control. Secondly, the
coordination between various factors involving in
connections between sensory information and motor
commands makes the motor actions readily approaching to
the goal-state, thus showing the description-prescription
connection of action-oriented representations.
The
sensorimotor transformation stands at the core of inverse
models, which presumes this description-prescription
connection.
Representations in the above two senses together are
different from those in perception, declarative language and
memory. Each of the latter representations is basically a
matter of factuality and consequently is to be evaluated with
truth-value. By contrast, the motor control concern both
factuality and effectivity, and consequently need to be
evaluated with the value of accuracy. In the maintenance of
anticipation, evaluation of motor actions can be made in
terms of accuracy; for example, reaching without missing
the target, grasping a cup firmly, walking ahead in balance,
are movements that fulfill the goal-states accurately.
Whether a goal-state is achieved can be evaluated, regarding
the degree of error when a current-state is compared to the
goal-state; in this way, conditions of misrepresentation are
clearly defined. Thus, representations of the motor action
differ from those of perception, memory and declarative
language, in a way that the category of accuracy is different
from that of truth. This is a distinctive reason why the bases
of motor actions—coordination and non-referring-based
anticipation, as aforementioned—are not put in the

categories of structural isomorphism (as Ramsey (2007)
characterizes), 1-1 correspondence or mirroring, on which
representations of perception, memory and declarative
language are based.
The third sense of representation—the basis for
development of novel skills through refining inverse
models—must be addressed for responding to the problem
of characterizing cognitive representations in terms of
necessary and sufficient conditions, which attempts to find a
clear-cut boundary (with a set of properties) between the
mental and the physical. Yet, coordination and the nonreferring-based anticipation not only appear in behaviors but
also turns up in biological structures (e.g. homeostasis),
even in physical phenomena (see various examples of
anticipatory coupling in Stepp and Turvey (2010)). By
contrast, that motor actions are cognitive is distinguishingly
manifest in the characteristic that individuals may develop
(as opposed to changing in the phylogeny) various
dexterities through practice. Motor actions are bases for
further development (through practice) of motor skills. The
development of motor skills implicates that structures and
phenomena of motor actions continue and are enhanced in
those skills. The continuation is unlike further constructions
on materials, e.g. building up a house with sand and stone,
and constructing a bridge with steel.
Rather, the
development of motor new skills is like a young manager
being supported (and consequently `enhanced’) by
experienced advisors. The motor dexterity is developed out
of motor actions, which provide primitive structures and
shapes for further transformation into various motor
dexterities. The continuation from motor actions to motor
dexterities is made possible with practice, especially that
through perseverance. Furthermore, learning of motor skills
is achieved by adapting internal inverse models (Wolpert
and Ghahramani, 2000), which are non-referring-based
models, as aforementioned. Hence, the motor learning is
achieved on grounds of adapting non-referring-based
models. To summerize, insofar as motor dexterities are
cognitive performances, those three characteristics of the
motor
control—non-referring-based
anticipation,
coordination, and the basis for development of dexterities
through practice—make representations of the motor control
be consisted of not only truth-based representations but
effectivity-based representations.

Concluding Remarks
Pezzulo (2008, 2011) and Grush (2004) contend for
embodied cognitive science but interpret representations of
motor behaviors as grounded on internal models, apart from
this, motor control would be ‘merely adaptive’. Pezzulo
argues that motor control is representational because of
predictive models; similarly, Grush argues it because of the
prediction made in forward models. As prediction made in
forward models is ground on the referring-based
representation, their arguments are amount to the claim that
the motor control is representational because of the
referring-based relation. Against this claim, as the present

1414

paper contends, inverse models disclose that motor control
may be representational in a different sense—directing
relation (directing something toward a goal)—a nonreferring-based sense of representation. This new sense of
representation has four characteristics: perspective,
changing perspectives, normativity of the goal, and planning.
Apart from those four characteristics, the cognitive
representation of the motor control has two more
characteristics: coordination, and the basis for motor
learning by refining inverse models. As for coordination,
motor behaviors are characterized with action-oriented
representations, in which sensory states are directly
connected with motor information, and in turn descriptive
information is tightly connected with indicative information,
which results in coordination of relating elements in the
regarded phenomena.
The property of decouplability is seen as a pivotal
characteristic of referring-based representation, and is used
to challenge the notion of action-oriented representation
manifest in embodied cognitive science. The reason is that
without decouplability even biological phenomena, such as
homeostasis, would be representational. In order to meet
this challenge, the present paper raises the third
characteristic of motor behaviors—the basis for
development into dexterity through practice—motor
representations are bases that can be extended to ground the
development of motor dexterities. Such a continuation to
dexterity manifests the cognitive nature of motor
representations, as aforementioned, and consequently
distinguishes motor behaviors from biological ones.
In the nutshell, the motor control is ground on both
referring-based representation (as manifest in forward
models) and non-referring-based representation (as manifest
in inverse models); the latter representation has six
characteristics:
perspective,
changing
perspectives,
normativity of the goal, planning, coordination, and motor
learning by refining inverse models. Clark’s and Mandik’s
notion of action-oriented representations is largely limited
to reactive actions (though not necessarily reflexes); its
internal version can be found in internal inverse models of
the motor control.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by National Science Council,
Taiwan, R.O.C., under grant NSC 102-2410-H-126-007.

References
Christensen, M. S. (2012). Body schema, illusions of
movement and body perception, in Gollhofer et al. (eds.).
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body and
World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ellaway, P H, Prochazka, A., Chan, M., Gauthier, M. J.
(2004). The sense of movement elicited by transcranial
magnetic stimulation in humans is due to sensory
feedback, Journal of Physiology, 15, 556(pt 2): 651–660.

Gollhofer, A., Taube, W., and Nielsen, J. B. (eds.) (2012).
Routledge Handbook of Motor Control and Motor
Learning, London, UK: Routledge.
Grush, R. (2004). The emulation theory of representation:
motor control, imagery, and perception. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 27: 377-442.
Koch, I., Keller, P. E., & Prinz, W. (2004). The ideomotor
approach to action control: Implications for skilled
performance, International Journal of Sport and Exercise
Psychology, v.2, pp. 362-375.
Mandik , P. (2005). Action-oriented representation. In
Kathleen Akins and Adrew Brook (eds.) Cognition and
the Brain: The Philosophy and Neuroscience Movement.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mandik, P. (2003). Varieties of Representation in Evolved
and Embodied Neural Networks, Biology and Philosophy,
18: 95–130, 2003.
Millikan, P. (2005). Pushmi-pullyou representations, in
Language: A Biological Model, Oxford University Press.
Pezzulo, G. (2011). Grounding procedural and declarative
knowledge in sensorimotor anticipation. Mind and
Language, 26(1):78–114.
Pezzulo, G. (2008). Coordinating with the Future: the
Anticipatory Nature of Representation. Minds and
Machines, 18, 179-225.
Pouget, A., and Snyder, L. H. (2000) Computational
approaches to sensorimotor transformations, Nature
Neuroscience supplement, v.3, pp. 1192-1198.
Ramsey, W. M. (2007). Representation Reconsidered.
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge: UK.
Rowat and Selverston (1997). Oscillatory mechanisms in
pairs of neurons connected with fast inhibitory synapses ,
Journal of Computational Neurophysiology, 4(2):103-27.,
Rowat and Selverston (1993). Modeling the gastric mill
central pattern generator of the lobster with a relaxationoscillator
network,
Journal
of
Computational
Neurophysiology, 70(3): 1030-53.
Rozzi, S., Buccino, G., Ferrari, P. F. (2012). Mirror neurons
and imitation, in Gollhofer et al. (eds).
Schwartz, A., and Koller, D. (1986). Diurnal phototropism
in solar tracking leaves of Lavatera cretica. Plant
Physiology, 80: 778-781.
Stepp, N., and Turvey, M. T. (2010). On strong anticipation,
Cognitive Systems Research, v.11 (2): 148–164.
Todorov, E. (2004). Optimality principles in sensorimotor
control, Nature Neuroscience, 7(9): 907-915.
Umiltà, A., Escola, L., Intskirveli, I., Grammont, I., Rochat,
M., Caruana, F., Jezzini, A., Gallese, V., and Rizzolatti, G.
(2008). When pliers become fingers in the monkey motor
system, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 105(6): 2209-2213.
Wolpert, D. M., and Ghahramani, Z. (2000). Computational
principles
of
movement
neuroscience,
Nature
Neuroscience supplement, v.3, pp. 1211-1217.
Wolpert, D. M., Ghahramani, Z., and Jordan, M. I. (1995).
An internal model for sensorimotor integration, Science, v.
269, pp. 1880-1882.

1415

