Adaptive Perceptual Learning in Electrocardiography:
The Synergy of Passive and Active Classification
Khanh-Phuong Thai (kpthai@ucla.edu)1
Sally Krasne (skrasne@mednet.ucla.edu)2
Philip J. Kellman (kellman@psych.ucla.edu)1,3

Departments of 1Psychology and 2Physiology and 3Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA

Abstract
Recent research suggests that combining adaptive learning
algorithms with perceptual learning (PL) methods can
accelerate perceptual classification learning in complex
domains (e.g., Mettler & Kellman, 2014). We hypothesized
that passive presentation of category exemplars might act
synergistically with active adaptive learning to further
enhance PL. Passive presentation and active adaptive methods
were applied to PL and transfer in a complex real-world
domain. Undergraduates learned to interpret real
electrocardiogram (ECG) tracings by either: (1) making active
classifications and receiving feedback, (2) studying passive
presentations of correct classifications, or (3) learning with a
combination of initial passive presentations followed by
active classification. All conditions showed strong transfer to
novel ECGs at posttest and after a one-week delay. Most
notably, the combined passive-active condition proved the
most effective, efficient, and enjoyable. These results help
illuminate the processes by which PL advances and have
direct implications for perceptual and adaptive learning
technology.
Keywords: perceptual learning; educational technology;
active learning; passive learning; medical education

Introduction
Experts in many domains differ from novices in their ability
to see patterns at a glance (Gibson, 1969).	  A radiologist can
quickly recognize a tumor in an x-ray (Lesgold et al., 1988).
A chess master can, at a glance, spot an impending
checkmate multiple moves in advance (c.f., Chase & Simon,
1973). These important patterns –	   including relations that
are quite abstract –	  are often invisible to novices; yet experts
can recognize them rapidly and automatically. Such fluent
pattern recognition characterizes experts in many domains
of human expertise and largely develops from perceptual
learning, defined by Gibson (1969) as experience-induced
improvements in the extraction of information. 	  
Until recently, perceptual learning (PL) has received little
attention in instruction. Both familiarity with PL and
suitable instructional methods have been lacking. Under
unsystematic learning conditions, attaining expert pattern
recognition may require many years of practice. 	  
Recent research, however, has shown that PL can be
systematically accelerated in real world learning domains
(e.g., Goldstone, Landy, & Son, 2008; Kellman & Massey,
2013; Kellman, Massey & Son, 2009). In our work, PL
methods are realized in perceptual and adaptive learning
modules (PALMs). PALMs combine PL techniques with

adaptive learning technology that uses both accuracy and
speed to optimally sequence categories, determine mastery,
and focus learning where it is most needed (e.g., Mettler &
Kellman, 2014). These methods advance students’ grasp of
crucial structures and relations, develop fluency, and support
transfer in mathematics (e.g., Kellman et al., 2009), medical
learning (e.g., Krasne et al., 2013) and other domains
(Mettler & Kellman, 2014).
Much is unknown about the cognitive components of
adaptive PL and how these might be integrated to optimize
the development of expertise in real-world settings. PALMs
typically employ active classification practice, but does
active classification better support PL than passive
exposures to appropriate classifications? The little research
done on this topic is not conclusive.
Active classification refers to learning tasks where the
learners select a category label for a presented example and
receive feedback that informs their perceptual, attentional
and decision processes. Passive learning provides the same
category membership information, but learners study the
example and the category label without engaging in the
choose-and-correct cycle.
Benefits of active retrieval have been well studied in the
memory literature. The testing effect (Roediger & Karpicke,
2006) refers to the idea that when learners actively engage
with the learning material by answering test questions,
memory is improved. The improvement usually exceeds
learning gains obtained from repeated passive study of the
same information (e.g., Roediger & Karpicke, 2006). Most
research on the testing effect has involved declarative
memory, but similar principles may apply to PL.
Ordinary experience suggest that passive exposure alone
can lead to discovery of relevant features and relations in
PL. Children learn to tell dogs from cats by seeing a number
of instances of dogs and cats. Novice wine drinkers can
learn to discriminate between wines without any instruction
(Hughson & Boakes, 2009). People can learn to recognize
the styles of artists in new paintings by passive viewing of
multiple samples of each artist (Kornell & Bjork, 2008).
In some cases, passive presentations may actually be
better than active presentations. Passive presentation in the
form of worked examples is the preferred mode of learning
for novices (e.g., Recker & Pirolli, 1995), and is an effective
instructional alternative to solving problems in a variety of
domains. Paas and van Merrienboer (1994) studied student
learning of geometrical problem solving skills and found
that when students studied worked examples of problems

2350

(passive), they attained better accuracy on solving new
problems than those who had to solve problems from scratch
(active). Paas and van Merrienboer postulated that a
considerable part of the mental effort in the active condition
was allocated to processes that were irrelevant for learning.
Those in the passive condition, on the other hand, could
focus on the relevant aspects of problem structure and
solutions, thus requiring less training time and less mental
effort. Passive learning trials also offer error-free exposures
to the classifications to be learned, eliminating residual
effects of incorrect guesses that may occur in active
learning. Conversely, Bodemer & Faust (2006) found that
when asking students to make active connections between
multiple representations of fractions, they were better able to
understand the underlying structures of fractions than when
they passively observed the correspondences.
Research on category learning suggests that passive and
active processes have complementary benefits. An active
task tends to encourage learners to focus on information that
distinguishes categories, while a passive task tends to
engage them with finding within-category regularities (e.g.,
Markman & Ross, 2003; Carvalho & Goldstone, 2014). In a
recent article, Levering and Kurtz (2015) compared the
category knowledge produced by an active classification
task and a passive observational learning task. They trained
participants to discriminate between two artificially created
categories, each with 5 stimuli, in which a single feature
determined category membership and other features
correlated but did not perfectly predict category
membership. They found that the active learning task biased
learners toward more discriminative learning compared to
the passive learning task. However, passive learning allowed
for enhanced sensitivity to the features that were not
perfectly predictive.
It is possible that combining passive and active learning
may be most beneficial. This hypothesis accords with
research on skill acquisition by Renkl, Atkinson, and
colleagues under the ACT-R framework (e.g., Atkinson,
Derry, Renkl, & Worthham, 2000; Renkl, Atkinson &
Grobe, 2004), in which passive study of examples is
valuable early in training. Much of this work focused on
procedural problem solving domains, for which a smooth
transition (fading) from study of worked-out examples to
problem solving may be ideal. Initial passive presentations
can reduce cognitive load early in training when it is highest
by not having to engage in decision-making processes,
resulting in fewer unproductive learning events (Renkl et al.,
2004). Active learning, in contrast, forces guessing at the
start, which might lead to cognitive overload. Wrong
guesses or hypotheses may also tend to linger and impede
later learning. In addition, being forced to produce responses
without knowing much may be frustrating, undercutting
motivation in some learners.
Most potential advantages of passive exposure can be
realized by using passive trials only at the start of learning.
Initial passive study in PL might focus learners’ attention on
specific features that define each category and in turn
support the acquisition of the category representation. As the

learning progresses, active learning can support
discriminative processes needed for correct classification.
Active learning after an initial stage may be especially
valuable in an adaptive framework. We sought to test this
hypothesis in a real-world, complex PL domain.
We trained undergraduates to classify seven diagnostic
patterns
in
electrocardiography.
The
12-lead
electrocardiogram (ECG) is one of the oldest and most
informative cardiac assessments available. Visual
interpretation of ECGs, however, requires superior
perceptual recognition skills ordinarily attainable only
through years of practice (Wood, Batt, Appelboam, Harris &
Wilson, 2013). One difficulty is discriminating relevant
from irrelevant information in ECGs. For any category,
some locations contain relevant information while some do
not. Each category involves patterns of diagnostic features,
but the features are variable across the ECG traces. Salient
features of an ECG trace do not necessarily indicate an
abnormality, and waveforms that indicate normality at one
location may not be normal at another. Thus, learners have
to know not only what to look for but also where to look.
We created three versions of an ECG PALM involving:
(1) only active classification of ECGs for the underlying
diagnostic pattern, (2) only passive presentations of the
correct interpretations, (3) initial passive presentations
followed by active classifications (passive-active condition).
The active and passive-active conditions involved
classification with feedback and were adaptive to the
learner’s performance, and the passive training involved
study of the correct interpretations and was not adaptive. To
compare learning across conditions, we examined
participants’ ability to correctly and quickly classify novel
ECG traces into trained categories of diagnostic patterns. All
active trials used an adaptive learning system – the ARTS
(Adaptive Response-time-Based Sequencing) system
(Mettler & Kellman, 2014).

Method
Participants
87 undergraduates from University of California, Los
Angeles without any prior knowledge of ECG interpretation
participated in the experiment for course credit.
Materials
The materials consisted of 250 unique 12-lead ECG traces
from real patients, with 26 - 46 unique traces for each of
seven categorical diagnostic patterns. The seven patterns
were: Normal, Acute Anterior ST Segment Elevation
Myocardial Infarction, Acute Inferior ST Segment Elevation
Myocardial Infarction, Right Bundle Branch Block, Left
Axis Deviation, Right Axis Deviation, Old Inferior
Myocardial Infarction.
The training consisted of two phases: a brief primer on
ECG interpretation (same for all conditions) and the PALM
phase with either active, passive, or passive-active task
formats. The primer was a PowerPoint slideshow consisting
of a brief explanation of the ECG, how to measure widths
and heights on the ECG grid, and one example of a typical

2351

ECG trace for each diagnostic pattern. In each example, the
relevant features were marked and described, similar to
samples provided in textbooks. No other information about
the heart anatomy, physiology, or other basics of ECG
interpretation was provided in the primer.
In the active PALM, on each trial, participants chose
among seven choices the diagnostic category for a given
ECG trace. Figure 1a shows an example trial. Accuracy and
speed were continually tracked; trial feedback was given
after each response and block feedback was given after
every 12 trials. The trial feedback played a sound
corresponding to the correctness of the response, and
displayed the correct answer, and response time when
correct. It also marked relevant features on the ECG, along
with a brief description of those features as seen in the
primer. Block feedback provided average accuracy and
speed by block and percentage of categories completed.
Feedback screens were not timed. Figure 1b shows an
example feedback screen following an incorrect response.
Categories were adaptively sequenced based on both
accuracy and response times as according to the ARTS
sequencing algorithm (see Mettler & Kellman, 2014).
Categories were dropped (retired) from the training set after
reaching learning criteria (i.e., correctly identified
consecutively in 4 out of 4 presentations, each in under 15
seconds). Participants completed the module when they had
retired all 7 categories.
In the passive PALM, each trial was the same as the
correct trial feedback screen for the active group (similar to
Figure 1b). The correct label, the relevant features and their
descriptions were provided, and participants were asked to
pay attention and to study each correct diagnosis. The
passive condition thus did not have classification feedback
and was not adaptive. To equate the total number of trials
across two groups, we yoked each participant in the passive
training condition to the total number of trials seen by
another participant in the active training condition. To
determine how many items per category to show, we used
the average proportions of trials per category that a pilot
group of active participants needed to complete the module.
These proportions were similar across active participants, so
we used the same proportions for all passive participants.
The duration of each passive trial was 13 seconds,

determined from the average amount of time it took pilot
participants in the active group to respond and view the trial
feedback. After 13 seconds, the screen cleared. To keep the
participants engaged and to equate the existence of a motor
response with the active condition, participants had to click
on a Next button to see the next trial, and there was a sound
played to signal the beginning of each trial. There was an
untimed break every 12 trials.
In the passive-active PALM, participants viewed a set of
14 passive trials (two examples from each category) as in
the passive condition, in random order, before moving on to
the adaptive active classification trials for which participants
received the same feedback and learning criteria as those in
the active classification condition. All three PALMs used
the same pool of ECGs.
Three assessments, each consisting of 14 new ECG’s (two
from each category), were used in counterbalanced order as
pretest, posttest, and delayed-posttest. None of the ECGs
used in the assessments appeared in the PALM. Each
assessment trial presented an ECG and seven answer
choices (Figure 1a). No feedback was given after each trial.
Procedure and Design
Participants were given 20 minutes to study the primer
followed by a quiz on which they were asked to match the
descriptions of the diagnostic features to each of the seven
heart patterns shown on the primer. This was to ensure that
participants were familiar with the diagnostic features of
each heart pattern. They checked their answers afterward.
After the quiz, participants took the pretest and were
randomly assigned to learn with either the active, passive, or
passive-active PALM. When participants finished the
module (or after the 2-hour time allotted), they completed
the posttest and a survey. The survey asked about their prior
knowledge of ECG reading, amount of sleep they had the
night before, and demographic information (age, gender,
English fluency). Because passive and active training may
differ not only in cognitive aspects of learning, but also in
the motivational and engagement aspects, we asked
participants to report their levels of engagement and
enjoyment of the training experience, and to provide a
judgment of learning and memory for the delayed test.
Participants returned for the delayed-posttest one week later.

Figure 1.
(a) Sample
active
classification
trial;
(b) feedback
provided
when
incorrect.

2352

Figure 2. (a) Accuracy, (b) Response times on correct answers, (c) Training efficiency across conditions. Error bars ± 1SE.
Dependent Measures, Data Analyses and Hypotheses
posttest, regardless of condition. Participants were able to
Based on prior work, we expected all PALMs to produce
interpret ECGs they had never seen before and to do so with
robust improvements in classification, and the passive-active
improved speed. The passive-active condition produced the
group to produce the best results. Because we used learning
greatest learning gain with the fewest training trials. The
to criterion, our primary measure was learning efficiency,
active condition also produced greater learning gains than
defined as accuracy gain from pretest to posttest divided by
the passive condition. Table 1 contains the descriptive
minutes invested in the training. We expected the active
statistics from the training for each condition.
group to have greater improvements in accuracy and/or
Accuracy
response time (for correct answers -- RTc) than the passive
Accuracy Gain. We analyzed accuracy gain (posttest
group. We used analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) in
minus pretest) in a 2 phase (pre-post, pre-delayed) x 3
analyzing differences among the groups in accuracy gain,
condition (active, passive, passive-active) repeatedRTc change, and Efficiency because of possible differences
measures ANCOVA with pretest accuracy as the covariate.
1
in pretest mean values between groups. Participants in the
The covariate, pretest accuracy, was significantly related to
active group on average retired 87.3% and the passive-active
the posttest gains, F(1,65) = 48.89, p < .001, η2 = .43.
89.9% of the categories. To compare the effectiveness of the
Indeed, better pretests predicted less improvement at
training conditions, we report results from participants who
posttest, r = -.43, p < .001, and delayed test, r = -.55, p <
completed the assigned modules (N = 23 per condition). The
.001, suggesting that pretest variations were largely due to
same patterns of results were found with all participants (N
chance. After controlling for the effect of the pretest, there
= 27 per condition). Yoking by number of trials was not
was a reliable effect of condition, F(2, 65) = 6.00, p < .01, η2
perfect for 5 pairs of participants; however, we retained
= .16. The active and passive-active conditions produced
them in the analyses because (1) removing them did not
higher gains than the passive condition, t(44) = 2.18, p <
change the results, and (2) total trials and training times
.05, d = .64; t(44) = 2.41, p < .05, d = .71, respectively.
were similar between the active and passive groups. The
There were no reliable differences in accuracy gains
three groups did not differ on quiz performance or any other
between the passive-active and active conditions, t(44) =
measures not reported here. Because we sought to compare
.68, p > .05, and no significant interactions (p’s > .05).
differences across training conditions, we conducted
There was a statistically significant main effect of phase,
planned comparisons across conditions. All statistical tests
F(1, 65) = 5.54, p < .05, η2 = .08. The pre-post accuracy
2
were two-tailed, with a 95% confidence level.
Total Trials
Minutes on Training
Results and Discussion
Condition
Completed
Training Accuracy
Figure 2 shows the average accuracy, RTc at each test
phase, and efficiency scores by condition. As expected,
Active
167.52 (11.82) 43.96 (3.37)
.49 (.02)
participants showed substantial learning gains from pretest
Passive-Active 137.78 (6.69) 37.70 (2.68)
.57 (.02)
to posttest and retained much of their learning at delayed
Passive

1

Assumptions for ANCOVA were met for all dependent variables,
F’s < 1, p’s > .05.
2
Due to small sample size, we followed the recommendations of
Nakagawa (2004) and provided effect size estimates to evaluate the
strength and direction of each relationship in our multiple tests.

159.74 (8.64)

47.91 (2.40)

--

Table 1. Average training performance across the three
experimental groups (Standard errors in parentheses). Both
passive and active trials were included in total trials
completed for the passive-active condition.

2353

Response Times
Generally, participants became faster at arriving at the
correct answers at posttest and delayed test. However, there
were no reliable effects of condition or phase (pre-post vs.
pre-delayed post), p’s > .05.
Efficiency
After controlling for the effect of pretest accuracy, there was
a reliable main effect of condition, F(2, 77) = 6.10, p < .01,
η2 = .14. There were no reliable differences between active
and passive-active groups in the average efficiency (p =
.11), but both of the active and passive-active groups had
better efficiency than the passive group, t(44) = 2.34, p <
.05, d = .69, and t(44) = 4.41, p < .001, d = 1.01.
Since there were no condition differences in pretest
accuracy, we also analyzed efficiency uncorrected for
pretest variation (assuming that differences seen in pretest,
before any experimental treatments, were random). Passiveactive outperformed active at delayed test, t(44) = 2.14, p =
.04, d = .63, and marginally at immediate posttest, t(44) =
1.87, p = .07, d = .56. Passive-active and active also had
higher efficiencies than passive at both immediate and
delayed posttest, t(44) > 2, p < .03, d = .67 to 1.31.
Progression of Learning
Figure 3 shows the average accuracy over the first 17
training blocks for the active and passive-active conditions.
The passive-active group performed consistently better than
the active group, t(44) = 3.84, p <.001, d = 1.13, after 3
blocks, t(44) = 2.79, p < .01, d = .82. This result suggests
that initial passive exposure speeds learning relative to
starting with active classification, despite the similar number
of learning trials in the passive portion and the first active
trial block. In the first few blocks, the abrupt change from
passive to active introduced similar error rates as those in
the active condition. However, after the first few blocks, as
we expected, those in the passive-active group made fewer
errors. These gains appear to be preserved through the
course of learning and in posttests.

1.00
Proportion Accurate

gain was reliably higher than the pre-delayed gain (34% vs.
16%, respectively, d = .81).
Raw Accuracy. We also compared raw accuracy across
groups. A 3 phase (pre, post, delayed test) x 3 condition
ANOVA confirmed a main effect of condition, F(2,66) =
4.61, p < .05, η2 = .12. The passive-active condition
outperformed both the active, t(44) = 2.15, p < .05, d = .62,
and passive conditions, t(44) = 2.64, p < .05, d = .78, on
overall accuracy. Active and passive did not differ reliably,
t(44) = 1.23, p = .22. There was a marginally significant
phase x condition interaction, F(4,132) = 1.99, p < .10, η2 =
.06. There were no condition differences at pretest (p > .10),
but the passive-active group outperformed the passive group
at both posttest, t(44) = 2.37, p < .05, d = .70, and delayed
test (50% vs. 39%), t(44) = 2.75, p < .01, d = .82. The active
group also had a marginally higher delayed test accuracy
than the passive group, t(44) = 1.73, p < .10, d = .51. There
were no other differences among conditions.

0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00

Active
Passive-Active

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Training Blocks (12 trials per block)
Figure 3. Average accuracy across training blocks. The
passive-active group received 14 passive trials at block 1.
Self-Report Ratings
On the survey, participants differed marginally in how they
responded to “How enjoyable was the training as a whole,
on a scale from 1-6 (1 = not at all enjoyable, 6 = very
enjoyable)”,3 F(2,61) = 2.51, p < .10. The passive-active
PALM was reliably more enjoyable (M = 4.55, SD = 1.23)
than the passive PALM (M = 3.76, SD = 1.22), t(47) = 2.01,
p = .05, d = .64, and marginally more enjoyable than the
active PALM (M = 3.90, SD = 1.14), t(46) = 1.74, p < .10, d
= .55. Participants in the passive-active training condition
also self-reported to be more highly motivated and engaged
during the module (on a scale from 1-6, 1 = not at all, 6 =
very much, M = 4.90, SD = .72) than the active (M = 4.38,
SD = 1.02) and the passive groups (M = 3.95, SD = 1.36),
t(39) = 1.87, p = .07, d = .59, and t(39) = 2.77, p < .01, d =
.87. We found no differences in the reported level of
engagement and motivation between the active and the
passive condition, p > .05. There were no condition
differences on the other self-report measures.
Conclusion
The passive-active condition in this study, consisting of
initial passive exposure, followed by active adaptive
learning, produced durable learning that was faster, more
accurate, efficient, and enjoyable than passive learning for
the same amount of time in this complex pattern recognition
domain. Passive-active also outperformed active adaptive
learning on some measures, especially comparisons during
the course of learning (Figure 3), as well as in accuracies
and efficiencies uncorrected for what were likely random
pretest variations across groups. Effect sizes for learning
differences between passive-active and active ranged from
around .6 to .8, which are medium to large effect sizes. The
active condition in this experiment, as well as the active part
of the passive-active condition, utilized the ARTS adaptive
learning algorithm previously found to be highly effective in
earlier work. The passive-active condition here appears to
markedly enhance a learning approach that has been
3

The survey was implemented shortly after data collection began,
so we did not have responses from the first 8 participants.

2354

previously shown to outperform classic adaptive learning
systems and a number of presentation schemes in adaptive
PL (Mettler & Kellman, 2014).
The advantages of passive-active learning may have
several explanations. Consistent with work on cognitive
load and worked examples (e.g., Renkl et al., 2004), initial
familiarization with category exemplars may allow relevant
structure to be learned without imposing the additional task
demands of active responding. Moreover, passive and active
learning may complement each other in focusing attention
on within-category similarities and between-category
contrasts respectively (e.g., Carvalho & Goldstone, 2014).
Specific advantages of passive exposure at the start of
learning may include avoiding initial errors and persistence
of incorrect guesses, as well as averting frustration that may
arise in active learning from having to guess initially.
This work has clear practical implications. Incorporating
passive-active training is an easily implemented technique
that is likely to improve learning technology. The primer
used in this study, modeled after textbook instruction,
prepared undergraduates to benefit from the ECG PALMs,
but it was clearly not sufficient for producing highly
accurate or fluent interpretation of heart patterns (e.g.,
accuracy levels after the primer averaged around 30%
(pretest scores in Figure 2A). Thus, the present results
confirm the importance of PL interventions as a valuable
complement to declarative and procedural components of
instruction (Kellman & Massey, 2013). Our results also
raise a number of new research questions. For example, does
the combination of passive and active classification produce
similar learning gains and efficiency in other domains,
particular in those where the learner already has more prior
knowledge? How many passive exposures are optimal, and
what is the relationship between the optimal number of
exposures and the complexity of the learning domain?
Additional research will be needed to further understand and
optimally utilize the passive-active synergy.
Acknowledgments
We thank Joel Zucker, Tim Burke, Rachel Older, and
research assistants of the UCLA Human Perception Lab, and
gratefully acknowledge support from NSF REESE Award
No. 1109228 and the US Office of Naval Research to PJK.
References
Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.
(2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of
Educational Research, 70(2), 181-214.
Bodemer, D., Faust, U. (2006). External and mental
referencing of multiple representations. Computers in
Human Behavior, 22, 27-42.
Carvalho, P. F., & Goldstone, R. L. (2014). The benefits of
interleaved and blocked study: Different tasks benefit
from different schedules of study. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 1-8.
Chase, W.G. & Simon, H.A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4(1), 55-81.

Gibson, E.J. (1969). Principles of perceptual learning and
development. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Goldstone, R.L., Landy, D., and Son, J.Y. (2008). A well
grounded education: The role of perception in science and
mathematics. In M. De Vega, A. Glenberg, and A.
Graesser (Eds.), Symbols, Embodiment, and Meaning (pp.
327–355). Oxford Press.
Hughson, A. L., & Boakes, R. A. (2009). Passive perceptual
learning in relation to wine: Short-term recognition and
verbal description. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62(1), 1-8.
Kellman, P. J., & Massey, C. M. (2013). Perceptual
learning, cognition, and expertise. Psychology of Learning
and Motivation, 58, 117 – 165.
Kellman, P.J., Massey, C., & Son, J.Y. (2009). Perceptual
learning modules in mathematics: Enhancing students’
pattern recognition, structure extraction, and fluency.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 1-21.
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories: Is spacing the enemy of induction?
Psychological Science, 19, 585-592.
Krasne, S., Hillman, J. D., Kellman, P. J., & Drake, T. A.
(2013). Applying perceptual and adaptive learning
techniques
for
teaching
introductory
histopathology. Journal of Pathology Informatics, 4(34).
Markman, A.B., & Ross, B.H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 592- 613.
Mettler, E., & Kellman, P. J. (2014). Adaptive responsetime-based
category
sequencing
in
perceptual
learning. Vision Research, 99, 111-123.
Mettler, E., Massey, C. & Kellman, P. (2011). Improving
adaptive learning technology through the use of response
times. In L. Carlson, C. Holscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Boston, MA: Cognitive
Science Society, 2532-2537.
Nakagawa, S. (2004). A farewell to Bonferroni: the
problems of low statistical power and publication bias.
Behavioral Ecology, 15, 1044-1045.
Paas, G., & van Merrienboer, J. (1994). Variability of
worked examples and transfer of geometrical problem
solving skills: a cognitive-load approach. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 86, 122-133.
Pirolli, P., & Recker, M. (1994). Learning strategies and
transfer in the domain of programming. Cognition and
Instruction, 12, 235–275.
Renkl, A., Atkinson, R. K., & Grobe, C. S. (2004). How
fading worked solution steps works – A cognitive load
perspective. Instructional Science, 32, 59-82.
Roediger, H. L., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). The power of
testing memory: Basic research and implications for
educational practice. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1, 181–210.
Wood, G., Batt, J., Appelboam, A., Harris, A., & Wilson,
M. R. (2013). Exploring the impact of expertise, clinical
history, and visual search on electrocardiogram
interpretation. Medical Decision Making, 34(1), 75-83.

2355

