Agency concepts across cultures: How intuitive is folkpsychology?

1

bethany l. ojalehto1 (bethanyojalehto@u.northwestern.edu)
Douglas L. Medin1 (medin@northwestern.edu)
Salino García G.2

Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
2
Ngöbe Culture and Language Education Program, Bocas del Toro, Panama
Abstract
The present research investigates cultural variation in conceptual frameworks for interpreting agency. A mind perception
measure (Gray, Gray, & Wegner, 2007) was adapted for interviews with Indigenous Ngöbe adults in Panama and US
college students. Participants ranked the agency capacities of
various entities and provided explanations. Rankings varied
systematically, with Ngöbe more likely to ascribe agency to
nonhuman natural kinds than US participants. Analysis of explanations indicated that agency concepts are organized under
different folktheories: US participants construed agency as a
hierarchical, prototypically human capacity requiring consciousness, whereas Ngöbe construed agency as a multidimensional relational capacity expressed in directed interactions. An emphasis on psychological agency as distinct from
other (biological, physical) forms of agency is widely assumed to be a conceptual prior, but these findings suggest it
may instead be a feature of Western cultural epistemologies.
Keywords: agency; folkpsychology; mind perception; culture; domain specificity; animism; Indigenous; Western

Introduction
A major goal for cognitive science is to understand how
people recognize and conceptualize agents. Here, we report
cultural differences in agency attribution between Indigenous Ngöbe of Panama and US college students. We argue
that these differences derive from striking variation in
grounding principles for inferring agency.
Agency, or the capacity to act, is a signature property of
moving, living, and sentient kinds (e.g., Lowder & Gordon,
2015). It can be imagined along a spectrum of causal force
that evokes distinct interpretations depending on the kind of
cause attributed to an action (e.g., physical versus mental).
The skeletal representational system for agency appears to
be early developing, with infants discriminating between entities based on cues such as goal-directed action and contingent interaction (Johnson, 2003). But how these basic representations relate to later developing concepts of agency is a
matter of debate (Csibra & Gergely, 2007). Much of the
conversation revolves around the link from agency to
folkpsychology (Poulin-Dubois et al., 2009), asking how
and when actions come to be understood via mental states.
One influential view holds that agency is conceptualized
under distinct frameworks according to ontological kinds
(Wellman & Gelman, 1992). On this domain-specificity account, children naturally come to understand causal events

and actions in terms of distinct intuitive theories for physical forces (folkphysics), living kinds (folkbiology), and
minds (folkpsychology).
Domain-specificity is widely thought to be universal
(Gelman & Legare, 2011; Sperber & Hirschfeld, 2004). At
the same time, it is well known that cultures diverge in explicit beliefs about agency. For instance, many Indigenous
philosophies hold that natural kinds like plants or thunder
may think and talk (Harvey, 2005)—capacities that Western
researchers view as psychological. As such, they have treated these beliefs as overextensions of a universal concept of
psychological agency beyond its proper domain, characterizing them as counterintuitive, supernatural, or animistic
concepts (Atran & Norenzayan, 2004; Boyer, 1996).
An alternative possibility is that “overextensions” reflect
different concepts of agency, because cultural epistemologies (or worldviews) parse agency according to different focal dimensions of interest (Bird-David, 1999; Cajete, 2000;
Kohn, 2013; Viveiros de Castro, 1998). Specifically, scholars have argued that Indigenous epistemologies are concerned with agency as expressed in relational interaction
with others and environments. This cultural organization of
knowledge does not share the overtly mentalistic emphasis
of Western folkpsychology, and it affords recognition of
many nonhuman entities as complex agents.
On this account, people may attend to similar action cues
for agency across cultures (e.g., Barrett et al., 2005), but
those cues evoke concepts that acquire very different meanings across cultural frameworks. We propose that two such
cultural differences can be understood in terms of: (a) ecocentric or anthropocentric prototypes for agency, corresponding to a focus on natural kinds broadly or humans specifically; and (b) distinct causal theories of agency as a relational capacity (reasoning about interactions) or a psychological capacity (reasoning about mental states).
As we will see, Ngöbe informants focus on discriminating
different causal aspects of agency across a different scope of
actors than would be predicted by current accounts of
folkpsychology. From this we argue that the principled distinction between agency in general, and uniquely psychological agency in particular, may not be a conceptual prior
but a property of Western epistemologies. If so, the implications would be far-reaching, for agency concepts play a fundamental role in cognitive processes ranging from causality
and mind perception to morality (Banaji & Gelman, 2013).

1763

Table 1. Mean rankings and percent inclusions for agency by culture (across five capacities)
Average Rankings1
Ngöbe

US

Average Percent Inclusions
Overall

Ngöbe

US

M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
Kind
Humans
3.86
(1.58)
4.21
(.58)
4.03a
(1.18)
0.93
(0.10)
0.85
(0.14)
Animals
6.51
(1.94)
5.66
(1.16)
6.08b
(1.62)
1.00*
(0.00)
0.83*
(0.21)
Plants
10.65
(1.23)
11.08
(1.19)
10.87c
(1.20)
0.55*
(0.33)
0.21*
(0.26)
Ecol. Kinds
11.00
(1.71)
11.78
(0.85)
11.39c
(1.38)
0.45*
(0.37)
0.08*
(0.17)
Artifacts
12.35*
(1.55)
10.58*
(1.40)
11.47c
(1.70)
0.38
(0.36)
0.29
(0.26)
Overall
8.88†
(0.22)
8.66†
(0.16)
8.77
(0.22)
0.66†
(0.20)
0.45†
(0.15)
1
Average Rankings: Lower numbers indicate higher rankings (range: 1 - 16); excluded items scored as tied for last.
* Interaction of culture x kind: p < .05 comparing cultural means within that kind.
a,b,c
Main effect for kind: p < .05 for pairwise comparisons between kinds. (Ecol. Kind: ecological kind, e.g., sun.)
†
Main effect for culture: p < .05 for overall cultural comparisons.

Current Study
We adapted the mind perception survey (Gray, Gray, &
Wegner, 2007) for use in interviews.1 US participants (N =
11) were students in an introductory psychology course at a
private Midwestern university. Ngöbe participants (N = 11)
were residents of an indigenous village where subsistence
practices are ecologically coordinated (e.g., agroforestry).
Ngöbe participants’ experience with formal schooling
ranged from 6-12 years (M = 7.60; SD = 2.17).
First, we assessed cultural attributions of agency capacities. We predicted that Ngöbe would be more likely than US
participants to attribute such capacities to plants and ecological kinds.2 Second, we elicited explanations for capacity attributions. We predicted that Ngöbe and US respondents
would draw on different framings of and criteria for the capacities under question.

Methods
In identical interview procedures, participants rank-ordered
16 entities by their capacities for agency, allowing for ties
(equal capacity) and exclusions (no capacity). Five representative capacities were selected from the 18-item mind
perception survey: communication, thought, morality, hunger and desire.3 Entities were 4 humans (old and young
woman, infant, fetus), 3 mammals (chimp, dog, cow), 2
plants (banana, manioc [Panama]; lettuce, strawberry [US]),

1

Adapted from the original survey as follows: (a) stimuli included plants and ecological kinds in addition to selected original
items; (b) response method was ranking rather than pairwise comparisons; (c) explanations were elicited.
2
Such natural kinds are often referred to as “nonliving,” but
Ngöbe may consider them alive so we refer to “ecological kinds.”
3
Gray et al (2007) propose that minds are perceived along two
dimensions, experience and agency. They define agency in terms
of moral agency and responsibility, as distinct from the usage here
(namely, any entity that is [perceived] capable of acting). Specifically probing these two dimensions was not the goal of the current
study, but we are exploring this distinction in ongoing work.

Overall
M

SD

0.89a
0.91a
0.38b
0.26b
0.34b
0.56

(0.12)
(0.17)
(0.34)
(0.34)
(0.31)
(0.20)

5 ecological kinds (sun, clouds, rain, ocean, rocks), and 2 artifacts (robot, computer).4
Each participant ranked, on average, three of the five capacities to keep interviews of reasonable duration. Participants were probed to explain a subset of their rankings.
Ngöbe and US respondents provided similar number and
length of explanations per capacity and kind.
Participants were interviewed in Spanish (Panama) or
English (US). Survey items were translated into Spanish by
a bilingual research assistant in the US and checked for accuracy by a trilingual researcher (S.G.G.) in Panama. Ngöbe
participants were bilingual in Spanish and their native
Ngöbere; U.S. participants were fluent English speakers. Interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed, and Spanish
responses were translated into English for coding analysis.

Agency Rankings
We analyzed results by considering which entities were included in agency rankings (inclusion) and by their mean
rank (ranks). Lower numbers indicate higher rank (range: 116); excluded items were scored as tied for last place.
Results Measures of inclusion and ranks were averaged
by kind across the five agency capacities, then analyzed
with a 2 (culture) X 5 (kind: artifact, ecological kind, plant,
animal, human) repeated-measures ANOVA. Degrees of
freedom used Huynh-Feldt estimates due to violation of assumption of sphericity (inclusion: χ2 (9) = 28.31, p < .01, ε
> .75; ranks: χ2 (9) = 18.02, p < .05, ε > .75).
Results and descriptive statistics are summarized in Table
1. As expected, there were main effects for kind on inclusion, F(3.24, 64.87) = 61.48, p < .01, η2 = .76, and ranks,
F(3.47, 69.35) = 114.41, p < .01, η2 = .85. Follow-up t-tests
showed that animates were included more than inanimates,
(ps < .05). Humans were ranked highest, followed by animals (ps < .05), then inanimate kinds, which did not differ.
There were main effects for culture on inclusion and
ranks. Overall, Ngöbe included more entities than US par4

Notably, previous surveys have tended not to include plants or
ecological kinds, preferring instead computerized artifacts; this is
itself a commentary on Western views of agency.

1764

Table 2: Coding scheme for US cultural framework: Anthropocentric psychological agency
Code
Human-centric
framing

Scalar framing

Internalized
indicators

Consciousness

Description
Implicates humans as prototypical
agents by referring to:
(i) Human-nonhuman comparisons
(ii) Human perception of agency
(iii) Human intervention on agency
Frames agency as scalar capacity by:
(i) Assessing agency in terms of
hierarchical scales or timelines
(ii) Hedging the sense in which an
entity has capacity, implying an ideal
Focus on internal parts or substrates
underlying indicators of agency:
(i) mind or brain
(ii) interior or bodily substrates
Consciousness is criterial to agency, as
indicated by:
(i) self-awareness
(ii) autonomy over own actions
(iii) (not) instincts or mere reactions

Examples
(i) Animals “don’t have the capacity to think like people” (NG, Th.)
(ii) Animals “not so much, because they’re difficult to interpret”
(US, Com.)
(iii) Dogs have “been conditioned to act that way” (US, Mor.)
(i) Mammals “tend to be smarter, have a more complex brain” (US,
Th.); Baby will “given time, overcome the chimpanzee” (US, Mor.)
(ii) Plants “feel emotion in like a different sense” (US, Com.); “But
the plant doesn't really get hungry” (NG, Hun.)
(i) Animals “have receptors and stuff in their brain that signal when
they’re hungry” (US, Hun.)
(ii) Robot has “electric cables in their body” (NG, Com.); Human
“body requires nutrients” (US, Hun.)
(i) Plants “perform actions” but “have no concept of being moral”
(US, Mor.); Baby “can’t recognize” its hope (US, Des.)
(ii) Animal’s “brain doesn’t control what he’s communicating”
(US, Com.)
(iii) Cows have “primal instinct rather than...more technical
cognition levels” (US, Th.)

Abbreviations: (NG/US) Ngöbe/US; (Hun.) Hunger; (Th.) Thought; (Mor.) Morality; (Des.) Desire; (Com.) Communication

ticipants, F(1, 20) = 7.82, p <.05, η2 = .28, and mean rank
differed slightly, F(1, 20) = 6.69, p < .05, η2 = .25.5
On an ecocentric prototype, Ngöbe should be more likely
than US participants to include ecological kinds (but not artifacts) in agency ranks. This was confirmed by a culture by
kind interaction for inclusion, F(3.24, 64.87) = 2.86, p <.05,
η2 = .13. As predicted, follow-up t-tests showed that Ngöbe
were significantly more likely than US participants to include animals (Ngöbe: M = 1.00, SD = 0; US: M = 0.83, SD
= 0.21), plants (Ngöbe: M = 0.55, SD = 0.33; US: M =
0.21, SD = 0.26), and ecological kinds (Ngöbe: M = 0.45,
SD = 0.37; US: M = 0.08, SD = 0.17) ps < .05.
US participants were more likely than Ngöbe to rank
complex artifacts above plants and ecological kinds, as indicated by a culture by kind interaction for ranks, F(3.47,
69.35) = 2.70, p < .05, η2 = .12. Follow-up tests showed that
the point of cultural divergence in rank order fell at artifacts,
with US rankings significantly higher than Ngöbe rankings
for artifacts (US: M = 10.58, SD = 1.40; Ngöbe: M = 12.35,
SD = 1.55), t(20) = 2.82, p < .05, d = 1.20. The US pattern
aligns with an anthropocentric view of agency, given that
these are human-designed information processing artifacts.
Discussion. Ngöbe were more likely to attribute agency
to nonhuman natural kinds than US participants, who tended
to restrict agency attributions to humans and animals, with
the occasional exception for artifacts. The fact that the two
groups did not differ on artifact inclusion rules out a generalized tendency for Ngöbe to attribute agency to everything.
We also observed a flip in rank order for artifacts versus
natural inanimates. US attribution profiles are consistent
5

Ranks are not exactly equal because aggregation by kinds leads
to a weighted mean rank.

with a view of uniquely psychological agency tied to (human-like) minds, whereas Ngöbe profiles align with an ecologically oriented view of agency as a relational capacity.
These possibilities were further investigated by analyzing
explanations for agency rankings.

Agency Explanations
An entity can express agency in many ways. Whether
those expressions are interpreted as relevant to the capacity
in question hinges on one’s conceptual framework for agency. Building on current accounts of Western and Indigenous
cultural epistemologies (see Medin et al., 2013), as well as
the folkpsychology and mind-perception literatures, we developed several predictions. US folkpsychology is expected
to treat humans as the prototype, linked to a scalae naturae
model where organisms are hierarchically ordered on a scale
from simple to complex agency. In contrast, Ngöbe are expected to treat agency as a capacity for relating to others and
the environment, exercised by human and nonhuman entities alike in diverse ways (e.g., see Bird-David, 1999).
To operationalize these hypotheses, we designed a coding
scheme to assess constructs associated with each proposed
cultural framework (see Tables 2 and 3). Our coding system
measured the extent to which participants’ explanations focused on the following variables: human-centric, scalar, or
relational framings of agency; internalized or interactive indicators of agency; and consciousness or directedness as criteria for agency (each is described in more detail below).
Coding scheme The dependent variable was the percent
of explanatory content associated with a given coding category, adjusted for explanation length. Two raters (b.o. and a
research assistant blind to the hypotheses) each coded half
the data independently. Inter-rater agreement was good: in-

1765

Table 3: Coding scheme for Ngöbe cultural framework: Ecocentric relational agency
Code
Relational
framing

Interactive
indicators

Directedness

Description
Frames agency as relational capacity
by referring to interactions and
other-orientated states involving:
(i) other agents
(ii) environments
Focus on observable interactions as
cues to agency, including:
(i) Behavioral patterns
(ii) Means of expressing agency
Directedness is criterial to agency,
as indicated by:
(i) goal-directed needs or wants
(ii) teleological processes
(iii) variable states of the entity

Examples
(i) Chimps “have a good sense of social structure” (US, Th.); Cows
“know their owner” but are “fierce” to others (NG, Mor.)
(ii) “Plants have hunger, for the rain that falls” (NG, Hun.); Sun
“communicates with [water] in the moment of rising” (NG, Com.)
(i) Dogs have “certain things that they do or don’t do, when they live
with people” (US, Mor.)
(ii) Plants “communicate in the way they go growing” (NG, Com.);
Animals “have their distinct forms to wait, express, know” (NG, Des.)
(i) Plants are “hungry for something that will allow them to survive”
(US, Hun.)
(ii) Sun “has the thought to light the world” (NG, Th.);
Rain “has thoughts, that it falls as the rain” (NG, Th.)
(iii) Oceans “have a moment where they wait for the change” (NG,
Des.)

Abbreviations: (NG/US) Ngöbe/US; (Hun.) Hunger; (Th.) Thought; (Mor.) Morality; (Des.) Desire; (Com.) Communication

	  
tra-class
correlations for each variable ranged from r = .62
to .85, ps < .01, (df = 232).

that US explanations relied more on scalar framings than
Ngöbe explanations.
Relational frame A relational framing was assessed by
coding references to relationships, interactions, and otheroriented states involving (i) other agents (e.g., “babies know
who their mother is”) (social relations); and (ii) environments (e.g., a plant “wants to wet itself with rain and eat
sun”) (ecological relations). As expected, there was a main
effect for culture, F(1,18) = 7.76, p < .05, η2 = .30, such that
Ngöbe participants provided more content associated with
relational framings than US participants.

Results All tests reported below are 2 (culture) x 2 (kind:
animate, inanimate) repeated-measures ANOVAs on the
coding variable of interest. Data were collapsed over the
five kinds into two categories (in/animate) to reduce empty
cells (this split allowed us to include 10 of 11 participants
from each group). We report only results that reached statistical significance. There were no main effects for kind, or
interactions of culture by kind, for any test reported here.
Results and descriptive statistics are summarized in Table 4.
Framings of agency On an anthropocentric model, we predicted that US explanations would treat humans as the ideal
or most “developed” agents and thus contain more humancentric and scalar framings of agency. On an ecocentric
model, we predicted Ngöbe explanations would frame agency in terms of relational action, both social and ecological.
Human-centric frame An anthropocentric framing was
assessed by coding for (i) comparison of nonhumans to humans (e.g., chimps think because “they’re very similar to
human minds”); (ii) taking a human vantage point on perceiving or appraising nonhuman agency (e.g., animals have
minimal communication because “they’re difficult to interpret”); or (iii) human intervention on nonhuman agency
(e.g., dogs only behave morally because they are trained to
follow rules). As predicted, there was a main effect for culture, F(1,18) = 8.65, p < .01, η2 = .33, such that US participants provided more human-centric content than Ngöbe.
Scalar frame A scalar framing was defined as explanations that (i) assess agents according to hierarchical taxonomies or developmental scales (e.g., mammals “tend to be
smarter, have a more complex brain”); or (ii) hedge the
sense in which an entity possesses a capacity (e.g., in an
“abstract” or “different” sense), implying an anchoring concept based on an ideal standard. The predicted main effect
for culture emerged, F(1,18) = 7.82, p < .05, η2 = .30, such

Indicators of agency We predicted that US explanations
would focus more on internalized indicators of psychological agency by referring to (i) minds and brains, or (ii) other
interior substrates (e.g., cables in robot) that underlie such
capabilities. Contrary to our prediction, there was no main
effect for culture on explanatory content associated with internalized indicators, F(1,18) = .20, ns.
In contrast, we expected Ngöbe explanations to focus on
interactive indicators of agency by referring to (i) observable behavioral patterns as evidence of a capacity (e.g., learning from experience), or (ii) tangible means and multiple
ways of expressing a capacity (e.g., barking as evidence of
communication). As predicted, there was a significant main
effect for culture, F(1,18) = 9.01, p < .01, η2 = .33, such that
Ngöbe participants focused more on interactive indicators
than US participants.
Criteria for agency Following from a focus on psychological agency, we expected US participants to treat consciousness as criterial to agency by focusing on (i) self-awareness
or consciousness and (ii) autonomy over own actions, distinguishing these from (iii) mere instincts or mechanistic reactions. As predicted, there was a reliable main effect for
culture, F(1,18) = 10.83, p < .01, η2 = .38, with US participants providing more content associated with consciousness
(versus instincts) than Ngöbe participants.

1766

Table 4. Explanatory content associated with coding constructs by culture
Percent explanatory content (across all kinds)
US
M
SD
2.66*
(1.93)
6.22*
(2.54)
Anthropocentric &
psychological (US)
0.53
(0.50)
1.31*
(0.92)
3.82*
(2.37)
Ecocentric & relational
0.60*
(0.85)
(Ngöbe)
0.93*
(0.96)
Overall content coded
16.07%
(3.43%)
* Cultural main effect: p < .05 for cultural difference on that code.
Agency framework

Coding construct
Human-centric framing
Scalar framing
Internalized indicators
Consciousness
Relational framing
Interactive indicators
Directedness

Following from a focus on relational agency, Ngöbe explanations were predicted to treat directedness as criterial to
agency by focusing on (i) goal-directed needs or desires, (ii)
teleological processes (e.g., “plants have the thought to
grow”), and (iii) change or continuity in states (e.g., growth,
transformation, modulation). As expected, there was a reliable main effect for culture on directedness, F(1,18) = 24.97,
p < .01, η2 = .58, with Ngöbe participants providing more
such content than US participants.
Summary With the exception of internal indicators of
agency, the coding analysis revealed distinct cultural
frameworks for agency. US participants were more likely to
frame agency in terms of a hierarchical scale where nonhumans are compared against human minds, and to treat consciousness as a criterion for agency attribution. Their justifications implied that humans serve as arbiters of nonhuman
agency, reflecting a view of humans as privileged knowers
(e.g., “the smaller an animal is, the less I get a read of intention”). These findings fit with a concept of agency as a psychological capacity tied to the mind (as humans know it).
Anthropocentric framings were significantly less pronounced in Ngöbe explanations, which instead framed
agency in terms of relational capacities not unique to humans. When Ngöbe informants referred to humans’ role in
perceiving agency, they unanimously did so to affirm nonhuman agency (“The stones can tell you how long a life or
time they were there”), and sometimes to deny that humans
are privileged knowers (nonhumans “have their own form of
communication, even though you don’t know”). Significantly, Ngöbe also emphasized interactions and behavioral directedness as criteria for agency, rather than consciousness.
This is congruent with a view of agency as a relational capacity that exhibits many unique endpoints in nature more
akin to a scale-free network than a scalae naturae.

Discussion
This study revealed systematic cultural variation in understandings of agency. Ngöbe were more likely to attribute
agency capacities to animals, plants, and ecological kinds
than US college students. Current theories would interpret
this as evidence that Ngöbe overextend folkpsychological

Ngöbe
M
SD
0.78*
(0.63)
2.71*
(3.06)
0.91
(2.62)
0.24*
(0.47)
7.47*
(3.41)
1.78*
(0.91)
4.32*
(1.92)
18.20%
(5.10%)

Overall
M
SD
1.72
(1.70)
4.46
3.28
0.72
(1.84)
0.78
(0.89)
5.65
(3.42)
1.19
(1.05)
2.62
(2.28)
17.14%
(4.36%)

concepts beyond their proper domain. This makes sense if
we assume that people universally share the Western view
of agency as a scalar, prototypically human capacity requiring consciousness (as exemplified by our US participants’
explanations). However, Ngöbe explanations challenge the
idea that agency concepts are universally structured around
a concern for minds and mentalistic interpretation of actions. Instead, Ngöbe focused on entities’ directed interactions with environment and others, indicating a concern for
the relational dimensions of agency. Before discussing implications of these findings we address potential limitations.
First, these results could be argued as revealing metaphors
rather than agency concepts. For instance, perhaps Ngöbe
speak metaphorically when they attribute thought to plants.
We did not find evidence for this in the frequency of hedges
or metaphorical construals (e.g., “in a sense”). More to the
point, identifying a metaphorical extension of such capacities rests on one’s definition of agency itself. From this perspective, appealing to metaphor is question begging (why
are Ngöbe more metaphorical than US participants?).
Second, it could be claimed that Ngöbe and US respondents interpreted the questions differently. There may be a
sense in which the two groups are not answering the same
questions, but we believe the source of variability lies not in
the questions but in the conceptual frameworks they evoke.
A capacity such as communication acquires different meanings on an ecocentric model of relational agency than it does
on an anthropocentric folkpsychological model. For instance, one Ngöbe informant cited communication between
ocean and rain via water falling and “vapor rising like new.”
Last, if Ngöbe conceptualize these as relational capacities
and ascribe agency on the basis of cues such as directed behavior, the question might arise: Do Ngöbe view these cues
as sufficient to ascribe mental states to natural kinds like the
ocean? This question implies that an ecocentric concept of
relational agency can (or should) be aligned with commonsense Western views of agency. But we might equally
turn our question to ask: Do Westerners view directed motion as evidence that plants have a capacity for relating?
This poses an interesting challenge. For starters, domain
specificity offers no obvious conceptual slot for intrinsically
relational capacities (e.g., communication) between

1767

folkpsychology, folkbiology, and folkphysics (see critiques
in Hirschfeld, 2013; Luhrmann, 2011; ojalehto, Waxman, &
Medin, 2013). This underscores the need for comparative
research on agency concepts to start from an understanding
of culture-specific systems of knowledge organization.
These findings raise a wealth of questions about the interaction of agency concepts and broader cultural systems
(ojalehto & Medin, 2015). For instance, one might speculate
that the US folkpsychological stance on agency is tied to a
heightened focus on (human) minds under Cartesian dualism, whereas the Ngöbe ecological stance on agency partakes of a cultural worldview that sees humans as part of nature (Medin & Bang, 2014). One must also consider that our
two samples differed in many ways, including formal
schooling, language, and familiarity with computerized artifacts. Each factor might relate to beliefs about agency, yet
each factor also reflects and reinforces cultural epistemologies. If one views cultures as complex systems, then it may
not be feasible (or desirable) to isolate one factor and give it
explanatory priority in a system where many variables interrelate with one another and epistemological orientations.

Conclusion
We have argued that Ngöbe individuals hold a conceptual
framework for agency that is fundamentally geared toward
understanding interactions and relationships, not internalized mental states. This leads to an ecocentric model of
agency conceptualized in terms of relational capacities.
This provides a novel perspective on current domainspecific theories of folkpsychology. An anthropocentric
folktheory of mentalistic agency may reflect particular cultural concerns, and the corresponding dissociation of psychological versus biological or physical modes of agency
may be specific to Western epistemologies. This proposal
resonates with other work that reevaluates the privileged
role of mentalistic folkpsychology in theories of cognition
(Heyes, 2014; Hirschfeld, 2013; ojalehto et al., 2013).
In the context of the massive pool of studies of agency,
the present results are a small drop. Yet they bring to light a
novel perspective for understanding agency concepts and
their place in cultural domain-specific epistemologies. Indigenous knowledge systems such as those of the Ngöbe
provide us with new ways of thinking about old questions.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Ngöbe community for their support and participation. Thanks to Joshua Knobe, Lance Rips, Philip
Young, Sonya Sachdeva, and three reviewers for helpful
comments. This work was supported by NSF under Grants
SES0962185, DRL1114530; and NSF GRFP, DRMS
DDRIG, and Smithsonian Institute fellowships to blo.

References
Atran, S., & Norenzayan, A. (2004). Religion's evolutionary
landscape: Counterintuition, commitment, compassion,
communion. Behav. Brain. Sci., 27(06), 713-730.

Banaji, M., & Gelman, S. A. (2013). Navigating the Social
World. NY: Oxford Univ. Press.
Barrett, H., Todd, P., Miller, G., & Blythe, P. (2005).
Accurate judgments of intention from motion cues alone:
A cross-cultural study. Evol. Hum. Behav., 26(4), 313-31.
Bird-David, N. (1999). “Animism” Revisited. Curr.
Anthropol., 40(S1), S67-S91.
Boyer, P. (1996). What makes anthropomorphism natural:
Intuitive ontology and cultural representations. J. Roy.
Anthropol. Inst., 83-97.
Cajete, G. (2000). Native science: Natural laws of
interdependence. Sante Fe, NM: Clear Light Publishers.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2007). ‘Obsessed with goals’:
Functions and mechanisms of teleological interpretation
of actions in humans. Acta Psychologica, 124(1), 60-78.
Gelman, S. A., & Legare, C. H. (2011). Concepts and folk
theories. Annu. Rev. Anthrop., 40, 379-398.
Gray, H., Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2007). Dimensions of
mind perception. Science, 315(5812), 619-619.
Harvey, G. (2005). Animism. New York: Wakefield Press.
Heyes, C. (2014). Submentalizing I Am Not Really Reading
Your Mind. Perspect. Psychol. Sci., 9(2), 131-143.
Hirschfeld, L. A. (2013). The myth of mentalizing and the
primacy of folk sociology. In Banaji & Gelman (Eds.),
Navigating the Social World. NY: Oxford Univ. Press.
Johnson, S. C. (2003). Detecting agents. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
Series B, 358(1431), 549-559.
Kohn, E. (2013). How Forests Think. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Lowder, M. W., & Gordon, P. C. (2015). Natural forces as
agents: Reconceptualizing the animate–inanimate
distinction. Cognition, 136, 85-90.
Luhrmann, T. (2011). Toward an anthropological theory of
mind (Overview). Suomen Antropol., Soc., 36, 5-69.
Medin, D. L., & Bang, M. (2014). Who's Asking?
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Medin, D. L., ojalehto, b., Marin, A., & Bang, M. (2013).
Culture and epistemologies: putting culture back into the
ecosystem. In Gelfand, Chiu & Hong (Eds.), Advances in
culture and psychology (4). NY: Oxford Univ. Press.
ojalehto, b., & Medin, D. L. (2015). Perspectives on culture
and concepts. Annu. Rev. Psychol., 66, 249-275.
ojalehto, b., Waxman, S. R., & Medin, D. L. (2013).
Teleological reasoning about nature: intentional design or
relational perspectives? Trends Cogn. Sci., 17(4), 166-71.
Poulin-Dubois, D., Brooker, I., & Chow, V. (2009). The
developmental origins of naïve psychology in infancy.
Advances in Child Development & Behavior, 37, 55-104.
Sperber, D., & Hirschfeld, L. A. (2004). The cognitive
foundations of cultural stability and diversity. Trends
Cogn. Sci., 8(1), 40-46.
Viveiros de Castro, E. (1998). Cosmological deixis and
Amerindian perspectivism. J.Roy.Anthropol. Inst. 469-88.
Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, S. A. (1992). Cognitive
development: Foundational theories of core domains.
Annu. Rev. Psychol., 43(1), 337-375.

1768

