Algebraic reasoning in 3- to 5-year-olds
Pierina Cheung (mpcheung@uwaterloo.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W., Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1

Mathieu Le Corre (mathieu@uaem.mx)
Centro de Investigación Transdisciplinar en Psicologia, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos
Abstract

transformation) or a transformation that did not change the
numerosity (e.g., shaking the box; a non-numerical
transformation), and asked whether there was still the same
number of objects in the box (Lipton & Spelke, 2006).
Crucially, the researchers used numbers that were beyond
children’s counting range (e.g., 127) to ensure that children
could not recruit particular facts about number words to
succeed on the task. They found that children correctly
responded with the original number word after nonnumerical transformations, but a different number word
after numerical transformations. This finding shows that 5year-olds understand the circumstances under which a
change in number word is licensed. On the assumption that
children understand how number words represent
numerosities, this suggests that they understand when the
numerosity has changed.
Some studies suggest that younger children have similar
knowledge; however, the evidence is weaker. Sarnecka and
Gelman (2004) presented older 2- and 3-year-olds with one
set of objects placed in an opaque box and labeled it with a
large (e.g., five, six) number word that was outside the
counting range of children. Then, the experimenter
performed a numerical (adding one object, subtracting one
object) or a non-numerical (shaking) transformation.
Children were asked whether the original or a new,
alternative number word applied, e.g., “Now how many
moons – is it five or six?” They found that children correctly
chose the alternative number word after the numerical
transformation and the original number word after the nonnumerical transformation.
However, in another study with a slightly different
paradigm, the experimenter used two sets of objects rather
than one, and labelled one of the two sets with a number
word (e.g., “This tray has [five] sheep”; Condry & Spelke,
2008). Children between the ages of 3 and 3 ½ were tested,
and number words that were outside of their known number
word range (e.g., five, seven) were used. A numerical or
non-numerical transformation was performed on the
labelled set, and the experimenter asked children to point to
the tray that was labelled by either the original number word
(e.g., five) or a different number word (e.g., six). Using the
two-set task, 3-year-olds were equally likely to choose the
labelled and the unlabelled tray regardless of the type of
transformation, suggesting that they may not understand
how transformation affects number word meanings. Some
have proposed that the success on the one-set task could be
explained by domain-general pragmatic reasoning, rather
than domain-specific numerical reasoning (Brooks, Audet,
& Barner, 2013). Despite the factors that may explain these

The current study asks when children begin to understand that
when an object is added to a set, the numerosity of the set has
increased regardless of set size. This knowledge can be
expressed algebraically as ‘x + 1 > x’. In Experiment 1, 3- to
5-year-old children were asked to reason about
transformations (i.e., addition, subtraction, rearrangement)
performed on a visible set of objects. We found that 5-yearolds were able to reason about how each transformation
affected numerosity, and 4-year-olds showed limited
understanding. In Experiment 2, children were asked to
reason about transformations performed on a hidden set of
objects. Similar results were found. Together, we showed that
the ability to reason about number algebraically develops
gradually between the ages of 3 and 5. Implications for
number word acquisition were discussed.
Keywords: algebraic reasoning,
concept, numerical transformations

preschoolers,

number

Introduction
In the last few decades, research on the development of
numerical cognition has focused mostly on the
representation and reasoning about particular numbers such
as ‘two’, ‘five’, and ‘fifty’. For example, researchers have
examined how the Approximate Number System (ANS)
represents numbers (Dehaene, 1997; Xu & Spelke, 2000),
the role of counting in children’s concept of number (Fuson,
1988; Gelman & Gallistel, 1978; Wynn, 1990, 1992), and
how Parallel Individuation, an object tracking system, may
be involved in number word learning (Carey, 2009; Le
Corre & Carey, 2007). However, our knowledge of number
is not restricted to particular numbers; it also involves
knowledge about number that applies to all possible
numbers. For example, for any given set of objects with
numerosity x, x changes whenever an object is added to or
subtracted from the set; this knowledge applies regardless of
what numerosity x refers to. Thus, whether the set contains
1, 5, or 100 objects, when an object is added to the set, the
numerosity has increased. We can represent this with
algebraic expressions ‘x + 1 > x’. The present studies
investigate the developmental trajectory of children’s
understanding of algebraic number.
Previous research has shown that sometime between the
preschool and kindergarten years, children begin to show
signs of knowledge that adding one element to a set
increases its numerosity. In one study, 5-year-olds were
shown a box of objects labelled with a number word. The
experimenter then performed a transformation that changed
the numerosity (e.g., taking away one object; a numerical

369

Method

conflicting findings, most previous studies on children’s
understanding of number require them to interpret number
words in the tasks. Children’s apparent difficulty in
mastering the logic of number words may reflect a lack of
knowledge of how number words represent number, and
might not constitute evidence for a lack of numerical
knowledge per se. Moreover, studies on children’s verbal
numerical comparison have found that 4-year-olds may not
understand that “ten” is more than “six” (Le Corre & Carey,
2007; Schaeffer, Eggleston, & Scott, 1974). Thus, even if
children apply a different, larger number word after the
addition of one object, this does not necessarily show that
they understand the numerosity has increased as a result of
addition.
The current experiments investigate the developmental
trajectory of children’s understanding of algebraic number –
specifically, the knowledge that when an object is added to a
set, it necessarily follows that the numerosity has increased.
In two experiments, children’s reasoning about changes in
numerosities of visible sets (Experiment 1) and hidden sets
(Experiment 2) was investigated. Given that in previous
studies, children demonstrate conflicting behaviour in tasks
involving number words, the current experiments did not
require children to interpret or use number words.

Participants Forty-eight children between the ages of 3 and
5 participated. There were 19 3-year-olds (range = 3;1 to
3;11; mean = 3;6), 14 4-year-olds (range = 4;0 to 4;11;
mean = 4;3), and 15 5-year-olds (range = 5;0 to 5;11; mean
= 5;6). They were recruited at daycare centres in KitchenerWaterloo and nearby areas.
Design and Procedure At the beginning of the session,
children were introduced to two puppets – Winnie the Pooh
and Giraffe. Children first completed two familiarization
trials, followed by 16 experimental trials. The purpose of the
familiarization trials was to test whether children can reason
about changes made to a single object. During
familiarization, Winnie the Pooh took out a ball that could
be made bigger and smaller (Hoberman’s Sphere), and
asked Giraffe to make it bigger. On one trial, Giraffe made
it bigger; on another trial, Giraffe made it smaller. The
direction of the change was counterbalanced across
participants. After each trial, children were asked, “Does
Winnie the Pooh have a bigger ball now?” A ‘yes’ or ‘no’
response was recorded. If children answered incorrectly,
feedback was given. Almost all children succeeded on the
two familiarization trials with no feedback. One child failed
one of the trials but succeeded on a second attempt, and was
included in the analyses.
The experimental trials began with a dialogue between
Winnie the Pooh and Giraffe.

Experiment 1 – Visible Sets
To investigate when children begin to understand that
adding one element to a set of objects increases its
numerosity regardless of set size, children were asked to
reason about numerical and non-numerical transformations
of visible sets of objects that differed in set size – small and
large. Small number trials always began with a set of 2
objects, and large number trials always began with a set of
15 objects. For both small and large sets, children observed
four kinds of transformation: addition of an object (‘Plus
1’), subtraction of an object (‘Minus 1’), addition and
subtraction of the same object (‘Minus A Plus A’), and
moving one object (‘Move 1’). After the transformation,
children were asked whether there were more objects in the
set.
Given that children cannot rely on the ANS for reasoning
about large sets because a numerical ratio of 15:14 (in the
case of subtraction) or 15:16 (in the case of addition) is
beyond the range of ratio discrimination that preschoolers
can perform (see Halberda & Feigenson, 2008), their
performance on large number trials is critical for
determining whether children are capable of reasoning about
algebraic number. However, if they fail at reasoning about
large sets, it could be due to task demands. To ensure that
task demands are not an issue, small sets were included.
Given that children can recruit Parallel Individuation to
reason about small sets, if they succeed with small sets but
fail with large sets, this provides evidence that they do not
reason about number algebraically. However, if they fail
with both small and large sets, this suggests that their failure
may be due to a difficulty in understanding the task.
Importantly, children were prevented from counting.

Winnie the Pooh: Giraffe, I have some toys to show you.
Do you want to see?
Giraffe: Yeah, sure!
Winnie the Pooh: Look, here are my [blocks] and I want
more [blocks]. Can you help me?
Giraffe: Yeah, let me help you. (Giraffe performs the
transformation).
Then the experimenter asked, “Does Winnie the Pooh
have more [blocks] now?” Children gave a ‘yes’ or ‘no’
response. Stimuli included eight different kinds of objects –
pom poms, bows, buttons, red Lego blocks, yellow Lego
blocks, bells, rocks, and hearts. Real objects were used. All
objects were presented on a coloured sheet of letter-sized
paper (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: An illustration of the experimental set-up.
Children received both small and large number trials,
which were conducted in blocks. The order of the blocks
was counterbalanced between children. For each number
block, the experimenter transformed the set in one of four

370

ways: (a) by moving one object (‘Move 1’); (b) by adding
one object (‘Plus 1’); (c) by removing one object (‘Minus
1’); and (d) by moving one object outside of the sheet and
then putting it back into the set of objects (‘-A+A). There
were two trials for each transformation, making a total of 16
trials for each child. There were two possible item orders,
and the order of trial type was randomized such that no two
consecutive trials were of the same trial type.

computed separately for each age group. The dependent
variable was proportion of ‘yes’ responses. If children can
reason about number algebraically, they should understand
that ‘Plus 1’ is the only transformation that increases
numerosity, and respond ‘yes’ only in the case of ‘Plus 1’.
Thus, for this analysis, we asked whether children were able
to differentiate ‘Plus 1’ from the other transformation types
that do not increase the numerosity of a set. A Bonferroni
correction (adjusted alpha = .017 for each age group) was
applied. Figure 2 displays the proportion of ‘yes’ responses
for each transformation type for large number trials.
For 3-year-olds, responses did not vary across the four
transformation types (χ2 (3) = 7.34, p = .062). For 4-yearolds, responses varied across the four transformation types
(χ2 (3) = 24.3, p < .001). Wilcoxon signed rank tests
revealed that 4-year-olds were sensitive to the difference
between ‘Plus 1’ and ‘Minus 1’ (p = .009), but not between
‘Plus 1’ and ‘-A+A’ and ‘Move 1’ (p’s > .038). For 5-yearolds, responses varied across the four transformation types
(χ2 (3) = 30.2 p < .001). Wilcoxon signed rank tests
revealed that 5-year-olds were able to differentiate between
all the transformation types (all p’s < .003).

Results
Overall proportion correct Participants received a score of
1 for each trial that they answered correctly. The maximum
score is 8 for both the small and large number trials.
Preliminary analyses found no order or gender effects (p’s
> .49), so these variables were not included in subsequent
analyses. First, to examine the performance on small and
large number trials, a repeated measures ANOVA using
proportion correct as the dependent variable, with Set Size
(Small and Large) as a within-subjects factor, and Block
Order (Small first vs. Large first) and Age Group (3-yearolds vs. 4-year-olds vs. 5-year-olds) as between-subjects
factors was conducted. There was a main effect of Age
Group, F(2,42) = 8.33, p < .001. Tukey HSD revealed that
3-year-olds (57.6%) did not differ significantly from 4-yearolds (58.9%), but both groups performed significantly worse
than the 5-year-olds (85.8%). There was a significant main
effect of Set Size, F(1,42) = 36.02, p < .001. Children were
better at reasoning about small sets (78.0%) than large sets
(57.0%). No interactions were found. There was also a main
effect of Block Order, F(1,42) = 8.25, p = .027, indicating
that children performed better overall when they were tested
on small number trials first (small block first 74.6%; large
block first: 60.4%).
To examine children’s ability to reason about algebraic
number, their performance on large number trials was tested
against chance (50%). Separate analyses were conducted for
each of the three age groups. One-sample t-tests showed that
only 5-year-olds (79.2%) performed significantly above
chance on large number trials, t(15) = 3.95, p <.001. Both
the 3- and the 4-year-olds were not different from chance, M
= 46.1%, t(18) = -.71, p = .49, M = 45.5%, t(13) = -.66, p
=.52, respectively.
However, one may argue that 3-year-olds simply do not
understand the task (e.g., difficulty of reasoning about the
puppet’s intentions). To address this, one-sample t-tests
were performed for small number trials. Results showed that
children from all age groups demonstrated above chance
performance: 3-year-olds: M = 69.1%, t(18) = 3.27, p =
.004; 4-year-olds: M = 72.3%, t(13) = 2.96, p = .011; 5year-olds: M = 92.5%, t(14)=9.38, p < .001.

*

* * *

Figure 2: Proportion of ‘yes’ responses for each
transformation type for large number trials by age group. To
facilitate comparison, responses on ‘Minus 1’, ‘-A+A’, and
‘Move’ trials were plotted on top of responses on the ‘Plus
1’ trial.

Discussion
Using the visible-set experiment, we found that 3-year-olds
can reason about the effects of transformations on small
sets, but not on large sets, suggesting that they lack the
ability to reason about algebraic number. By age 4, children
are capable of differentiating between addition and
subtraction, but they fail to recognize that taking away an
individual and returning it back to the set does not result in a
change of numerosity of the set. Five-year-olds are able to
recognize that addition increases the numerosity of the set,
but other transformations do not. Results from this
experiment show that the ability to reason about algebraic
number begins to emerge by age 4, and is fully in place by
age 5.

Proportion of ‘yes’ responses on large number trials To
further explore the development of children’s algebraic
reasoning, we analyzed whether children’s responses
differed on the four different transformation types for the
large number trials. Friedman’s ANOVA with the four
transformation types as within-subject variables was

371

The current results raise interesting questions about why
4-year-olds understand the effects of addition and
subtraction, but fail to understand that the addition of one
element and subtraction of one element does not increase
the numerosity. There are two possible explanations. First,
children may succeed on the ‘Plus 1’ and ‘Minus 1’ trials,
but fail on the ‘-A+A’ trial because the latter type of
transformation involves two steps – i.e., the subtraction and
addition of an individual, whereas the former
transformations only involve one step. Thus, reasoning
about the effect of ‘-A+A’ may be computationally more
complex than ‘Plus 1’ and ‘Minus 1’. Another possibility is
that 4-year-olds may be responding based on a ‘last-action’
heuristic. For example, whenever the last action is adding an
object, children respond that there are ‘more’, and whenever
the last action is taking away an object, they respond that it
is ‘not more’. However, this possibility does not explain
children’s failure to differentiate between ‘Plus 1’ and
‘Move’. Nevertheless, to examine these two possibilities,
we added another type of transformation in Experiment 2.
Specifically, we included a transformation that involved the
removal of 3 individuals and addition of 1 individual (‘3+1’). If children’s difficulty with the ‘-A+A’ trial is due to
the fact that this transformation involves two steps, then
they should also fail on ‘-3+1’. If they are responding based
on a ‘last-action’ heuristic, then they should respond that
there are more objects after the ‘-3+1’ trial.

presented in an opaque box. Then a numerical or a nonnumerical transformation was performed, and the
experimenter asked if there were more objects in the box.
This also provides another test for children’s reasoning
about algebraic number.

Method
Participants Fifty-two children between the ages of 3 and 5
participated. There were 21 3-year-olds (range = 3;0 to 3;11;
mean = 3;7), 17 4-year-olds (range = 4;1 to 4;11; mean =
4;5), and 14 5-year-olds (range = 5;0 to 6;1; mean = 5;8).
They were recruited at daycare centres in KitchenerWaterloo and nearby areas. An additional three children
were excluded from the analyses for failing twice on a
familiarization trial (n = 2) and object trials during the test
phase (n = 1; see below).
Design and Procedure The design of the hidden-set
experiment was similar to the visible-set experiment except
that the sets children had to reason about could not be seen.
This experiment began with the same familiarization phase
using Hoberman’s Sphere, followed by experimental trials.
Twelve kinds of objects were used in the study: buttons,
rocks, Lego blocks, bows, sticks, pom poms, flowers,
leaves, stars, beads, shells, bells.
After familiarization, children were told that they were
going to play a game with a box and some objects. The
experimenter first showed that the box was empty, then she
transferred objects from an opaque cup into the box, and
said, “I’m going to put [bells] into the box”. The
experimenter closed the box, and asked, “Are there more
[bells] in the box now?” The experimenter then performed a
transformation, and asked again, “Are there more [bells] in
the box now?” The purpose of repeating the same test
question twice is that in piloting, we found that some
children had difficulty parsing the event into appropriate
time points for comparison. For example, it appeared that
they sometimes compared the initial state of the box (i.e., an
empty state) to the post-transformation state. To scaffold
children into comparing the post-transformation state to the
state of the box that was immediately before transformation,
we asked the test question directly before and after
transformation. Responses to the first question were not
analyzed.
Five kinds of transformation were performed: adding one
object (‘Plus 1’), removing one object (‘Minus 1’), taking
away one object and putting it back (‘-A+A’), taking away
three objects and putting another one back (‘-3+1’), and
knocking on the box (‘Knock’). For ‘Plus 1’, the
experimenter added an identical object to the box. For
‘Minus 1’, the experimenter removed an object and hid it
under the table. For ‘–A+A’, the experimenter took an
object out of the box, put it in front of the child, and put it
back into the box. For ‘-3+1’, the experimenter took out 3
objects, put them in front of the child, quickly showed
him/her that the box was not empty, and added an identical
object.

Experiment 2 – Hidden Sets
Experiment 1 suggests that the capacity to reason about
numerical transformations without representing any
particular numerosities may begin to emerge around age 4,
and is fully in place at age 5. However, the visible-set
experiment could underestimate children’s ability to reason
about algebraic number because some of the transformations
required children to resolve a conflict between perception
and their conceptual understanding of numerical
transformations. For example, in the case of moving one
object, children may experience conflict between their
perceptual reasoning (i.e., the set of objects takes up more
space) and conceptual reasoning (i.e., the numerosity has
not changed even though objects are moved). And this may
explain why 3- and 4-year-olds responded that there were
more elements around 50-70% of the time after one object
was moved. Nevertheless, children’s performance on the ‘A+A’ trial in Experiment 1 suggests that the reasoning
conflict explanation does not fully explain the results. On
the ‘-A+A’ trial, the pre- and post-transformation sets
looked perceptually the same, yet 3- and 4-year-olds said
there were more elements post-transformation 80% of the
time. Moreover, 3-year-olds performed poorly on the
‘Minus 1’ trials, despite the fact that perceptual and
conceptual reasoning coincide. This makes it unlikely that
such a conflict can account for all of the results in the
previous experiment. Nevertheless, to ensure that the
perceptual aspect of sets does not interfere with children’s
numerical judgments, in Experiment 2, objects were

372

The purpose of the ‘-3+1’ trial was to examine if
children’s difficulty with reasoning about the effects of
transformation is specific to a change of one individual
object. Children’s performance on ‘-3+1’ trial also
addresses the question of whether their difficulty with the ‘A+A’ trial in the visible-set experiment can be explained by
the ‘two-step’ processing account or the ‘last-action’
heuristic account.
There were three trials for each transformation type. The
type of transformation was pseudo-randomized such that no
two consecutive trials were of the same transformation type.
Children received one of two randomized orders of trials.
In addition to trials that required children to judge
whether there were more elements, children were given
three object trials as control trials. These trials were
designed to ensure that children understood the task
instructions. They involved the addition of a pen, the
removal of a pen, and knocking on the box. The
experimenter asked, “Is there a red pen in the box now?”
after each trial. For addition, the experimenter first put a
blue pen, and then a red pen into the box; for the removal of
a pen, the experimenter put both the blue and the red pens
into the box, and then removed the red pen; for knocking,
the experimenter put the blue pen in the box, and knocked
on the box. Children were allowed to make one error across
the three trials. Altogether, only four children made an error;
they were included in the analyses. One child made two
errors and was excluded.

*

*

*

**

Figure 3: Proportion of ‘yes’ responses for each
transformation type by age group in Experiment 2.
Consistent with the previous experiment, the current
experiment showed that 3-year-olds fail to reason about
algebraic number, and this ability emerges at age 4. It is
important to note that 4-year-olds in this experiment
distinguish between addition and ‘-3+1’ but continue to
have difficulty with reasoning about ‘-A+A’. This suggests
that children’s difficulty with reasoning about the effect of
‘-A+A’ in the previous experiment cannot be explained by
the fact that ‘-A+A’ involves two steps, because ‘-3+1’ also
involves two steps. Given that the last action of ‘-A+A’ and
‘-3+1’ both involve the addition of an individual, these
results also suggest that children are likely not relying on a
‘last-action’ heuristic.
Nevertheless, the current experiment showed that 5-yearolds have trouble reasoning that ‘-A+A’ does not affect the
numerosity of a set. This was somewhat inconsistent with
findings from the previous experiment, which showed that
5-year-olds understand how adding and removing the same
individual does not change the numerosity of visible sets.
One possibility is that children were unwilling to answer
‘no’ to the question, “Are there more [bells] in the box
now?” when the numerosity of a set remains the same (as in
‘-A+A’). For example, a handful of children responded “the
same” to the test question about ‘more’ on the ‘–A+A’ trial,
but these same children had no difficulty answering yes/no
for addition and subtraction. We speculate that this
difficulty may be related to the semantics of adjectives. For
example, pairs of adjectives such as tall/short have different
entailment patterns than pairs of adjectives such as
dead/alive. A person who is not tall does not entail that the
person is short, but a person who is not dead does entail that
the person is alive. This difference in meaning highlights a
distinction that is documented in the semantics literature:
tall/short are gradable adjectives and dead/alive are absolute
adjectives. It is possible that children are interpreting ‘more’
as if it is an absolute adjective, when in fact it behaves more
similarly to gradable adjectives.

Results and Discussion
Preliminary analyses found no order or gender effects (p’s >
.31), so these variables were not included in subsequent
analyses.
Proportion of ‘yes’ responses Similar to the visible-set
experiment, we analyzed whether children’s responses
differed on the five different transformation types using
Friedman’s ANOVA, followed by Wilcoxon signed rank
tests. The dependent variable was proportion of ‘yes’
responses. A Bonferroni correction (adjusted alpha = .0125
for each age group) was applied. Figure 3 displays the
proportion of ‘yes’ responses for each transformation type.
For 3-year-olds, responses did not vary across the five
transformation types (χ2 (4) = 8.87, p = .064). An inspection
of Figure 3 suggests an overall ‘yes’ bias for 3-year-olds.
For 4-year-olds, responses varied across the five
transformation types (χ2 (4) = 23.43, p < .001). Wilcoxon
signed rank tests revealed that 4-year-olds were able to
differentiate ‘Plus 1’ from ‘Minus 1’ and from ‘-3+1’ (all
p’s < .007). The results also revealed that they were
marginally able to differentiate between addition and
‘Knock’ (p = .018). However, they did not recognize that ‘A+A’ does not increase the numerosity of the set. For 5year-olds, responses varied across the five transformation
types (χ2 (4) = 31.35, p < .001). 5-year-olds can distinguish
‘Plus 1’ from most transformation types (all p’s < .009),
except for ‘-A+A’ (p = .18).

General Discussion
Two experiments explored the development of children’s

373

capacity to reason about algebraic number – i.e., that the
addition of one object necessarily increases the numerosity
of a set regardless of set size. In each of the experiments,
children were asked to reason about how different types of
transformation changed the numerosity of a set of objects.
To assess when children begin to show a capacity to reason
about algebraic number, set size (Experiment 1) and the
presentation of the set of objects (Experiment 2) was
manipulated such that children could not recruit
representations of particular numbers to conclude whether
the numerosity increased as a result of the transformation. In
both experiments, we found that 3-year-olds were not able
to reason about algebraic number, and this ability emerges
at around age 4, and is fully in place by age 5.
What might account for the developmental differences
between ages 3 to 5? One possibility is the experience of
schooling. Being in a school environment with structured
activities may enhance children’s numerical reasoning
abilities. However, both 4- and 5-year-olds in our sample
received the same amount of schooling, but they
demonstrated a different level of understanding of the
effects of numerical transformations. Thus, it seems
unlikely that schooling alone can explain the developmental
differences.
The developmental differences raise important questions
regarding the nature of algebraic reasoning. It is possible
that children have algebraic representations all along, but
they have to learn about particular generalizations. For
example, understanding ‘x + 1 > x’ does not grant one the
knowledge that ‘x – 1’ is less than 1. Thus, one could argue
that what is developing is not the representation of algebraic
number per se, but children’s ability to apply numerical
principles to algebraic representations. Alternatively,
children may have to construct a new type of
representations sometime between ages 3 and 5. As the
current findings suggest, children are capable of reasoning
about small sets (1-3) before reasoning about large sets (1416) and hidden sets. On the constructivist account, children
know that small sets of objects have a particular numerosity,
and that there is an order for small sets, i.e., a set of three is
more than a set of two, and a set of two is more than a set of
one. Moreover, it has also been shown that infants can
perform addition over small sets of individuals (Wynn,
1992). Thus, the analogies children observe in the small
number range may be powerful enough to allow them to
make a crucial induction: any sets of objects will have a
numerosity x, which is different from ‘x + 1’.
Lastly, the current study has implications for the literature
on number word acquisition. As noted in the Introduction,
much previous research on children’s understanding of
number words is motivated by the assumption that
children’s understanding of numerical symbols may reveal
the nature of their numerical knowledge. The present
experiments adopted a different strategy in examining
children’s numerical knowledge. In particular, children were
asked to reason about changes in numerosity, and not how
number words change their application in the context of

numerical and non-numerical transformations. We found a
similar pattern of results – i.e., by 5, children understand
how rearranging objects, addition, and subtraction affect the
numerosity of sets. This converges with findings from
Lipton and Spelke (2006), who showed that 5-year-olds
understand that an unknown number word changes when
objects are removed from or added to the set, but it remains
the same when objects are simply rearranged. This
converging result tentatively suggests that 5-year-olds begin
to reason about algebraic number at the same time that they
understand the meanings of number words outside of their
count list.
To sum up, the current experiments are the first to show
that children are able to reason about particular numbers
much earlier than they can reason about number
algebraically.

References
We thank Bridjet Lee, Alex Buttie, Elie O’hana, and Brent
Wettlaufer for their help with data collection. We also thank
the preschools for their participation. This research was
supported by an NSERC CGS scholarship awarded to PC
and an NSERC Discovery Grant awarded to MLC.

References
Brooks, N., & Audet, J., & Barner, D. (2013). Pragmatic
inference, not semantic competence, guides 3-year-olds’
interpretation of unknown number words. Developmental
Psychology.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Condry, K.F., & Spelke, E.S. (2008). The development of
language and abstract concepts: The case of natural
number. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
137, 22-38.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Fuson, K. (1988). Children’s counting and concepts of
number. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Gelman, R., & Gallistel, C.R. (1978). The child’s
understanding of number. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Lipton, J.S., & Spelke, E.S. (2006). Preschool children
master the logic of number word meanings. Cognition, 110.
Sarnecka, B.W., & Gelman, S.A. (2004). Six does not just
mean a lot: Preschoolers see number words as
specific. Cognition, 92, 329-352.
Schaeffer, B., Eggleston , V. H., & Scott , J. L. (1974).
Number development in young children. Cognitive
Psychology, 6, 357-379.
Wynn, K. (1990).
Children's understanding of
counting. Cognition, 36, 155-193.
Wynn, K. (1992). Addition and subtraction by human
infants. Nature, 358, 749-750.
Xu, F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Large number discrimination
in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74, B1-B11.

374

