An Account of Associative Learning in Memory Recall
Robert Thomson (rob.thomson@knexusresearch.com)1,3
1

Knexus Research Corporation, National Harbor, MD 20745 USA

Aryn A Pyke2 (apyke@andrew.cmu.edu)
2

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

J. Gregory Trafton3 (greg.trafton@nrl.navy.mil)
Laura M. Hiatt3 (laura.hiatt@nrl.navy.mil)
3

Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375 USA

Abstract
Associative learning is an important part of human cognition,
and is thought to play key role in list learning. We present here
an account of associative learning that learns asymmetric itemto-item associations, strengthening or weakening associations
over time with repeated exposures. This account, combined
with an existing account of activation strengthening and decay,
predicts the complicated results of a multi-trial free and serial
recall task, including asymmetric contiguity effects that
strengthen over time (Klein, Addis, & Kahana, 2005).
Keywords: associative learning; priming; cognitive models;
list memory

Introduction
Associative learning is an essential component of human
cognition, thought to be part of many mental phenomena such
as classical conditioning (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972),
expectation-driven learning (Lukes, Thompson, & Werbos,
1990), similarity judgments (Hiatt & Trafton, 2013), and
managing sequential tasks (Hiatt & Trafton, 2015). Despite
its ubiquity, it is hard to model directly due to its entangled
ties to other aspects of cognition (e.g., memory decay).
List learning is one task in which associative learning is
increasingly thought to play a role and, because it involves
fairly simple tasks, can be helpful in isolating and
understanding any underlying associative mechanisms that
may be at play (Howard & Kahana, 1999; Kahana, 1996).
These tasks typically involve being shown a list of simple
words or numbers, and being asked to recall them as
accurately as possible.
One recent experiment studied list learning under both free
recall (recalling list items in any order), and serial recall
(recalling list items in the same order as they were presented),
including an examination of how recall patterns change over
several presentations of the list (i.e., multi-presentation
recall) (Klein et al., 2005). In addition to serial position (SP),
which shows each list item’s recall accuracy, the study also
considers conditional response probabilities as a function of
lag (CRPs), which measures the distribution of successive
recalls as a function of item distance from the current item.
These two measures help to distinguish between effects
arising from primacy and recency of items, and effects arising
from the close temporal proximity of items to one another in
the list (e.g., contiguity effects). The detailed results of this

study, which show how these measures change over multiple
list presentations, present a challenge for other theories of
memory (e.g., Henson, 1998; Brown, Neath, & Chater, 2007;
Polyn, Norman, & Kahana, 2009), which generally match
some, but not all, of the data.
We present here a theory of memory recall that heavily
emphasizes the role of associative learning. This theory
stems from the ACT-R architecture, which has been shown
to perform very well on more limited list recall tasks in the
past (Anderson, Bothell, Lebiere & Matessa, 1998). Since
ACT-R is a general theory of cognition, and is not limited to
memory, our use of ACT-R also connects this work with a
plethora of literature across many different domains
(Thomson, Lebiere, Anderson, & Staszewski, 2014; Hiatt &
Trafton, 2013; Pyke, West, & Lefevre, 2007). While very
promising, ACT-R’s account of associative learning,
however, is insufficient to capture data in list memory;
specifically, it does not strengthen associations with repeated
exposures in a manner that effectively accumulates over time,
making it difficult for this account to predict the multipresentation recall data we consider here.
In this paper, then, we heavily expand and improve the
notion of associative learning in ACT-R. While we still keep
many of its basic features – namely, spreading activation over
asymmetric, item-to-item associations -- we developed a
mechanism for associations to be learned, and strengthened,
as new or repeated items are presented over time. We then
combine activation via associative learning with ACT-R’s
second, and well supported, source of learning, activation
strengthening (Anderson et al., 1998; Schneider & Anderson,
2011), which favors items that were recently or frequently in
memory. Activation strengthening then serves to predict the
exhibited primacy and recency effects, while associative
learning predicts the shown contiguity effects. Overall, our
account provides a good account for the data from Klein et
al. (2005), showing primacy, recency, and asymmetric
contiguity effects that strengthen over time.
The contributions of this paper are thus two-fold: a new,
richer account of associative learning; and an overall theory
of memory recall that combines this with an existing account
of activation strengthening and decay. In the next section, we
describe the list memory task we model in more detail. Then,
we relate these results to other theories of list memory and

2386

memory recall, and qualitatively distinguish our approach
from these other theories. Then, we discuss our theory in
more detail, present results, and end with a discussion of the
implications of our theory.

Previous Experimental Results:
Multiple-Presentation List Recall
To evaluate our theory of memory recall, we modeled the
multi-presentation list recall task from Klein et al. (2005). A
trial consisted of 5 separate presentations of a list of words.
Each list consisted of 19 non-repeating words that were
presented verbally, with a word presented every 1500ms.
The words did not rhyme, and appear with similar
frequencies in the English language. Each time the full list
was presented, a tone and visual instructions then cued
participants to recall the list by speaking the list items aloud.
The experiment included three conditions of presentation
and recall. In the free-varied condition, list items were
randomized between list presentations and participants were
instructed to recall the list in any order (e.g., free recall). In
the free-constant condition, list items were in the same
position between list presentations and participants were
instructed to recall the list in any order (e.g., free recall).
Finally, in the serial-constant condition, list items were in the
same position between list presentations and participants
were instructed to recall the list in the order it was perceived
(e.g., serial recall). Twelve participants completed 21 test
trials each for each condition across several sessions. In each
session, participants completed a set of trials from only one
condition.
As mentioned earlier, participant responses were scored
according to serial position (SP), and conditional response
probability (CRP) as a function of lag. Serial position
measures recall accuracy as a function of an item’s position
in the list; that is, for each list position (1 st, 2nd, 3rd, etc.), the
probability that participants report the corresponding item
during recall. Typically recall is best for items in early
positions (primacy) and late positions (recency). The
conditional response probability as a function of lag measures
the distribution of successive recalls as a function of item
distance from the current item in the presentation of the list.
Mathematically, it shows the probability of recalling item
i+lag after recalling item i (see Kahana, 1996 for more
details). Typically, as per the contiguity effect, after recalling
item i, learners are most likely to next recall the successive
item (i+1) from the list presentation. Participants were also
scored according to item score, which measures how many
total list items were successfully recalled for each
presentation regardless of order.
In accordance with prior findings (Howard & Kahana,
1999; Kahana, 1996), this study showed several noteworthy
effects. First, the serial position measure (shown with our
model results in Figure 2) indicated strong primacy and
recency effects, where participants are biased towards
recalling items at the beginning and end of the list. In both
free recall conditions, the recency effect is generally favored,
whereas in serial recall, the primacy effect dominates and the

recency effect is significantly lower. These effects are
attenuated across learning, however, as subsequent
presentations increase the accuracy rate overall.
Second, the conditional response probability measure
(shown with our model results in Figure 3) indicated a clear
contiguity effect, where participants are biased towards
recalling neighbors of the item they just recalled. For all
three conditions, this effect was also significantly
asymmetric, where participants favored subsequent items as
opposed to preceding items. Multiple significant interactions
between presentation, transition direction and condition show
that the asymmetry shows different characterizations for each
condition over time. Specifically, the asymmetric effect was
stronger in the serial-constant condition than the others, and
for both it and the free-constant condition, the effect
increased with the number of presentations. While the effect
size in the free-varied condition was comparable to the freeconstant condition after the first presentation, however, it
decreased with further presentations until, after the fifth
presentation, it was virtually absent.
The measure of item score showed a significant increase in
accuracy over time. Although we correctly predict this
increase, since this does not shed much additional light on
distinguishing between the different theories of list recall, we
do not focus on it much in this paper.
The study’s authors interpret these results as being
supportive of an associative account of list learning, as do we.
To preview our approach, we explain the primacy effects via
mental rehearsal, and we explain the recency effects via the
decaying nature of activation strengthening, where more
recent items in memory are more likely to be recalled. The
asymmetric contiguity effect, and how it changes over time,
is explained by asymmetries in associative learning. We go
into this in more detail in the following section.

Associative Learning in Memory Recall
Our account of associative learning, as we have said, is
situated in the cognitive architecture ACT-R/E (Adaptive
Character of Thought-Rational / Embodied; Trafton et al.,
2013), an embodied version of the cognitive architecture
ACT-R (Anderson et al., 2004). ACT-R is an integrated
theory of human cognition in which a “production system
operates on a declarative memory” (Anderson et al., 1998).
Key to this paper, in ACT-R, item recall depends on three
main components: activation strengthening, activation noise,
and associative activation. These three values are summed
together to represent an item’s total activation. When a recall
is requested, the item with the highest total activation is
retrieved, subject to a retrieval threshold; if no item’s
activation is above the threshold, the retrieval is said to fail
and no item is recalled. We next discuss each of these
components in turn, focusing on associative activation, which
is the main contribution of this work.

Activation Strengthening
ACT-R’s well-established theory of activation strengthening
has been shown to be a very good predictor of human

2387

declarative memory (Anderson et al., 1998; Anderson, 2007;
Schneider & Anderson, 2011). Intuitively, activation
strengthening depends on how frequently and recently a
memory has been relevant in the past. It is designed to
represent the activation of a memory over longer periods of
time and, generally, is highest right after the memory has
been accessed in working memory, slowly decaying as time
passes. Working memory represents the items that are
currently the model’s focus of attention.
Activation
strengthening, As, is calculated as:
𝑛

𝐴𝑠 (𝑖) = ln (∑ 𝑡𝑗−𝑑 )
𝑗=1

where n is the number of times an item i has been accessed in
the past, tj is the time that has passed since the jth access, and
d is the strengthening learning parameter, specifying items’
rate of decay, and which defaults to 0.5. Importantly, this
equation predicts that items that have occurred recently, or
have been rehearsed more, are more likely to be recalled than
those that have not.

of working memory for a while before another is added, they
will be only weakly associated.
In this way, rich associations are formed that point forward
in time, relating past items to current ones. Unlike explicit
chaining models (e.g., Lee & Estes, 1977) that form only
direct item-item chains between immediately adjacent
neighboring items (i.e., between the last item and the current
item entering working memory), we form multiple item-item
associations between all items recently in working memory
and newly added items.
There are two other substantial differences between ACTR’s original associative learning mechanisms and our new
account’s that are not relevant to this model, but that we
mention here for completeness. First, our associative
learning mechanism is based on Hebbian, not Bayesian
learning; recently, we have argued that this is better suited to
the types of large, complicated tasks that human memory is
able to handle (Thomson & Lebiere, 2013a). Additionally,
our mechanism includes buffer-specific associations that
create a rich context for memory recall; again, however, that
is outside the scope of this experiment.

Activation Noise

Modeling Multi-Presentation List Recall

The activation noise of a memory is drawn from a logistic
distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation the
parameter σc. It is a transient value that changes each time it
is used, and models the neuronal noise found in the human
brain. This parameter’s default value was 0.25, a common
value for this parameter across models.

Associative Activation
While associations are not new to the ACT-R framework
(e.g., Anderson, 1983), we adopt a new account of associative
learning as part of our approach (Thomson & Lebiere,
2013a). Like in the original version, a third contributor to the
activation of items in memory is associative activation, which
sources from the contents of working memory. Activation
then spread along associations to items or memories related
to those in working memory. Here, we describe this new
account qualitatively, for the purposes of clarity; more
technical details, formulations, and justifications of its
mechanisms can be found in previous work (Thomson &
Lebiere, 2013a; 2013b; Thomson, Bennati & Lebiere, 2014).
Important to this paper are that associative strengths are
learned, strengthened, and weakened over time, as new or
repeat items are encountered. Additionally, as in the original
version, associations are directional; an association can be
stronger from an item i to an item j, for example, than the
association from item j to item i (or, there could be no
association from item j to item i at all).
Associations are learned between items that are relevant in
working memory in temporal proximity to one another, and
lead from earlier items to later items. The strength of the
association (or how strongly it is increased) is determined by
the amount of time that passes between when the items were
each in working memory. If one item is immediately
followed by another in working memory, they will be very
strongly associated; on the other hand, if an item has been out

We wrote a model in ACT-R/E that completes both free and
serial multi-presentation recall tasks, as were in Klein et al.
(2005). We begin by assuming that, before a task begins, the
model has a “start” concept in working memory that tells it
to wait for the stimuli to start being presented; we also assume
that the model has no a priori knowledge of these words (i.e.,
the words are not already associated with other items or
concepts). Upon hearing a stimulus, the model initially
encodes the stimulus as a word. The rapid pace of the
experiment leaves little time for rehearsal; therefore, the
model rehearses the first stimulus, but forgoes rehearsal after
that due to the tight time constraints.
Once the full list has been presented, the model then
attempts to recall each element of the list; at any given time,
the item with the highest total activation is recalled.
Retrievals proceed until the complete list has been recalled or
until a recall request fails, at which point the presentation is
considered complete.
The only difference between how the model performs the
free and serial recall tasks is that, when beginning to recall a
list in the serial recall task, the model first retrieves the “start”
concept in an attempt to start at the beginning of the list. It
forgoes this step in the free recall task.
When the model looks at a new item, the previous item
immediately precedes the new item in working memory.
Thus, a strong positive association is formed (or
strengthened) from the preceding item to the new item.
Additionally, associations from more distant items to the new
item are also formed or strengthened, attenuated by their
temporal distance to the new item. Figure 1 shows an
example of what the associations look like after three items
of a list have been presented.

2388

0.61'

0"START'

0.91'

0.61'

1"MANNER'

0.91'

2"WORKER'

0.91'

3"SENATE'

0.29'

Figure 1. A sample associative structure, including
associative strengths, after three items of a list have been
viewed. Of note is that association strengths weaken as items
become farther removed in time, as well as the asymmetric
structure of the associations. Note that, for clarity, we omit
here associations not relevant to our discussion.
With respect to parameters, all ACT-R/E parameters were set
at their default values. The three associative learning
parameters (learning rate, interference rate, and residual
activation decay rate; see Thomson, Lebiere, & Bennati,
2014) were set to represent a fairly moderate pace of
associative learning (set at 1.5, .25, and .5, respectively).
Note that these parameters were the same for both the serial
and recall tasks and, thus, for all three conditions of the
experiment we are modeling.

Model Explanations
The model explains the data according to both activation
strengthening and associative activation. First, the decaying
nature of activation strengthening implies that more recently
presented stimuli will be more likely to be recalled, creating
a recency effect among all conditions. Primacy is primarily
explained by the rehearsal of the first few items. Primacy is
relatively stronger in serial recall because the model makes
the effort to retrieve the “start” concept before beginning list
recall, which activates the beginning items of the list. On the
other hand, the lower primacy effect in free recall implies that
it will have a stronger recency effect. This is because the
beginning items of the list will provide less competition to
the items at the end of the list, leading to an increased bias
towards those ending items.
The forward asymmetry of the associative structure created
as the model learns the list clearly explains the forward
asymmetry effects shown by the conditional response
probability measure. When an item is in working memory,
the subsequent item receives a strong amount of associative
activation; the item after that, in turn, receives a much
smaller, but still positive, amount. This boosts the probability
that items in the forward direction will be recalled at any
given time. The model also indicates that this asymmetry will
only increase across multiple presentations of both freeconstant and serial-constant conditions as the forwardleaning associations are strengthened. For the free-varied
condition, the model explains why the asymmetry contiguity
effect diminishes over multiple presentations: it is because,
in this condition, associations are created and strengthened in
various directions across various items.
Our model also explains why the serial-constant condition
has a stronger contiguity effect than the free-constant
condition. This is due to how the model learns during both
the learning and recall phases of the experiment. In the serial-

Figure 2. Serial Position curves, showing the overall recall
probability for each list item, across serial-constant, freeconstant, and free-varied conditions for both human and
model. Paneled from left to right are the results for
presentations 1, 3, and 5, respectively. As seen, the model
captures the broad primacy and recency effects in the first
presentation, but not later ones; we believe this is due to a
higher emphasis on rehearsal than we assume here.
constant condition, because the model attempts to report the
items in order, the forward-facing associations are
strengthened during the recall phase; in the free-constant
condition, since items are not reported as serially, the
forward-facing associations are strengthened to a lesser
extent. This different in associative strength ultimately
predicts that the serial-constant condition will exhibit
stronger continuity effects than the free-constant condition.

Model Results
To collect results, the model performed all three conditions
of the Klein et al. (2005) experiment, performing the serial
recall or free recall task as appropriate. All stimuli were
presented at the same rate as they were to the human
participants, and the same words were used as stimuli. The
model was run for the same number of trials (252) per
condition as all human participants (252 trials); we assume
that the model begins each trial with no knowledge of any of
the items.
As predicted, the model strongly predicts serial position
curves in serial-constant condition (r2 = .92; see Figure 2).
The results of the serial position curve in the free-varied and
free-constant, while acceptable, were not as strong (r2 = .71
and 0.67, respectively). An in-depth look at the data suggests
that this lower-quality fit is due to us not accounting for
primacy effects strongly enough in later presentations; we

2389

Figure 3. Conditional Response Probability curves, showing
the probability of recalling item i+lag after item i, across
serial-constant, free-constant, and free-varied conditions for
both human and model. Paneled from left to right are the
results for presentations 1, 3, and 5, respectively. As seen, the
model accurately captures not only the amount of asymmetric
contiguity effect per condition, but also the change in the
effect across multiple presentations.
believe this is due to participants putting more emphasis on
rehearsal than we assume, and plan to investigate this further.
As seen in Figure 3, our model strongly matches the
contiguity affects across all three conditions (r2 = .89 for freevaried; r2 = .96 for free-constant; and r2 = .99 for serialconstant). As predicted, the asymmetric contiguity effect
increases across presentations in the serial-constant condition
and, to a lesser extent, in the free-constant condition, while it
is reduced in the free-varied condition. The model slightly
over-predicts contiguity in the free-constant condition while
slightly under-predicting contiguity in the serial-constant
condition. We argue that this is because the model learns no
strategy while performing the task. Humans performed each
condition in a block, and we argue, were able to adapt their
encoding/recall strategies based on their task instructions. To
avoid overfitting, all three of our models used the same
encoding strategy. Our goal was to show the amount of
variance that could be captured by a low-level, automatic, and
stimulus-driven mechanism such as associative learning.
As a minor note, our model also correctly predicts
increases in item score across presentations for all three
conditions, with r2 = .96. Our model predicts this due to
increased associativity and activation strengthening over
multiple presentations.

Alternate Accounts of List Learning
The detailed results from Klein et al. (2005) present a
challenge for many of the current theories of memory that

explain serial and free recall of lists, which have modeled
only a subset of its results. The temporal context model
(TCM, also called the context maintenance and retrieval
model, CMR) (Polyn, Norman, & Kahana, 2009) for
example, associates items with contextual states; when an
item is recalled, so is its contextual state, which drives the
recall of other temporally similar items. They use this
construct to account for both recency and asymmetric
contiguity (Howard & Kahana, 2001). While they
qualitatively describe how their model extends to serial
recall, they do not explicitly model it, so it is unclear how
good of a match it can achieve. More importantly, they also
do not model how these curves change over multiple
presentations. In contrast, the cornerstone of our theory of
associative learning is explicitly modeling how associative
strengths change with repeated exposure to items, allowing
us to account for the multi-presentation recall data we discuss
here.
The start-end model (SEM) (Henson, 1998) relies upon
implicit start and end markers of the list sequence, as well as
tokens for spatiotemporal markers for each item, to make its
predictions. While these constructs allow it to successfully
match data showing primacy and recency in single-trial serial
recall, it does not explain serial recall’s contiguity effects. It
also does not model free recall, and the author also makes no
predictions about how it would perform in a multi-trial
setting.
SIMPLE (Brown, Neath, & Chater, 2007) models both
serial and free recall tasks. Its predictions are generally based
on the temporal distinctiveness of items in memory; it can
also include other measures of distinctiveness (e.g., semantic
distinctiveness). More importantly, it has been matched
against only data showing primacy and recency effects, and
it does not appear to correctly predict asymmetric contiguity
effects, nor how these effects change across multiple list
presentations. Like SIMPLE, we include a time-based
component in the form of activation strengthening; our
analog of their semantic distinctiveness, however, is our
theory of associative learning, which more naturally explains
the asymmetry that arises in conjunction with contiguity
effects.
Anderson et al. (1998) models both free and serial recall
tasks, as well. It also includes a simple conceptualization of
item-item associations, and so it seems to predict contiguity
effects after a single trial. It does not, however, seem to
predict how contiguity effects would increase over time. This
is because its associations, once learned, do not strengthen
over time, they only potentially weaken as more and more
items are encountered. As we indicated earlier, however,
overall we view this approach as one of the most promising
both because of its close capture of SP and CRP curves, and
because of its strong foundation in general cognition; that is
why we have expanded upon it in this paper by adding in a
richer notion of associative learning.

Discussion
In this paper we presented a theory of memory recall that
includes a rich account of how associations are learned and

2390

strengthened over time. We described how a single model
with fixed parameters presented an excellent fit to human
data across both free and serial multi-presentation list recall
tasks, including modeling asymmetric contiguity effects than
change over time.
One criticism of other models of both free and serial recall
has been that they do not well account for two notable effects
that have been shown to differentiate between the two
conditions (Murdock, 2008). First, similarity between list
items seem to facilitate performance on free recall tasks, but
hinder performance on serial recall tasks. Our model predicts
this because of the nature of our associations, where similar
items naturally become associated in memory; in fact, there
is some evidence that similarity itself is based on associative
learning (Hiatt & Trafton, 2013). This similarity would
facilitate performance on a free recall task because
remembering one item would activate similar items, boosting
their recall probability. For the same reason, it would hinder
serial recall accuracy since similar items that appear out of
order would hinder the recall of items in the correct order.
Second, longer presentation rates have been shown to
improve performance in free recall tasks, but do not affect
performance on probe-digit experiments (a simplified version
of serial recall). We predict this because longer presentation
rates, as opposed to the rapid presentation rate in this
experiment, promote rehearsal; rehearsal, in turn, increases
activation strengthening for list items. While this intuitively
helps recall performance for free recall tasks, the serial
effects of the items’ forward associations shield the probedigit experiment from any negative (or positive) implications
of the higher activation strengthening.
While associative learning account relies on item-item
associations, these associations do not fall prey to the general
criticisms against chaining models (Lee & Estes, 1977; see
Henson, 1998 for critique). Specifically, since associations
are formed between all items recently in working memory
and a newly added item (i.e., what Henson (1998) refers to as
compound-chaining) we avoid the brittleness of typical
chaining theories, where a broken ‘link’ in the chain can
cause cascading errors and leads to trouble matching
behavioral data. Instead, our approach can recover from such
problems due to its richer association structure.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Office of the Secretary of
Defense / Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and
Engineering (LH) and the Office of Naval Research (LH).
The views and conclusions contained in this paper do not
represent the official policies of the U.S. Navy.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007) How Can the Human Mind Occur in the
Physical Universe. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Anderson, J. R. (1983). A spreading activation theory of memory.
Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 22 (3), 261-295.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S., Lebiere,
C., Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of mind. Psychological
Review, 111, 1036-1060.

Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Lebiere, C. & Matessa, M. (1998). An
integrated theory of list memory. Journal of Memory and
Language, 38, 341-380.
Brown, G. D., Neath, I., & Chater, N. (2007). A temporal ratio
model of memory. Psychological review, 114 (3), 539-547.
Hiatt, L. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2015). An Activation-Based Model
of Routine Sequence Errors. Proceedings of the International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling.
Hiatt, L. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2013). The Role of Familiarity,
Priming and Perception in Similarity Judgments. Proceedings of
the Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (1999). Contextual variability and
serial position effects in free recall. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(4), 923-940.
Henson, R. N. (1998). Short-term memory for serial order: The startend model. Cognitive Psychology, 36 (2), 73-137.
Kahana, M. J. (1996). Associative retrieval processes in free recall.
Memory & Cognition, 24, 103-109.
Klein, K. A., Addis, K., & Kahana, M. J. (2005). A comparative
analysis of serial and free recall. Memory & Cognition, 33(5),
833-839.
Lee, C. L., & Estes, W. K. (1977). Order and position in primary
memory for letter strings. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16 (4), 395-418.
Lukes, G., Thompson, G., & Werbos, P. (1990). Expectation driven
learning with an associative memory. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks.
Murdock, B. (2008). Issues With the SIMPLE Model: Comment on
Brown, Neath, and Chater (2007). Psychological review, 115(3),
779-785.
Polyn, S. M., Norman, K. A., & Kahana, M. J. (2009). A context
maintenance and retrieval model of organizational processes in
free recall. Psychological Review, 116 (1), 129-40.
Pyke, A., West, R. L., & LeFevre, J. A. (2007). How Readers
Retrieve Referents for Nouns in Real Time: A Memory-based
Model of Context Effects on Referent Accessibility. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian
conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement and
nonreinforcement. Classical Conditioning II: Current Research
and Theory, 2, 64-99.
Schneider, D. W., & Anderson, J. R. (2011). A memory-based
model of Hick’s law. Cognitive Psychology, 62 (3), 193-222.
Thomson, R., Bennati, S., & Lebiere, C. (2014). Extending the
Influence of Contextual Information in ACT-R using Buffer
Decay. In Proceedings of the Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Thomson, R., Lebiere, C., Anderson, J. R., & Staszewski, J. (2014).
A general instance-based learning framework for studying
intuitive decision-making in a cognitive architecture. Journal of
Applied Research in Memory and Cognition Special Issue on
Intuitive Decision-Making.
Thomson, R. & Lebiere, C. (2013a). Constraining Bayesian
Inference with Cognitive Architectures: An Updated Associative
Learning Mechanism in ACT-R. In Proceedings of the
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Thomson, R. & Lebiere, C. (2013b). A Balanced Hebbian
Algorithm for Associative Learning in ACT-R. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Cognitive Modeling.
Trafton, J. G., Hiatt, L. M., Harrison, A. M., Tamborello, F. II,
Khemlani, S. S., & Schultz, A. C. (2013). ACT-R/E: An
embodied cognitive architecture for human-robot interaction.
Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 2 (1), 30-55.

2391

