An ACT-R Model of the Choose-Short Effect in Time and Length
Jung Aa Moon (jmoon001@ets.org)
Educational Testing Service
Princeton, NJ 08541 USA

John R. Anderson (ja0s@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract

The Choose-Short Effect

Duration of an event tends to be underestimated as it becomes
temporally distant (Spetch & Wilkie, 1983). The current study
investigated this so-called choose-short effect in time and
length in order to reevaluate the claim that the choose-short
effect is special to temporal memory (Wearden, Parry, &
Stamp, 2002). Participants made discrimination judgments in
time or length on a pair of line stimuli separated by a delay.
The stimulus presented during delay was varied in time or
length. A length manipulation intended to be an analogue of
temporal delay induced the choose-short effect in length
discrimination. We developed a computational model based
on ACT-R memory mechanisms (Anderson et al., 2004) to
account for the main results in both time and length. The
current results indicate that domain-general memory
principles could account for the seemingly unique temporal
phenomenon.
Keywords: temporal memory; ACT-R cognitive architecture

Introduction
One of the unresolved questions in time estimation research
is whether temporal memory involves special mechanisms
that fundamentally differ from non-temporal memory.
Evidence for the uniqueness of temporal memory comes
from studies in which temporal memory performance differs
from non-temporal memory performance. For instance,
increasing interstimulus interval decreases performance in
non-temporal discrimination (Kinchla & Smyzer, 1967;
Moss, Myers, & Filmore, 1970), whereas it has little effect
on temporal discrimination (Allan, Kristofferson, & Rice,
1974). On the other hand, others have found similar patterns
of performance shared between temporal and non-temporal
memory. One of those examples is the end effect, which
refers to better identification performance on stimuli located
at either end of stimulus set. The end effect has been
robustly found in non-temporal stimuli (Lacouture, 1997;
Petrov & Anderson, 2005; Weber, Green, & Luce, 1977) as
well as temporal stimuli (Brown, McCormack, Smith, &
Stewart, 2005; Lacouture, Grondin, & Mori, 2001)
suggesting some common underlying principles. To address
the question whether temporal memory involves special
mechanisms, the current study investigated the choose-short
effect (Spetch & Wilkie, 1983) that has been claimed to be
unique to temporal dimension.

Wearden and colleagues (Wearden & Ferrara, 1993;
Wearden, Parry, & Stamp, 2002) investigated the chooseshort effect in a temporal discrimination paradigm.
Participants attended to a pair of sub-second durations
presented successively with an intervening delay randomly
varied across trials, and indicated whether the second
duration (test) was shorter than, equal to, or longer than the
first (study) duration. The paradigm had three types of trials:
T < S (test shorter than study), T = S (test equal to study),
and T > S (test longer than study). Predictions were made
based on the subjective shortening hypothesis (Spetch &
Wilkie, 1983) according to which the choose-short effect
arises because analogical representation of study duration
undergoes gradual foreshortening over delay. The subjective
shortening hypothesis predicts worse performance after a
longer delay in the first two trial types. In the T < S trials,
the shortened study representation would decrease the
perceived differences between study and test, making it
increasingly difficult to discriminate between the two. In the
T = S trials, the shortened study representation would make
it more difficult to judge that the two are equal. On the other
hand, it predicts better performance in the T > S trials after a
longer delay, termed as the “signature of subjective
shortening”. The shortened study representation would
increase the perceived difference between study and test,
making it easier for participants to judge that test is longer
than study. Their results supported those predictions.
Wearden, Parry, & Stamp (2002) further investigated
whether the choose-short effect is unique to time dimension.
The authors manipulated both presentation duration and
length of line stimuli and asked participants to make
discrimination judgments based on an instructed dimension.
Time discrimination performance exhibited the signature of
subjective shortening. However, length discrimination
performance was relatively unaffected by the delay
manipulation. Based on these results, the authors argued that
temporal memory exhibits a unique form of forgetting
which is different from non-temporal memory.
Although these results seem to support uniqueness of
temporal memory mechanism, a closer look at their
experimental paradigm suggests a possible alternative
interpretation. In this paradigm, participants were presented
with a blank screen with no visual stimulus during the

1625

delay. While waiting for the forthcoming test stimulus,
participants presumably attended to time which was the only
changing dimension. The delay duration was randomly
varied across trials, which imposes temporal uncertainty
regarding when exactly the test stimulus would appear. This
temporal uncertainty makes it likely that participants
attended to time during the delay in both time and length
discrimination. In time discrimination, the dimension to
judge (time) matches the dimension attended during the
delay (time), and the choose-short effect might be explained
as an interaction between the two temporal representations.
In length discrimination, the dimension to judge (length)
does not match the dimension attended during the delay
(time), and this mismatch could explain the absence of the
choose-short effect.
We questioned whether the choose-short effect could be
introduced in length discrimination by presenting visual
stimulus during delay and manipulating its length. We
modeled our results in the ACT-R cognitive architecture
(Anderson et al., 2004). Memory mechanisms of ACT-R
have been established in non-temporal memory and are
considered to be domain-general theories of human
memory. By modeling the choose-short effect in ACT-R,
we aim to test whether common principles could account for
both temporal and non-temporal memory.

The experiment had a 2-task x 3-type x 2-delay-time x 2line-length within-subject design. Task is either time or
length discrimination. Type refers to the relationship
between the study and test which could be T < S, T = S, or
T > S. Delay-time refers to the duration of the delay and
was either short (DT1: 2 s) or long (DT2: 10 s). Line-length
refers to the length of the grey line and was either short
(LL1: 447 px) or long (LL2: 1000 px).
Table 1: Study (S) and test (T) stimulus range.
Duration (ms)

Length (px)

Trial
Type

S

T

S

T

T<S

400-550

S – 200

160-250

S – 15

T=S

250-550

S

150-250

S

T>S

250-400

S + 200

150-240

S + 15

Experiment
Figure 1: Experimental paradigm.

We modified the discrimination paradigm in Wearden,
Parry, & Stamp (2002) and introduced a visual stimulus
during the delay. We predicted that manipulating length of
this stimulus would influence length discrimination in the
similar way that manipulation of delay duration influences
time discrimination. A longer stimulus length would result
in worse length discrimination performance in the T < S and
T = S trials and better performance in the T > S trials.

Method
Participants Twenty-five adults (19 female, 6 male, mean
age 20.3) were recruited from local community. Participants
earned either course credit or cash ($5 per 30 min).
Stimuli and Design We used yellow horizontal line stimuli
presented in the black background. The stimuli varied in
both duration of presentation and visual length. In each trial,
the study stimulus was randomly selected from a predefined
range in Table 1 depending on the trial type. In the time
task, the test duration was equal to the study duration, or
200 milliseconds (ms) longer or shorter. In the length task,
the test length was equal to the study length, or 15 pixels
(px) longer or shorter. The relationship between the study
and test in time was independent of the relationship in
length. The major difference from the Wearden, Parry, &
Stamp (2002) paradigm was the presence of a grey
horizontal line stimulus. The grey line appeared at the study
onset and disappeared at the test offset. During the study
and test phases, the yellow line was superimposed on the
grey line, both centered on the screen.

Procedure Participants performed six time and six length
discrimination blocks in a randomized order. Each block
started with a screen that informed the participant of the
target stimulus dimension (duration or length) for that
block. Participants performed 18 discrimination trials based
on the instructed dimension in the rest of the block. Each
trial (Figure 1) began with a screen that prompted
participants to press the spacebar. This self-paced intertrial
interval (ITI) was followed by a study-test pair of yellow
lines separated by a delay during which a grey line was
presented. After the test offset, participants were presented
with the following question: “Was the duration (or length in
the length task) of the second line longer than, shorter than,
or equal to the first line?” Participants were instructed to
respond within two seconds after this prompt by pressing
one of the three keys: J key for Short (T < S), K key for
Equal (T = S), and L key for Long (T > S) responses. There
was no trial-by-trial feedback. At the end of each block, a
screen showed the numbers of correct and timeout trials.

Results and Discussion
A 3-type x 2-delay-time x 2-line-length repeated measures
ANOVA was performed for each task. In the time task, the
only significant effect was type x delay-time interaction
(F(2,48) = 11.24, p < .001, partial eta-squared = .319). In
the T < S trials, performance was worse with the longer
delay-time (DT1: .67, DT2: .54, t(24) = 3.49, p = .002). In
the T = S trials, performance was slightly worse with the

1626

longer delay-time without statistical significance (DT1: .54,
DT2: .49, t(24) = 1.12, p = .272). In contrast, performance
in the T > S trials was better with the longer delay-time
(DT1: .48, DT2: .63, t(24) = 3.38, p = .002).
In the length task, there was a significant type x delaytime interaction (F(2,48) = 6.35, p = .004, partial etasquared = .209). Performance did not significantly differ
between the delay-time conditions in the T < S (DT1: .42,
DT2: .45) and the T > S trials (DT1: .53, DT2: .53). In the T
= S trials, performance was worse with the longer delaytime (DT1: .57, DT2: .41, t(24) = 4.04, p < .001).
Importantly, the type x line-length interaction (F(2,48) =
4.59, p = .015, partial eta-squared = .161) was significant. In
the T < S trials, performance was slightly worse with the
longer line-length (LL1: .48, LL2: .40, t(24) = 1.96, p =
.061). In the T = S trial, performance did not differ between
the line-length conditions (LL1: .50, LL2: .49, t(24) = .27, p
= .785). In the T > S trials, performance was significantly
better with the longer line-length (LL1: .49, LL2: .57, t(24)
= 2.65, p = . 014).

Short response decreased with the longer line-length in the
T < S trials. In the T = S trials, the Equal response changed
little, but the changes in the error responses were consistent
with the choose-short effect (decreased Short and increased
Long). In the T > S trials, the Long response increased,
exhibiting the signature of the choose-short.
The results indicated that we replicated the choose-short
effect in time discrimination (Wearden, Parry, & Stamp,
2002). More importantly, the line-length effects in length
discrimination were qualitatively similar to the delay-time
effects in time discrimination. In both tasks, performance
was better with the longer delay stimulus in the T > S trials.
In both tasks, participants increased their Long responses
and decreased their Short responses with the longer delay
stimulus in the T = S trials. The results support the
assumption that stimulus information presented during the
delay can bias discrimination performance, and this bias
occurs when the stimulus dimension attended during the
delay matches the dimension attended for discrimination.
These results can be accounted for by either contrast or
assimilation account. If the study representation is
contrasted with delay representation, the longer delay would
make the study look shorter. Alternatively, if the test
representation is assimilated with the delay representation,
the longer delay would make the test look longer. Both
accounts predict better performance in the T > S trials. In a
follow-up study in which ITI duration was manipulated
(Moon & Anderson, 2015), the longer ITI resulted in better
time discrimination performance in the T < S trials and
worse performance in the T > S trials, which can be
explained by the assimilation account. The longer ITI makes
the study look longer, which results in easier discrimination
in the T < S trials and harder discrimination in the T > S
trials. Overall, our results suggested that the choose-short
effect arises out of a tendency to assimilate the current
stimulus with the most recent stimulus.

ACT-R Modeling

Figure 2: Probabilities of response choice in time (A) and
length (B) discrimination. Left: Participants. Right: Model.
The left panel of Figure 2 plots the probabilities of
response choice (Short in red, Equal in green, and Long in
blue bars) as a function of the delay-time (DT) in the time
task and the line-length (LL) in the length task. In the time
task (Figure 2A), the longer delay-time decreased correct
responses in both T < S (red bars) and T = S trials (green
bars). In addition, performance in the T = S trials indicated
an increased tendency to judge that test is longer than study
(decreased Short and increased Long) with the longer delaytime. In the T > S trials, the Long response increased with
the longer delay-time. In the length task (Figure 2B), the

We implemented a model of the choose-short effect in the
ACT-R cognitive architecture (Anderson et al., 2004), an
integrated theory of human cognition. Declarative memory
in ACT-R consists of chunks that can represent associations
learned between stimuli and labels (e.g., “short” is n units).
Each chunk is associated with an activation value that
reflects the likelihood that information will be useful in the
future. The assimilative effects will be produced by the
variations in activation and its effects on performance.
The declarative memory interacts with multiple other
modules as coordinated by a central production system.
Each module is dedicated to a specific operation (e.g.,
vision module processes visual features of a stimulus). The
outcome of processing within each module is communicated
with the production system through an interface called
buffer. The production system selects a production that
satisfies the current status of buffers. Execution of a
production can modify the buffers and thus change the
current status of the model. Time estimation in ACT-R is

1627

achieved through the processing in the temporal module
(Taatgen, Van Rijn, & Anderson, 2007) and its interaction
with the rest of the system. Based on the internal clock
model (Matell & Meck, 2000), a pacemaker in the temporal
module starts accumulating pulses in the temporal buffer
once a start signal is given. The number of the accumulated
pulses corresponds to the estimated time duration1.

Blending Mechanism
Critical to our model is the blending mechanism (Lebiere,
Gonzalez, & Martin, 2007) in declarative memory. The
blending process has been used to model various kinds of
magnitude judgments in both temporal (Moon & Anderson,
2013; Taatgen & Van Rijn, 2011) and non-temporal
(Peebles & Jones, 2014) dimensions. Instead of retrieving a
specific chunk, blending produces a weighted aggregation
of all candidate chunks available in memory. Each candidate
chunk is given a different weight based on how recently the
chunk has been created and how closely it matches the
current retrieval request.
Several models of magnitude estimation assume that a
stimulus is represented with a category label selected on the
basis of its similarity to the category prototype (Petrov &
Anderson, 2005; Ward, 1979). Building on this notion, we
assume that participants assign a label to each stimulus
based on the similarities between the stimulus information
and the prototypes of multiple rank-ordered categories. In
our model, those prototypes are represented in reference
chunks. The model has three reference chunks for duration
(T1 through T3) and six for length (L1 through L6) 2. Each
of those reference chunks stores task information, label, and
the associated stimulus information that increases with the
label (e.g., T1: time task, label 1, & 12 pulses. T2: time task,
label 2, & 15 pulses). For the delay stimulus, the model
makes a binary judgment (“short” or “long”) and assigns
one of the two extreme labels based on the estimated
stimulus information (e.g., label 1 for the short delay-time
and label 3 for the long delay-time). For the target stimulus,
the model makes a more fine-grained judgment by
retrieving a label.
Figure 3 illustrates the blending process for labeling the
test duration. The model makes a blending request (A)
specifying the task condition and the pulse value that
1

The temporal module produces a logarithmic representation of
time. The pulse length keeps increasing as time progresses. The
following equations describe how the initial (t0) and the nth (tn)
pulse lengths are computed: t0 = start + ε1, tn = a*tn-1 + ε2 (start:
value of the time-master-start-increment parameter, a: value of the
time-mult parameter, b: value of the time-noise parameter. ε1:
noise generated with the act-r-noise command with an s (scale
parameter of logistic distribution) of b*5*start, ε2: noise generated
with the act-r-noise command with an s of b*a*t n-1). We used the
default parameter values (:time-master-start-increment .011 s,
:time-mult 1.1, and :time-noise .015).
2
The numbers of reference chunks were determined based on
the stimulus range and the resolution sufficient for discrimination
in each task.

represents the estimated test duration. Upon the request,
candidate chunks in the declarative memory (B) that meet
the conditions are selected for blending. The task condition
is strictly applied and only the “time” chunks can participate
in the blending3. Those chunks include three reference
chunks (T1 through T3) as well as chunks that store delay
durations experienced over the trials: Delay-1 (not shown in
Figure 3) through Delay-9. The partial matching process in
ACT-R allows chunks with pulse value other than 15 to
participate in the blending but with a penalty based on the
match.

Figure 3: An example of blending in time discrimination.
The activation associated with each chunk reflects a
combination of its recency, match with the request, and
activation noise. The activation in turn determines the
weight (Figure 3B) of the chunk and determines the degree
to which the chunk contributes to the blending. For instance,
• Delay-9 chunk holds the estimation of the long delay
in the current trial. It mismatches the pulse value but
is most recent: Weight .309.
• Delay-8 chunk holds the estimation of the short delay
in the last trial. It mismatches pulse value and is the
second-most recent: Weight .001.
• T3 chunk holds the reference duration for label 3 and
is close but not the perfect match: Weight .089.
• T2 chunk holds the reference duration for label 2 and
is the perfect match: Weight .385.
• T1 chunk holds the reference duration for label 1 and
is close but not the perfect match: Weight .1594.
Product of weight and label is computed for each chunk,
and then aggregated over the chunks to give the label of
2.62. This label is greater than the best-matching label 2 due
to the assimilative bias from the most recent long delay.

Model of Discrimination Task
Figure 4 illustrates how the model performs time
discrimination in a T = S trial. The model starts
accumulating pulses in the temporal buffer whenever a
stimulus appears and stops accumulation when it disappears.
3

Assuming that participants attended to the instructed stimulus
dimension, we restricted the candidate chunks to only those that
match the task condition.
4
Both T1 and T3 are 3 pulses away from the requested pulse
value, but T1 gets a higher weight due to activation noise.

1628

After estimating the study duration, the model makes a
blending request with 15 pulses (blue box). The blended
study label 1.95 (green box) is close to 2 (white box) which
is the best match with the requested pulse value. After
estimating the long delay (52 pulses), the model assigns
label 3 (red box). After estimating the test duration, the
model makes another blending request with 15 pulses. Due
to the assimilative (red arrow) bias from the most recent
delay (label 3), the blended test label 2.62 (green box) is
greater than the best-matching label of 2 (white box). The
model rounds the study and test labels to the closest integers
and makes a response based on the comparison (2 < 3:
“Long”). The example shows that the longer delay can exert
an assimilative bias and make the test look longer than the
study (i.e., increased Long response in the T = S trials in
Figure 2A). The model performs length discrimination in a
similar manner using the estimated length information (in
pixels) available in the vision module. Based on the same
blending mechanism, the label for the grey line presented
during the delay exerts an assimilative bias on the test label.

Figure 4: ACT-R model of time discrimination.

Model Results
The right panel in Figure 2 plots the model results. In the
time task (Figure 2A), the model performed worse with the
longer delay-time in the T < S trials. The model somewhat
overproduced the effect showing a greater reduction of the
Short response than participants. In the T = S trials, the
model decreased the Short response and increased the Long
response with the longer delay-time. In the T > S trials, the
model increased the Long response with the longer delaytime. In the length task (Figure 2B), the model captured
performance decrease in the T < S trials and increase in the
T > S trials with the longer line-length. In the T = S trials,
the model also decreased the Short response and increased
the Long response albeit to a weaker extent. Overall, the
model captured the major effects of delay-time and linelength and exhibited the choose-short effect in both tasks.
The correlations between the participants and the model
were .94 in the time task and .95 in length task5.
5
Adjusted model parameters: Retrieval threshold (:rt -10),
latency factor (:lf .1 s), activation noise (:ans .35), imaginal-delay

Discussion
The current study investigated whether temporal and nontemporal memory could be accounted for by the common
principles. An experiment was designed based on the
assumption that stimulus information attended during the
delay could bias processing target stimulus information. We
found that the length manipulation introduced during the
delay could influence length discrimination performance in
a manner parallel to the choose-short in time discrimination.
A computational model was developed based on the
ACT-R blending mechanism. The model encoded and
labeled stimulus information presented during the delay,
which exerted an assimilative influence on the subsequent
memory retrieval. Due to the push and pull factors of
recency and match, the judgments based on the retrieved
representations were overall close to the correct responses
but biased towards the most recent stimulus information.
The common blending mechanism accounted for the major
behavioral patterns in time and length discrimination.
Our account for the choose-short effect is in accord with
some accounts proposed for priming effects. In social
psychology, priming a cognitive category (e.g., hostility) by
unobtrusive exposure to exemplars of category increases the
likelihood that a subsequent ambiguous stimulus (e.g.,
person who shows ambiguous behaviors) is judged as a
member of the category (e.g., Higgins, Rholes, & Jones,
1977). According to category accessibility account (Herr,
Sherman, & Fazio, 1983), a frequent or recent presentation
of exemplars of a category increases the availability of the
category and influences judgment on a new stimulus to
assimilate to the category. In psychophysical judgments,
response in the current trial tends to be positively correlated
with the response in the previous trial. Petrov and Anderson
(2005) accounted for this sequential assimilation effect
based on the activation-mediated priming mechanism.
Presentation of stimulus in the previous trial strengthens the
activation of the associated category. Due to the residual
activation, the current stimulus tends to be judged as a
member of the previously strengthened category. Our model
categorizes each stimulus by assigning a label, which is
influenced by the relative availabilities of the categories
(i.e., weights). Exposure to the long delay stimulus activates
the long category and increases the likelihood that the target
stimulus is judged as the long category.
The current study provides a new perspective on the
choose-short effect, which has been traditionally framed as
forgetting of temporal memory over time. Models in time
estimation domain (e.g., Spetch & Wilkie, 1983) have
(0 s), :visual-onset-span (.01 s), and mismatch penalty (:mp 2.0).
The :ans parameter was set at a level that matches overall
performance level of participants. The :mp parameter was
estimated to match the magnitude of the delay stimulus effect.
Increasing :mp tends to weaken the delay stimulus effect because
the chunks with delay stimulus information get weighed less (i.e.,
more heavily penalized) due to their worse match with blending
request. The rest of the parameters were set to ensure that the
model performs the task within the response deadline.

1629

treated the choose-short effect as a case unique in the time
dimension rather than seeking domain-general explanations.
The current study redefined the choose-short effect as an
interaction between two memory representations in the
matching dimension. Based on this definition, the chooseshort effect is not “a unique form of forgetting”, but is an
instance of domain general memory effects. Our results
argue against the uniqueness of temporal memory
mechanisms and prompt further investigations of the
choose-short effect outside the temporal domain.
By modeling the results in the domain-general ACT-R
memory mechanism, we showed that the common principles
could account for both temporal and non-temporal memory.
The current approach is in the same vein as previous efforts
(Brown et al., 2005; Taatgen & Van Rijn, 2011) on
modeling temporal phenomena based on principles
developed outside the temporal domain. We showed that
principles that have accounted for non-temporal memory
could successfully apply to accounting for temporal
memory. In comparison with time estimation models
developed within temporal domain, the current approach
allows a rigorous comparison between temporal and nontemporal memory.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ONR grant
N000140910098.

References
Allan, L. G., Kristofferson, A. B., & Rice, M. E. (1974).
Some aspects of perceptual coding of duration in visual
duration discrimination. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 15(1), 83-88.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. L. (2004). An integrated theory of
the mind. Psychological Review, 111(4), 1036-1060.
Brown, G. D. A., McCormack, T., Smith, M., & Stewart, N.
(2005). Identification and bisection of temporal durations
and tone frequencies: Common models for temporal and
nontemporal
stimuli.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 31(5),
919-938.
Herr, P. M., Sherman, S. J., & Fazio, R. H. (1983). On the
consequences of priming: Assimilation and contrast
effects. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
19(4), 323-340.
Higgins, E. T., Rholes, W. S., & Jones, C. R. (1977).
Category accessibility and impression formation. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 13(2), 141-154.
Kinchla, R. A., & Smyzer, F. (1967). A diffusion model of
perceptual memory. Perception & Psychophysics, 2(6),
219-229.
Lacouture, Y. (1997). Bow, range, and sequential effects in
absolute identification: A response-time analysis.
Psychological Research, 60(3), 121-133.

Lacouture, Y., Grondin, S., & Mori, S. (2001). Absolute
identification of temporal intervals: Preliminary data.
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Meeting of the
International Society of Psychophysics (pp. 493–498).
Berlin: Pabst Science Publishers.
Lebiere, C., Gonzalez, C., & Martin, M. K. (2007).
Instance-based decision making model of repeated binary
choice. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Cognitive Modeling (pp. 67–72), Ann Arbor, MI:
Psychology Press.
Matell, M. S., & Meck, W. H. (2000). Neuropsychological
mechanisms of interval timing behavior. Bioessays, 22(1),
94-103.
Moon, J., & Anderson, J. R. (2013). Timing in multitasking:
Memory contamination and time pressure bias. Cognitive
Psychology, 67(1-2), 26-54.
Moon, J., & Anderson, J. R. (2015). Is temporal memory
special? The choose-short effect in time and length.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Moss, S. M., Myers, J. L., & Filmore, T. (1970). Short-term
recognition memory of tones. Perception &
Psychophysics, 7(6), 369-373.
Peebles, D. & Jones, C. (2014). A model of object location
memory. Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Petrov, A. A., & Anderson, J. R. (2005). The dynamics of
scaling: A memory-based anchor model of category rating
and absolute identification. Psychological Review, 112(2),
383-416.
Spetch, M. L., & Wilkie, D. M. (1983). Subjective
shortening: A model of pigeons' memory for event
duration. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 9(1), 14-30.
Taatgen, N., & Van Rijn, H. (2011). Traces of times past:
Representations of temporal intervals in memory.
Memory & Cognition, 39(8), 1546-1560.
Taatgen, N. A., Van Rijn, H., & Anderson, J. (2007). An
integrated theory of prospective time interval estimation:
The role of cognition, attention, and learning.
Psychological Review, 114(3), 577-598.
Ward, L. M. (1979). Stimulus information and sequential
dependencies in magnitude estimation and cross-modality
matching. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 5(3), 444-459.
Wearden, J. H., & Ferrara, A. (1993). Subjective shortening
in humans' memory for stimulus duration. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46(2), 163-186.
Wearden, J. H., Parry, A., & Stamp, L. (2002). Is subjective
shortening in human memory unique to time
representations? The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Section B, 55(1), 1-25.
Weber, D. L., Green, D. M., & Luce, R. D. (1977). Effects
of practice and distribution of auditory signals on absolute
identification. Perception & Psychophysics, 22(3), 223231.

1630

