Analyzing chunk pauses to measure mathematical competence:
Copying equations using ‘centre-click’ interaction.
Peter C-H. Cheng (p.c.h.cheng@sussex.ac.uk)
Department of Informatics, University of Sussex
Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK
Abstract

miliar chunks are processed more rapidly, because their occurrence in a stimulus will be perceived as a unit and the
retrieval of elements of the chunk from memory leads to
rapid processing. Without such chunks stimuli elements
must be perceived and encoded individually, which consumes more time. Second, because (sub-)chunks are aggregated during learning, familiar chunks may contain a relatively large number of elements that is greater than the
number of elements that can be individually processed at the
same time: the capacity of working memory is about four
chunks for resource intense tasks (Cowen, 2001). Copying
is such as task. Thus, the intra-chunk pauses will be shorter
and less frequent for people familiar with a target stimulus,
whereas others will have more numerous and longer pauses
associated with small groups of elements due to the novelty
of the stimulus. The third quartile (Q3) of individual’s distributions of pauses can be used to detect these longer and
more frequent pauses, so they may serve as an effective
measure of competence (Cheng, 2014; Zulkifli, 2013).
The temporal chunk signal has also been used to investigate cognitive strategies in free-hand drawing (Obaidellah &
Cheng, 2009; Roller & Cheng, 2014), so it might to be a
good indicator of cognitive performance. However, can it
be used to evaluate performance with forms of interaction
more generally beyond handwriting and drawing? Pauses
have been widely used to study the nature of typewriting;
for instance, competence in transcription typewriting (e.g.,
Salthouse, 1986). However, such studies require the aggregation of data over many participants in order to find any
reliable effects: this suggests measurement of individual
competence using typing is unlikely to be feasible. Moreover, in a pilot experiment on the typewritten copying of
English sentences (Ismail, 2010) found no significant relation between second language competence and pauses
measures. Large individual differences in typing skill likely
masks the temporal chunk signal.
So, is it feasible for the temporal chunk signal to be found
at a level that can be used to measure competence in any
forms of interaction beyond handwriting? To this end the
‘centre-click’ method of interaction was devised and is
evaluated in the experiment here. Centre-click interaction
was designed to exploit computer mouse skills, because
mouse movement and clicking (button presses) are relatively simple and are uniform of across individuals, in contrast
to the complexity and variability of typewriting.
Fig 1 shows the centre-click response grid used in the experiment, which is displayed on a conventional computer
display. Participants copy equations by clicking on the
square with the symbol they wish to input, as if it is a button. (In the present setup no visual or audio feedback is

Mathematical competence can be evaluated by analyzing
pauses between strokes that occurring whilst an individual
copies equations. These pauses provide a temporal signal that
reflects the cognitive effort to process chunks. ‘Centre-click’
interaction with a mouse and response grid on a computer
display is introduced as new technique for measuring the
temporal chunk signal. Alternative pause measures and forms
of normalization are explored. It is shown that centre-click
copying can be used to measure mathematical competence.
Keywords: chunks, mathematical competence, pauses analysis, graphical interface, copying equations, centre-click

Introduction
This paper continues our investigations into the measurement of complex high-level cognitive skills using simple
assessments tasks. Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2007) found that
the people with substantially different levels of mathematical competence could be readily differentiated in the simple
task of freehand copying mathematical formulas using a
measure based on the temporal chunk signal manifested in
the duration of pauses between pen strokes. Cheng (2014)
found that both the third quartile and interquartile range of
pause durations are potentially effective measures of mathematical competence in the freehand copying of equations.
Beyond mathematics, Zulkifli (2013) showed that the competence of speakers of English as second language could be
assessed using the third quartile of pauses in sentence coping tasks. Van Genuchen and Cheng (2009) found that the
mean duration of the pauses of Dutch children writing justmemorized sentences in their native language distinguishes
between children of seven and eight years of age. In general, it appears that measures based on the pauses that occur
in copying and writing can be used to assess the level of
competence in high-level cognitive skills.
This is feasible because of a well-establish and widelyknown phenomenon: the duration of pauses between motor
actions is longer for the processing elements that occur at
the transition between two chunks than for element within
the same chunk (e.g., van Genuchten & Cheng, 2010). For
memorized chunks, the production of the first element in a
chunk is slowed by the time needed retrieve and place the
chunk into working memory, but once there all its elements
are immediately available. In copying tasks the production
of the first element is slowed by the processing associated
with the perception, encoding and preparation of the chunk.
Individuals with greater knowledge or more competence in
a particular domain possess familiar chunks for that domain,
which has two effects that underpins the temporal chunk
signal that we are using to measure competence. First, fa-

345

given to the clicks). Critically, participants are trained to
click the black square in the
center of response grid between each symbol click.
This Return To Centre (RTC)
action aims to make the distances that the mouse moves
to reach each symbol fairly
uniform. (In a pilot experiFig 1. Centre-click
ment in which participants
response grid
centre-click copied equations
but the distance was not controlled, no correlation between
mathematical competence and pauses measures was found.)
The participants in the present experiment were given no
directions about whether to think of RTC actions as associated with the preceding or following symbol click. To copy
stimulus equations participants execute RTC and symbol
clicks as required.
Symbols in the response grid are largely grouped according to related mathematical meanings, on the assumption
that this may differentially assist participants who have
greater mathematical competence.
Cheng (2014) showed that the third quartile (Q3) of pauses between written strokes was a good measure, where a
pause is the time between the placing of the pen to the paper
to inscribe the current symbol minus the time at the lifting
of the pen at the end of the previous symbol. Theoretically,
for the centre-click interaction several measures can be imagined depending on the assumed interaction strategy. (1) If
participants do a RTC automatically after the completion of
a symbol click, then chunk processing will be associated
with symbol clicks and hence the pauses of interest are
those just before the symbol click. The third quartile measure based on such pauses will be designated Q3sym. (2) If
participants’ chunk processing occurs before the RTC, delaying the RTC until just before the symbol click, then the
target pauses are associated with the RTC: designation
Q3RTC. (3) Chunk processing might sometimes occur just
before RTCs or just before symbol clicks, in which case all
the pauses are potentially relevant, so the pauses for both
may be pooled: Q3All. (4) Chunk processing for each symbol might consistently be distributed between both RTCs
and symbols clicks, so the
sum of the pauses could be
considered: Q3RTC+sym. (5)
Given case (1) in which all
the chunk processing occurs just before the symbol
click, we might assume the
RTC pauses simply reflect
basic move and click
times. Thus, those pauses
might be used to normalize
symbol click times for individual differences in
Fig 2. Elementary skills
such elementary actions,
normalization.

by subtracting RTC
pauses from symbol
pauses: Q3sym-RTC.
Which of these pauses
measure will best predict
competence?
Fig 3. Basic mathematical
In addition, the experskill normalization.
iment will also examine
if normalizing for individual differences will improve the basic Q3 pause measure.
For the handwritten copying of equations Cheng (2014) attempted to two forms of normalization. (a) The idea of
normalization for elementary skills is illustrated in Fig 2.
Assume that the duration of first quartile, Q1, pauses are
representative of the time to execute common elementary
inter-chunk processes. If these are quite different, as shown
in Fig 2A, then these elementary skills will individually affect Q3 to different extents (horizontal position of the distributions). However, by subtracting Q1 from Q3, Fig 2B, the
Q3 measures for both participants are put on an equal footing. Q3-Q1 is of course the interquartile range, IQR. (b)
Normalization for basic mathematical skill gives a measure
that aims to estimate pauses that are associated with handling more challenging parts of expressions, such as the
perception and production non-alphanumeric symbols in
non-linear arrangements, over and above processes that are
required for basic components of expressions, such as simple linear sequences of numbers. Challenging aspects are
likely to better differentiate people with different levels of
competence. This is illustrated in Fig 3, where curve M is
the measured distribution of pauses for a participant copying
a complex equation and curve B is the distribution for copying a simple list of numbers. Now, if distribution B is subtracted from distribution M, a distribution for challenging
aspects, N, is estimated. The actual normalized measure is
calculated by subtracting Q3B from the measured Q3
(Q3N=Q3-Q3B). Will the two forms of normalization improve the basic Q3 pause measure?

Method
The experiment was conducted by student experimenters on
the Psychological Methods for System Evaluation module of
the HCI MSc at the University of Sussex. The University’s
ethics committee granted ethics approval.
Participants
The 22 participants were adult friends and relatives of the
students, who were deliberately recruited to span a range of
mathematical experience. They were all competent computer users and had no impairments.
Materials
To independently assess their mathematical competence the
participants completed the same questionnaire as used by
Cheng (2014). It had three equal weight parts that assessed:
(a) mathematical qualifications and current use of mathematics; (b) mathematical knowledge by posing problems
with multiple choice answers; (c) participants’ confidence
through their ratings of the answers to the questions in (b).

346

identity of the symbols from the computer logs and calculated Q1 and Q3 for the stimulus, RTC, All, RTC+stim and
stim-RTC pauses as defined above. The dataset comprised
approximately 13,200 data points including symbols clicks
and RTC actions, with each participant providing about 600
data points, depending on whether they used symbols ‘d’
and ‘x’ or the combined ‘dx’ for copying equation items E7
and E8.
The participants quickly became used to centre-click input. Inspection of the time series graphs of the pauses for
the first practice item revealed that all participants’ shortest
pauses had asymptoted to a value typical of their individual
shortest pause for later items, implying that centre-click input had rapidly become automatic.
Pause magnitudes
Fig 5 shows sample data of the Q3All pauses for the least and
most competent participants, P1 and P22, respectively, on
equation item E4. The pauses range from about 500 ms to
over 5000 ms (above the graph). The magnitudes of both
participants’ shortest pauses are approximately equal but
P1’s curve has many more long pauses than P22. As this
graph is typical of other participants, Q1 pauses should in
general be similar among participants and Q3 should vary
with competence and potentially be a good measure of competence. The ‘#’ and ‘•’ labels along the x-axis stand for
RTC actions. The ‘•’ labels also indicate where mathematically meaningful chunk boundary occur in the stimulus:
specifically, breaks between equations or following the
equal sign. P22’s longest pauses largely coincide either
with a • RTC label or the immediately following symbol,
whereas as for P1 few of these boundaries are associated
with long pauses and many long pauses occur elsewhere.
This implies that P22’s mathematical knowledge at the level
of the equation structure substantially influenced P22’s performance, whereas P1’s profile is not consistent with the use
of such knowledge. Although P22’s longest pauses are associated with chunk boundaries, some of these pauses occur
with symbol clicks and others with RTC actions, which
suggests the investigation of different pauses measures is
worthwhile.
Fig 6 shows the Q3 pause measure for each of the practice
and equation test items. There is little variability in the
click durations. For the first practice item, Pr1, which involved clicking symbols in the order of appearance the response grid, there is no difference between the All, symbol
and RTC pauses, which implies participants are largely at-

Fig 4. The equation stimuli items
The test stimuli included four practice items and eight
equation items, shown in Fig 4. Each practice item was a
list of all the symbols in the response grid but in particular
arrangements that aimed to support participants familiarization with the grid. The equation items, shown in Fig 4, were
designed to span a range of sophistication in mathematical
competence, from number sequences to equations and on to
calculus formulas.
Procedure
The trials were run on the individual computers of the experimenters with a conventional mouse for input. The
mouse settings of the computers were adjusted to suit the
preferences of each participant. Bespoke software with millisecond temporal resolution and accuracy (SMouseLog),
programmed within the Investigator’s lab, was used to present the response grid and to log interactions.
After familiarization with the experimental setup, the centre-click interaction was explained and was briefly practiced. The stimulus items were individually presented printed on a card placed immediately to the left of the computer
at the same height as the response grid on the display. The
practice items were given in the order and the presentation
order of the equation items (Fig 4) was randomised. For
each trial the participants were told to begin as soon as the
item was revealed and to centre-click copy as quickly and as
accurately as possible, and simply to continue without pausing if they made a mistake.

Results
The student experimenters collated the data from their participants using a pre-prepared spreadsheet that extracted the

Fig 5. Pauses for symbol and RTC actions (#,•) by the least (P1) and most (P22) competent participants.

347

than the Q3RTC pauses. Aggregating over the trials for each
participant the Q3sym pauses for participants were longer for
symbols than Q3RTC pauses: practice items, mean Q3sym =
1142 (S.D. = 267) versus mean Q3RTC = 886 (S.D. = 201)
ms; equation items mean Q3sym = 1072 (S.D. = 241) versus
mean Q3RTC = 417 (S.D. = 85) ms, which by one-tail T tests
(N=22) are both significant at p<.001. All this taken together implies that chunk processing is more associated with
symbols than RTCs. Thus, it is expected that measures for
RTC alone will not be good predictors of competence.
Competence correlations
Pearson’s Correlations between the pause measures and
competence scores of participants’ were computed for each
test item. In all cases N=22 (df=20) and the R values for
standard critical values are: p=.05, R=0.360; p=.01,
R=0.492. For the purpose of exposition, correlations at these levels will be called weak and strong.
Although six weak correlations for particular test items
were found for first quartile measures, Q1All, Q1sym, Q1RTC,
Q1RTC+sym, and Q1sym-RTC, they are in a minority among the
60 measures, which is much as expected by chance. No
strong correlations were present. For completeness correlations of competence test scores with the durations of mouse
button presses were also calculated, Q1click, Q3click and Q3Q1click. Give the 24 comparisons across the eight equations,
the two weak correlations that were found can be attributed
to chance. Reassuringly, there are no unexpected effects in
participants’ underlying performance.
Table 1 shows correlations values for various measures all
against the participants’ competence scores. The table includes correlations for the mean of the overall Q3 pauses
found by aggregating over practice items or over equation

Fig 6 Various Q3 pauses across stimulus items
tending to grid location rather than symbol identity. Q3
pauses decreases substantially across practice items Pr2 to
Pr4, which suggests participants became well familiarized
with the symbols themselves. In the equation items a general trend exists for all measures to increase with increasing
sophistication of the equations, which is monotonic for
Q3RTC and nearly so for Q3ALL.
Chunk processing with before symbols or RTCs?
Does perceptual and cognitive processing of chunks tend to
occur before the symbol clicks or RTC actions? In Fig 6,
across both practice and equation items RTC pauses are
shorter than the symbol pauses and over the equation items
the rate of increase is greater for Q3sym (range=742 ms) than
for Q3RTC (range=301 ms). Across all 88 practice trials 72%
of Q3sym pauses were greater than the Q3RTC pauses. In the
176 equation trials 75% of the Q3sym pauses were greater

Table 1. Correlations of Q3 pause measures with competence.
Q3All

Pr1
-0.14

Q3sym

0.01

Q3RTC,

-0.18

Q3RTC+sym,

-0.02

Q3sym-RTC

0.09

Pr2
-0.57
**
-0.68
**
0.06

Pr3
-0.50
**
-0.48
*
-0.05

Pr4
-0.42
*
-0.34

-0.54
**
-0.54
**

-0.48

-0.27

-0.33

-0.20

-0.18

Pr
mean
-0.50
**
-0.52
**
-0.10
-0.39
*
-0.35

E1
0.29

E2
0.29

E3
0.05

E4
-0.32

-0.07

-0.53
**
0.36
*
-0.17

-0.33
0.18

-0.43
*
-0.10

-0.10

-0.23

0.44
*
0.29
-0.35

E5
-0.43
*
-0.38
*
-0.27

E6
-0.53
**
-0.49
**
-0.13

E7
-0.26

-0.41
*
-0.14

-0.46
*
-0.31

-0.27

E6
-0.62
**
-0.49
*

E7
-0.33

-0.51
-0.38
-0.29
**
*
* – p<.05, ‘weak’ correlation, ** – p<.01 ‘strong’ correlation

-0.27
-0.10

-0.22

E8
-0.50
**
-0.42
*
-0.08
-0.37
*
-0.27

E
mean
-0.31
-0.48
*
0.01
-0.31
-0.38
*

Table 2. Correlations of IQR pause measures with competence.
IQRAll

Pr1
-0.14

IQRsym

0.05

Pr2
-0.48
*
-0.65
**

Pr3
-0.59
**
-0.50
**

Pr4
-0.60
**
-0.41
*

Pr
mean
-0.56
**
-0.53
**

E1
0.14

E2
0.12

E3
0.08

-0.22

-0.61
**

-0.38
*

E4
-0.47
*
-0.48
*

E5
-0.54
*
-040
*

-0.21

E8
-0.57
**
-0.39
*

Table 3. Correlations for basic mathematical skills normalization measures, Q3N, with competence.
Q3NAll

E3
-0.23

Q3Nsym

-0.06

E4
-0.56
**
-0.13

E5
-0.62
**
-0.15

348

E6
-0.59
**
-0.36

E7
-0.39
*
-0.08

E8
-0.55
**
-0.25

E mean
-0.60
**
-0.21

E
mean
-0.53
**
-0.51
*

now Q3NAll = -0.6 compared to Q3All = -0.31.
Fig 7 reveals why the basic mathematical skill normalization works better than the elementary skill normalization.
Fig 7A shows the Q3ALL and Q1ALL for all equations items
and the resulting normalized IQRALL curve. The dashed
lines are least-squares best-fit lines for Q3ALL and IQRALL.
The deviations of Q1ALL values from the best-fit lines shows
there are substantial individual differences, but the overall
shape of Q1ALL its similar to Q3ALL, which means it is encoding largely similar individual differences to as those already captured by Q3ALL, so normalizing using Q1ALL to
compute IQRALL does a little to improve upon Q3All. In Fig
7B the shape of Q3ALL,E1E2 (pauses for the two number
items) is quite different to Q3All,E3-E8 (pauses for equations
proper), so the difference found by subtracting the former
from the letter to give Q3NAll, does adjust Q3All,E3-E8 for individual differences that it does not already encode. In turn,
this yields a stronger the correlation with competence score,
as shown by the gradients of the best-fit lines.

items. None of the measures has a majority of strong correlations for the eight test items and none have strong correlation for their aggregate Q3 measures. In terms of numbers
of strong and weak correlations Q3sym performs best followed by Q3All. Q3RTC is the worst. Q1RTC+sym, and Q1symRTC are in the middle, which is not surprising as they combine symbol and RTC pauses, although in different ways.
The IQR measure attempts basic-skill normalization on
Q3 pauses by deducting Q1 pauses, on an item-by-item basis for each participant. IQRRTC, IQRRTC+sym, and IQRsym-RTC
correlations with competence scores show little improvement over their respective Q3 measures. Table 2 gives the
correlations of IQRAll and IQRsym. IQRsym normalization has
relatively little impact on Q3sym. IQRALL normalization
increases the strength of the correlations for items E4 to E8,
compared to Q3All alone, so the IQRALL correlation for the
mean of all the equations items is now strong.
Basic mathematical skills normalization, Q3N, is computed by subtracting a measure of basic math skills from Q3All,
Q3B in Fig 3. Conveniently, the mean of Q3 pauses for
equation items E1 and E2 provides such a measure, as these
a numerical items. To be precise, this measure (Q3B) is denoted by Q3All,E1E2. For the normalization it is subtracted
from each of the other equation items E3 to E8, individually
(i.e., Q3NAll,E3 = Q3All,E3-Q3All,E1E2, Q3NAll,E4 = Q3All,E4Q3All,E1E2, etc). The same was done for Q3sym for E3 to E8.
Table 3 shows the correlations of these measures with competence score. For Q3Nsym no relation holds. For Q3NAll,
just one equation test item has no correlation (E3), one is
weak (E7) and all the rest are strong (S4, S5, S6 and S8).
The correlation for the average pauses across all test items is

Discussion
This experiment addressed questions about the use of the
paused-based temporal chunk signal as a measure of mathematical competences in the simple task of copying equations. A reasonable strength correlation of -0.60 was found
between mathematical competence and the third quartile
pause measure after normalization for basic mathematical
skills (Q3N). For the normalized interquartile range measure
(IQRAll) a correlation of -0.53 was obtained. These are
weaker than the -0.72 correlation for a simple Q3 measure
and the -0.73 correlation for an IQR measure obtained by
Cheng (2014) for handwritten copying of equations. Apart
for the intrinsic difference in the modes of interaction, a
possible factor in the weaker correlations found here is a
less uniform distribution of participant’ competence than in
the Cheng (2014) sample; here participants with lower
mathematical competence were somewhat over represented.
Nevertheless, the strength of the correlations (especially
Q3NAll) is sufficient to claim that the centre-click interaction
exhibits the temporal chunk signal with sufficient strength
that it can be used to measure mathematical competence. In
turn, this demonstrates that temporal chunk signal extends
beyond normal freehand writing and drawing to use with
conventional mouse operated computer interfaces. In contrast to previous studies that used typewriting, centre-click
copying does not require aggregation over large amounts of
data to differentiate levels of competence (cf., the studies
cited by Salthouse, 1986), nor it is hampered by large individual differences in typing skills that mask the signal when
assessments are limited to a small number of test items per
participant (c.f., Ismail, 2010).
The specific design of the response grid (Fig. 1) appears
to be important to the efficacy of centre-click copying used
to measure mathematical competence. In an earlier pilot
experiment, in which no strong correlations to mathematical
competence were found, the distances of the symbols to the
center in the response grid was far less uniform than in the

Fig 7. Normalizations of pause measures:
(A) IQRALL (Q3-Q1ALL); (B) Q3NALL, basic maths skills.

349

Acknowledgments

present experiment. However, the distances to the symbols
are not equal in Fig 1, so it will be interesting to investigate
whether this is still a substantial source of noise for the Q3
measures.
Following Cheng (2014), Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2007),
Zulkifli (2013) and van Genuchten & Cheng (2009), it has
again been shown that competence in a knowledge-rich
cognitive tasks can be measured using a simple stimuli copying activity. The more knowledgeable participants exhibit
shorter pauses (Figs 5 & & 7), because they possess relevant
chunks that likely support their more rapid encoding of larger (meaningful) patterns from the stimuli. The claim that
copying has some potential as a general method for measuring competence is further supported by the success of centre-click interaction. As the predicted order of difficulty of
the equation test items appears to be reflected in the aggregate measures of pauses, Fig 6, this adds weight to the claim
that the process of copying and the Q3 pauses therein are
related to participants level of understanding of each target
stimulus.
Centre-click copying involves the RTC, return to center,
actions and symbol clicks, so the time associated with the
processing of chunks might be associated with symbol and
RTC pauses in different ways. Five theoretically possible
pauses measures were defined in the introduction: Q3ALL,
Q3sym, Q3RTC, Q3RTC+sym, Q3sym-RTC. The values of Q3sym are
substantially longer than Q3RTC pauses, Fig 6, which suggests that Q3sym ought to have had the strongest correlations
with the competence test scores. However, just the pooled
pauses including symbol clicks and RTC actions gave
strong correlations (Table 2). Of the other measures, there
was a hint that Q3sym might reflect the temporal chunk signal, but no other meaningful patterns of correlations were
observed. All this suggests that there are substantial differences in the way individual participants distribute the processing of chunks within centre-click copying, despite the
relatively simple nature of the underlying task.
In Cheng (2014) the normalization for elementary skills
and basic mathematical skills did not not improve the Q3
pause measures. Here, in contrast, the IQRAll correlations
were significant and did improve the measure and even
more so with the normalization for basic mathematical
skills, Q3NAll. This occurred for the overall aggregate measure but more impressively it was seen at the level each equation test item (Table 3 cf. Table & 2). The improvement for
Q3NAll worked here because the distribution of Q3All,E1E2
pauses across participants for number test items reflects individual differences not seen in the Q3All,E3E8 distribution for
equations proper (Fig 7). In Cheng (2014) the equivalent
number and equation test item distributions were similar,
which implies that it was a less sensitive measure of underlying mathematical skills. The overall implication, of this
and the point in the previous paragraph, is we must understand to what extent, and how, individual differences are
manifested in different techniques to measure the temporal
chunk signal when evaluating competence.

My thanks go to Shona McLeod, Maya Stanford, Matthew
Bodell and Mikael Fodor their conscientious and thorough
collection and collation of the data.

References
Cheng, P. C-H. (2014). Copying equations to assess mathematical competence: An evaluation of pause measures using graphical protocol analysis. In P. Bello, M. Guarini,
M. McShane & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proc. of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 319324). Austin, TX: Cog. Sci. Soc.
Cheng, P. C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2007). Measuring
Mathematical Formula Writing Competence: An Application of Graphical Protocol Analysis. In D. S. McNamara
& J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proc. of the 29th Annual Conf. of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 869-874). Austin, TX:
Cog. Sci. Soc.
Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term
memory: A reconsideration of mental storage capacity.
Behavioral and Brain Science, 24(1), 87-114.
Ismail, H.B. (2010). Using pauses in typing to measure language competence. Unpublished MSc dissertation, Department of Informatics, University of Sussex.
Obaidellah, U. H., & Cheng, Peter C-H. (2009). Graphical
production of complex abstract diagrams: drawing out
chunks and schemas. In N. Taatgen & H. v. Rijn (Eds.),
Proc. of the 31st Ann. Conf. of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cog. Sci. Soc.
Roller, R., & Cheng, P. C-H. (2014). Observed strategies in
the freehand drawing of complex hierarchical diagrams.
In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane & B. Scassellati
(Eds.), Proc. of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 2020-2025). Austin, TX: Cog. Sci.
Soc.
Salthouse, T.A. (1986). Perceptual, Cognitive, and Motoric
Aspects of Transcription Typing. Psychological Bulletin,
99(3), 303-319.
van Genuchten, Erlijn, & Cheng, Peter C. H. (2009). Missing working memory deficit in dyslexia: children writing
from memory. In N. Taatgen & H. v. Rijn (Eds.), Proc. of
the 31st Annual Conf. of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1674-1679). Austin, TX: Cog. Sci. Soc.
van Genuchten, E., & Cheng, P. C.-H. (2010). Temporal
chunk signal reflecting five hierarchical levels in writing
sentences. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proc.
of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1922-1927). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Zulfliki, P. A. M. (2013). Applying pause analysis to explore cognitive processes in the copying of sentences by
second language users. Unpublished PhD thesis, Department of Informatics, University of Sussex.

350

