Animation Facilitates Source Understanding
and Spontaneous Analogical Transfer
James R. Kubricht (kubricht@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology

Hongjing Lu (hongjing@ucla.edu)
Departments of Psychology and Statistics

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Abstract
Research on analogical problem solving has found that people often fail to spontaneously notice the relevance of a source
analog when solving a target problem, although they are able to
form mappings and derive inferences when given a hint to recall the source. To investigate the determinants of spontaneous
analogical transfer, the present study systematically compared
the effect of augmenting verbal descriptions of the source with
animations or static diagrams. Solution rates to Duncker’s radiation problem were measured across varying source presentation conditions, and participants’ understanding of the relevant source material was assessed. Supplemental animations
increased both comprehension of the source analog and spontaneous transfer to the radiation problem. Supplemental diagrams yielded lesser improvement in participants’ understanding of source material and did not increase solution rates to the
target problem. To investigate individual differences in spontaneous transfer, fluid intelligence was measured for each participant using an abridged version of the Raven’s Progressive
Matrices (RPM) test. Animated source depictions were most
beneficial in facilitating spontaneous transfer for those participants with low scores on the fluid intelligence measure.
Keywords: Analogy; animation; multimedia learning; transfer; intelligence

Introduction
The human ability to make inferences and solve problems involves comprehension of abstract principles that often apply across superficially dissimilar systems. Analogical inference–the application of knowledge about a familiar source system to a novel but structurally similar target
system–is critical in scientific discovery (Dunbar & Klahr,
2012) and many other aspects of creative human activity
(Gentner, 2010; Holyoak, 2012; Holyoak & Thagard, 1995).
The human capacity for abstract thinking, which is exemplified by analogical reasoning, exceeds that of any other species
and plays a significant role in formulating ideas that transcend
direct perception (Penn, Holyoak & Povinelli, 2008).

Spontaneous Analogical Transfer
It is generally recognized that analogical reasoning involves
several subprocesses, most notably retrieval of a related
source analog, mapping, inference, and subsequent generalization (e.g., Holyoak, Novick & Melz, 1994). A basic find-

ing is that when a source and target are drawn from different
knowledge domains and encountered in different contexts,
a potentially useful source analog often remains unnoticed.
The gap between noticing and actual use of a source analog has been explored most extensively in experiments using
Duncker’s (1945) radiation problem as the target analog. In
this problem, a doctor must find a way to use a radiation ray of
varying intensity to destroy an inoperable stomach tumor in
a patient. The essence of the problem is that high-intensity
rays will destroy healthy tissue when they pass through it
on their way to the tumor. While low-intensity rays do not
harm healthy tissue, they are also ineffective in damaging or
destroying the tumor. The convergence solution is to apply
multiple low-intensity rays to the tumor simultaneously from
multiple locations surrounding the target.
Gick and Holyoak (1980, 1983) found that in the absence
of a related source analog to draw from, about 10% of the
participants were able to generate the convergence solution to
the radiation problem. When a verbal story highly dissimilar
to the radiation problem (a story about a general using converging troops to capture a fortress) was given to participants
prior to the target problem, the rate of spontaneously generating convergence solutions increased to about 30%. After
receiving an explicit hint to recall the source analog, approximately an additional 50% of the participants gave the convergence solution, for a total solution rate of roughly 80%.
Thus, people often failed to spontaneously notice the relevance of the source in solving the target problem, though
they could successfully form mappings and derive inferences
when prompted to do so.
Spontaneous transfer can be facilitated in a number of
ways–e.g., choosing a source analog that is relatively similar to the target (Keane, 1988), or one that permits a clear,
isomorphic mapping to the target problem (Holyoak & Koh,
1987). Close comparison of multiple source analogs appears to aid in abstracting a more general schema for a class
of problems, which in turn fosters later spontaneous transfer (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gick & Holyoak, 1983;
Loewenstein, Thompson & Gentner, 2003).

1213

Visuospatial Displays and Analogical Transfer
Research on diagrammatic reasoning has shown that visuospatial representations of solution strategies for mechanical
problems can enhance people’s ability to infer the principles
of operation of physical systems (Hegarty & Stull, 2012),
suggesting the importance of display format in acquisition of
abstract knowledge. A few studies have shown that static,
visual diagrams can be used as source analogs for verbal target problems (Gick, 1985; Gick & Holyoak, 1983). While
uninterpreted diagrams generally result in low rates of spontaneous transfer, they can serve as effective analogs following
a hint to recall and apply them to a novel target problem (Gick
& Holyoak, 1980).
In contrast, there is some evidence that animated displays
can facilitate spontaneous transfer (Beveridge & Parkins,
1987; Pedone, Hummel & Holyoak, 2001). The radiation
problem is temporally dynamic, in that the key concepts involve the summation of forces over space and time. The
use of physical motion in an animated display may help the
learner to focus attention on dynamic relationships (Tversky
& Morrison, 2002), which may in turn provide additional retrieval pathways when the target problem is encountered. Day
and Goldstone (2011) found that presenting a force-based
physical system can prime dynamic mental models, which in
turn facilitates spontaneous transfer when solving problems
based on superficially dissimilar dynamic systems.
The present experiment aimed to systematically compare the effectiveness of animations and static diagrams–
combined with verbal descriptions–in facilitating spontaneous analogical transfer to the radiation problem. The animations and diagrams tested by Pedone et al. (2001) were
presented without any verbal cover story, and no measures of
participants’ understanding of the source analogs were obtained. There is evidence that the combination of animations and oral narration is especially effective in increasing
understanding of a mechanical system (Mayer, 2009; Mayer
& Anderson, 1991). Thus, animations may provide deeper
insight into the causal structure of a dynamic system than
does a verbal description alone. To assess this possibility,
the present experiment included measures designed to assess
participants’ understanding of the source analog. We hypothesized that animations would improve initial understanding
of the source and facilitate subsequent spontaneous analogical transfer.
A secondary aim of the present study was to investigate
potential individual differences that may predict success in
spontaneous transfer. There is a great deal of evidence that
measures of fluid intelligence, notably Raven’s Progressive
Matrices (Raven, 1938), predict performance on standardized analogy tests (Snow, Kyllonen & Marshalek, 1984).
However, such tests always present the source and target together (typically in A:B :: C:D format), so that the need for
spontaneous retrieval of the source is eliminated. Relatively
few studies have examined individual differences in analogical problem solving (Antonietti & Gioletta, 1995; Corkill

& Fager, 1995; Novick & Holyoak, 1991). The present experiment is the first to investigate whether fluid intelligence
scores predict spontaneous analogical transfer. By measuring individual differences, we were also able to determine
whether the impact of animation differs for people at varying levels of fluid intelligence.

Experiment
Participants
A total of 126 participants were recruited from the Department of Psychology subject pool at the University of California, Los Angeles, and were compensated with course credit.
Participants were randomly assigned into one of three conditions (Verbal, Verbal + Diagram, and Verbal + Animation),
and were naı̈ve to the purpose of the experiment.

Materials and Procedure
An initial instructions page outlined the general elements
of the source system, which was comprised of four scenarios presented in sequential order. Participants in each condition received an auditory-verbal (spoken monologue) version of each scenario. Those in the Verbal condition were
only presented with the spoken monologue, whereas subjects in the Verbal + Diagram and Verbal + Animation conditions received a supplemental diagram or animation, respectively. Figure 1 illustrates the diagrams used in the experiment. Videos of the animated scenarios, along with their
accompanying spoken monologues, are available online at
http://cvl.psych.ucla.edu/moviedemo.html.
In each of the four scenarios, one or more cannons attempt
to defeat an enemy octagon surrounded by a friendly barrier
by shooting at it with cannonballs of various sizes. The goal
of the cannon(s) in each scenario is to defeat the enemy octagon without allowing any local region of the barrier to exceed a critical level of damage. This successful scenario is
analogous to the convergence solution to Duncker’s radiation problem, in which multiple radiation sources are fired
at low intensity from multiple locations surrounding the patient’s stomach, successfully destroying the tumor without inflicting critical damage to any local region of the surrounding
healthy tissue. The relational structure of the cannonball scenario is thus isomorphic to the key relations in the potential
solution to the radiation problem.
Questions related to each scenario were presented sequentially following the presentation of all four scenarios. Participants answered two multiple-choice questions per scenario,
which assessed their understanding of the damage inflicted to
the key elements in each system (e.g., “What level of damage did the cannonballs cause to the friendly barrier in Scenario #1?”). The choices given for damage level were (1)
none, (2) minor, (3) moderate, and (4) major. Damage level
was directly stated in the spoken monologue for each scenario. After completing the multiple-choice questions, participants were asked to explain why the cannon(s) failed or
succeeded in meeting the objective in each scenario (one free-

1214

Figure 1: Scenario diagrams used in the Verbal + Diagram condition. Participants are presented with the scenarios in sequential
order, accompanied by an auditory-verbal explanation of key concepts. (A) In scenario 1, a single cannon fires at the enemy
octagon with small cannonballs and inflicts no damage to either the barrier or octagon. (B) In scenario 2, a single cannon fires
at the octagon with large cannonballs, inflicting minor damage to the octagon but critically damaging the barrier in the process.
(C) In scenario 3, multiple cannons fire at the octagon from different directions with large cannonballs, this time inflicting
major damage to the octagon, but again critically damaging the barrier. (D) In scenario 4, multiple cannons fire at the octagon
from different directions, but this time with small cannonballs. The cannonballs inflict no damage to the barrier, but are able to
defeat the octagon by converging upon their target simultaneously, inflicting a moderate amount of damage.
response question per scenario). Both multiple-choice and
free-response questions were administered using Qualtrics,
an online survey environment intended for research and experimental purposes.
Next, each subject completed an abridged, twelve-item
version of the Raven’s Progressive Matrices test (RPM;
Arthur, Tubre, Paul & Sanchez-Ku, 1999). The abridged
RPM test served as a filler task to create a delay (approximately 10-15 minutes) between presentation of the source
and target analogs. Moreover, the test provides a measure of
fluid intelligence, allowing us to assess potential individual
differences in transfer performance.
Finally, transfer rates to the radiation problem (Duncker,
1945) were measured across varying conditions of source
training. Participants were asked to solve Duncker’s radiation problem in a 2-pass fashion (cf. Gick & Holyoak,
1980). On the first pass, participants received no indication
that the previously-presented scenarios were related to the target problem. After the participant submitted his answer, the
radiation problem was presented again, but this time with an
explicit hint to recall the four previous cannon scenarios and
any solutions they might suggest.

Results
Analogical Transfer Rates
A set of criteria was adopted from previous research (Gick
& Holyoak, 1980) to determine whether participants successfully solved the radiation problem either before or after the
hint. Solutions were scored according to whether participants

conveyed at least two of the three critical ideas underlying
the convergence principle–i.e., multiple radiation sources are
needed, radiation sources should fire low-intensity rays, and
radiation sources should be positioned in different locations
surrounding the patient’s stomach tumor. Participants were
scored as having either (1) successfully solved the radiation
problem spontaneously (i.e., without the hint), (2) successfully solved the radiation problem with the hint, or (3) failed
to solve the radiation problem. Two researchers naı̈ve to the
experimental hypothesis independently scored each participant’s responses, with an agreement rate of 95% (Cohen’s κ
= .87). A third researcher broke the tie if the first two researchers disagreed with one another.
Spontaneous transfer rate corresponds to the percentage of
participants who produced the convergence solution to the radiation problem before a hint was given to recall the source
analog. This measure assesses participants’ ability to spontaneously retrieve the source analog and apply their knowledge
to a novel target problem. Total transfer rate corresponds
to the percentage of participants able to solve the radiation
problem either before or after a hint was given. Figure 2 depicts percentage of spontaneous transfer before a hint, and
total transfer percentage after a hint for each condition (42
participants per condition). The spontaneous transfer rates
were 55%, 50%, and 81% for the Verbal, Verbal + Diagram,
and Verbal + Animation conditions, respectively. The spontaneous transfer rate in the Verbal + Animation condition exceeded that obtained in the Verbal + Diagram (χ2 (1) = 8.90, p
= .003) and Verbal conditions (χ2 (1) = 6.60, p = .01), indicat-

1215

ing that animated source instruction facilitated spontaneous
analogical inference. Spontaneous transfer rate did not differ
significantly between the Verbal and Verbal + Diagram conditions (χ2 (1) < 1), suggesting that the addition of a static
pictorial display was not effective in priming the temporally
dynamic convergence principle. The total transfer rates after the hint were 83%, 69%, and 90% for the Verbal, Verbal
+ Diagram, and Verbal + Animation conditions, respectively.
Results are consistent with previous findings in that roughly
80% of people were able to solve the radiation problem following a hint to think back to a relevant source analog (Gick
& Holyoak, 1980, 1983). The total transfer rate in the Verbal
+ Animation condition exceeded that found in the Verbal +
Diagram condition (χ2 (1) = 5.97, p = .02), but did not differ
from that found in the Verbal condition (χ2 (1) < 1).

Understanding of Source Analog
To assess whether the advantage of the Verbal + Animation condition in supporting spontaneous transfer was linked
to deeper understanding of the source analog, we evaluated
participants’ responses to multiple-choice (MC) and freeresponse (FR) source understanding questions. The four FR
questions assessed participants’ understanding of why the
cannon(s) failed or succeeded in each scenario. For FR responses, three key principles were chosen for each scenario–
e.g., the cannonballs were too large, or there were not enough
cannons. Participants received one point for each correctly
conveyed principle and had one point deducted for each incorrect idea they stated. For each response, participants with
two or more points were given a score of 2, participants with
one point were given a score of 1, and participants with zero
points or less were given a score of 0. The FR responses in
each scenario were scored by two researchers. A third scorer
was employed for those responses where the first two disagreed. If two of the three scorers agreed, their score was
used. If the three scorers disagreed, the response was jointly
discussed until two researchers agreed on a score. The agreement rate for the first two scorers was 80% (Cohen’s κ = .62).
The agreement rate for the three scorers (i.e., cases where two
of the three scorers agreed) was 95%.
The eight MC questions aimed to measure participants’ understanding of how the small and large cannonballs interact
with the various elements in the system, and how their forces
sum together across scenarios. Each MC question was scored
as either correct or incorrect, according to whether the participant selected the correct amount of damage inflicted to the
specified element by the cannon(s). Participants received a
score between 0 and 8 for each of the FR and MC source
understanding measures.
FR and MC scores were correlated across participants (r
= .47, p < .001). For FR scores, participants in the Verbal
+ Animation condition scored higher than those in either the
Verbal + Diagram (t(82) = 2.12, p = .04) or Verbal conditions
(t(82) = 3.99, p < .001). Those in the Verbal + Diagram condition also scored higher than participants in the Verbal condition (t(82) = 2.35, p = .02). For MC scores, participants in

Figure 2: Percentage of convergence solutions generated before and after hint for Verbal, Verbal + Diagram, and Verbal
+ Animation conditions. Total transfer corresponds to height
of entire bar.

Figure 3: (A) Free-response and (B) multiple-choice source
understanding score for Verbal, Verbal + Diagram, and Verbal
+ Animation conditions.
the Verbal + Animation condition scored higher than those in
either the Verbal + Diagram (t(82) = 2.76, p = .007) or Verbal
conditions (t(82) = 4.02, p < .001), whereas there was no significant score difference between Verbal + Diagram and Verbal participants (t(82) < 1). The consistent superiority of the

1216

ticipants. For high-RPM participants, the spontaneous transfer rate in the Verbal + Animation condition was marginally
greater than that in the Verbal + Diagram condition (χ2 (1) =
3.64, p = .06), but did not differ from that in the Verbal condition (χ2 (1) = 1.58, p > .05). The transfer rate in the Verbal +
Diagram condition also did not differ from that in the Verbal
condition (χ2 (1) < 1). Thus, the benefit of animation in fostering spontaneous analogical transfer was greatest for those
participants scoring relatively low on our measure of fluid intelligence.

Discussion

Figure 4: Spontaneous transfer rate (percentage of convergence solutions generated before hint) for (A) low-RPM and
(B) high-RPM participants in Verbal, Verbal + Diagram, and
Verbal + Animation conditions.
animation condition in both FR and MC responses indicates
that the addition of animation led to deeper understanding of
the source analog relative to other presentation methods (see
Figure 3).

Individual Differences in Analogical Transfer
To assess whether the impact of source presentation was influenced by a measure of fluid intelligence, we performed a
median-split on participants according to their Raven’s score,
classifying them as either low (Raven’s score < 8) or high
(Raven’s score > 8) on the RPM test. Forty-five participants
were classified as low-RPM and 57 participants were classified as high-RPM. The other 24 participants had median
Raven’s scores (Raven’s score = 8); they were dropped from
the individual differences analysis as they could not be reasonably classified as either high or low.
Spontaneous transfer rates were compared across conditions for the low and high-RPM subgroups (see Figure 4).
For low-RPM participants, the spontaneous transfer rate for
the radiation problem in the Verbal + Animation condition exceeded that obtained in the Verbal + Diagram (χ2 (1) = 5.93,
p = .02) and Verbal (χ2 (1) = 4.89, p = .03) conditions. No
difference was observed in transfer performance between the
Verbal + Diagram and Verbal conditions (χ2 (1) < 1). This
pattern is consistent with the global pattern across all par-

The present study found that animated source analogs yielded
greater spontaneous transfer than either diagrammatic or
purely verbal source analogs. These findings are consistent
with those of Beveridge and Parkins (1987) and Pedone et
al. (2001). The present study went beyond prior work by
measuring the impact of varying presentation conditions on
source understanding. We found that animation leads to superior source understanding as well as greater spontaneous
analogical transfer. The benefit of animation in promoting
an abstract understanding of the source may be similar to
the benefit of comparing multiple source analogs, which appears to foster induction of a more abstract schema (Gick &
Holyoak, 1983; Novick & Holyoak, 1991). The inherently
dynamic nature of animation may be especially effective in
inducing a dynamic schema for problems involving the application of forces over time and space. It is possible that an
animated source induces internal scan patterns across a mental image of the target problem that facilitate transfer (analogous to benefits conveyed by certain patterns of over eye
movements across a diagram of the radiation problem; Grant
& Spivery, 2003; Thomas & Llereas, 2007).
In contrast to the apparent benefit of adding an animation to
a verbal source representation, supplemental static diagrams
were not effective in increasing transfer performance either
before or after their relevance was pointed out. This appears
to be inconsistent with the findings from our free-response
measure, where adding a diagram appeared to improve source
understanding. To account for this discrepancy, it should
be noted that source understanding was measured before the
RPM (filler) task. Thus, we do not know whether the initial benefit of static pictorial representations in source understanding survived the potential interference created by the
RPM questions. Also, it is possible that although static diagrams effectively demonstrate certain properties of the source
system, they do not effectively convey the dynamic convergence principle, which is crucial in solving the target problem.
Overall, supplemental animations led to deeper source understanding and greater spontaneous analogical transfer than
did supplemental static diagrams or verbal representations
alone. Analyses of individual differences in cognitive ability, as assessed by scores on an abridged Raven’s Progressive
Matrices test, indicated that animation is especially helpful

1217

for participants with relatively low RPM scores. This finding
suggests that dynamic displays may be especially useful in
teaching relational concepts and their generalization to students at lower ability levels. Providing these students with
more robust representations of a novel source analog may reduce working-memory demands, thereby fostering analogical
transfer. Future work should focus on how dynamic schemas
can be learned from animations, perhaps by extending current theories of relation learning (e.g., Lu, Chen & Holyoak,
2012) to analogical transfer.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a University Fellowship and a
Dean’s Scholar Award from the UCLA Graduate Division in
addition to a grant (BCS-135331) and Graduate Research Fellowship from the National Science Foundation.

References
Antonietti, A., & Gioletta, M. A. (1995). Individual differences in analogical problem solving. Personality and Individual Differences, 18, 611-619.
Arthur, W., Travis, C., Paul, D. S., & Sanchez-Ku, M. L.
(1999). College-sample psychometric and normative data
on a short form of the Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices test. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 17,
354-361.
Beveridge, M., & Parkins, E. (1987). Visual representation in
analogical problem solving. Memory and Cognition, 15(3),
230-237.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 1147-1156.
Day, S. B., & Goldstone, R. L. (2011). Analogical transfer
from a simulated physical system. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37, 551567.
Dunbar, K. N., & Klahr, D. (2012). Scientific thinking and
reasoning. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning. New York: Oxford University Press.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological
Monographs, 58 (Whole No. 270).
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5), 752775.
Gick, M. L. (1985). The effect of a diagram retrieval cue on
spontaneous analogical transfer. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 39(3), 460-466.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12(3), 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15(1), 1-38.
Grant, E. R., & Spivey, M. J. (2003). Eye movements and
problem solving: Guiding attention guides thought. Psychological Science, 14, 462-466.

Hegarty, M., & Stull, A. T. (2012. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G.
Morrison (Eds.), Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. In
K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), Oxford handbook
of thinking and reasoning. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer. Memory and Cognition, 15(4),
332-340.
Holyoak, K. J., Novick, L. R., & Melz, E. R. (1994). Component processes in analogical transfer: Mapping, pattern
completion, and adaptation. In K. J. Holyoak & J. A. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in connectionist and neural computation theory, Vol. 2: Analogical connections. Norwood, N.J.:
Ablex.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps: Analogy
in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keane, M. T. (1987). On retrieving analogues when solving
problems. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
39A, 29-41
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (2003). Analogical learning in negotiation teams: Comparing cases
promotes learning and transfer. Academy of Management
Learning and Education, 2, 119-127.
Lu, H., Chen, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Bayesian analogy with relational transformations. Psychological Review,
119(3), 617-648.
Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia learning. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., & Anderson, R. B. (1991). Animations need
narrations: An experimental test of a dual-coding hypothesis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 484-490.
Novick, L. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical problem solving by analogy. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 510-520.
Pedone, R., Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2001). The use
of diagrams in analogical problem solving, Memory and
Cognition, 29(2), 213-221.
Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., & Povinelli, D. J. (2008). Darwin’s mistake: Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
31, 109-130; discussion 130-178.
Raven, J. C. (1938). Progressive matrices: A perceptual test
of intelligence, individual form. London: Lewis.
Snow, R. E., Kyllonen, P. C., & Marshalek, B. (1984). In R.
J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the psychology of human
intelligence, Vol. 2. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thomas, L. E., & Lleras, A. (2007). Moving eyes and moving
thought: On the spatial compatibility between eye movements and cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 14,
663-668.
Tversky, B., & Morrison, J. B. (2002). Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.

1218

