Anticipatory and Locally Coherent Lexical Activation Varies as a Function of
Language Proficiency
Ryan E. Peters (peters@psy.fsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Florida State University
1107 W. Call Street, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA

Theres Grüter (theres@hawaii.edu)
Department of Second Language Studies, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa
1890 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Arielle Borovsky (borovsky@psy.fsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Florida State University
1107 W. Call Street, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA
Abstract
Interpreting sentences spoken in a second language can be
demanding and plagued with uncertainty, especially for lower
proficiency listeners. While native language listeners use
numerous information sources to anticipate upcoming words
accurately, the pattern of anticipation may be different for
second language users. We explore this issue in bilinguals with
varying English proficiency by recording anticipatory eyemovements as participants listened to sentences (e.g., “The
pirate chases the ship”) for which the object and three
distractors (agent-related, action-related, unrelated) appeared
in the concurrently presented images. Higher proficiency
participants were faster than lower proficiency participants.
Fixations to action-related distractors after onset of the action
also varied by proficiency, with lower proficiency participants
showing greater tendency to fixate this locally coherent actionrelated distractor. This final effect is supported by a trial level
analysis, but appears to be unrelated to the effect of proficiency
on anticipation speed.
Keywords: Individual differences, Language processing,
SLA, Eye-tracking, Visual-world paradigm, Prediction

Introduction
It has long been accepted that the integration of newly
activated lexical information plays an important role in
sentence processing, but only relatively recently has the
central role of anticipatory lexical activation become
apparent (Altmann & Kamide, 1999; DeLong, Troyer, &
Kutas, 2014; Levy, 2008). Like many cognitive processes,
the ability to anticipate varies as a function of numerous
individual differences, including vocabulary size (Borovsky,
Elman, & Fernald, 2012; Mani & Huettig, 2012), age
(Borovsky et al., 2012; Borovsky, Sweeney, Elman, &
Fernald, 2014; Wlotko, Federmeier, & Kutas, 2012) and
verbal fluency (DeLong, Groppe, Urbach, & Kutas, 2012;
Federmeier, McLennan, De Ochoa, & Kutas, 2002). These
and other related individual differences change dramatically
over the course of not only native language (L1) acquisition,
but also over the course of second language (L2) acquisition.
Indeed, there is growing evidence that patterns of anticipatory
lexical activation in sentence comprehension change as L2

proficiency develops (Chambers & Cooke, 2009; Dussias et
al., 2013; Hopp, 2013; Kaan, 2014). Here we further
investigate this issue by asking: How does L2 proficiency
influence the timing and dynamics of lexical activation
during spoken sentence comprehension?
We explore this question using the Visual World Paradigm
(VWP; Tannenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy,
1995), in which measurements of eye fixations to a scene or
set of referents, made while listening to spoken language, are
taken as an index of online processing. We use an
experimental design where participants listened to simple
sentences of the form “The pirate chases the ship” while
viewing a set of four images: the target object (SHIP), an
agent-related distractor (TREASURE), an action-related
distractor (CAT), and an unrelated distractor (BONE). The
task is to select the image that “goes with the sentence.” On
the assumption that visual attention reflects referential
processing, we take proportion of looks to each image as an
index of the amount of lexical activation of its referent. We
take an increase in looks prior to the referent being named as
an indication of anticipatory lexical activation.
Returning to the question at hand, one possibility is that
increased proficiency leads to faster and more robust
anticipatory lexical activation. This option is supported by
(child and adult) L1 findings showing that vocabulary skill
affects the timing of sentential prediction. Adults as a group
demonstrated faster anticipatory lexical activation than
children, and participants with higher vocabularies were
faster than those with lower vocabularies within their
respective age groups (Borovsky et al., 2012). Differences
between L1 and L2 users in speed of information integration
are well known (e.g., Kilborn, 1992), yet to what extent
differences in (L2) proficiency relate to speed of anticipatory
processing has not been explored in detail.
In addition to differences in speed, we also consider the
possibility that proficiency may alter the dynamics of lexical
activation for referents that are less likely given the
cumulative evidence from the unfolding sentence at a given
point, but which are locally coherent with the most recently
encountered word. In the specific setup used in our
experiment, locally coherent lexical activation takes the form

1865

of increased looks to the action-related distractor after the
onset of the verb (e.g., looks to CAT after hearing “The pirate
chases”). Looks to the action-related distractor are typically
seen in native language processing regardless of the fact that
the action-related distractor has already been disqualified as
a likely target by the agent (Borovsky et al., 2012). While this
pattern may seem less than optimal, locally coherent
processing may play the important role of facilitating
recovery in the face of uncertainty and unexpected outcomes
(McClelland & Elman, 1986). Interestingly, this type of
activation at a semantic/sentential level was found to be
absent in children with SLI (Borovsky, Burns, Elman, &
Evans, 2013), though it appears to be boosted at a
phonological level in children with SLI (McMurray,
Samuelson, Lee, Tomblin, 2010). Together, these findings
suggest that the timing and pattern lexical activation during
sentence processing may vary according to individual
differences in language proficiency and experience. Here we
explore whether the degree of activation of locally coherent
referents is similarly related to differences in proficiency in
adult bilinguals.

a 400 × 400 pixel white square background in its own
quadrant of a black screen. Across the four image/sentence
combinations each of the theme pictures corresponded
variously to each of four conditions: target, agent-related
distractor, action-related distractor, and unrelated distractor.
Thus each word and image served as its own control across
lists, balancing for differences in intrinsic saliency.
Additionally, across all versions of the study each theme
picture appeared with equal frequency in each quadrant, and
in a given version the target image appeared with equal
frequency in each quadrant.
The sentences were presented as auditory stimuli that were
recorded by a female native English speaker (A.B.) in a childdirected voice, sampled at 44,100 Hz on a single channel.
Word durations were normalized to the following values:
Art1, 134 ms; agent, 768 ms; action, 626 ms; Art2, 141 ms;
target, 630 ms. For a given version of the study, participants
saw each of the eight images twice, each with a different
associated sentence, so that any one participant heard 16 of
32 possible sentences.

Procedure

Method
Participants
Sixty-eight bilingual college students (mean age: 21.6 years,
52 women), all with a first language other than English and a
range English proficiency (from self-declared native speakers
to second language learners who acquired English later in
life) participated in return for course credit. The sample is
highly heterogeneous, including simultaneous bilinguals who
have multiple first languages, sequential bilinguals who
learned another first language before learning English, and
heritage speakers who no longer use their first language
regularly. For the purpose of this study, we simply refer to
the language other than English as the 1st Language, and
English as the L2. Participants reported normal hearing,
normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and no history of
diagnosis of mental illness or treatment for speech, language
or cognitive issues. One participant was excluded for
receiving prior speech therapy.

Stimuli
The stimuli used in this experiment were the same as in
Borovsky et al. (2012), for which eight sentence quartets
were developed by mixing two agents, two actions, and four
themes appropriate for each agent-action combination. All
sentences consisted of the standard structure: article, agent,
action, article, theme. An example quartet is:
1. The pirate hides the treasure.
2. The pirate chases the ship.
3. The dog hides the bone.
4. The dog chases the cat.
Each quartet had an associated image that consisted of
photo-realistic pictures of the four themes, each presented on

Experimental Task The stimuli were presented on a 17-inch
LCD display using a PC computer running EyeLink
Experiment Builder software (SR Research, Mississauga,
Ontario, Canada). Participants were told they would see sets
of pictures while listening to sentences, and that they should
click on the picture that “goes with the sentence.” Before the
experiment, the eye-tracker was focused and calibrated using
a manual 5-point calibration and validation with a standard
black-and-white 20-point bull’s-eye image. Before each
trial, participants were presented the same bull’s eye in the
center of the screen, with the trial starting once they had
fixated on it. The images were presented for 2000 ms before
sentence onset, and remained on the screen after sentence
offset until participants clicked on an image with the mouse.
Eye Movement Recording Eye movements were sampled at
500 Hz using an EyeLink 2000 remote eye-tracker attached
directly below the LCD display. A remote arm configuration
allowed for flexible adjustment of the camera and display so
as to allow for reliable positioning within 580-620 mm from
the participant’s (typically right) eye. Head and eyemovement were automatically tracked by the system via a
sticker affixed to each participant’s forehead.
For each trial, eye-movements were recorded from image
onset until participants clicked on a picture with the mouse.
The eye-tracking system automatically classified recorded
eye-movements into saccades, fixations and blinks using
default settings, and were then binned into 10 ms intervals for
subsequent analyses.
Offline Measurements Prior to the eye-tracking task
participants completed a language history questionnaire.
After the eye-tracking task they were administered two
offline language measures: the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test-Version 4 (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn, 2007) and the

1866

Sentence Completion subtest of the Comprehensive
Assessment of Spoken Language (CASL-SC; CarrowWoolfolk, 1999).
Assignment to Proficiency Groups Placement in a given
Proficiency Group was determined by participants’ answers
to the question: “Do you consider yourself a native speaker
of English?” Participants who answered "yes" were put in the
Higher Proficiency group (n=32), whereas participants who
said "no" were put in the Lower Proficiency group (n=35).
While this criterion for group assignment is a relatively crude
one, comparisons between the two subgroups for various
offline measures of language ability support this grouping.
The mean values for participants’ scores on the PPVT (agenormed), CASL-SC (age-normed), and five answers from the
language history questionnaire, by Proficiency Group, are
shown in Table 1. Proficiency in English and 1st language
was measured by self-ratings on a scale from 1 to 10. With
the exception of age, t(57.21) = -.74, p = .46, d = .20, there
were significant group differences for all other measures
(comparisons assume unequal variances): PPVT, t(53.75) =
4.19, p < .005, d = 1.14; CASL-SC, t(48.78) = 2.37, p < .05,
d = .68; English proficiency, t(57.97) = 3.88, p < .005, d =
1.02; English Age of Acquisition (AoA), t(62.05) = -6.16, p
< .005, d = 1.56; English experience, t(49.53) = 5.33, p <
.005, d = 1.51; 1st language proficiency, t(62.52) = -4.47, p <
.005, d = 1.13.
Overall, the results of the offline measures and
questionnaire answers support the groupings, painting a
picture in which participants in the Lower Proficiency group
are significantly different from the self-declared native
speakers in the Higher Proficiency group. Using these
groupings we are able to plot the time course of proportions
of fixations to the target and distractors across trials and
highlight group level differences, which we then explore
further using a continuous measure of proficiency.

Results
Behavioral Accuracy
The accuracy with which participants selected the correct
target picture in the experimental task was checked in order
to make certain that they understood the sentences and the
task. Accuracy was high, with only 8 incorrect responses
(99.3% correct).

Eye-movement Analyses
Time Course by Proficiency Group: To explore
anticipatory and locally coherent eye-movements during the
incremental processing of the sentences, the timecourse of
fixations was visualized by first calculating the mean
proportion of time spent fixating the four target areas in each
image (the target, agent-related, action-related, and unrelated
pictures).
These means were then averaged across
participants in each of two Proficiency Groups and plotted
against time from sentence onset in Figure 1.
Higher Proficiency (n = 32)

Lower Proficiency (n = 35)

Table 1: Mean values of offline measures and questionnaire
answers by Proficiency Group
Proficiency Group

Higher Prof.
Lower Prof.
n = 32
n = 35
PPVT
100.90
90.17 **
age-normed
(11.81)
(8.47)
CASL-SC
96.17
89.15 *
age-normed
(13.43)
(9.25)
Eng. Prof.
9.42
8.51 **
self-rating
(0.72)
(1.15)
AoA (yrs)
2.47
7.43 **
(2.77)
(3.75)
Age (yrs)
21.35
21.74
(1.58)
(2.59)
Eng. Exp. (yrs)
19.42
13.03 **
(2.98)
(6.35)
1st Lang. Prof.
6.91
8.50 **
self-rating
(1.51)
(1.38)
Note. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.
* p < .05. ** p < .005.

Time in ms from sentence onset
Figure 1: Timecourse of fixations to each area of interest, in
10-ms time bins (with SE bars).

1867

In these time course plots, there are two very apparent
visual patterns. First, there is a rapid rise in fixations to the
target that continues to the end of the trial. This rise appears
to begin near the border between the agent and action time
windows for both groups, and is initially accompanied by an
equal increase in fixations to the agent-related distractor.
Second, there is a momentary increase in fixations to the
action-related distractor. This begins near the end of the
action time window and subsides in the theme time window.
We then carried out analyses that address two main issues,
(1) does the timing of anticipatory fixations vary between
high and low proficiency groups and (2) do patterns of
fixations to the locally coherent referent vary as a function of
proficiency?
Analysis of Anticipatory Fixations There are two places in
the sentences where anticipatory lexical activation seems to
occur: (1) anticipation of the theme and agent-related
distractor after onset of the agent, which takes the form of a
divergence in the timecourse between both agent-related
(theme and agent-related) and both non-agent-related (actionrelated and unrelated) target areas (white arrows in Fig. 1).,
and (2) anticipation of the theme after onset of the action,
which takes the form of a divergence in the timecourse
between the theme and the agent-related target areas (grey
arrows in Fig.1). Following the methodology of Borovsky et
al. (2012), significant divergence is determined as the time
point at which the relevant comparisons, conducted using
point-by-point one-tailed t tests, are significant for a
minimum of five subsequent and consecutive 10-ms bins.
This minimizes the likelihood of spurious results that might
arise from a single pointwise comparison.1
For (1), comparisons were made between measures in
which both agent-related and both unrelated target areas are
collapsed, thus allowing for a single comparison to be made.
Significant divergence occurs at 540 ms, t(62) = 2.09, p < .05,
d = .53, for the Higher Proficiency group and at two points
for the Lower Proficiency group, first ranging from 600 ms,
t(68) = 2.22, p < .05, d = .54 to 720 ms, t(68) = 2.28, p < .05,
d = .55, and again at 860 ms, t(68) = 2.12, p < .05, d = .57.
For (2), significant divergence occurs at two points for the
Higher Proficiency group, first ranging from 1080 ms, t(30)
= 2.2, p < .05, d = .79 to 1230 ms, t(30) = 2.23, p < .05, d =
.8, and again at 1260 ms2, t(30) = 2.21, p < .05, d = .79, while
for the Lower Proficiency group it occurs at 1290 ms, t(33) =
2.14, p < .05, d = .73. Although these descriptive statistics are
suggestive of timing differences between the groups, our
inferential statistics are not robust enough to allow for
stronger claims.
Analysis of Locally Coherent Fixations Consistent with
prior work in native English speakers, we see locally coherent
lexical activation for Higher and Lower proficiency groups
1 In the cases in which significant divergence as defined here
happens twice, only the second is marked by an arrow in Figure 1.
2 This later time is more in line with what is seen in monolingual
adult native speakers (Borovsky et al., 2012).

following the onset of the action.
This pattern is
characterized by increased looks to the action-related target
area relative to the unrelated target area. Although this
technically can also be considered anticipatory processing, it
differs from the other instances of anticipatory processing in
that it is not cumulative, ignoring what came earlier in the
sentence, and resulting solely from information encoded in
the action.
The increase in looks to the action-related target area is
clearly visible in the timecourse plots for both Proficiency
Groups, but is noticeably larger for the Lower Proficiency
group than the Higher Proficiency group. In order to compare
groups, we calculated the log-gaze probability ratio of
percentages of looks to the action-related vs unrelated
distractors in the time window going from action onset to
theme onset following the methodology of Borovsky et al.
(2014), so that:
Log– gaze = log (

𝑃(𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑘𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛–𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑)
𝑃(𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑘𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑢𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑)

)

(1)3

With the log-gaze measure, as with normal proportions, a
score of zero indicates no bias, whereas a positive score
indicates a bias to look at the action-related distractor. The
mean log-gaze ratio for the Higher Proficiency participants
was .08 (SD = .95), and for the Lower Proficiency
participants was .65 (SD = .55). Based on a comparison
assuming unequal variances the groups were significantly
different, t(48.85) = -2.95, p < .005, d = .84.
Exploring the Individual Measures that Contribute to
Proficiency Effects The grouping factor of self-determined
English native-speaker status could conceivably be driven by
any of the measures presented in Table 1, so it would be
useful to understand which factors are most important. Is it
overall years of experience? AoA? Vocabulary skill? Some
combination? Knowing the answer to this question would
give us theoretical insight into what drives the differences in
locally coherent processing. To answer these questions, we
next carried out stepwise multiple regressions to determine
which of the measures presented in Table 1 predict the loggaze probability ratio for any given individual participant.
Forward selection and backwards deletion methods (both
using a minimum Bayesian Information Criterion stopping
rule) converged on a simple regression model containing only
the age-normed PPVT score (grand mean centered). To the
simple model we added subjects as a random effect, r, and
ran the following mixed model:
Log-gazei = β0 + β1 * PPVTi + ri

(2)

This resulted in β0 = 0.411, t(63) = 4.46, p < .001, β1 = .022, t(63) = -2.70, p = .009, with Pearson’s r = .32. Thus,
3 Log ratios are undefined for 0, so every 0 in either the numerator
or denominator was replaced with 0.01.

1868

out of the measures presented in Table 1, it seems that
vocabulary, as measured by the PPVT, plays the most
important role in driving the individual differences in the
probability of fixations to the locally coherent referent.

Log-gazeti = β00 + β01* PPVTi + β10* 1st Sacti + r0i+ eti (4)

Exploring Proficiency Effects at the Trial Level The
subject level findings suggest that delayed anticipation in
lower proficiency participants has cascading effects on
subsequent lexical activation, which are revealed by the
proficiency related differences in mean probability of
fixations to the locally coherent referent. In other words,
slower anticipation of the theme in lower proficiency
participants appears to result in greater locally coherent
lexical activation. If these findings are connected, one might
expect trial level relationships between fixations towards the
action-related distractor and the timing of anticipatory eyemovements to the target item. We explore this potential
connection using Hierarchical Linear Modeling (HLM; Bryk
& Raudenbush, 1992).
First, it is important to note that, as with the subject level
log-gaze ratios, every 0 value for proportion of looks in the
time window going from action onset to theme onset in either
the numerator or denominator was replaced with 0.01 when
calculating the trial level log-gaze ratios. However, unlike
with the subject level values where mean proportions across
trials were rarely equal to 0, a large number of 0’s needed to
be replaced when calculating the trial level values. As a
result, this process added far more noise to the data in
comparison to the subject level ratios and resulted in an
across the board reduction in values. The mean log-gaze ratio
calculated across all trials using the updated values was .03
(SD = 1.05) for Higher Proficiency participants and .24 (SD
= 1.05) for Lower Proficiency participants. Given the large
difference between the original mean values and those
calculated after replacing the 0s, we first ran a trial level
version of equation (2) with a new trial level random effect,
e, as a check on the viability of the trial level log-gaze
probability ratio.
Log-gazeti = β00 + β01* PPVTi + r0i+ eti

(3)

This resulted in β00 = 0.145, t(63) = 4.09, p < .001, and β01
= -.009, t(63) = -3.298, p = .002. Although the coefficients
are smaller than in equation (2), the direction and size of the
PPVT effect is nearly equivalent. Thus, even with the added
noise, it appears that trial level log-gaze values appear to act
in a similar manner as the subject level values.
In order to explore the hypothesis that anticipation speed
and log-gaze probability ratio are related, the next step was
to add the trial level time of the launch of the first saccade (1st
Sac) that landed on and resulted in a fixation of the target in
the anticipatory time window going from action onset to
theme onset to equation (3). Z scores were used to
standardize PPVT and first saccade time effect scales to allow
for comparison of the coefficients.

This resulted in β00 = 0.122, t(63) = 2.291, p = .025, β01 = .152, t(63) = -2.907, p = .005, and β10 = -.200, t(63) = -3.705,
p < .001.4 Interestingly, while there is indeed a significant
effect of 1st saccade time on the log-gaze probability ratio, it
is in the opposite direction of what was expected based on the
subject level proficiency related results. Instead, the effect
seems to indicate that in trials where participants were slower
to view the target item they were also less likely to view the
action related distractor. While this result does not
necessarily rule out a relationship between the two
proficiency related results, it does indicate that at the trial
level this specific measure of target anticipation is connected
to fixations to the action-related distractor via an effect that
is unrelated to the subject level proficiency effects.

Discussion
In this study we set out to address the question: How does L2
proficiency influence the timing and dynamics of lexical
activation during spoken sentence comprehension?
The first prediction was that more proficient participants
would show patterns of fixations indexing anticipatory
lexical activation occurring sooner and to a greater degree
than participants with lower proficiency. Although our
inferential statistics are not strong enough to allow more
robust claims, the descriptive results of the analysis of
anticipatory fixations largely support this prediction, with the
points of significant divergence between the relevant targets
occurring sooner for more proficient participants.
An additional prediction was that proficiency may alter the
dynamics of lexical activation for less-likely, locally coherent
options across the sentence. Again, the results of the analysis
of locally coherent fixations largely support this prediction,
with the lower proficiency group showing a significantly
greater bias to look at the action-related distractor. In other
words, participants with lower proficiency, who may
experience considerable uncertainty in everyday language
interpretation, appear to adaptively activate less-likely
locally coherent referents.
The effect of proficiency on locally coherent lexical
activation holds not only at the subject level, but also at the
trial level. However, the picture is complicated by a trial
level effect of anticipation speed in which later anticipation
of the target actually results in less activation of the locally
coherent referent. While this effect indicates that there is
indeed a relationship between speed of anticipation and the
later dynamics of lexical activation, it is in the opposite
direction of what would be expected based on the subject
level proficiency results, namely that slower anticipation of
the theme would result in greater locally coherent lexical
activation.

4 A subject level random effect for 1 st Saccade was not included
based on the result of a deviance test

1869

Overall, the results seem to weigh in favor of the
interpretation that two separate effects of proficiency on
lexical activation are at play in the comprehension of simple
sentences of the kind used in this experiment, with a separate
relationship between anticipation speed and the degree of
locally coherent lexical activation also playing an important
role.

Acknowledgments
Financial support was provided by the National Institutes of
Health: F32 DC010106, R03 DC013638 to A.B. There are
no nonfinancial relationships to disclose.

References
Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73(3), 247-264.
Borovsky, A., & Creel, S. C. (2014). Children and adults
integrate talker and verb information in online
processing. Developmental Psychology, 50(5), 1600.
Borovsky, A., Elman, J. L., & Fernald, A. (2012). Knowing
a lot for one’s age: Vocabulary skill and not age is
associated with anticipatory incremental sentence
interpretation in children and adults. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 112(4), 417-436.
Borovsky, A., Sweeney, K., Elman, J. L., & Fernald, A.
(2014). Real-time interpretation of novel events across
childhood. Journal of Memory and Language, 73(112), 114.
Bryk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). Hierarchical
linear models. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Carrow-Woolfolk, E. (1999). Comprehensive assessment of
spoken language. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance
Service.
Chambers, C. G., & Cooke, H. (2009). Lexical competition
during second-language listening: sentence context, but not
proficiency, constrains interference from the native
lexicon. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 35(4), 1029-1040.
DeLong, K. A., Groppe, D. M., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M.
(2012). Thinking ahead or not? Natural aging and
anticipation during reading. Brain and Language, 121(3),
226-239.
DeLong, K. A., Troyer, M., & Kutas, M. (2014). Pre‐
processing in sentence comprehension: Sensitivity to likely
upcoming meaning and structure. Language and
Linguistics Compass, 8(12), 631-645.
Dunn, D. M., & Dunn, L. M. (2007). Peabody picture
vocabulary test. Minneapolis, MN: NCS Pearson.
Dussias, P. E., Valdés Kroff, J. R., Guzzardo Tamargo, R. E.,
& Gerfen, C. (2013). When gender and looking go hand in
hand. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 35(02),
353-387.
Federmeier, K. D., McLennan, D. B., Ochoa, E., & Kutas, M.
(2002). The impact of semantic memory organization and
sentence context information on spoken language

processing by younger and older adults: An ERP study.
Psychophysiology, 39(2), 133-146.
Hopp, H. (2010). Ultimate attainment in L2 inflection:
Performance similarities between non-native and native
speakers. Lingua, 120(4), 901-931.
Hopp, H. (2013). Grammatical gender in adult L2
acquisition: Relations between lexical and syntactic
variability. Second Language Research, 29(1), 33-56.
Kaan, E. (2014). Predictive sentence processing in L2 and
L1: What is different? Linguistic Approaches to
Bilingualism, 4(2), 257-282.
Kilborn, K., 1992. On-line integration of grammatical
information in a second language. In Harris, R. (Ed.),
Cognitive Processing in Bilinguals (pp. 337–350).
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Leonard, L. B. (2014). Children with specific language
impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Levy,
R.
(2008).
Expectation-based
syntactic
comprehension. Cognition, 106 (3), 1126-1177.
Mani, N., & Huettig, F. (2012). Prediction during language
processing is a piece of cake—But only for skilled
producers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 38(4), 843-847.
McClelland, J. L., & Elman, J. L. (1986). The TRACE model
of speech perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18(1), 1-86.
McDonald, J. L. (2006). Beyond the critical period:
Processing-based explanations for poor grammaticality
judgment performance by late second language
learners. Journal of Memory and Language, 55(3), 381401.
McMurray, B., Samelson, V. M., Lee, S. H., & Tomblin, J.
B. (2010). Individual differences in online spoken word
recognition:
Implications
for
SLI.
Cognitive
Psychology, 60(1), 1-39.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K. M.,
& Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information
in
spoken
language
comprehension. Science, 268(5217), 1632-1634.
Wlotko, E. W., Federmeier, K. D., & Kutas, M. (2012). To
predict or not to predict: Age-related differences in the use
of sentential context. Psychology and Aging, 27(4), 975.

1870

