Applying Pattern-based Classification to Sequences of Gestures
Suzanne Aussems (s.aussems@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
University Road, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom

Mingyuan Chu (mingyuan.chu@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
PO Box 310, 6500 SH Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Sotaro Kita (s.kita@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
University Road, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom

Menno van Zaanen (mvzaanen@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, the Netherlands
Abstract

though the frequency of gestures might be the same among
people with different levels of empathy, these people may order different types of gestures, most notably interactive gestures (i.e., conduit and palm-revealing gestures) in different
ways. That is, in some situations more information might be
hidden in frequencies of gesture sequences than in frequencies of single gestures.
Previous studies on cross-linguistic differences in speechaccompanying gestures (see Kita (2009) for a review) suggested that looking at gesture sequences may be fruitful.
For instance, in verb-framed languages such as Turkish and
Japanese, path information is expressed in one clause and
manner information in another clause, in contrast to English,
in which manner and path are expressed in a single clause.
The verb “rolling down” is expressed in one clause in English, but it takes two clauses (e.g., “rolling/spinning” and
“descending/downwards path”) to express this verb in Turkish and Japanese. Research has shown that such linguistic
structures influence the ways in which gestural communication is structured (Özyürek & Kita, 1999; Kita & Özyürek,
2003). Whereas Turkish and Japanese speakers tend to use
one gesture to depict the rolling movement, and one gesture
to depict its downward path, English speakers tend to depict
manner and path in a single gesture. These studies suggest
that in some languages, multi-gesture sequences depict one
event, and accordingly, that the order in which people produce gestures alongside their speech may follow particular
patterns.
There may be other sequential regularities present in
speech-accompanying gestures. For example, different types
of gestures represent different types of information in narrative, and these gestures may be ordered in a systematic
way. Representational gestures often accompany speech with
“narrative-level” information, which is about events and situations in the story (e.g, “A cat is looking at a canary bird in
a cage.”). Beat gestures often accompany speech with “metanarrative-level” information (McNeill, 1992) which refers to

The pattern-based sequence classification system (PBSC)
identifies regularly occurring patterns in collections of sequences and uses these patterns to predict meta-information.
This automated system has been proven useful in identifying
patterns in written language and musical notations. To illustrate the wide applicability of this approach, we classify symbolic representations of speech-accompanying gestures produced by adults in order to predict their level of empathy. Previous research that focused on isolated gestures has shown
that the frequency and salience with which individuals produce certain speech-accompanying gestures are related to empathy. The current research extends these analyses of single gestures by investigating the relationship between the frequency of multi-gesture sequences of speech-accompanying
gestures and empathy. The results show that patterns found in
multi-gesture sequences prove to be more useful for predicting empathy levels in adults than patterns found in single gestures. This paper thus demonstrates that sequences of gestures
contain additional information compared to gestures in isolation, suggesting that empathic people structure their gestural
sequences differently than less empathic people. More importantly, this study introduces PBSC as an innovative, effective
method to incorporate time as an extra dimension in gestural
communication, which can be extended to a wide range of sequential modalities.
Keywords: Grammatical inference; speech-accompanying
gestures; empathy; pattern-based sequence classification.

Introduction
People naturally accompany their speech with gestures. Several studies have reported results indicating that gesture type,
frequency, and salience are related to personality traits, cognitive abilities, and empathy levels (Hostetter & Alibali, 2006;
Chu & Kita, 2011; Hostetter & Potthoff, 2012; Chu, Meyer,
Foulkes, & Kita, 2014). For example, Chu et al. (2014) found
that empathy (i.e., how much people think about other people’s thoughts and feelings) predicts the frequency of gestures with an interactive function, that is, conduit and palmrevealing gestures. Whereas previous studies mainly looked
at the frequency of isolated gestures, the current research
aims to extend these analyses to sequences of gestures. Even

124

Pattern-Based Sequence Classification

the structure of the story (e.g., “The cat tries to catch the canary bird in different ways, but he never succeeds.”). Interactive gestures (Bavelas, Chovil, Lawrie, & Wade, 1992) often
accompany speech with “para-narrative-level” information,
which refers to the interactive exchange between the speaker
and the listener (e.g., “Do you know one of these American
cartoons?”). These types of information may be ordered in
a particular way in narrative; for example, a cluster of metanarrative utterances may be followed by a long sequence of
narrative utterances. This would in turn lead to systematic
patterns in sequences of gestures. Manually annotating such
regularities in gestural communication is very time consuming and inefficient, which is why it is important to investigate
if such regularities can be identified automatically.

Pattern-based sequence classification (henceforth PBSC) is
an approach that aims to identify patterns in longer sequences
of symbols. The patterns describe regularities found in sequences that come from the same class. Given a sequence,
PBSC uses the identified patterns to assign the sequence to
the class it belongs to. This approach stems from the field of
grammatical inference, which addresses the task of building
a compact representation of a class given a subset of sample
sequences from that class (van Zaanen & Gaustad, 2010). In
contrast to other grammatical inference systems, PBSC aims
to learn a representation that describes the boundaries between multiple classes (corresponding to the number of empathy levels in the current study), allowing for the classification of sequences into their corresponding class. This is done
by extracting patterns in the shape of sub-sequences, i.e., consecutive symbols, from the sequences in the training dataset.
For practical purposes, patterns have a predetermined, fixed
length (although combinations of different pattern lengths are
possible as well) which coincides with the notion of n-grams,
where n defines the length of the pattern (Heaps, 1978). The
system only retains and uses patterns that are deemed useful according to some “usefulness” measure or scoring metric. A sequence can then be classified into a class based on
which patterns are found in the sequence and the scores of the
matching patterns.

In this paper we propose a pattern-based classification approach to extend the analyses of single gestures to multigesture sequences. In order to demonstrate the applicability
of the system, we use empathy scores as meta-information to
classify the gesture sequences. Empathy may be related to
the ways in which people structure information during conversation (people with high empathy levels may order information in ways that are more helpful to the listener than
people with low empathy levels), which may result into particular sequences of gestures. To our knowledge, this is the
first study that uses a pattern-based learning system to identify regularly produced sequences of speech-accompanying
gestures and relates these to empathy. We hypothesize that
multi-gesture patterns predict empathy levels in adults better
than information extracted from isolated gestures.

System Walk-Through
PBSC, like other supervised classification systems, involves
a training and a testing phase. During training, the system
receives a collection of sequences that are labeled with its
underlying class. First, from these sequences, all possible ngram patterns (n consecutive symbols) are extracted and for
each pattern the scoring metric is calculated indicating how
well the pattern fits each of the possible classes. This results
in a set of patterns with a score for each class. These patterns
can be seen as vectors in a multi-dimensional space with one
dimension per class. Summing pattern vectors for each occurrence in a sequence results in a vector that describes the
sequence in the vector space. Second, based on the patterns,
all training sequences are inserted in the vector space (and
their correct class is known).
During testing, the system needs to assign a class to a new,
unseen sequence. First, the system builds a vector for the
sequence using the patterns. Next, it identifies the vector (of
the training sequences) that has the lowest cosine distance to
the vector of the test sequence. The class belonging to the
training vector is returned. This corresponds to a k-nearest
neighbor approach (Cover & Hart, 1967) with k = 1.

Our classification approach is based on an existing patternbased learning system (van Zaanen & Gaustad, 2010). This
system has proven to be useful in identifying patterns in several sequential modalities, including semantics in written language (van Zaanen & van de Loo, 2012) and musical notations (van Zaanen, Gaustad, & Feijen, 2011). Our main aim
is to demonstrate the wide applicability of the PBSC system.
In this paper, we show the effectiveness of the system in the
context of gestural communication.
The methodology we use is similar to that of Schmid,
Siebers, Seuß, Kunz, and Lautenbacher (2012), who use a
pattern-based sequence classifier to predict pain levels with
patterns in action units that describe facial expressions. Their
approach requires manual tuning of the learned patterns and
can only make a distinction between two classes (pain or no
pain). In contrast, our system can be applied without manual intervention and can make distinctions between any preselected number of classes, which correspond to different levels of empathy in the current study. Classifying into only
two classes (high and low empathy) may be insufficient, because it leads to greater variability in people’s empathy levels
within a class. Our system’s ability to increase the number of
classes results in more specific information about the empathy level of a person, which utilizes the uniqueness in gesture
sequences that people produce. We proceed by describing our
system in more detail in the next section.

Scoring Metric
During training, the system aims to identify patterns that are
maximally discriminative between classes. Patterns that occur frequently in a class are assigned a high score for that
class compared to patterns occurring less frequently in that
class, because frequent patterns describe sequences from that

125

Data

class better than less frequent patterns. Additionally, patterns that occur only in sequences in a particular class are
more discriminative compared to sequences occurring in all
classes. The combination of these properties are described
in a well-known scoring metric taken from the field of information retrieval: tf*idf (Sparck Jones, 1972). This measure,
which is extended to handle patterns (van Zaanen & Gaustad, 2010), consists of two components: term frequency (tf )
which measures the relative frequency of the pattern and inverse document frequency (idf ) which measures the discriminative power of the pattern over all classes. The tf is defined
as the relative frequency of the pattern with respect to the total number of patterns found in the sequences belonging to
that class. The idf is the logarithm of the total number of
classes divided by the number of classes containing the pattern. Thus, tf*idf provides a score describing the discriminative power of the pattern with respect to each class.
tf i, j =

idf i = log

We used the dataset developed by Chu et al. (2014), which
represents a sample of 122 English native speakers (71 female, 51 male) with a mean age of 19.41 years (SD = 4.85).
This dataset contains a total of 11,032 annotated speechaccompanying gestures elicited by description tasks (for more
information see Chu et al. (2014). In addition, participants
were tested on several cognitive abilities and their level of
empathy. Here, we focus on the relationship between the gestures participants produced alongside their speech and their
level of empathy.

Empathy Quotient
In the study by Chu et al. (2014), the Empathy Quotient questionnaire (Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright, 2004) was used to
measure the empathy levels of adult participants. This instrument comprises 40 questions related to empathy (e.g., “In
a conversation, I tend to focus on my own thoughts than on
what my listener might be thinking”) and 20 filler questions
unrelated to empathy (“I prefer animals to humans”). Participants were instructed to rate how strongly they agreed or
disagreed with each statement (agree strongly, agree slightly,
disagree slightly, or disagree strongly). On each item of the
task, participants scored 2 points if the response reflected
empathy strongly, 1 point if the response showed empathy
slightly, or 0 points if the response did not show empathy at
all. A total score was computed to indicate the level of empathy of each participant, with a maximum score of 80.

ni, j
∑k nk, j

|C|
|{c ∈ C : ti ∈ c}|

tf*idf i, j = tf i, j × idf i
Here, ni, j describes the number of occurrences of pattern ti
in class c j and C denotes the set of classes under consideration.
Note that a pattern that occurs frequently in a particular
class has a higher tf score compared to the classes in which
the pattern occurs less frequently. However, the tf score of
a pattern is weighted by the idf component. Patterns occurring in all classes will have a zero idf value, in contrast to
patterns occurring in fewer classes, which will have higher
idf values. Patterns that have a tf*idf score of zero for all
classes (because they occur in all classes) are not retained, as
they are useless for classification purposes. Note that when
no matching patterns are found, the system falls back on a
majority class baseline. This baseline measurement leads the
system to classify a sequence into the class that occurs most
frequently in the training data.
The length of the patterns has impact on the tf*idf scores as
well as their practical usefulness in classification. In general,
short patterns occur more frequently in both training and testing data. On the one hand, during training, very short patterns
are likely to occur in all classes, leading to zero scores. On
the other hand, it is more likely to find a short pattern (with
non-zero tf*idf score) in the test data compared to a very long
pattern (corresponding to a very specific sequence of symbols). This means that (depending on the amount of training
data available), there is a sweet spot in which a specific pattern length performs best. Previous research has shown that
the best results are often found with pattern lengths of three
or four symbols (van Zaanen & Gaustad, 2010; van Zaanen
et al., 2011).

Data Representation
In the dataset, each gesture was annotated with information
about its semantics, salience, and handedness. For the input of our PBSC system, we extracted this information and
converted it into three distinct datasets of symbolic gesture
sequences. First, the semantics of the gestures was denoted
by seven unique symbols that provided information about the
different types of gestures, such as representational gestures,
beat gestures, and palm-revealing gestures, unclear representational gestures, representational gestures specifically used
for indexing the listener, unclear gestures in general, and gestures that did not belong to the mentioned categories. Second, the level of salience of the gestures was denoted by four
symbols indicating the part of the arm that was used to produce the gesture (finger, forearm, hand, or whole arm). Third,
handedness was represented by three symbols that included
information about whether speakers gestured with their right
or left hand, or with both hands. In addition to the denotations
of the latter two gesture representations, we also incorporated
information (five unique symbols) about gestures that were
produced with the arm only, feet, legs, torso, and head.

Classification Tasks
The PBSC system assigns participants to an empathy level
class based on pattern occurrences in the (sequences of) gestures they produce. Having a partition of two classes corresponds to classifying into high or low empathy classes,

126

whereas three classes corresponds to low, mid, or high empathy classes. To define empathy-level classes, we first divided the range of empathy scores from all participants by
the number of classes to obtain the size of sub-range of empathy scores for each class, and then classified participants
into the different empathy-level classes. For example, when
the class size was two, participants who scored anywhere between the minimum and the minimum + (maximum – minimum) / 2 were classified into the low-empathy level class,
and the rest, into the high-empathy level class. The gesture
sequences produced by participants with empathy scores belonging to the same class were considered example sequences
from that class. We varied the number of classes in the partition from two to six, which resulted in five classification
tasks. During testing, gesture sequences produced per participant were classified and the performance of the system
was measured by classification accuracy (percentage of participants classified in the correct empathy level class based
on their gesture sequences). Note that it is expected that the
overall system performance will decrease as the number of
classes increases, because increasing the number of classes
has an impact on the number of class boundaries that PBSC
should learn, which makes the classification task harder. At
the same time, relatively less training data is available per
class when the number of classes is increased (as the participants are divided over the classes available). In contrast, the
idf factor in the scoring metric performs better with a high
number of classes (with two classes, only one non-zero idf
value is available, with six classes, five distinct idf values are
available).

performance was not affected by the symbolic representation
of the gestures.
In Figure 1, horizontal lines represent the classification
accuracy when the system used information extracted from
single gestures (n = 1). The other lines illustrate the classification accuracy when the system used gesture sequences
(n = 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6). As can be seen, increasing the number
of classes to classify into (illustrated in the different panels)
leads to lower accuracy scores overall, which is an artifact of
the system.
The ANOVA revealed a significant interaction effect between pattern length and classification task on classification
accuracy, F(20) = 7.901, p < .001. Tukey’s HSD comparisons indicated that when the system classified participants
into two or three classes of empathy, varying pattern lengths
did not affect classification accuracy significantly. This is due
to the fact that the idf has limited impact in these situations.
In fact, when classifying into two classes, the system often
falls back on the majority class baseline. When participants
were assigned to four classes, the PBSC system that used sequences of three or more gestures to predict adults’ empathy
levels outperformed the PBSC system that used single gestures (p < .001). Additionally, the classification accuracy of
the system was significantly higher when using sequences of
three or more gestures than when extracting information from
sequences of two gestures (p = .009 for n=3, p < .001 for
all other pattern lengths). This indicates that long patterns
lead to higher classification accuracy than short patterns. Pattern lengths had an effect when participants were classified
into five classes: the system that used sequences of two or
more gestures to predict empathy outperformed the system
that used single gestures (p < .001). It is not surprising that
a significant pattern length effect was found for these classification tasks. With a high number of classes to classify into,
the idf weight is more useful (for all pattern lengths), allowing for a more fine-grained weighing of the corresponding tf
score. Increasing the number of classes even more, leads to
a decrease in amount of training (and testing) data per class,
which is why we found no interaction effect when participants were classified into six classes of empathy. When the
number of classes is higher than five, the amount of training
data per class becomes too small to accurately find patterns
in sequences of gestures. With the amount of data available
from the dataset developed by Chu et al. (2014), the sweet
spot seems to lie around four or five empathy-level classes
and sequences of three or more gestures. When more data
is available, we expect that a higher number of classes and
longer pattern lengths lead to even better classification results.

Comparison of Results
In order to show that sequences of gestures provide more information about empathy levels than single gestures, we need
to compare the performance of the PBSC system using longer
patterns (n = 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6) with the performance of the
PBSC system using single gestures (n = 1). Thus, our analysis includes six pattern lengths.
The accuracy of the system was measured through 10-fold
cross-validation. This procedure involves randomly breaking
up the dataset into ten folds of equal size and subsequently
training the system based on nine of these folds to test on the
tenth (unseen) fold. This process is then repeated until all ten
folds have been tested once and a mean accuracy is computed
for the system’s performance.

Results
The accuracy of classification by the PBSC (0–100%) was
entered in a 3 (gesture representation) x 5 (classification
task) x 6 (pattern length) ANOVA. The results revealed no
main effect of gesture representation on system performance,
F(2) = 0.251, p = .778. Moreover, gesture representation did
not significantly interact with the other two variables in the
design. Thus, it did not matter if a gesture was described
based on its semantics, salience, or handedness; the system

Conclusion & Future Work
PBSC is a pattern-based classification approach, which has
proven to be useful in predicting meta-information in a range
of sequential modalities (e.g., written language, musical notations). To contribute to the wide applicability of the PBSC,

127

Symbol types
2

Semantics

3

Salience

Handedness

4

5

6

Classification accuracy

80

60

40

20
2

3

4

5

6

2

3

4

5

6

2

3

4

5

6

2

3

4

5

6

2

3

4

5

6

Pattern length

Figure 1: Accuracy of classifying participants into empathy-level classes based on their gesture sequences (y-axis), using 10fold cross-validation. The analyses were split based on the different gesture representations (symbol types), pattern length
(x-axis), and classification tasks (different panels). Horizontal lines represent classification accuracy with single gestures.
sults indicated that they are related to each other in time. The
PBSC identified this information and successfully used it to
predict empathy levels in adults.
Previous research has shown that gestures are shaped in
part by speakers’ desire to communicate information clearly
to their listeners (Hostetter, Alibali, & Schrager, 2011). Empathy levels may be related to the ways in which people structure information in conversation. Speech-accompanying gestures are related to information threads in the flow of the conversation. Speakers with a high empathy level may think
more about how well the listener can follow the conversation and structure the order of information, accordingly. This
may lead to specific patterns gesture sequences because different types of gestures are associated with different types
of utterances (e.g., representational gestures with narrative
utterances and beat gestures with meta-narrative utterances
(McNeill, 1992)). Our results suggest that empathic people
structure their gestural communication at the discourse level
in ways that are different from less empathic people.
Several directions for future work may be considered.
First, an in-depth, qualitative analysis of the patterns may be
carried out to investigate, for instance, whether differences
are caused by clustering of certain types of gestures at various points in narrative and/or systematicities in the use of interactive gestures alongside speech. The most discriminative

we demonstrate that the approach can also be successfully
used in the context of gestural communication. As a practical example, we examined the relationship between patterns
in sequences of speech-accompanying gestures produced by
adults and their level of empathy.
We found that patterns describing sequences of gestures
provide more discriminative power compared to patterns describing single gestures when predicting empathy levels of
gesturing participants. That is, the relative frequency of
multi-gesture patterns predicted participants’ empathy scores
better than the relative frequencies of gestures in isolation.
This was the case for all three symbolic gesture representations: semantics, salience, and handedness. We found evidence for this when comparing symbol patterns consisting of
one symbol with longer patterns. The differences lie within
the tasks in which participants were classified into four or
five empathy classes, because these classification tasks provided the system with enough training data in each class to
allow for optimal discriminative power of the idf component
of our scoring metric. This, in turn, led to more pronounced
differences between the patterns. When classifying into four
classes, we found additional evidence that long patterns contain more information than short patterns, as patterns of two
symbols were outperformed by longer patterns. We conclude
that gestures are not produced in isolation; in fact, our re-

128

patterns between the classes could provide insight into which
gesture sequences are typical for a particular empathy level.
Second, PBSC allows for alternative gesture representations,
for instance, combining representations of different aspects
of a gesture into one complex symbol. This can be used to
investigate the relative importance of different aspects of gestures. Third, a cross-linguistic comparison may be interesting. Information provided in multi-pattern gesture sequences
might become more pronounced in, for instance, Turkish and
Japanese conversations, because in these languages certain
aspects of motion events in gesture are more often sequentialized than in English. Fourth, the relationship between multigesture sequences and other personality traits than empathy
or particular cognitive abilities can also be investigated. Finally, we believe that the PBSC approach can be applied to
many other situations that deal with the classification of symbolic sequences (e.g., the visual, auditory, and motor sensory
domains).

Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2006). Raise your hand if
you’re spatial: Relations between verbal and spatial skills
and gesture production. Gesture, 7(1), 73-95.
Hostetter, A. B., Alibali, M. W., & Schrager, S. M. (2011).
If you don’t already know, I’m certainly not going to show
you! Motivation to communicate affects gesture production. In G. Stam & M. Ishino (Eds.), Integrating gestures:
The interdisciplinary nature of gesture. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Benjamins.
Hostetter, A. B., & Potthoff, A. L. (2012). Effects of personality and social situation on representational gesture production. Gesture, 12(1), 62-83.
Kita, S.
(2009).
Cross-cultural variation of speechaccompanying gesture: A review. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 24(2), 145-167.
Kita, S., & Özyürek, A. (2003). What does cross-linguistic
variation in semantic co-ordination of speech and gesture
reveal? Evidence for an interface representation of spatial
thinking and speaking. Journal of Memory and Language,
48(1), 16-32.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Özyürek, A., & Kita, S. (1999). Expressing manner and path
in English and Turkish: Differences in speech, gesture, and
conceptualization. In M. Hahn & S. Stoness (Eds.), Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (p. 507-512). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schmid, U., Siebers, M., Seuß, D., Kunz, M., & Lautenbacher, S. (2012). Applying grammar inference to identify generalized patterns of facial expressions of pain. In
J. Heinz, C. de la Higuera, & T. Oates (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 11th International Conference on Grammatical Inference. Heidelberg: Springer.
Sparck Jones, K. (1972). A statistical interpretation of term
specifity and its application in retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 28(1), 11-21.
van Zaanen, M. (2000). ABL:Alignment-Based Learning. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) (p. 961967). Saarbrücken, Germany.
van Zaanen, M., & Gaustad, T. (2010). Grammatical Inference as Class Discrimination. In J. Sempere & P. Garcia (Eds.), Grammatical Inference: Theoretical Results and
Applications. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
van Zaanen, M., Gaustad, T., & Feijen, J. (2011). Influence of Size on Pattern-based Sequence Classification. In
P. van der Putten, C. Veenman, J. Vanschoren, M. Israel,
& H. Blockeel (Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th Dutch Conference on Machine Learning (p. 53-60). The Hague, The
Netherlands.
van Zaanen, M., & van de Loo, J. (2012). Learning Interpretations Using Sequence Classification. In J. Heinz, C. de la
Higuera, & T. Oates (Eds.), Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Grammatical Inference (p. 220223). Washington, DC.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an Economic and Social Research Council Grant RES-062-23-2002 granted to Sotaro
Kita and Antje Meyer. We thank Antje Meyer for allowing the use of the dataset. Our gratitude goes to Farzana
Bhaiyat, Christina Chelioti, Dayal Dhiman, Lucy Foulkes,
Rachel Furness, Alicia Griffiths, Beatrice Hannah, Sagar
Jilka, Johnny King Lau, Valentina Lee, Zeshu Shao, Callie
Steadman, and Laura Torney for their help with data collection and coding. We thank Birmingham City University,
Bishop Vesey’s Grammar School, City College Birmingham,
CTC Kingshurst Academy, and University College Birmingham for their participation in our research.

References
Baron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (2004). The Empathy
Quotient: An investigation of adults with Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex differences. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
34(2), 163-175.
Bavelas, J. B., Chovil, N., Lawrie, D. A., & Wade, A. (1992).
Interactive gestures. Discourse Processes, 15(4), 469-489.
Chu, M., & Kita, S. (2011). The nature of gestures’ beneficial
role in spatial problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 140(1), 102-116.
Chu, M., Meyer, A., Foulkes, L., & Kita, S. (2014). Individual differences in frequency and saliency of speechaccompanying gestures: The role of cognitive abilities and
empathy. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 143(2),
694-709.
Cover, T., & Hart, P. (1967). Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 13(1),
21-27.
Heaps, H. (1978). Information Retrieval: Computational and
Theoretical Aspects. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Hostetter, A. B. (2011). When Do Gestures Communicate? A
Meta-Analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 137(2), 297-315.

129

