Assessing Claims of Metaphorical Salience Through Corpus Data
Jenny Lederer (lederer@sfsu.edu)
Program in Linguistics, Department of English Language and Literature, San Francisco State University
1600 Holloway Ave.
San Francisco, CA 94132 USA

Abstract

much research in this arena occurs outside the academic
publishing sphere, the research methods are often underdescribed. For the most part, advocacy organizations draw
on small samples of data and reach conclusions that are
most aptly described as conjecture. The goal of applied
cognitive and conceptual metaphor research is admirable –
to effect change by promoting models that align with a
progressive value system. But that goal begs a fundamental
research question. How can conceptual dominance be
established through corpus methodology? And, how can
naturally occurring language data translate into individual
and or collective conceptual mental models? For example,
how many times does a particular model need to be evoked
in order to establish it as a ‘dominant’ conceptual model?
Can dominance be quantified outside of the
psycholinguistic, experimental arena?

In the linguistic domain, conceptual metaphors have been
shown to structure grammar, the lexicon, and abstract
reasoning. Much recent research on conceptual metaphor
comes from corpus examination, which is increasingly
focused on developing quantificational tools to reveal cooccurrence patterns indicative of source and target domain
associations. Some mappings between source and target are
transparent. However, other metaphors, especially those that
structure abstract processes, are more complex because the
target domain is lexically divorced from the source. This
study introduces new techniques directed at the quantitative
evaluation of metaphorical salience when target and source
relationships are nonobvious. Constellations of sourcedomain triggers are identified in the data and shown to
disproportionately emerge in topic specific discourse. This
measurement can be taken as one indicator of conceptual
salience among the target speech community.
Keywords: conceptual metaphor; corpus linguistics; political
discourse

A Case Study: Gender Transition

Introduction
In the last few decades, cognitive scientists have begun to
rigorously investigate the metaphorical models, which
organize speakers’ comprehension of complex political
topics. (Lakoff 2002, 2009; Lakoff and Wehling 2012;
Fausey and Matlock, 2011; Matlock, 2012). Increasingly,
this research is based on corpus studies of topic specific
discourse. Researchers in academia and partner researchers
outside reveal how social inequality is embedded in and
perpetuated by language use, spanning issues such as
sexuality education (Real Reason), women’s health and
abortion (Real Reason), same-sex marriage (Face Value
Project), education reform (Frameworks Institute, Cultural
Logic), climate disruption (Skinnemoen 2009; Cultural
Logic), crime (Thibodeau and Boroditsky 2011), economic
inequality (Shenker-Osorio 2012), and immigration
(Charteris-Black 2006; Chilton 2005; Hart 2007, 2010;
Lakoff and Furgusson 2006; Lederer 2013). In the case of
immigration, for example, migration is understood as a flow
of water from outside the country through porous borders.
When countries are metaphorically construed as containers
and migrants as part of tides, waves, and floods, it makes
sense to interpret immigration as a threat, a destructive force
from which we need protection. The metaphor, thus,
reinforces anti-immigrant sentiment.
A challenge for those working at the intersection of
politics and cognitive science rests on the methodological
rigor with which data-driven study is conducted. Because

Collections of naturally occurring language data serve as
repositories of metaphor and can be used to investigate
lexical patterns indicative of specific source domains. In
this paper, I introduce simple corpus linguistic techniques to
be considered as quantitative evidence for the conceptual
potency of a given metaphorical understanding. The case
study I present here is based on an investigation of the
metaphors that structure speakers’ understandings of gender
transition, the process by which individuals change their
birth-assigned gender to the gender with which they identify
later in life (Lederer 2014). The abstract idea of gender and
transition is metaphorical, and, like other politically relevant
concepts, it is based on a set of conceptual metaphors
(Lakoff and Johnson 1980). Two robust metaphors cover a
sizable portion of metaphorical language in this issue area.
In the first metaphor, TRANSITION IS A JOURNEY, gender
transition is structured by speakers’ experience of physical
space, location, direction, and movement, as evidenced in
terms like cross-dressing, transitioning, changing, male-tofemale, coming out, intersex. The language of gender
transition is indicative of a dual or binary category model of
gender assignment, where male and female are understood
as separate bounded regions in space. In this model, humans
are assigned a sex at birth, thought of as the origin of the
transition. The destination of the transgender traveller maps
to the gender with which one identifies as an adolescent
and/or adult. The journey’s path represents decisions made
to reach the desired gender identity. These choices are both
steps taken to recognize and accept the gender mismatch
and practices that affect one’s physical appearance –

1255

clothing and hair choices, hormone therapies, and surgical
procedures.
A second model in transgender narrative data is centered
on the DIVIDED-SELF metaphor. Transgender individuals
sense a mismatch between two genders. This experience
leads to unique understandings of a self divided (Talmy
2000; Lakoff 1996), in which the ‘real’ inner self is hidden,
a covert gender identity which clashes with the exterior self,
one’s public gender presentation. Transition involves
harmonizing the two selves.
These two metaphors are conceptually potent in
qualitative surveys of transition narrative data. In the
subsequent presentation, I explore how qualitative insight
can be translated into quantitative evidence. A movement
towards quantifiable indicators of metaphorical salience
pushes metaphor research of all kinds into the
computational arena and will help to shield conceptual
metaphor researchers from on-going methodological
criticism (Gibbs 2011:533).

Metaphor and Corpus Data
Since the recent introduction of big data, in the form of
sizable, computationally searchable corpora, metaphor
analysts in academia have begun to probe questions of
quantitative validity (Deignan 2005). Musolff (2006: 24),
for instance, proposes that token frequency in an authorgenerated corpus should be taken as a measure of
conceptual potency. He investigates the family based
models that structure descriptions of political relations
within the European Union by counting the number of times
each source domain strain is evoked in his corpus. He
maintains that certain discourse communities share specific
source domain scenarios through their reliance on common
folk models.
Adopting a lexical approach to metaphor identification,
Oster (2010) relies on collocation patterns to show which
lexical units are most associated with metaphorical
description of the emotion fear. Oster uses co-occurrence
information – the lexical units that most frequently collocate
with fear – to find target-specific metaphorical expressions.
She draws on this data to build a source-domain ontology.
She argues the most “relevant” metaphors are those evoked
by the highest number of linked linguistic expressions
(p.742). For example FEAR IS SOMETHING INSIDE THE BODY
is evoked more frequently than is FEAR IS AN ANTAGONIST.
Some metaphors, however, such as FEAR IS FIRE are more
creatively produced because they are evoked by a larger set
of linguistic expressions. Oster, therefore, combines
frequency information with lexical co-occurrence data to
produce a source domain’s productivity and creativity index
(p. 748) – additional parameters by which she can compare
source domains.
One difficulty in this algorithmic approach comes from
the nature of conceptual metaphor itself. Most metaphorical
data draws from multiple source domains simultaneously.
For example, when fear is attacking from the inside, fear is

both an entity in the body and an antagonist at the same
time. Thus, though useful for attaining certain types of
information, Oster’s lexical approach doesn’t provide a
complete picture of how fear is understood metaphorically
on its own and in relation to other emotions.
In more recent research, investigators working on the
MetaNet project at the International Computer Science
Institute have engaged in a corpus-driven, lexical approach
to researching the alignment between target domain
expressions, source domain frames, and the grammatical
constructions that blend the two (David, et al. 2014; Stickles
et al. 2014). Target and source word pairs, such as alleviate
poverty, in which the source domain of DISEASE is evoked to
understand the target domain POVERTY, are used to
quantitatively evaluate the frequency of one source domain
in relation to another. Through the same approach, the
frequency of activation of individual frames can be
compared to other frames within the same source domain.
For example, in the British National Corpus, Stickles et al.
(2014) show how POVERTY is more frequently discussed as
a DISEASE than as a basic HARM. And, when understood as a
disease, speakers are more likely to discuss the treatment of
the affliction of poverty than the diagnosis of the disease of
poverty. Thus, at a macro level, the corpus results lead to
the conclusion that AFFLICTION and TREATMENT roles in the
source domain are more salient than is the role of
DIAGNOSIS (Stickles et al. 2014).
Corpus-based approaches to metaphorical investigation
have moved toward increasingly sophisticated quantitative
methodology, and the alignment between lexically encoded
metaphor and grammar is more researchable than ever.
Nonetheless, much metaphorical structure rests beyond
obvious, direct lexical investigation. This is the case with
metaphorical concepts fundamentally understood as
processes not as entities. The ease with which conceptual
potency can be exposed has to do with the relationship
between source-domain lexical triggers and the structural
character of the target domain. When the target domain is
cognitively complex and lexically divorced from the source
domain, conceptual salience can still be revealed, but the
implementation of corpus methodology must be tweaked.

Beyond Direct Lexical Searches
Unlike the investigation of a lexically encoded metaphorical
concept like fear or poverty, a corpus approach directed at
an issue like gender transition isn’t straightforward. Because
transition is understood as a process, not an abstract entity, a
corpus investigation cannot begin with lexeme specific
searches as has been done by Oster (2010) and Stickles et al.
(2014). That is, searching the topic-specific corpus data for
the word transition won’t reveal the complex model(s)
and/or source domains involved in understanding gender
transition as is the case with an emotion like fear or a state
like poverty. Ultimately, the investigation of these types of
metaphorical models must be carried out through a mixedmethod approach in which the corpus is qualitatively

1256

scanned, manually tagged, and as an additional measure,
quantitatively assessed.

(5) I am 17 years old, I am a beautiful young woman
trapped in a hideous gentleman's body.

The Corpus. Preliminary data for this case study analysis
was drawn from various online sources, resulting in an
archive of transition narratives that includes 30 selfpublished coming-out stories on YouTube™, five published
autobiographical works, 10 television interviews from
broadcast networks such as ABC and CNN, multiple
internet forum postings, and message board commentary.
To supplement the archive of narrative data, a transitionspecific corpus was contructed by pulling 200 consecutive
postings from one specific thread called “I am Transgender”
within
the
Experience
Project
website
(www.experienceproject.com)1. The Experience Project is a
free, publically accessible website in which members build
online communities centered on a wide variety of life
experiences.2
Motivating a Quantitative Approach. Qualitative
metaphor research forces researchers to assert rather than
show the conceptual dominance of particular metaphorical
models. A dearth of quantitative data suggests a quantitative
approach to establishing dominance is challenging. The
challenge resides in the observations raised above – direct
lexical searching is fruitless when a metaphorical model
structures an abstract process.
A New Methodology. When the target domain isn’t
encoded lexically, isn’t encoded directly in the corpus,
relevant source domains must be identified manually, by
scanning the data line by line. In the case of gender
transition, obvious patterns reveal themselves quickly. Data
from just a few coming-out narratives indicates speakers
rely heavily on journey language and discuss a complex, yet
common, understanding of an inner and outer self:
(1) I can admit it now, I am a transgender woman and
I'm ready to start my journey!
(2) So September again is a big month for my
progression down this transition road.
(3) The next year, 2010, I went through the next major
step in my transition.
(4) It's taken 5 years to get here, today was a mile
stone, soon I will be complete and by 2014
hopefully I can pee and make love like other
woman do.
1

The ‘I am Transgender’ (IAT) corpus contains 5996 unique
word types and 75,505 total tokens.
2
The thread I accessed is called “I am Transgender (Personal
stories, advice, and support)” (IAT). There are 2010 subscribers to
this thread. From it, I culled 200 consecutive postings from the
years 2012-2014. Each posting ranges from a few sentences to well
over 10 paragraphs.

(6) To do that I had to look inside of my own self and
discover who I am.
Once the relevant source domains are identified, simple
frequency statistics can, in fact, serve as indicators of model
salience. If a source domain is actively structuring an
abstract idea, language from the source frame should be
frequent and robust in topic specific discourse.
The “over-use” of model-evoking lexical units points to
conceptual reliance on a holistic domain. Therefore, one
way to argue a given model is dominant among a particular
group of speakers is to compare the frequency of lexical
triggers in and out of the speech community. If a particular
model is consistently evoked to address a metaphorical
concept, then some of the lexemes associated with that
model should appear in topic specific data more frequently
than in the language overall.
In order to test this proposition, I compared the frequency
of use of the noun journey within the IAT corpus to the
frequency of occurrence in a sample of American English
between the years 2010 and 2012 (taken from the Corpus of
Contemporary American English (COCA) (Davies 2008-)).
COCA serves as a robust representation of the English
language as a whole due to its shear size and varied register
representation3. Between the years 2010-2012, there are
1,976 tokens of the noun journey in COCA, resulting in a
0.0190% chance of occurrence during this time period. On
the other hand, there are 33 tokens of the noun journey
(specified to the transition process) in the IAT corpus,
amounting to a 0.0437% chance of occurrence. In other
words, the lexical item journey is more than twice as likely
to show up in the IAT corpus than it is in COCA. An
analogous comparison can be made with the lexical item
self. In the IAT corpus there are 27 tokens of the noun self
(used to address the transition process), resulting in a
0.0365% chance of occurrence. This is almost three times
the likelihood of occurrence in non-topic-specified
discourse in COCA, where it has a 0.0137% chance of
occurrence. (And this differential is based on only the uses
of self used to evoke the DIVIDED-SELF metaphor, not other
unrelated used of the word.)
However, in order to evaluate the robustness or potency
of a complete metaphorical model, it is insufficient to probe
the frequency of just one lexical item. A better
representation of model salience is to establish the
comparative frequency of a collection of lexical items all
related to the same source domain. But, the evaluation of the
constellation of source domain triggers must be carried out
with caution. Trigger lexemes used to mine the corpus data
are not necessarily lexical items exclusive to the source
domain. For example, the word step has a high frequency of
3

At the time of this investigation, COCA was comprised of
464,020,256 tokens.

1257

occurrence in language used to describe gender transition,
but it also has a very high frequency in all types of English
discourse and is active in many other unrelated target
domains that rely on the same source domain. Therefore,
direct frequency count comparisons of individual words will
not necessarily yield useful information. Trigger lexemes
need to be evaluated as a group.
Grouping lexical triggers yields a new kind of quantitative
measurement of conceptual salience. For individual lexical
items, Ahmad (2005) has developed a simple ‘weirdness’
algorithm to measure genre, topic-specific key words, which
appear disproportionately in a restricted corpus compared to
a baseline. In Ahmad’s measure, the frequency of the lexical
item in the specialized corpus is divided by the frequency of
the item in a general corpus. Any item which occurs more
frequently in the specialized corpus will measure at a
weirdness score greater than 1.0. A measure greater than 1.0
indicates a word is comparatively unique to the restricted
corpus.
weirdness(term) = Fspecial/Nspecial
Fgeneral/Ngeneral
This measure of ‘weirdness’, which I will term ‘keyness’,
allows lexical items to be both ranked by their relative
frequency and numerically compared to one another. If a
metaphorical model is salient in topic specific discourse, we
should expect all, or almost all, lexical triggers to exhibit a
score greater than 1.0.

Results
The results differ for the two metaphors investigated in this
paper. The source domain of a JOURNEY in the TRANSITION
IS A JOURNEY metaphor exhibits a more diffuse lexical
representation. Nevertheless, as shown in Table 1, almost all
journey-evoking lexical items measured show a keyness
score higher than 1.0, meaning their relative frequency is
higher in the IAT than in COCA, and the words journey,
path, forward, and step show comparatively high keyness
scores. This result supports the proposition that certain
aspects of the concept of a journey are being addressed
more frequently when speakers discuss gender transition
than in the language overall. And, it is clear from the
qualitative evaluation of the data that the journeys discussed
in the IAT corpus are indicative of metaphorical, not literal,
travel.
Table 1 –‘Keyness’ factor for journey-associated lexical
items in the IAT compared to the baseline COCA
_______________________________________
Lexical Item IAT %
COCA% Keyness
Journey
.000437
.000033
13.24
Path
.000159
.000058
2.74
Forward
.000318
.000130
2.45
Step(s)
.000503
.000208
2.42
Direction
.000119
.000075
1.59
Far
.000490
.000336
1.46

Back
Here
Place
Stage(s)
Arrive(d)
Road

.001775
.001470
.000517
.000119
.000093
.000146

.001221
.001023
.000472
.000116
.000093
.000170

1.45
1.44
1.10
1.03
1.00
0.86

This type of frequency ranking comparison also suggests the
strength by which an individual lexical item is tied to a
source domain. We can hypothesize that the words journey
and path, for example, are robust indicators of the
metaphorical model since their relative frequencies are
significantly higher in the IAT than in COCA, certainly
more so than the words like place, stage, or road.
Demonstrating a more uniform pattern, the set of modelreferencing words used to evoke the DIVIDED-SELF metaphor
are all more frequent in the IAT than in COCA.
Table 2- ‘Keyness’ factor for divided-self-associated lexical
items in the IAT compared to the baseline COCA
______________________________________
Lexical Item IAT %
COCA% Keyness
Self
.000781
.000037
21.11
Coming out
.000252
.000020
12.60
Inner
.000265
.000032
8.28
Hide
.000172
.000030
5.73
Trapped
.000093
.000017
5.47
True
.000675
.000194
3.48
Body
.000834
.000255
3.27
Hidden
.000093
.000040
2.33
Inside
.000305
.000203
1.50
Each trigger word in Table 2: body, self, true, coming out,
inside, inner, hide, hidden, and trapped, appears more
frequently in the IAT than in COCA and has a significant
keyness score greater than 1.0. However, again there are
disparities in how strong a trigger word is associated with
the source domain. For example, self, coming out, inner,
hide and trapped (all scoring >5) are much more frequently
used in the IAT than in COCA; whereas, true, body, hidden
and inside are more frequent in the IAT, but not by such a
large margin.

Defining Lexical Density in the Source Domain
The fact that JOURNEY language overall exhibits a lower
keyness average (2.57) while DIVIDED-SELF language
averages to a higher score (7.09) suggests that the lexical
items tied to the DIVIDED-SELF metaphor may function as a
tighter constellation of lexemes. That is, the lexical set is
comprised of specific expressions that pattern more closely
and frequently together. To show this, the corpus can be
searched for N-grams (e.g. Carter and McCarthy 2006: 832).
For example, inner self functions as a formulaic expression.
In the IAT, inner is the third most frequent collocate one
words to the left (1L) of self, with a Mutual Information
score of 7.58. (An MI score is a statistical measure of lexical
attraction in the corpus and an MI greater than 3.0 is

1258

interpreted as significant (Cheng 2012).) When the IAT
corpus is probed for N-gram clusters wrong body is found
10 times (MI=7.99), and there are four instances of trapped
in a * body.
Journey language, on the other hand, is more diffuse. The
lexical set used to trigger the source domain is larger, cooccurrence patterns are weaker, and the constellation of
model-evoking terms is less directly tied to the metaphor
itself. For example, of the other trigger words, only step(s)
occurs as a collocate of the noun journey in the IAT (5L,
5R). Clearly the words journey, path, step, etc. form part of
the lexical set that evokes a JOURNEY frame, but they don’t
appear next to one another in running discourse.

Discussion
Comparative frequency rankings through the calculation of
‘keyness’ can be used as a measure of comparative
conceptual salience as well. In some cases, multiple
complex metaphorical models structure one particular target
domain. When two models are in conceptual competition, so
to speak, comparative frequency rankings can be used to
establish conceptual dominance. However, in the case of
gender transition, the difference between the average
keyness score across the two models should not be taken as
a sign that speakers evoke one model over the other. In fact,
many examples from the IAT corpus exemplify how both
models are active simultaneously in the same narrative. In
(7), the speaker elaborates both the TRANSITION IS A
JOURNEY metaphor and the DIVIDED-SELF understanding in
her description of gender transition:
(7) I became quiet and withdrew into myself. I could
see a doorway and I was on one side of an open
door, staring through into another room…The
place I started was my male-centric life. The place
I crossed into is my female-centric life. During this
I saw myself turn and stare back through the door
in which I just passed. I could see my old self
standing there, unable to come with me. I looked
down at my new self and there I was, the woman I
am becoming... I know there will be parts that I,
indeed, do miss, but nothing can compare with
what lies ahead. After a pause, I stepped into my
future. I guess, really though, when you’ve kept a
secret as long as I have, when you’ve had to hide
your inner self, even from yourself as long as I
have when you’re finally able to live as the person
you’ve always known yourself to be it’s hard to
control your emotions...
This dream sequence is representative of many other
narratives of gender transition. The exterior self is modified
over time to match the interior self –the identified gender.
The process is a journey of multiple stages, usually slow
and methodical, carried out over a time span of several
years. One metaphorical model does not preclude the other,

but rather the two metaphors work in tandem to structure
speakers’ understanding of change.
When it comes to the metaphorical analysis of other issue
areas, it is not uncommon for analysts to speculate on the
dominance of one model over another with no real
quantitative analysis. An impressionistic assessment of
metaphorical salience has its place in applied conceptual
metaphor research. However, the availability of
computational assessment vis-à-vis corpus analytics is
becoming cheaper, easier, and more common in the
evaluation of discourse in other applied areas of linguistic
research (Cheng 2012). There is a case to be made that
metaphor researchers should follow suit and infuse more
precision into the dissection of conceptual models.
The use of a ‘keyness’ measure allows the researcher to
put numbers to observations. As executed using the data of
gender transition, keyness can be calculated for individual
metaphor triggers, and the average of the keyness score
across each lexeme can be taken as a numerical indicator of
a model’s overall lexical salience in the data. This method is
not without limitations. For example, there is no way to
restrict keyness calculations to only metaphorical senses of
the lexical item without manually tagging both the restricted
corpus and the baseline corpus. Tagging of this sort runs
counter to the purpose of using the statistical measure to
optimize the research process.
It is still an open research question as to whether corpus
frequency statistics translate into conceptual potency. This
proposal rests on the assumption that the model most
frequently evoked within a speech community is also the
model most conceptually salient in the minds of the
speakers. Clearly, moving forward, analysis drawn from the
quantification of corpus data needs to be paired with
psycholinguistic, experimental research in the lab. It is only
when patterns from both research strands align that
metaphor analysts can be truly confident in the conceptual
dominance of one model over another.

Conclusion
In this paper, I have used the case study of gender transition
to demonstrate how corpus frequency statistics can be used
to bolster claims of metaphorical salience. Corpus-driven,
statistical data are making their way into the study of
conceptual metaphor research (Stefanowitsch 2006). Often
however, these analyses are based on metaphorical data that
are easy to mine. That is, probing a corpus for metaphorical
data in which both source and target domain language is
paired and collocated is a straightforward process. But, this
method is not possible for many metaphorical concepts due
to the nature of how target domains are represented. When a
target domain like gender transition is understood as a
process, direct lexical searches won’t recover pertinent
structural information about active source domains. The
corpus data must be first qualitatively analyzed for
metaphorical structure and then searched based on
preliminary findings.

1259

In the case of gender transition, the constellation of
source-domain lexical triggers occurs more frequently in the
corpus of transition narratives than the same lexical items do
in nonspecific English discourse. The methodology
presented in this study includes a multistep process in which
topic-specific corpus data is collected, manually scanned,
and then statistically compared to non-specific, generic
discourse. This relative frequency differential is assessed
through a ‘keyness’ score, which is a numerical measure of
how frequent, on average, metaphorical triggers occur in the
restricted corpus compared to the baseline corpus. The
application of this new methodology to other politically
relevant issue areas will result in quantifiable observations
of metaphorical salience, thus providing metaphor
researchers additional strategies to validate impressionistic
conclusions of model dominance.

References
Ahmad, K. (2005). “Terminology in text”, Tuscan Word
Centre Workshop. Siena, Italy. June 2005.
Carter, R. & McCarthy, M. (2006). Cambridge grammar of
English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Charteris-Black, J. (2006). Britain as a container:
Immigration metaphors in the 2005 election campaign.
Discourse and Society, 17(5), 563-581.
Cheng, W. (2012) Exploring Corpus Linguistics, Language
in Action. Routledge, England.
Chilton, P. (2005). Missing links in mainstream CDA:
Modules, blends and the critical instinct. In Wodak, R.
and Chilton, P. (Eds.), A New Agenda in (Critical)
Discourse Analysis: Theory, Methodology and
Interdisciplinarity
(pp.19-53).
Amsterdam:
John
Benjamins.
David, O., Dodge, E., Hong, J., Stickles, E., and Sweetser,
E. (2014). "Building the MetaNet metaphor repository:
The natural symbiosis of metaphor analysis and
construction grammar." Talk presented at the 8th
International Conference on Construction Grammar
(ICCG 8), Osnabrück, Germany. September 4.
Davies, M. (2008-) The Corpus of Contemporary American
English: 450 million words, 1990-present. Available
online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/.
Deignan, A. (2005). Metaphor and Corpus Linguistics.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Fausey, C.M., & Matlock, T. (2011). Can grammar win
elections? Political Psychology, 32, 563–574.
Gibbs, R. W. (2011). Evaluating Conceptual Metaphor
Theory, Discourse Processes 48:8, 529-562,
Hart, C. (2007). Critical discourse analysis and
conceptualisation: Mental spaces, blended spaces and
discourse spaces. In C Hart, C., Lukes, D. (Eds.),
Cognitive Linguistics in Critical Discourse Analysis:
Application and Theory, (pp. 107-131). Cambridge
Scholars Publishing, Cambridge.
Hart, C. (2010). Critical Discourse Analysis and Cognitive
Science: New Perspectives on Immigration Discourse.
Palgrave Macmillan, England.

Lakoff, G. (1996). Sorry, I'm Not Myself Today: The
Metaphor System for Conceptualizing the Self. In
Fauconnier, G., Sweetser, E. (eds.), Space Worlds and
Grammar, (pp. 91-123). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lakoff, G. (2002). Moral politics: How liberals and
conservatives think. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lakoff, G. (2009). The political mind: A cognitive scientist's
guide to your brain and its politics. New York: Penguin
Books.
Lakoff, G. & Fergusson, S. (2006). The framing of
immigration.
The
Rockridge
Institute.
http://academic.evergreen.edu/curricular/ppandp/PDFs/La
koff%20Framing%20of%20Immigration.doc.pdf
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. & Wehling, E. (2012). The little blue book: The
essential guide to thinking and talking Democratic. New
York: Free Press.
Lederer, J. (2013). ‘Anchor baby’: A conceptual explanation
for pejoration. Journal of Pragmatics 57, 248-266.
Lederer, J. (2014) “Gesturing the source domain: Exploring
the metaphorical models of transgenderism,” 6th
Conference of the International Society for Gesture
Studies, San Diego, July 11.
Matlock, T. (2012). Framing political messages with
grammar and metaphor. American Scientist, 100, 478483.
Musolff, A. (2006). Metaphor scenarios in public discourse.
Metaphor and Symbol, 21(1), 23-38.
Oster, U. (2010). Using corpus methodology for semantic
and pragmatic analyses: What can corpora tell us about
the linguistic expression of emotions? Cognitive
Linguistics, 21(4), 727-763.
Shenker-Osorio, A. (2012). Don't Buy It: The Trouble with
Talking Nonsense about the Economy. Philadelphia, PA,
PublicAffairs.
Skinnemoen, J. (2009). Metaphors in Climate Change
Discourse. Dissertation, University of Oslo.
Stefanowitsch, A. (2006). Corpus-based approaches to
metaphor and metonymy. In Stefanowitsch, A. & Gries,
S.T. (Eds.) Corpus-based approaches to metaphor and
metonymy, (pp. 1-16). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Stickles, E., Dodge, E., and Hong, J. (2014). "A
construction-driven,
MetaNet-based
approach
to
metaphor extraction and corpus analysis." Talk presented
at the 12th meeting of Conceptual Structure, Discourse,
and Language (CSDL 12), Santa Barbara, CA. November
7.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a Cognitive Semantics.
Cambidge MA: MIT Press.
Thibodeau, P. & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors We
Think With: The Role of Metaphor in Reasoning. PLoS
ONE 6(2).
Thibodeau, P. & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Natural language
metaphors covertly influence reasoning. PLoS ONE (8)1.

1260

