Attention and Pattern Consciousness Reorganize the Cortical Topography of EventRelated Potential Correlates of Visual Sequential Learning.
Sonia Singh (ssingh11@student.gsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 5010, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA

Jerome Daltrozzo (jdaltrozzo@gsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 5010, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA

Christopher M. Conway (cconway@gsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 5010, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA
Abstract
Although SL has sometimes been regarded as a form of
implicit learning (Perruchet & Pacton, 2006), there is also
evidence that it may involve explicit processing (Daltrozzo
& Conway, 2014; Turk-Browne, Junge, & Scholl, 2005;
Wessel, Haider & Rose, 2012). An issue that is often skirted
is whether SL should simply be dissected into attentional
levels, stemming from the classic definition of implicit and
explicit mechanisms (Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977) or
whether this definition should be updated to involve PC. It
might be advantageous to evaluate SL based on both
attention and PC levels. PC is a dimension that has been
explored in previous SL research, but not simultaneously
with the attentional dimension (e.g., Daltrozzo & Conway,
2014). Even though PC and attention are known to affect
the perception of structural regularities, their effect on SL
may not be strictly identical. Attention to patterns may be
necessary for SL to occur but attention alone may be
insufficient without a certain level of PC. Thus, in SL tasks,
the effect of attention and PC on SL may to some extent act
independently of one another. In fact, a recent study
attempting to dissociate between selective attention and PC
for temporal order of visual events, demonstrated that
attention and PC are functionally distinguishable constructs
(Eimer & Grubert, 2015).

Statistical
or
sequential
learning
(SL)
involves
comprehending environmental patterns in which some items
precede other items with a given likelihood. SL is thought to
occur without attention or consciousness (or explicit
knowledge) of the learned patterns and thus is sometimes
considered to be implicit learning. However, this assumption
is still debatable (Daltrozzo & Conway, 2014). We examined
the role of selective attention and pattern consciousness (PC)
in SL using event-related potentials (ERP) with healthy
adults. Thirty-four participants (27 females, 18-49 years)
performed a Flanker task to assess their level of selective
attention, followed by a visual SL task while ERPs were
recorded. Participants’ level of PC was assessed via a
questionnaire. In the SL task, participants viewed a sequence
of different stimuli on the screen and were instructed to press
a button as fast as possible, when they saw a target stimulus.
They were unaware that: 1.) two predictor items were
embedded in the sequence and 2.) the items predicted target
occurrence with high or low probability. ERPs were timelocked to predictor onsets. The mean ERP between 200 and
700ms post-predictor onset revealed an interaction between
target occurrence probability, PC, attention, and two scalp
topographic factors. Post-hoc tests indicated that higher
attention was related to a more rostral left lateralized effect
under high PC and a left lateralization of SL ERP effects
under low PC. These neural findings suggest that both
attention and PC modulate SL.

The Current Study

Keywords: Implicit; explicit; left lateralization; statistical
learning; language; automatic; controlled; sequence learning

Introduction
Sequential Learning (SL) is a process that enables people to
perceive and learn statistically structured sequences in the
environment (Lashley, 1951; Saffran, Aslan, Newport,
1996). For example, in spoken language, linguistic units
such as phonemes, syllables, and words follow each other in
a non-random sequence according to the language’s
phonology, phonotactics, semantics, and syntax.

The purpose of the present study was to simultaneously
explore the individual effects of attention and PC on SL. To
this aim, we measured SL with a visual event-related
potential (ERP) paradigm based on that used by Jost et al.,
(2015). The task involved the presentation of a series of
visual stimuli wherein target stimuli could be predicted with
varying levels of probability by the preceding stimulus.
ERPs to two different predictors, reflecting high and low
probability of being followed by the target, were compared
across two levels of attention and two levels of PC.
According to recent research, SL shares mechanisms with
language processing (Christiansen, Conway, & Onnis, 2012;

2212

Conway et al., 2010; Uddén & Bahlmann, 2012). Assuming
that language mechanisms are predominantly lateralized and
that some of the shared mechanisms between language
processing and SL are explicit, we predicted that increased
attention would result in a higher activation of these explicit
SL mechanisms, leading to a left-lateralization of SL ERP
effects.
We further predicted that increased attention in
conjunction with increased PC would correlate with more
rostral SL ERP effects in the left hemisphere. This second
prediction is in line with Uddén and Bahlmann (2012) who
proposed a rostro-caudal organization of SL mechanisms in
the left hemisphere in which greater sequence complexity
and attentional load is associated with more rostral activity.

belonged to one of four groups: high PC and high attention
(HCHA), high PC and low attention (HCLA), low PC and
high attention (LCHA), and low PC and low attention
(LCLA). Attention differed significantly between groups for
each level of PC (Table1).

Pattern Consciousness

Table 1: Mean (SD) attention scores as measured by the
Flanker task for attention and PC groups.

Method
Participants
A total of 34 participants (27 females, M = 22.4 years, SD=
6.3, 18-49 years) without any language, neurological, or
psychological deficits from Georgia State University
participated in the study for class credit. All participants
were right handed according to the Edinburg Handedness
Inventory (Oldfield, 1971) except seven (3 left-handed and
4 ambidextrous). All participants were native English
speakers. None of them spoke, wrote, read, or understood
Chinese. Participants were recruited from a local University
online recruiting system and provided written informed
consent to participate. The study was conducted in
accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Review
Board of Georgia State University.

Attention
High

U

p

High

221 (156.28)

27 (24.27)

63

.001

Low

143 (126)

-26 (63.99)

64

<.001

Attention measured by the mean response time (RT)
difference between incongruent and congruent Flanker task
conditions differed significantly between groups for each
level of PC. [Two-tailed Mann-Whitney tests]

Stimuli

T
HP$

Procedure
Before the SL task (Figure 1), we assessed the participants’
level of selective attention with the Flanker task (Eriksen &
Eriksen, 1974). This task is commonly used to test response
inhibition and selective attention (Fenske & Eastwood,
2003, Lavie et al., 2004). It measures a person’s ability to
detect relevant from irrelevant information. It is comprised
of a central target (having a directional response-left/right)
flanked by non-target stimuli whose direction matches that
of the target (congruent) or is in the opposite direction of the
target (incongruent). In the present study participants were
required to provide the correct direction of a central target
arrow while ignoring congruent (e.g., <<<<<) or
incongruent (e.g., >><>>) flanker arrows. Typically,
response times (RTs) for flanker incongruent trials are
longer than for congruent trials – a difference known as the
‘flanker effect’ (Eriksen and Eriksen 1974). After the SL
task, participants completed a questionnaire regarding their
level of PC (Appendix). PC levels were obtained from an
inter-rater agreement amongst three scorers from the
participants’ responses of the PC questionnaire (Inter-rater
reliability: Cronbach’s alpha = 0.965). Participants were
each ranked as high or low (median split) based on their
levels of attention and PC (Table 1). Thus each participant

Low

S$

S$

S$

10%$

S$

50%$

S$

90%$
S$

50%$

S$

LP$

T$

S$

S$

S$

S$

S$

20%$

80%$

Figure 1: Visual SL task layout. [high probability, HP; low
probability, LP; standard, S; target, T]
In the SL task, a sequence of visual items was presented on
each trial (Figure 1). The sequence included a series of
‘standard’ stimuli (S) followed by a ‘predictor’ stimulus,
and a ‘target’ (T) or standard stimulus. The target followed
either a high probability predictor (HP) on 90% of trials or a
low probability predictor (LP) on 20% of trials. For each
participant, HP, LP, and S were pseudo-randomly assigned
to 3 different Chinese characters from the 6 displayed on the
top panel of figure 1, whereas T was pseudo-randomly
assigned to one of the two smiley faces, to ensure target

2213

saliency. The participants’ task was to indicate as fast as
possible when the target occurred by pressing a button. Note
that participants were given no prior knowledge of the
predictor-target statistical contingencies, or even that there
was a distinction among the different stimulus types.
Instead, as was observed by Jost et al. (2015), the participant
was expected to learn the predictor - target relationship
(hereafter referred to as SL).
Each predictor condition (HP and LP) was presented 50
times. All sequence trials were continuous and randomly
ordered across the two probability conditions, so that
participants could not distinguish the onset or offset of one
trial from another. Each participant was presented with a
total of 100 trials (5 blocks of 20 trials each). A break of 30
seconds was given between each block.
We expected the Chinese characters to be perceived as
abstract shapes by participants because they were unfamiliar
with the Chinese language. By presenting items most likely
perceived as abstract shapes, we expected to discourage any
mental labeling of stimuli, shifting participants' reliance to a
more implicit type of pattern learning.
Stimuli were presented electronically using E-Prime
2.0.8.90 software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh,
PA), on a Dell Optiplex 755 computer. Every trial started
with the presentation of a white fixation cross in the center
of the screen over a dark background. Each visual stimulus
was presented in white at the center of the screen on top of a
dark background, displayed for 500ms with a stimulus onset
asynchrony of 1000ms. A dark screen was displayed during
the interstimulus interval of 500ms.

Electroencephalography Acquisition
Electroencephalography (EEG) was acquired from 256
scalp sites using an Electrical Geodesic Inc. sensor net
(Figure 2) and was pre-processed using Net Station Version
4.3.1 with subsequent processing using custom scripts
written in Matlab (version R2012b 8.0.0783, The
MathWorks) and the EEGLAB toolbox (version 10.2.2.2.4a;
Delorme & Makeig, 2004). Electrode impedances were kept
below 50 kΩ. The EEG was acquired with a 0.1 to 100 Hz
band-pass at 250 Hz and then low-pass filtered at 30 Hz.
The continuous EEG was segmented into epochs -200ms to
+1000ms with respect to the predictor onset. ERPs were
baseline-corrected with the 200ms prestimulus data and
averaged-referenced. Individual ERPs were computed for
each participant, probability condition, and electrode. All
experimental sessions were conducted in a 132 square foot
double-walled, soundproof acoustic chamber.

Figure 2: 256 sensors EEG net with the highlighted nine
regions of interest.

Statistical Analysis
Statistical calculations were performed on the individual
mean amplitude ERPs within 4 time-windows of interest
(200-700ms, 400-800ms, 600-1000ms, and 800-1000ms)
selected by comparing grand averages over each of the four
participant groups (HCHA, HCLA, LCHA, and LCLA) to
identify the main ERP variations due to the level of PC and
the level of attention.1 An unbalanced design due to the two
between-participants factors (PC and attention) warranted
the use of a linear mixed model (LMM) approach, which is
suitable to analyze such data designs (West, Welch, Galecki,
2014).
To analyze the effect of cortical topography, nine regions
of interest (ROIs, Figure 2) were defined: left (LAn), middle
(FRz), and right anterior (RAn); left (LCn), middle (CNz),
and right central (RCn); and left (LPo), middle (POz), and
right posterior (RPo) regions. These ROIs defined the 3
levels of two topographic factors: Anteroposteriority
(anterior, central, posterior ROIs) and Laterality (left,
medial, right ROIs). For each of these 4 time-windows of
interest (see previous footnote) a LMM was applied with:
(1) fixed effects: probability condition (2 levels: HP and
LP), probability condition X PC (2 levels: “high” and “low”
PC), probability condition X Attention (2 levels: “high” and
“low” attention), probability condition X PC X Attention,
probability
condition
X
PC
X
Attention
X
Anteroposteriority (3 levels: anterior, central, and posterior
ROIs), probability condition X PC X Attention X Laterality
(3 levels: left, medial, and right ROIs), and probability
condition X PC X Attention X Anteroposteriority X

Results obtained from the analyses of 400-800ms, 600-1000ms,
and 800-1000ms time windows were similar to those obtained
from the 200-700ms window. Therefore, we report only the results
obtained with the 200-700ms window

2214

Laterality; (2) random effects: PC and Attention. Pairwise
comparisons were Šidák corrected for multiple comparisons.

LCLA!

LCHA!

FRz!

FRz!
LAn!

LCn!

LCHA

LAn!

RAn!

CNz!

+4μ$

RCn!

LCn!

RAn!

CNz!

RCn!

**!

**!
**!
FRz
LAn

LCn

LPo

LPo!

RAn

CNz

**!

RCn

POz!

**!

POz!

RPo!

RPo!

RPo

POz

+4μ$
LAn!

LCn!

FRz!

RAn!

CNz!

RCn!

HCLA!

HCHA!
FRz!
LAn!

RAn!

RPo!

LPo!

LAn!

FRz!

RAn!

POz!

**!

*!
LCn!

LCLA

CNz!

CNz!

RCn!

**!

**!

**!

FRz
LAn

LCn

RAn

CNz

RCn

LPo!
LPo

FRz
LAn

LPo

RAn

CNz

RCn

RPo

POz

HCLA
FRz
LAn

LCn

LPo

HP

**!

RPo!

Figure 4: Means with standard error bars of ERPs in the
200-700ms time window for each ROI in each subgroup of
participants [high probability condition (HP, uniform red
bar); low probability condition (LP, dotted blue bar).
Vertical scale displayed in the center of the figure: electric
potential in µV, positivity upward, **=p <.01; * = p <.05].

HCHA
LCn

POz!

RPo

POz

RAn

CNz

POz

RCn

RPo

Behavioral analyses were conducted across all four
groups to assess influence of PC and attention. Similar to
the ERP data analyses, RTs were analyzed with a LMM
applied with: (1) fixed effects: probability condition (2
levels: HP and LP), probability condition X PC (2 levels),
probability condition X attention (2 levels), probability
condition X PC X attention and (2) random effects: PC and
attention. Pairwise comparisons were Šidák corrected for
multiple compare

LP

Figure 3: Grand average ERPs over the 4 groups: LCHA,
LCLA, HCHA and HCLA. All are in response to the high
probability condition (HP, red solid line) and low
probability condition (LP, blue dotted line) (vertical axis:
electric potential in µV, positivity upward; horizontal
axis: time in seconds). Schematic heads: crosses indicate
the corresponding ROIs.

Figure 5. RT across the four performance groups for the
high (uniform red) and low probability condition (dotted
blue); [* = p <.05].

Results
Figure 3 displays the grand average ERPs across LCHA and
LCLA participants for each probability condition, within the
200-700ms range. Visual inspection indicates that the
difference between the ERP to HP and LP conditions (i.e.
the SL ERP effect) shifts from a right central effect in the
low attention group (LCLA) to a left and medial effect in
the higher attention group (LCHA).

2215

Figure 3 also displays the grand average ERPs across
HCHA and HCLA participants for each predictor condition,
within the 200-700ms range. Visual inspection indicates that
the SL ERP effect shifts from a more caudal - centroposterior - effect in the low attention group (HCLA) to a
more rostral – fronto-central - effect in the higher attention
group (HCHA).
A LMM performed on mean ERPs within the 200-700ms
window indicated an interaction between probability
condition, attention, PC, and the two topographic factors
(Anteroposteriority and Laterality) [F(32, 1466.81) = 4.23,
p < .001]. Posthoc tests revealed significant SL ERP effects
in a subset of the 9 ROIs that varied across groups (Figure
4). A LMM performed on RTs indicated faster responses to
HP (M = 406ms) than to LP (M = 441ms) demonstrating SL
in the HCHA group [F(1,34) = 5.18, p = 0.029] (Figure 5).
Trends in other groups suggested SL decreases as attention
and PC decreased.
Grand averaged ERPs in Figure 3 indicate variations in
ERP effects according to the lateral dimension (LCLA vs
LCHA) and the rostro-caudal dimension (HCLA vs. HCHA)
some of which are significant as indicated in Figure 4.

Discussion
We explored the effects of attention and PC on the neural
correlates of visual SL using ERP. Our main findings are
that: (1) under low PC, increased attention resulted in a left
lateralization of the SL ERP effects; and (2) under high PC,
increased attention induced more rostral left-lateralized SL
ERP effects.
The left-lateralization of SL ERP effects with increased
attention suggests that shared mechanisms between SL and
language processing (Christiansen et al., 2012; Conway et
al., 2010; Uddén & Bahlmann, 2012) are likely to be partly
explicit. Thus, the larger left-lateralized SL ERP effects
with increased attention could be a correlate of a greater
activation of these explicit mechanisms that are shared with
left-lateralized language processes.
Alternatively this left lateralization of SL ERP effects
with attention could be due to left-lateralized attentional
mechanisms that engage in temporal processing. Emerson,
Daltrozzo and Conway (2014), reported larger left
lateralized SL ERP effects with higher musical expertise
using a SL ERP paradigm similar to ours. Several studies
have suggested that variation in cognitive processing of
temporal structures with higher musical expertise may not
be due to musical expertise alone but possibly due to a
higher ability in musicians to focus their attention on
temporal patterns, compared to non-musicians (ParberyClark et al., 2011; Strait et al., 2010). Thus, left
lateralization of our SL ERP effects with attention could be
due to higher attention to the temporal sequence activating
SL mechanisms that are common between SL and music
processing.

In addition to an overall increased left lateralization with
higher attention, we also found more rostral left lateralized
SL ERP effects with higher attention in participants with
high PC. Udden and Bahlmann (2012) proposed that the left
inferior frontal gyrus is part of a general rostro-caudal
abstraction gradient in the left pre-frontal cortex, in which
complex sequences such as sentences are predominantly
processed by more rostral mechanisms, while simpler
sequences such as syllables that consist of single words
would be more caudally distributed. Importantly, this
dimension of complexity is partially expected to correspond
with the level of attention, at least in the language domain
with sentence-level processing recruiting more attentional
resources than word-level processing (Daltrozzo, Wioland,
& Kotchoubey, 2012). Taken together, our results seem to
confirm the rostro-caudal model of SL, by Uddén and
Bahlmann (2012), if we assume that their dimension of
sequence complexity is related to attentional capacity and
cognitive control.
Furthermore, current RT data indicated that the high PChigh attention group was better at learning the predictortarget rules than the low PC-low attention group,
demonstrating that some unique combination of PC and
attention, shape SL. Also, the present quasi-experimental
study is essentially correlational, as we compare groups of
participants with varying attention and PC. Hence, we can
only account for relationships between SL ERP effect of
cortical topography, attention, and PC without attributing
cause-effect relationships between these variables.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that the cortical
organization underlying SL depends heavily on two separate
cognitive dimensions that have often been confounded in
previous SL research (Daltrozzo & Conway, 2014), or at
least have not been tested independently, namely the levels
of attention and of PC. Currently, it is unclear why attention
modulates SL differently across levels of PC. This likely
pertains to a more general issue, that which highlights the
exact relationship between attention and PC and their
influence on the cortical assembly underlying SL and
language.

Acknowledgments
We thank Georgia State University’s Language and Literacy
Initiative and the NIH (R01DC012037) for their financial
support and S. Sims, J. Trapani, S. Emerson, and M.
Freggens for their help with data acquisition and analysis
and J. Deocampo for her help in designing the study.
Appendix
Questionnaire assessing the level of PC:
1. Think about the task with Chinese characters you did. Did you
notice anything about the Chinese characters? Tell me about
your perception of the task. [Verbatim record]

2216

2. Do you think the Chinese characters were occurring randomly?
[If the participant says no, ask to explain how the characters
were non-randomly displayed.]
3. Was there a pattern or anything regular in the order that the
Chinese characters were presented?
4. Was there a Chinese character that usually came before the target
(the smiley face you were looking for)?
5. If you noticed a pattern, at what point did you notice it? Before
1st break, after 1st break, after 2nd break, after 3rd break, after
4th break?
6. Did you get tired during the task? At what point did you start
getting tired?
7. Was the task too long?

References
Christiansen, M. H., Conway, C. M., & Onnis, L. (2012).
Similar neural correlates of language and sequential
learning: Evidence from event-related potentials.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 27(2), 231 -256.
Conway, C. M., Bauernschmidt, A., Huang, S. S., & Pisoni,
D. B. (2010). Implicit statistical learning in language
processing: Word predictability is the key. Cognition,
114(3), 356-371.
Daltrozzo, J., & Conway, C. (2014). Neurocognitive
mechanisms of statistical-sequential learning: What do
event-related potentials tell us? Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 8, 437.
Daltrozzo, J., Wioland, N., & Kotchoubey, B. (2012). The
N400 and Late Positive Complex (LPC) effects reflect
controlled rather than automatic mechanisms of sentence
processing. Brain sciences, 2(3), 267-297.
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open
source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics
including independent component analysis. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods, 134(1), 9-21.
Eimer, M., & Grubert, A. (2015). A dissociation between
selective attention and conscious awareness in the
representation
of
temporal
order
information.
Consciousness and Cognition. In Press.
Emerson, S., Daltrozzo, J., Conway, C. M., (2014, July).
The Effect of Music Processing on Auditory Sequential
Learning: An ERP Study. In 36th Annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise
letters upon the identification of a target letter in a
nonsearch task. Perception & psychophysics, 16(1), 143149.
Fenske, M. J., & Eastwood, J. D. (2003). Modulation of
focused attention by faces expressing emotion: evidence
from flanker tasks. Emotion, 3(4), 327.
Jost, E., Conway, C.M., Purdy, J.D., Walk, A.M., &
Hendricks, M.A. (2015). Exploring the neurodevelopment
of visual statistical learning using event-related brain
potentials. Brain Research, 1597, 95-107. doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2014.10.017.

Lashley, K. S. (1951). The problem of serial order in
behavior. 1951, 112-135.
Lavie, N., Hirst, A., de Fockert, J. W., & Viding, E. (2004).
Load theory of selective attention and cognitive control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133(3),
339.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9(1), 97-113.
Parbery-Clark, A., Strait, D. L., Anderson, S., Hittner, E., &
Kraus, N. (2011). Musical experience and the aging
auditory system: implications for cognitive abilities and
hearing speech in noise. PLoS One, 6(5), e18082.
Perruchet, P. & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and
statistical learning: One phenomenon, two approaches.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 233-238.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926-1928.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: II. Perceptual
learning, automatic attending and a general theory.
Psychological review, 84(2), 127.
Strait, D. L., Kraus, N., Parbery-Clark, A., & Ashley, R.
(2010). Musical experience shapes top-down auditory
mechanisms: evidence from masking and auditory
attention performance. Hearing Research, 261, 22–29.
Turk-Browne, N.B., Junge, J.A., & Scholl, B.J. (2005). The
automaticity of visual statistical learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 522-564.
Uddén, J., & Bahlmann, J. (2012). A rostro-caudal gradient
of structured sequence processing in the left inferior
frontal gyrus. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 367(1598), 2023-2032.
West BT, Welch KB, Galecki AT (2014). Linear Mixed
Models: A Practical Guide Using Statistical Software,
Second Edition. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis.
Wessel, J. R., Haider, H., & Rose, M. (2012). The transition
from implicit to explicit representations in incidental
learning situations: more evidence from high-frequency
EEG coupling. Experimental brain research, 217(1), 153162.

2217

