Beyond Magnitude:
How Math Expertise Guides Number Representation
April D. Murphy1, Timothy T. Rogers1, Edward M. Hubbard2, Autumn Brower2
(admurphy2@wisc.edu, ttrogers@wisc.edu, emhubbard@wisc.edu, ajbrower@gmail.com)
1

2

Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street Madison, WI 53706 USA
Department of Educational Psychology, 1025 W. Johnson Street Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract

Previous studies on numeric cognition have focused primarily
on magnitude, based on its role as a core feature of number
knowledge. In this paper, we report the results of three
experiments investigating adults’ sensitivity to properties of
number apart from magnitude. In Experiment 1, we use a
triadic judgment task to replicate a classic study of number
properties. In Experiment 2, we compare these representations
among expert and non-expert groups. In Experiment 3, we
examine whether instruction can tune representation of
number properties. Results indicate that the triadic
comparison task is a reliable method of assessing sensitivity
to number properties. We found that magnitude is difficult to
suppress among non-experts, who are primarily attuned to
magnitude and parity. Mathematically sophisticated
participants were sensitive to a range of number properties
compared with the non-expert group. We discuss implications
for theories of number concepts and their relation to special
populations.
Keywords: number representation, magnitude, individual
differences

Introduction
Psychological approaches to number knowledge often focus
on the representation of magnitude, under the assumption
that the semantic core of number knowledge is quantity
(Booth et al., 1999, Booth & Seigler 2008, Dehaene et al.
1993, Fias et al. 1996). Numbers have many properties
beyond quantity, however. The number 3, for example, can
be prime, odd, or a factor of 27; it can call to mind a set of
triplets, a bronze medal for third place, or a triangle. Though
research on the representation of quantity has advanced
rapidly in recent years, less is known about whether and to
what extent aspects of number knowledge beyond
magnitude shape number concepts.
A classic study by Shepard, Kilpatrick, and
Cunningham (1975) probed adult representation of number
properties using multidimensional scaling. Adults were
asked to make pairwise similarity judgments among the
single-digit numbers 0-9 presented in various forms (e.g.,
digits, number words, dot arrays). The results of a
multidimensional scaling on these data indicated that, in
addition to magnitude, features such as parity and powers of
two and three were used to make the judgments. The
implications of these findings for theories of number
concepts remains unclear, however. Observations were only
collected from 4 participants, all colleagues or students of
Shepard at Stanford who likely had substantial expertise in
mathematics. Do non-magnitude properties of numbers

shape number concepts broadly for people in our society, or
does sensitivity to such properties only arise as a
consequence of specialized learning and expertise?
A few studies have approached this question in
cognitive development. Miller & Gelman (1983) used a
explored children’s and adults’ sensitivity to the properties
identified in Shepard et al. (1975), using a triadic judgment
task whereby subjects rated the most similar of 3 numbers
printed on either cardboard wheels (for children) or index
cards (for adults). In this study they found sensitivity to both
magnitude and parity relations among adults and 6th gade
children, while kindergarteners and 3rd grade children were
only sensitive to magnitude. Similarly, Berch et al. (1999)
found that children from 4th grade onward were reliably
sensitive to parity in addition to magnitude.
To our knowledge, however, the original results
identified by Shepard et al. (1975) have not been replicated
in a sample of adults who are both representative of a
college-educated population and naïve to the experimental
goals. Yet the questions about the structure of number
concepts are important for understanding the origins and
nature of numeracy in human cognition. The literature’s
current focus on number magnitude has been useful in
connecting research in animal cognition, human
development, and neural bases of number knowledge (e.g.,
Feigenson et al. 2004, Verguts & Fias 2004, Dehaene &
Changeaux 1993, Wynn 1992, Xu & Spelke 2000, Kadosh
et al. 2008), and one implication of this work is that
numeracy may be grounded in an innate sense of quantity
that is conserved across both phylogeny and ontogeny
(Brannon & Terrace 2002). It is less easy to see how other
number properties, such as parity or primeness, might
connect to or emerge from sensitivity to magnitude as
observed in non-human animals, young infants, and neural
signals. If such properties broadly shape the relationships
we discern amongst numbers, this suggests that there are
important unanswered questions about the nature and
origins of numerical concepts.
The current study uses contemporary multidimensional
scaling (MDS) methods to measure the similarities people
discern amongst single-digit numbers and assess whether
they reflect the properties identified by Shepard et al.
(1975). Whereas these authors used overt similarity ratings
and classical MDS to generate embeddings, we employ a
triadic matching task in which participants must decide
which of two items is more similar to a third reference item,
and estimate embeddings with non-metric MDS. In

1679

Experiment 1 we assess whether this approach can replicate
the original findings, focusing on judgments of colleagues
with expert mathematical knowledge. We then compare the
structures uncovered by these methods in groups of
university undergraduates and in another special population
with expert mathematical knowledge, graduate students in
computer science and mathematics. Finally, we assess
whether the structures revealed in these studies change or
remain the same when participants are explicitly instructed
to ignore number magnitude when making their decisions.
The results allow us to assess whether magnitude is the
nucleus of numeric representation in university-educated
adults broadly speaking, and whether the saliency of
magnitude can be shifted either by expertise or through
explicit task instruction.

Experiment 1
The aim of Experiment 1 was to assess whether we could
replicate the results of Shepard et al. (1975) using triadic
comparisons and non-metric MDS to estimate the similarity
structure among single-digit numbers. To this end we
imitated Shepard et al.’s strategy of studying number
concepts in colleagues with extensive mathematical
knowledge. Sixteen participants, all graduate students,
research assistants, or faculty at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, participated in the task.

Triadic comparison task
The experiment was conducted on a computer using a Webbased paradigm that allows participants to visit a URL and
complete an experiment from a Web browser. After logging
in, subjects read an introduction to the experiment which
pointed out that numbers can have many properties such as
even or odd, large or small, prime, multiples of 3 and so on.
Participants were then instructed that, on each trial of the
study, they must decide which of two numbers is most
similar to a third, taking into account everything they know
about the three numbers. The experiment then randomly
selected three single-digit numbers (0-9) without
replacement and presented them on a computer screen. The
reference number was presented at the top of the screen, and
the two other numbers were presented below on the right or
left side of the screen. Participants made judgments by
pressing the left or right arrow key that corresponded to
their choice, after which the next triad would automatically
appear. Participants were told to complete as many
judgments as they could in 10 minutes. At the end of the
time limit, the experiment automatically terminated and a
debriefing message was displayed.
To investigate the structure underlying participant
judgments, we used a form of non-metric multidimensional
scaling (non-metric MDS) to generate several lowdimensional representations of the response data. This was
accomplished by using the participants’ responses to situate
the 10 target numbers in a low-dimensional space, which we
will refer to as an embedding. In this space, the distance

among the targets directly corresponds to their similarity.
The non-metric MDS embedding was computed using
stochastic gradient descent on a hinge-loss objective
function [see NEXT website for implementation details:
https://next.discovery.wisc.edu]. The computations are
performed across non-aggregated response data in a
different random order each time until the embedding
reaches a steady state whereby additional iterations have
minimal influence on the positions of the targets and the
overall error of the embedding. Reliability is evaluated by
testing the model results on a hold-out portion of the data
that was not used to generate the original embedding.
Again following Shepard et al. (1975), we simply
inspected the resulting embedding for evidence of
sensitivity to the properties explicitly identified in their
study—magnitude, parity, powers of two, powers of three,
and the special status of zero—as well as an additional
important property, primeness.
Figure 1 shows the resulting embedding, which closely
replicates the original findings. The embedding clearly
expresses dimensions that capture number magnitude and
parity, and there exist linear planes in the 2D space that
separate powers of 2 from other numbers, zero from other
numbers, and primes from non-primes. The only nonmagnitude property reported in the original study that is not
clearly reflected in this scaling is powers of 3. The study
thus validates the triadic comparison method as capable of
revealing non-magnitude properties in number concepts of
expert participants—but as in the original study it remains
unclear whether these results arise from expertise
specifically or reflect aspects of number concepts in a
broader population.

1680

Figure 1
2D solution of Shepard et al. (1975) replication

Experiment 2
The goal of experiment 2 was to compare the structure of
number concepts in a sample of university undergraduates
not necessarily possessing expert math knowledge to that
elicited from a new sample of math experts who were naïve
to the experimental goals, all graduate students in math and
computer science. The central question was whether the
same properties of numbers would be equally well
represented in the two groups. We adopted two different
approaches to testing this question quantitatively.

Participants and Task
The experiment was conducted in a computer lab in the
Psychology department at the University of WisconsinMadison. Participants consisted of 23 undergraduate
students and 9 Computer Science and Mathematics graduate
students at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Participants were recruited from the Psychology department
volunteer subject pool, as well as email solicitations to the
Computer Science and Mathematics departments.
Participants completed the same task with the same
instructions as in Experiment 1. Each participant made 100
similarity judgments, which took between 15-20 minutes.
Upon reaching the trial limit, the experiment automatically
terminated and a debriefing message was displayed.

group is sensitive. For the expert group, the error is lowest
in the 4D solution, indicating that these participants may be
sensitive to a broader range of numeric properties.
Second, for each group we used logistic regression as a
linear classification model to assess whether particular
number properties are present in the 2D embeddings
estimated for each group. Because our pilot study, as well as
prior research (e.g. Dehaene et al., 1993), indicated that 0 is
a special class of number for which discrimination of nonmagnitude properties may be difficult, we restricted our
classification model to numbers 1-9. The classifier was
trained to discriminate numbers possessing or not
possessing a numeric property as a function of the
coordinate vectors on each dimension of the 2D scaling. We
used leave-one-out cross-validation to evaluate the
predictive accuracy of the model, doing this for all 9 digits;
thus, in each iteration, the model was trained on 8 digits and
tested on the 9th. For instance, to assess whether an
embedding contains reliable information about parity, the
classifier was trained to discriminate even from odd
numbers for the digits 1-8, and the resulting model was used
to classify the digit 9.

Analysis
To compare the richness of the structures underlying expert
and novice judgments, we computed separate embeddings in
1-4 dimensions for each group using the same method as
Experiment 1. This allowed us to assess whether the
underlying dimensionality of representations governing
number judgments is similar or different in novices versus
experts. If experts possess richer knowledge about number
attributes, their performance should be best fit by a richer
(higher-dimensional) underlying representation.
Non-Experts: Open Instructions

Experts: Open Instructions

0.50

0.50

0.44

0.44

0.38

0.38

0.32

0.32

0.26

0.26

0.20

1D

2D

3D

4D

0.20

1D

2D

3D

4D

Figure 2
Error curves for non-metric MDS embeddings in
Experiment 2
Figure 2 indicates the relationship between training and
testing error across the 1D-4D solutions. The relatively flat
error curve for the non-expert group suggests that these data
may be best fit to a 1D solution; that is, a single numeric
property may be the only reliable dimension to which this

Figure 3
2D solution of Experiment 2 data, and cross-validation
model accuracy across categories and expertise groups

1681

This process was repeated, omitting each digit from the
training set once, and the total accuracy of the classifier
across all 9 runs was used as a measure of the degree to
which parity is expressed in the embedding. Using this
procedure, we assessed four number properties, which split
the 9 digits into two roughly equal-sized classes: magnitude
(large vs. small), parity, primeness, and multiples of three.
Figure 3 illustrates the 2D solution from non-metric
MDS and the cross-validation classification accuracy for
each of the four categories across the expert and non-expert
groups.

Results
Our objective in this study was to evaluate whether the four
properties of numbers we identified in the pilot study would
be well represented across both expert and non-expert
groups. Our quantitative approach made use of crossvalidation procedures with both the non-metric MDS and
logistic regression classifier to support model accuracy and
avoid overfitting the data.
In the non-expert group, our leave-one-out crossvalidation indicated that the most reliably classified feature
was magnitude, with a classification accuracy of 77%, as
visual inspection of the 2D embedding suggests. Other
features were less well classified, with parity surprisingly
being classified with 0% accuracy. Prime and multiples of 3
were both classified with 33% accuracy, indicating that few
participants consistently used these dimensions to determine
conceptual similarity among the numbers.
In the expert group, classification was most reliable for
parity, with an accuracy of 77%. Primeness was classified
with an accuracy of 66%, and it is notable that magnitude
was not as reliable a predictor with classification of 44%.
Visual inspection of the 2D embedding suggests it is
plausible that the experts may have also used powers of two
in addition to or instead of parity to make similarity
judgments. Classification accuracy for the multiples of three
category was only slightly better in the expert group, at
44%.
These results bring to light two interesting findings.
First, the properties of numbers which were strongly
identified in Shepard et al. (1975) and in Experiment 1 were
not consistent among the experiment-naïve mathematics
experts. Second, only the dimension of magnitude was
salient among the non-expert group, while parity was most
reliable in the expert group—this supports prior research on
aspects of number knowledge (Miller & Gelman 1983,
Dehaene et al., 1993). However, there was only weak
representation of other properties across both expert and
non-expert groups.
This raises the question of whether the saliency of
magnitude, particularly among the non-expert group,
suppressed other aspects of number besides parity.
Additionally, we hypothesized that there may high
variability in the experts’ sensitivity to various properties of

numbers, which led them to develop different strategies for
judging similarity.
To address these questions, we conducted a third
experiment in which we explicitly instructed participants to
ignore magnitude when making similarity assessments.

Experiment 3
Experiment 2 indicated that judgments among the four
number categories were represented unequally across the
undergraduate sample and the expert sample. We
hypothesized that because magnitude is so central to number
knowledge, this dimension may need to be explicitly
suppressed to reveal alternate aspects of number. In this
experiment, we gave participants instructions to avoid using
magnitude relations when making similarity judgments of
the stimuli. Our objective was to tune the strength of nonmagnitude number representations and evaluate the
consistency of these across expertise groups.

Participants and Task
The experiment was conducted in a computer lab in the
Psychology department at the University of WisconsinMadison. Participants consisted of a second group of 23
undergraduate students and 8 Computer Science and
Mathematics graduate students at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, who had not previously participated in
the experiment. Participants were recruited from the
Psychology department volunteer subject pool, as well as
email solicitations to the Computer Science and
Mathematics departments.
Participants completed the same computer-based task as
in Experiment 1. The experiment instructions were modified
to indicate that participants were to not think about
magnitude when making judgments. Each participant made
100 similarity judgments, which took between 15-20
minutes. Upon reaching the trial limit, the experiment
automatically terminated and a debriefing message was
displayed.

Analysis
As with Experiment 2, we used non-metric MDS to
compute separate embeddings in 1-4 dimensions for each
group using the same method as Experiments 1 and 2.
Figure 4 indicates the relationship between training and
testing error across the dimensions.
In contrast to
Experiment 2, the error curve for the non-expert group
flattened out around 3 dimensions, suggesting that ignoring
magnitude may successfully persuade participants to attend
to alternative features. For the expert group, the error is
again lowest in the 4D solution.

1682

Experts: No Magnitude Instructions

Non-Experts: No Magnitude Instructions
0.50

0.50

0.44

0.44

0.38

0.38

0.32

0.32

0.26

0.26

0.20

1D

2D

3D

4D

0.20

1D

2D

3D

4D

Figure 4
Error curves for non-metric MDS embeddings in
Experiment 3
We used logistic regression as a classifier to evaluate
whether the four number categories identified in Experiment
2—prime, parity, magnitude, and multiples of 3—would be
present in the 2D embeddings estimated for each group in
the ignore-magnitude condition.
Figure 5 illustrates the 2D solution from non-metric
MDS and cross-validation classification accuracy for each
of the four categories across the expert and non-expert
groups.

Results
Our aim in Experiment 3 was to constrain the influence of
magnitude on participants’ judgments of number similarity
in the triadic comparison task. By directing participants to
avoid using magnitude, and instead asking that they exercise
their knowledge of other types of number relations, we
expected that the saliency of non-magnitude properties of
numbers would be revealed.
Results for the non-expert group were surprising. The
leave-one-out cross-validation indicated that, rather than
suppressing magnitude’s importance, it remained reliably
classifiable with an accuracy of 88%. Importantly for our
hypothesis however, activating non-magnitude knowledge
through instruction allowed parity to be perfectly classified
at 100%; this is particularly evident in the 2D visualization.
Our hypothesis was also well supported within the expert
group, with all three non-magnitude properties classified
reliably better than in the open instructions condition. The
multiples of three category was perfectly separable with
100% accuracy, while parity representation was also well
classified with an accuracy of 88%. Primes and magnitude
were classified at 66% accuracy, changing little from the
open instructions condition.
The results of Experiment 3 provide compelling evidence
of the role of both instruction and expertise in guiding
representation of non-magnitude properties of numbers. We
note that, while further representational complexity may be
sacrificed in the expert group by compressing information
from higher dimensions into a 2D embedding, the results
from this potentially more coarse approach remain
encouraging with regard to our hypotheses.

Figure 5
2D solution of Experiment 3 data, and cross-validation
model accuracy across categories and expertise groups

General Discussion
These findings provide important implications for the study
of number representation and expertise. While Shepard et al.
(1975) claimed that adults are broadly sensitive to several
non-magnitude properties of number, we found this claim to
be supported only among highly trained experts.
Furthermore, when non-metric multidimensional scaling
and logistic regression are used to evaluate the inherent
dimensionality and classification accuracy of similarity
judgments, we can address questions of number knowledge
more quantitatively compared with visual inspection of
relationships in a 2D scaling.
We found that task instructions played a role in the
malleability of number knowledge for both experts and nonexperts. With open instructions, non-experts were most
reliably sensitive to magnitude, supporting prior research in
these domains (Miller & Gelman 1983, Dehaene et al.
1993), while experts were most reliably sensitive to parity.
When asked to suppress knowledge of magnitude relations,
non-experts had difficulty doing so, even while also
accurately discriminating parity. In contrast, the ignoremagnitude instructions allowed experts to improve

1683

reliability at uncovering the conceptual structure of all three
non-magnitude properties.
Although we assumed that features related to primeness,
parity, or multiplication should be commonly known and
easily accessed by both expertise groups, the college-level
mathematics skills possessed by the non-expert group did
not necessarily predict an ability to make similarity
judgments based on these features. Additionally, while
domain expertise may permit greater flexibility in shifting
representation away from magnitude, even then magnitude
must be explicitly suppressed to allow other features to
reliably surface.
Non-magnitude properties of number represent highly
abstract conceptual knowledge, and these studies address
classical findings while taking steps towards investigating a
relatively under-studied domain. While our results indicate
that these aspects of number knowledge can be highly
variable depending on individual expertise and task
demands, future research is needed to fully explore the
consequences of these findings for number cognition more
broadly.

References
Armstrong, S. L., Gleitman, L. R., & Gleitman, H. (1983).
What some concepts might not be. Cognition, 13(3), 263308.

Dehaene, S. (1992). Varieties of numerical abilities.
Cognition, 44(1), 1-42.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core
systems of number. Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(7),
307-314.
Fias, W. (1996). The importance of magnitude
information in numerical processing: Evidence from the
SNARC effect. Mathematical cognition, 2(1), 95-110.
Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (2000). Non-verbal
numerical cognition: From reals to integers. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 4(2), 59-65.
Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (1992). Preverbal and
verbal counting and computation. Cognition, 44(1), 4374.
Groen, G. J., & Parkman, J. M. (1972). A chronometric
analysis of simple addition. Psychological review, 79(4),
329.
Kadosh, R. C., Muggleton, N., Silvanto, J., & Walsh, V.
(2009). Double dissociation of format-dependent and
number-specific neurons in human parietal cortex.
Cerebral Cortex, bhp273.

Ashcraft, M. H. (1992). Cognitive arithmetic: A review of
data and theory. Cognition, 44(1), 75-106.

Kadosh, R. C., Lammertyn, J., & Izard, V. (2008). Are
numbers special? An overview of chronometric,
neuroimaging, developmental and comparative studies of
magnitude representation. Progress in neurobiology,
84(2), 132-147.

Berch, D. B., Foley, E. J., Hill, R. J., & Ryan, P. M.
(1999). Extracting parity and magnitude from Arabic
numerals: Developmental changes in number processing
and mental representation. Journal of experimental child
psychology, 74(4), 286-308.

Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of
numerical
estimation
evidence
for
multiple
representations of numerical quantity. Psychological
science, 14(3), 237-250.

Booth, J. L., & Siegler, R. S. (2008). Numerical
magnitude representations influence arithmetic learning.
Child Development, 79(4), 1016–1031.

Shepard, R. N., Kilpatric, D. W., & Cunningham, J. P.
(1975). The internal representation of numbers. Cognitive
Psychology, 7(1), 82-138.

Brannon, E. M., & Terrace, H. S. (2002). The evolution
and ontogeny of ordinal numerical ability. The cognitive
animal: Empirical and theoretical perspectives on animal
cognition, 197-204.

Verguts, T., & Fias, W. (2004). Representation of number
in animals and humans: a neural model. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(9), 1493-1504.

Starkey, P., & Cooper, R. G. (1980). Perception of
numbers by human infants. Science, 210(4473), 10331035.

Wynn, K. (1992). Addition and subtraction by human
infants.

Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General,122(3), 371.

Xu, F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Large number
discrimination in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74(1),
B1-B11.

Dehaene, S., & Changeux, J. P. (1993). Development of
elementary numerical abilities: A neuronal model.
Cognitive Neuroscience, Journal of, 5(4), 390-407.

1684

