Can Joint Action be Synergistic?
Studying the Stabilization of Interpersonal Hand Coordination
Veronica Romero (romerovc@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, University of Cincinnati, 4150 Edwards Cl., Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Rachel Kallen (kallenrl@ucmail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, 4130 Edwards Cl., Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Michael Riley (rileym@ucmail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, University of Cincinnati, 4150 Edwards Cl., Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Michael J. Richardson (richamo@ucmail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, University of Cincinnati, 4150 Edwards Cl., Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Abstract
The human perceptual-motor system is tightly coupled to the
physical and informational dynamics of a task environment and
these dynamics operate to constrain the high-dimensional order of
the human movement system into low-dimensional, task-specific
synergies. The aim of the current study was to determine whether
synergistic processes constrain and organize the behavior of coacting individuals. Participants sat next to each other and each used
one arm to complete a pointer-to-target task. Using the
uncontrolled manifold, the structure of joint-angle variance was
examined to determine whether there was synergistic organization
at the interpersonal or intrapersonal levels. The results revealed the
motor actions performed were synergistically organized at both the
interpersonal and intrapersonal levels. More importantly, the
interpersonal synergy was found to be significantly stronger than
the intrapersonal synergies. Accordingly, the results provide clear
evidence that the action dynamics of co-acting individuals can
become temporarily organized to form single synergistic twoperson systems.
Keywords: joint-action, interpersonal coordination, motor
synergies, motor control, uncontrolled manifold

Introduction
Individuals frequently perform social behavioral
coordination in a robust and flexible manner, with
seemingly little or no effort. Despite it being well known
that performing social motor activities is a fundamental
property of ongoing human behavior (e.g. Schmidt &
Richardson, 2008) our scientific understanding of how coactors are able to carry out joint motor acts remains lacking.
One challenge to understanding how coordinated social
motor behaviors are realized relates to the complexity of the
human movement system. Determining how the human
perceptual-motor system is able to organize and control its
degrees-of-freedom (DoF)—the so called DoF problem
(Bernstein, 1967)—is therefore an important question for
cognitive scientists who study motor control and perceptionaction.
Contemporary theorists have argued that the DoF problem
is greatly reduced when one considers that the human
perceptual-motor system is tightly coupled to the physical
and informational dynamics of a task environment and that
these dynamics operate to constrain the high-dimensional
order of the human movement system into low-dimensional,
task-specific synergies (Turvey & Fonseca, 2009; Kelso,

2009). Here the term synergy is used to refer to a functional
grouping of structural elements (neurons, muscles, limbs,
individuals, etc.) that are temporarily constrained to act as a
single coordinated unit. Evidence that the human movement
system is organized synergistically has been demonstrated
in a wide range of individual (i.e., non-social) motor tasks
(e.g. Jacquier-Bret et al., 2009; Scholz et al., 2000). In each
case, the movement DoF required for task performance are
found to be temporarily coupled, such that the control or
modulation of any one DoF functionally constrains and
regulates the activity of the other DoFs, thereby reducing
the dimensionality of the system as a whole.
Research demonstrating that rhythmic interpersonal
coordination exhibits the same behavioral dynamics as
intrapersonal, interlimb coordination (see Schmidt &
Richardson, 2008; for a review) and that individuals appear
to stabilize movement fluctuations during an interpersonal
rhythmic movement task at a collective level (Black et al.,
2007), has provided initial support for the interpersonal
synergy hypothesis. More recently, Ramenzoni and
colleagues (2011) provided evidence for interpersonal
synergies by demonstrating that the behavioral control
exhibited by a pair of individuals performing a continuous,
interpersonal, postural targeting task also appears to be
modulated in a collective or synergistic manner. More
empirical work is still required to verify this hypothesis,
however, especially with respect to goal-directed joint
action tasks. Indeed, there have been no research studies that
have investigated whether discrete joint-action movement
tasks, such as when two individuals shake hands or pass an
object, are synergistic.

Experimentally Investigating Synergies and the
Uncontrolled Manifold
To be considered synergistic, a multi-limbed or multicomponent action should exhibit two key characteristics:
dimensional
compression
(DC)
and
reciprocal
compensation (RC) (Riley et al., 2011). DC refers to the
reduction of effective DoF or overall system dimensionality
by coupling the relevant DoFs together, where the
movement of one motor DoF is connected to or dependent
on the movement of others. DC, coupled with the motor
abundance characteristic of the human movement system
(Latash, 2012) brings about RC, which refers to the

2021

processes that allow the system to adaptively react to
movement noise or unexpected changes in the task
environment—a change in one DoF will be compensated by
activity of other DoF to preserve the overall movement goal.
Together, these complementary processes reduce motor
system dimensionality, thereby simplifying control, while
ensuring the system’s flexibility to resist and overcome
unexpected situational constraints or perturbations via nonlocal component adaptations (Riley et al., 2011).
The uncontrolled manifold (UCM) method was first
introduced by Scholz and Schöner (1999), and enables one
to analyze data and test hypotheses about RC and DC. This
method is widely used, theory-neutral and useful in simple
tasks in which successful completion can be clearly
measured. An excellent example of how this can be
achieved was provided by Domkin and colleagues (2002)
who devised an experimental task in which a single
participant bent both his/her arms from a lateral,
outstretched position to the forward frontal position such
that a pointer located on the right hand was connected with a
target located on the left hand. They asked their participants
to repeat this movement several times and looked at the
effects of repetitive performance by comparing the
configuration of the joint angles at the beginning of the
experiment to that at the end. They were particularly
interested in whether the control employed to ensure the
meeting of the pointer and target was manifested at each
arm separately, or if the two arms were controlled together
as a synergy.
To determine whether task control was organized at the
unimanual or bimanual level, Domkin et al. (2002)
employed the UCM method. Successful completion of the
task employed by Domkin et al. is achieved by bringing the
tip of the pointer to the intended target. For such tasks, a
task space of all possible end-effector positions can be
created in which a sub-space or manifold (typically a line or
a plane) within the task space specifies all of the joint-angle
configurations (i.e., between elbows, wrists, shoulders) that
result in successful task completion (Scholz & Schöner,
1999). Variation along this manifold results in task
completion and is referred to as compensatory or
uncontrolled (i.e., tolerated) variation. Variation that is
perpendicular or orthogonal to the manifold is considered
uncompensated since it corresponds to variation that
negatively affects the ability to bring the pointer to the
target in a given trial. A synergy is thought to be present
when the ratio of uncontrolled variation to orthogonal
variation is above one.
By determining the ratio of uncontrolled to orthogonal
variation, the UCM method can therefore be used to index
DC and RC in a potentially synergistic action. RC is
represented in the UCM method through the sub-space of
successful completion of the task along which uncontrolled
variation falls. When comparing different DoF configuration
hypotheses at different organizational levels (i.e.
interpersonal vs. intrapersonal) against each other DC can
be measured. If the interpersonal joint configuration is the

strongest synergy identified via the ratio of uncontrolled to
orthogonal variation, then this would show the presence of
DC at an interpersonal level.
By employing the UCM method to measure RC and DC
across 315 trials completed over four days, Domkin et al.
(2002) were able to test three competing hypotheses: The
target and pointer position are stabilized by a joint
interaction of both arms; the target position is stabilized by
controlling the joints in the left arm; or the pointer is
stabilized by controlling the joints in the right arm. They
found that a bimanual synergy was formed in order to
complete the task effectively, and that this bimanual synergy
was stronger than each of the unimanual synergies. In other
words, the two-arm-system was controlled as a unitary
system and worked as a whole to bring about successful
completion of the task.

Current Study
The objective of this study was to use the UCM method to
directly examine whether synergistic processes constrain
and organize behavior in a simple, discrete, joint-action
task. Given the qualitative similarity to the simple jointaction of shaking hands with another person, a twoparticipant version of a Domkin et al. (2002) target-pointing
task was employed, in which pairs of participants sat next to
each other and each person used one arm to complete the
two-dimensional pointer-to-target task together (see Figure
1). By determining the UCM ratio of compensated-touncompensated variation at the interpersonal and
intrapersonal arm-system levels, the study centered on
testing the hypothesis (H1) that successful task completion
is stabilized by the collective and non-additive interaction of
each participant’s arm (i.e., participants form an
interpersonal synergy) against the hypotheses (H2 & H3)
that successful task completion is stabilized by participants
individually and independently controlling the joints in their
respective arm (i.e. intrapersonal left and intrapersonal
right) in a coordinated, yet additive manner (i.e., the
coordinated interpersonal action is not a synergy).

Method
Participants
Thirty students (15 pairs) from the University of
Cincinnati were recruited to participate in the experiment.
Participants were both male (N = 13) and female (N = 17)
and ranged in age from 19 to 34 years. All participants were
right-handed, had healthy motor function, and had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. Participants were matched
within pairs by height.

Apparatus
Participant pairs sat in rigid chairs that were constructed
in the laboratory to accommodate adjustable shoulder straps.
The chairs were positioned side-by-side in front of a 74 cm
high table. The participant seated to the left (participant 1)
held a plastic semi-circle (11.1 cm in diameter) in her/his
left hand, which was referred to as the target. The target was
taped to the participant’s left index finger and thumb. The
participant located to the right (participant 2) held a pointer

2022

on her/his right hand. This pointer was a 23 cm long
wooden stick that was taped to her/his right index finger.
An optical, marker-based Optotrak Certus motiontracking system (Northern Digital Inc.) was employed to
track the 3D position of arm joints. Markers were placed on
the standard bony landmarks that correspond to participants’
shoulder (the acromion), elbow (lateral epicondyle), and
wrist (between the radius and ulnar bones) (Domkin et al.,
2002, p. 14). Additionally, markers were placed at the tip of
the pointer and the center of the target. Finally, a marker
was placed between the two chairs at the level of the
participants’ shoulders so that the position of all other
markers could be re-scaled for analysis (see below for more
details). Position data for each marker was recorded at a
frequency of 100 Hz and filtered using a second order
Butterworth IIR filter with a cutoff of 10 Hz.

Figure 1. Bird’s-eye view of the experimental set-up with
participant 1 sitting on the left side using his or her left arm to hold
the target and participant 2 using his or her right hand to hold the
pointer at (a) the initial and (b) objective position. Black dots
represent markers placed on the participants and on the back of the
chairs.

Procedure
Upon entering the experimental room, participants were
asked to sit side-by-side in the chairs and their shoulders
were strapped securely in place. The table was then placed
in front of them and the motion tracking markers were
attached to each participant. The participants were informed
that the objective of their task was to bring the pointer to the
center of the target as fast and as accurately as possible.
They were informed that the straps were placed on their
shoulder to prevent the use of their torso during the
movement. Additionally, they were instructed to perform
the task movement parallel to the table (so as to prevent
movement in the vertical plane). Participants were
instructed to open their arms until they were flush with the
end of the table (thereby enabling full arm extension) and to
wait for a verbal command to perform the movement
quickly and accurately. They were then allowed to practice
the movement two times, so the experimenter could verify
that they were in fact limiting their movements to the
sagittal and coronal planes (see Figure 1).
Pairs completed 300 trials across two separate sessions,
with both sessions performed within the span of a single
week. For the first session, pairs completed two sequences
of 100 trials each, with a pause of at least 5 minutes between
each sequence. They were also allowed breaks every 25
trials if they deemed it necessary. For the second session,
pairs completed another 100 trials. Although position data
were collected for every trial, in replication of Domkin et al.

(2002) only the first and last 15 successfully completed
trials were used for analysis. More specifically, the first 15
successfully completed trials from the first 30 trials of the
first 100 trial sequence (pre-test) and last 15 successfully
completed trials within the last 30 trials of the third 100 trial
sequence (post-test) were used in the analyses1.

Measures
The same measures and UCM model calculations
employed by Domkin and colleagues (2002) were used for
the current analyses2.
Kinematic variables. The kinematic measures detailed
below were calculated as preliminary measures, both to
assess whether the shoulder straps had the intended
consequence of reducing the movement of the torso and as
preparation for the UCM calculations. Movement time was
based on the calculated initiation and termination time. The
initiation time was calculated as the moment where the
velocity of the target and pointer sensors exceeded 10% of
the maximum velocity over the whole trial. The movement
termination time was determined as the point at which the
velocity fell below 10% of its maximum. Both initiation and
termination times were calculated for both arms and when
these times were different the earliest initiation time and the
latest termination time were adopted as respective trial
beginning and end markers. All measures reported below
were calculated with respect to these movement period
markers.
The final movement position was considered to be 100 ms
after the termination time of the movement (Domkin et al.,
2002). It was at this final movement position that the
constant and variable errors were calculated as a function of
the target and pointer positions in the x (coronal) and y
(saggital) planes. Constant errors were calculated for each
plane separately and were determined as the spatial
separation between the pointer and target at the final
movement position. These measures quantified successful
completion and variability of placement at the termination
of the movement. The variable error, on the other hand, was
the SD of the constant error in individual trials with respect
to the mean position of the pointer sensor in each plane.
This measure provided a measure of variability at the
meeting point in each trial compared to the other trials.
The two-dimensional (x,y) meeting point position (where
the pointer and the target sensors actually met in the final
movement position) was also examined within the
movement plane. Since there was inherent variance in how
participants performed the task from trial-to-trial (even
when they completed it successfully), it was necessary to
assess how scattered the meeting point was within the
movement plane. The variability of this meeting point was
1

Trials where sensors were lost due to occlusion problems had to
be discarded. Due to these technological issues the pre-test block
for two of the pairs consisted of 11 trials instead of 15.
2
Prior to conducting the current study, a single-person pilot
experiment (N=5) was conducted using the same procedure and
methodology presented here. The results of this pilot study
replicated those of Domkin et al.

2023

calculated as the difference in planar distance of the meeting
points in the individual trials from the averaged planar
distance across the 15 trials of the respective trial block.
This provided a measure of variance of this meeting point
for both the initial and final trial blocks.
The average shoulder displacement of participants was
only 1.59 cm. This is consistent with the 1 cm displacement
found by Domkin et al. (2002) and indicates that the
shoulder straps on the chairs did stop participants from
using their torsos much during the task. Thus, only the three
arm joints (shoulder, elbow and wrist) for each participant
needed to be considered. The contribution of each joint to
the movement was first determined by calculating the range
of motion of each joint. This range of motion was calculated
as the difference between the biggest and the smallest joint
angle during each movement (i.e., between the initial and
final movement markers defined above). As was the case in
Domkin et al.’s study, these joint angles were calculated
using the approximations of arm segment lengths, obtained
by calculating the Euclidian distance between the markers at
the joints.
Total joint variance of joint configuration. Since trials
varied in duration, angular trajectories were timenormalized using a cubic spline interpolation within the preand the post-test blocks. The movement time in each trial
was divided into ten even time bins. This normalization
made direct comparison between trials possible.
The mean joint configuration was then computed for each
time bin and also across the whole trial. This measure
indexed how much each joint moved and contributed to the
overall completion of different parts of the trial.
Furthermore, the joint variance was the variable considered
to be stabilized in the formation of the synergy and was
therefore the main variable used for the UCM analysis
detailed below. Finally, the deviation of the mean
configuration of each time bin (Δk(t)) from the mean for the
whole trial was calculated. This deviation was then divided
by the number of trials in the block (i.e., 15) and the number
of degrees of freedom available (six when considering both
arms simultaneously and three when considering each arm
separately), to obtain the total variance per DoF of joint
configuration (VTOT) for each trial. VTOT quantifies the degree
of variability present in each trial when compared to the
other trials in the block. Since it is dependent on the DoF
used, it can be calculated at both the interpersonal (H1) and
intrapersonal (H2 & H3) levels.
Control hypotheses and task variables. Following
Domkin et al. (2002), three stabilization hypotheses were
tested. The first hypothesis (H1) to be tested was whether
the necessary joint stabilization needed to complete the task
was distributed across both arms (interpersonal or bimanual
hypothesis). In contrast, the second hypothesis (H2) was
that the control focused on stabilizing the target and,
therefore, that the joint configuration of the left arm of
Participant 1 was central to task performance (intrapersonal
or unimanual left). The third hypothesis (H3) was that the

right arm pointer (Participant 2) stabilization was the focus
of control (intrapersonal or unimanual right).
VTOT was partitioned into the variance that occurred along
the uncontrolled manifold (VUCM) subspace—which is
considered to be compensated variance—and the variance
occurring orthogonal (VORT) to this subspace—which is
considered uncompensated. The VUCM and VORT were
calculated for each time bin of each trial in the pre- and
post-test blocks for each pair for each hypothesis level.
Finally, the ratio of VUCM to VORT was calculated for each
hypothesis (by averaging VUCM and VORT across pairs and
time bins). If the variance along the UCM was found to be
higher than that found along the orthogonal task-space
dimensions (numbers higher than 1 in the ratio), the
organization of the movement DoF would be considered
synergistic. Accordingly, if this ratio is higher in H1
compared to H2 and H3 analyses, then the interpersonal
movement system would not only be considered synergistic,
but would be the strongest synergy and the one that best
characterizes the organization of the task-directed
movement system.
In other words, the stabilization
necessary to complete the task would be found to be
dependent on the movements of both participants (as one
single interpersonal synergistic system) as opposed to the
separate stabilization of each arm (two synergistic [arm]
systems interacting).

Results
Due to equipment malfunction and marker occlusion
issues, data from two pairs could not be analyzed. Thus, the
following analysis and results include data from only
thirteen of the fifteen pairs recruited (i.e., N = 13).

Movement Kinematics
A paired samples one-tailed t-test comparison revealed an
expected significant decrease in mean movement time from
pre-test to post-test (Mpre-test = 1.36 sec; Mpost-test = 1.20 sec;
t(12) = 1.91, p = .04).
Paired samples t-test analyses of the constant errors in the
final position in the x and y plane and as a function of test
block revealed no significant differences for these
dependent measures (all t(12) < 1.71, p > .11). The variable
error of this meeting point as a function of test was also
calculated, but there was no significant difference between
pre- and post-test, t(12) = 1.78, p = .19, indicating that the
meeting point was achieved successfully for all trials and
remained relatively constant across pairs and test blocks.
With respect to range of joint angles, even though
Domkin et al. (2002) found differences of joint range by
arm, indicating a handedness effect, this was not the case in
the current results. Repeated measures 2 (side: left vs. right)
 2 (test: pre vs. post) ANOVAs for each major joint
showed only a significant main effect of test for the
shoulder range of motion, which was significantly reduced
with practice. All other main effects and interactions were
not significant (all F(1,8) < 3.58, p > .08), which suggests
that participants contributed equally during the actualization
of the movement across all trials and sessions.

2024

normalized time bins. All possible synergy configurations—
intrapersonal
(arm)
and
interpersonal
synergy
configurations—show higher VUCM than VORT, both for preand post-test, indicating that the system at either level can
be considered to be synergistically organized. Consistent
with the VTOT results reported above, the UCM and ORT
variance for all level configurations (i.e., interpersonal, leftarm-participant, right-arm participant) also decreased from
pre- to post-test.

Figure 2. Mean joint angle configuration time series of the pre(top) and post-test (bottom row) blocks by arm in a representative
pair. The error bars depict standard deviation. The x-axis depicts
the mean time it took to complete the trial.

Joint-Angle Variance
Figure 2 provides a prototypical example of the mean
joint angle trajectory exhibited by the arms of participants
during pre- and post-test trials. The standard deviation,
depicted in the error bars, shows a general decrease in the
overall variance from pre- to post-test. To test whether this
decrease was significant we analyzed, the total variance per
DoF (VTOT), depicted in Figure 3left, averaged across pairs
and time bins. Since the interpersonal VTOT is the result of
the addition between the value of the two intrapersonal
hypotheses, a 2 (side: left vs. right)  2 (test: pre vs. post)
ANOVA was conducted. As expected, this analysis resulted
in a significant main effect of test, F(1, 12) = 14.83, p < .01,
ηp2 = .55, with VTOT being significantly lower in the post-test
(M = 0.005) compared to the pre-test (M = 0.01). That is,
participants showed significantly less variability in the posttest than the pre-test trials (i.e., their task performance
improved with time). No other significant effects were
obtained for the analysis of VTOT (all p > .51).

Figure 3. (left) Total variance per degree of freedom (VTOT)
averaged across the pairs and time bins presented by synergy and
(right) mean ratio of UCM variance to ORT variance by hypothesis
and test. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

Figure 4 shows the mean VUCM and VORT for both pre- and
post-test for each stabilization hypothesis across the ten

Figure 4. VUCM (represented by diamonds) and VORT (represented
by circles) averaged across pairs by time bins for the three control
configurations (interpersonal at the top, intrapersonal left in the
middle and intrapersonal right at the bottom). The variances are
also separated by test (pre-test being the unfilled and post-test
being the filled symbols). Error bars represent standard error of the
mean.

To assess the relative strength of the interpersonal
synergy and the two intrapersonal synergies, the ratio of
UCM variance over ORT variance (average across pairs and
time bins) was calculated for each possible synergy
configuration. As can be seen in Figure 3right, all the VUCM
to VORT ratios obtained were higher than one, indicating that
the DoF used for this task were synergistically organized at
all levels (interpersonal and intrapersonal). More
importantly, a 2 (test)  3 (hypothesis: bimanual, left and
right) ANOVA showed a significant main effect of synergy
configuration, F(2, 24) = 7.13, p = .01, ηp2 = .37, with LSD
post-hoc analyses revealing that the interpersonal synergy
was significantly stronger (M = 3.79) than the intrapersonal

2025

left (M = 1.32; p = .01) and also significantly stronger than
the intrapersonal right (M = 1.97; p = .04). No other
OMNIBUS effects were significant (all p > .20).

Distinguishing such synergistic processes will likely impact
our understanding of other joint-action and social motor
coordination phenomena (e.g. interpersonal passing
behaviors, team sports), as well as the dynamics of social
action and interaction in general.

Discussion
As expected, task performance improved over the course
of the study, as demonstrated by the reduction of VTOT
observed from the pre- to the post-test blocks. The
significant decrease in mean movement time also pointed to
an increase in task efficiency. Since a certain level of
variance is expected and even considered beneficial for
motor task completion (Bernstein, 1967; Black et al., 2007),
of greater relevance to the three hypotheses being examined
here was the nature of the variance (compensated vs.
uncompensated). Therefore, a VUCM to VORT ratio was
calculated for each of the three stabilization hypotheses
(with a variance ratio higher than one representing
synergistic organization at that level). The ratio of variance
analysis revealed two key findings.
The first finding was that the behavior was synergistic at
both the interpersonal and intrapersonal levels from the start
of the study (pre-test) and remained synergistic until the end
(post-test). This finding corroborates previous evidence
indicating that synergistic organization is prototypical of
human perceptual-motor behavior in general (e.g. Domkin
et al., 2002; Jacquier-Bret et al., 2009; Scholz & Schöner,
1999; Scholz et al., 2000). Moreover, it validates the
hypothesis that co-actors can spontaneously form a twoperson synergistic system in order to carry out a joint action
task. Related to the latter point, the second key finding was
that the strongest synergistic organization observed in the
task was at the interpersonal level. This finding suggests
that the movements of co-acting individuals were
temporarily constrained and organized to form a single
synergistic two-person system (Riley et al., 2011).
The findings of the current project extend our previous
knowledge of interpersonal synergies in several ways. First,
the current study provides the first definitive evidence that
interpersonal synergistic organization can characterize
discrete joint action tasks (Black et al., 2007). Second, by
using UCM the results of the current study show that jointaction behavior can possess both of the key characteristics
of synergistic behavior—RC and DC. While the use of PCA
had previously demonstrated DC across participants in a
supra-postural targeting task (Ramenzoni et al., 2011) it
failed to test the presence of RC. The presence of these two
key characteristics in the organization of DoF in a discrete
joint motor task therefore provides definitive support for the
emergence of interpersonal synergies.
Finding that the action dynamics of individuals
performing a joint-action task can become temporarily
organized to form a single synergistic two-person system
implies that social interactions in general may need to be
investigated from a synergistic perspective. In other words,
future research should be directed towards identifying the
reciprocal and functionally defined couplings that
constructively constrain the DoFs of co-actors.

Acknowledgment: This research was supported by the
National Institutes of Health (R01GM105045).

References
Bernstein, N. A. (1967). Coordination and regulation of
movements. New York: Pergamon Press.
Black, D. P., Riley, M. A., & McCord, C. K. (2007).
Synergies in intra- and interpersonal interlimb rhythmic
coordination. Motor Control, 11, 348-373.
Domkin, D., Laczko, J. Jaric, S., Johansson, H., & Latash,
M. L. (2002). Structure of joint variability in bimanual
pointing tasks. Experimental Brain Research, 143, 11-23.
Jacquier-Bret, J., Rezzoug, N., & Gorce, P. (2009).
Adaptation of joint flexibility during a reach-to-grasp
movement. Motor Control, 13(3), 342-361.
Kelso, J. A. S. (2009). Synergies: Atoms of brain and
behavior. In D. Sternad (Ed.), Progress in Motor Control
(pp. 83-91). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Latash, M. L. (2012). The bliss (not the problem) of motor
abundance (not redundancy). Experimental brain
research, 217(1), 1-5.
Ramenzoni, V. C., Davis, T. J., Riley, M. A., Shockley, K.,
& Baker, A. A. (2011). Joint action in a cooperative
precision task: nested processes of intrapersonal and
interpersonal coordination. Experimental Brain Research,
211, 447-457.
Riley, M. A., Richardson, M. J., Shockley, K., &
Ramenzoni, V. C. (2011). Interpersonal synergies.
Frontiers in Psychology, 2, doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00038.
Schmidt, R. C., & Richardson, M. J. (2008). Dynamics of
interpersonal coordination. In A. Fuchs & V. K. Jirsa
(Eds.), Coordination: Neural, behavioral and social
dynamics (pp. 281-307). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Scholz, J. P., & Schöner G. (1999). The uncontrolled
manifold concept: Identifying control variables for a
functional task. Experimental Brain Research, 126, 289306.
Scholz, J. P., Schöner G., & Latash, M. L. (2000).
Identifying the control structure of multijoint coordination
during pistol shooting. Experimental Brain Research,
135, 382-404.
Turvey, M. T., & Fonseca, S. (2009). Nature of motor
control: Perspectives and issues. In D. Sternad (Ed.)
Progress in Motor Control: A multidisciplinary
perspective (pp. 93-122). New York: Springer-Verlag.

2026

