Change your Mind: Investigating the Effects of
Self-Explanation in the Resolution of Misconceptions
Laura K. Allen (LauraKAllen@asu.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (DSMcnama@asu.edu)
Arizona State University, Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 872111
Tempe, AZ 85281 USA

Matthew T. McCrudden (Matt.McCrudden@vuw.ac.nz)
Victoria University of Wellington, School of Education, P.O. Box 17-310
Wellington 6147, New Zealand
Abstract

held by the reader (Kendeou & van den Broek, 2007; van
den Broek & Kendeou, 2008). The co-activation of both
correct and incorrect information presumably increases the
likelihood that readers recognize inaccuracies in their
understandings and work to revise their misconceptions.
Support for the co-activation hypothesis primarily stems
from research investigating the cognitive processes that take
place while reading refutational texts (Kendeou, Muis, &
Fulton, 2011; Kendeou & van den Broek, 2007; McCrudden
& Kendeou, 2014; van den Broek & Kendeou, 2008). Prior
studies, for instance, have demonstrated that readers allocate
more time to target sentences within refutational texts as
opposed to control versions of these texts. Additionally,
students who read refutational texts generate think-aloud
statements that are more indicative of conceptual change
strategies (Kendeou & van den Broek, 2007; Kendeou et al.,
2011; van den Broek & Kendeou, 2008).
Despite these online processing differences, research on
the efficacy of these specialized texts to promote conceptual
change has been mixed. Although some research has shown
positive effects of these texts on retention of science
knowledge and inference-level performance (Ariasi &
Mason, 2011; Diakidoy, Kendeou, & Ioannides, 2003;
Mason & Gava, 2007), other studies have reported null
results (Kendeou et al., 2011; Kendou & van den Broek,
2007; Palmer, 2003). These mixed findings indicate that
conceptual change from refutational texts is not a simple or
straightforward process. Rather, this learning process likely
depends on a number of other factors, and in particular, the
cognitive processes in which readers engage while reading.

We investigated the differential effects of self-explaining a
refutational text, compared to thinking aloud or rereading.
Undergraduate students (n = 105) read a refutational text
about natural selection and were asked to either self-explain,
think-aloud, or re-read the text. Then they completed a
posttest that assessed general knowledge of natural selection.
Students who self-explained the refutational text subsequently
outperformed their peers on a test of their knowledge of
natural selection. Additionally, the results suggest that both
instructional and performance differences were significantly
linked to the degree of causal cohesion present within
students’ natural language responses to the text (i.e., selfexplanations and think-alouds).
Keywords:
computational
strategies

comprehension;
conceptual
change;
linguistics; cohesion; self-explanation;

Introduction
Misconceptions emerge from our attempts to understand the
world around us (Guzzetti et al., 1993). As a result, they
tend to be relatively intuitive and relate to our prior
(accurate) knowledge reasonably well. Not surprisingly
then, these misconceptions can be difficult to recognize and
extremely resistant to change (van den Broek & Kendeou,
2008). Importantly, misconceptions cause interference when
we attempt to learn new and related information (Feltovich,
Couson, & Spiro, 2001), which can pose serious problems
in our academic and everyday lives. Hence, researchers
investigate processes involved in resolving misconceptions
(conceptual change) and means to promote conceptual
change most effectively (Vosniadou, 2003).
One method proposed to enhance conceptual change is
through the development of specific types of educational
texts. In particular, refutational texts are commonly
employed in classroom and laboratory settings because they
encourage students to alter their beliefs about concepts by:
(a) explicitly defining common misconceptions of a given
topic, (b) stating the inaccuracies in these beliefs, and (c)
following these statements with correct explanations of the
topic (Dole, 2000; Guzzetti et al., 1993). According to the
co-activation hypothesis, refutational texts are effective
because they promote the simultaneous activation of the
correct information in the text and the incorrect information

Text Comprehension Processes
Comprehension of texts is a complex activity that involves
knowledge of the language and the domain, as well as
interactions among lower and higher-order skills used to
process this knowledge. Not surprisingly, then, individuals
vary a great deal in the cognitive processes that they employ
during comprehension (McNamara, Jacovina, & Allen, in
press; McNamara & Magliano, 2009). One explanation for
inconsistent results regarding the effects of refutational texts
is that, despite reading the same text, students may engage
in vastly different processes depending on the particular
circumstances (instructions, goals, prior knowledge, etc.).

78

Current Study

Deep comprehension relies on a reader’s ability to
activate prior knowledge and make connections among this
prior knowledge and information in a text (McNamara &
Magliano, 2009). The result of these processes is the mental
representation. Readers develop coherent representations of
text material to the degree that they establish connections
using inferences (Oakhill & Yuill, 1996). Thus, the
generation of inferences is key to successfully
comprehending text information (McNamara, 2004;
McNamara & Magliano, 2009).
Self-explanation is a strategy that has been used to
promote these coherence-building processes (McNamara,
2004), which in turn enhances understanding of complex
concepts (Chi et al., 1989). In particular, self-explanation
fosters the activation of prior knowledge, the generation of
inferences, and places a greater focus on causally relevant
information, rather than perceptually relevant information
(Chi et al., 1989; Legare & Lombrozo, 2014; Walker et al.,
2014). Causal information focuses on mechanistic relations
between people or objects (e.g., X caused Y to happen),
whereas perceptual information refers to the characteristics
of those people or objects (e.g., their color or shape).
Our principal claim is that conceptual change may not
rely solely on the type of texts presented to students, but
also (and more importantly) on the comprehension
processes that students employ while reading these texts. In
particular, we suggest that refutational texts will be
successful to the extent that students generate inferences,
which will consequently increase the coherence of their text
representations. Thus, instructing students to self-explain
will promote coherence-building processes and increase the
efficacy of refutational texts to promote conceptual change.
As an initial step, we investigate coherence-building
processes while students read refutational texts. We do so
by examining both referential and causal cohesion in
students’ responses to the text (i.e., self-explanations and
think-alouds). Referential cohesion emerges from cues such
as overlap in objects (i.e., nouns) or people, indicating that
these referents are the same or different across sentences.
Causal cohesion is signaled by overlapping actions (i.e.,
verbs) and connectives (e.g., because, therefore), which
serve to explicitly describe connections among events,
actions, people, and objects.
Although these cohesion indices are not direct measures
of coherence (e.g., McNamara et al., 2014), studies have
shown that cohesion can serve as a proxy for coherence, and
the cohesion of students’ self-explanations is a strong
predictor of their ability to comprehend texts (Allen, Snow,
& McNamara, 2015; Varner et al., 2013). Thus, we predict
that in comparison to normal reading processes reflected in
students’ think-alouds, instructing students to self-explain
text will lead them to place a greater emphasis on causal
relationships, which will increase the degree to which their
text responses are causally cohesive. Additionally, we
predict that these cohesion differences will relate to their
performance on a posttest knowledge measure.

In the current study, we examine whether instructing
individuals to self-explain a refutational text will
differentially affect their understanding of natural selection
in comparison to thinking-aloud or rereading. We also
examine the extent to which these differences manifest in
the cohesion of students’ verbal responses while reading the
text. Our research questions are listed below:
1)

Does self-explanation of a refutational text enhance
comprehension of natural selection in comparison to
thinking-aloud or rereading the text?

2)

Does the cohesion of students’ natural language
responses vary as a function of instructional
condition (i.e., self-explanation vs. think aloud)?

3)

Does the cohesion of students’ natural language
responses predict post-reading performance on a test
of natural selection knowledge?

We first hypothesize that students in the experimental
conditions will vary in the degree to which they are able to
learn from the refutational text. In particular, we
hypothesize that students who engage in self-explanation
will outperform the students who think-aloud or reread on a
post-reading measure of natural selection knowledge.
Second, we hypothesize that students instructed to selfexplain the text will significantly differ from students
instructed to think-aloud in their use of causal cohesion, but
not in their use of referential cohesion. This hypothesis
follows from the assumption that self-explanation primarily
enhances the construction of causal connections between
events, rather than referential connections among concepts.
This hypothesis is in line with previous research that has
shown that self-explanation promotes greater processing of
causal information (Legare & Lombrozo, 2014; Walker et
al., 2014) and promotes more coherent mental
representations of text (Allen et al., 2015; McNamara, 2004;
McNamara & Magliano, 2009).
Our third hypothesis relates to the link between the
cohesion indices and performance on a post-reading test of
natural selection. We hypothesize that the cohesion indices
that significantly differentiate the self-explanation and
think-aloud conditions will also relate to students’ test
performance. This finding would suggest that the potential
benefits of self-explanation are related (at least in part) to
the degree to which self-explanation promotes specific
cognitive processes during comprehension.

Method
Participants
Participants were 105 introductory psychology students
from a university located in the southwestern United States
who participated for course credit. The students were
predominantly in their first year of college (66.3%); 67.3%
were male; 53% were Caucasian, 20% were Hispanic, 18%
were Asian, 9% were African American, and 4% reported

79

other; 18.3% of participants reported that they were second
language speakers of English. Seven participants were
excluded from the analyses due to missing data.

aggregated all of the responses provided by each individual
student (this aggregation method is discussed in greater
detail in Varner et al., 2013). Thus, for each student, one
aggregated response file was created, which contained all of
the text that they generated while reading. Paragraph breaks
were added to each of these aggregated files to preserve the
paragraph structure of the text; thus, each file contained
eight paragraphs.

Study Procedure
Students first completed a brief demographics questionnaire
and then read a refutational text related to natural selection.
The text was presented one sentence at a time, with previous
text remaining on the screen. Students completed a posttest
that assessed general knowledge of natural selection.
Students were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions, which related to the instructions they were given
for reading the text: self-explanation condition (n=33),
think-aloud condition (n=35), or reread condition (n=30).
Students in the self-explanation and think-aloud conditions
were prompted to generate typed responses on 16 separate
occasions throughout the text. The students in the selfexplanation condition were asked to explain the information
in the text that they had just read to themselves, whereas
students in the think-aloud conditions were told to state
whatever they were thinking. Students in the reread
condition did not generate responses while reading. To
control for time on task, they read the text twice.

Computational Analysis of Text Cohesion Students’
aggregated response files were analyzed using Coh-Metrix
(McNamara et al., 2014), which calculates linguistic text
properties, ranging from lower-level word indices to higherlevel indices about coherence and rhetorical language use.
For the purposes of the current study, we used Coh-Metrix
to measure referential cohesion and causal cohesion. For
each of these groups, three indices were selected.
The referential cohesion indices included: argument
overlap, stem overlap, and content word overlap. Argument
overlap refers to the degree to which sentences in the text
contain overlapping nouns and pronouns. Stem overlap is
similar to argument overlap, but it matches all words with
similar stems. Thus, overlapping stems will be counted even
if one is a noun and the other is an adjective. Finally,
content word overlap refers to the proportion of explicit
content words that overlap between two sentences.
Therefore, this variable helps to control for the varying
lengths of sentences in a text.
The causal cohesion indices included: causal ratio,
explicit verb overlap, and semantic verb overlap. The causal
ratio is assessed by calculating the ratio of causal verbs to
causal particles within a text. The causal verb measure is
based on the frequency of main causal verbs in a text (as
identified by WordNet; Felbaum, 1998) and the causal
particle count is based on a pre-defined set of causal
particles (e.g., because, as a result). This index reflects the
degree to which students are explicitly explaining causal
events by expressing the directionality of cause-effect
relationships. Verb overlap is also calculated with WordNet,
and measures the degree to which verbs (which have strong
links to actions, events, and states) are repeated in the text.
Verb cohesion indicates the degree to which a text makes
explicit connections among events (rather than objects).
Semantic verb overlap is calculated using Latent Semantic
Analysis and refers to the degree to which sentences in a
text contain verbs that have similar semantic meaning.

Measures
Refutational Text The text assigned to students (n=716
words; 8 paragraphs) was adapted from an excerpt in Steven
Pinker’s book, How the Mind Works and describes the
concept of natural selection and refutes intelligent design. In
particular, it explains how the world can appear to be a
product of intelligent design, but does not, in reality, have a
designer. To make this point, the text uses the example of
how the eye evolved. The text was adapted to be
refutational, in that it explicitly acknowledged commonly
held alternative conceptions about a topic (here, natural
selection) and directly refuted them by providing more
satisfactory explanations.
Conceptual Inventory of Natural Selection (CINS)
Natural selection is a topic for which students commonly
have misconceptions. Thus, in this study, we examined
students’ understanding of this topic. The CINS is a 20-item
multiple-choice assessment developed to measure general
knowledge of natural selection (Anderson, Fisher, &
Norman, 2002). The CINS was specifically developed to
capture students’ common misconceptions of natural
selection. The items address understanding of the five
factors and three inferences identified by Mayr (1982) as
important for understanding the logic underlying the theory
of natural selection. The CINS uses common alternative
conceptions as distractors. This assessment is considered to
be a valid and reliable measure of knowledge about natural
selection (e.g., Nehm & Shonfeld, 2008).

Results
Statistical analyses were conducted to examine whether
self-explanation of a refutational text enhanced students’
performance on a post-reading measure of natural selection
knowledge, as well as whether the cohesion of their typed
responses played a role in this effect.

Text Analyses

CINS Performance As predicted, students in the selfexplanation
condition
(M=51.36%,
SD=20.13%)
significantly outperformed students in both the think-aloud

To prepare the students’ natural language responses (i.e.,
their self-explanations or think-alouds) for text analysis, we

80

(M=41.43%, SD=15.93%), and reread (M=41.50%,
SD=20.09%) conditions, F(1,95)=43.17, p<.001 (see Figure
1). Hence, self-explanation enhanced students’ knowledge
of natural selection in comparison to thinking aloud or
rereading the text.

think-aloud (TA). A DFA model was first developed for the
entire set of students and this model was then used to
predict group membership of the students using leave-oneout-cross-validation (LOOCV) in order to ensure that the
model was stable across the dataset.
The stepwise DFA retained all three variables related to
causality. The results revealed that the DFA using these two
indices correctly allocated 50 of the 68 students in the total
set, χ2 (df=3, n=68)=25.00 p<.001, for an accuracy of
73.5% (chance level for this analysis is 50%). The reported
Cohen’s Kappa was .473, indicating a moderate agreement.
For the LOOCV analysis, the DFA allocated 47 of the 68
students for an accuracy of 69.1% (see the confusion matrix
reported in Table 2). The results of these analyses confirm
our second hypothesis and indicate that students in the selfexplanation condition generated text responses that were
more causally cohesive, but exhibited no differences in
terms of referential cohesion.

Figure 1: Conceptual Inventory of Natural Selection Scores
as a Function of Condition

Table 2: Confusion Matrix for DFA classifying Task
Instructions
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics [(Means and (SD)] for
Referential and Causal Cohesion
Index
Referential Cohesion
Argument overlap
Stem overlap
Content word overlap
Causal Cohesion
Causal ratio
Explicit verb overlap
Semantic verb overlap

SelfExplanation

Whole Set

SE
TA

SE
25
10

TA
8
25

LOOCV

SE
TA

SE
23
11

TA
10
24

ThinkAloud

0.31 (0.13)
0.03 (0.17)
0.06 (0.02)

0.26 (0.18)
0.02 (0.02)
0.06 (0.03)

1.00 (0.53)
0.58 (0.09)
0.13 (0.03)

0.69 (0.40)
0.48 (0.11)
0.10 (0.04)

Performance Differences Related to Causal Cohesion We
last examined the degree to which the indices of causal
cohesion that significantly differed according to
experimental condition also related to students’ performance
on the CINS test. Pearson correlations were calculated
between these causal cohesion indices and students’ scores
on the CINS. This analysis revealed that one of the three
causal cohesion indices was significantly correlated with
scores: explicit verb overlap (r=.36, p< .01).
A final DFA analysis was calculated to investigate
whether this measure of verb overlap accurately classified
the students according to their CINS performance group. A
median split was calculated on students’ CINS scores to
produce two groups: Low Score (M=6.26, SD=1.25) and
High Score (M=12.42, SD=2.69). The results of the DFA
revealed that the model correctly allocated 50 of the 68
students in the total set, χ2 (df=1,n=68)=15.832 p< .001, for
an accuracy of 73.5% (the chance level for this analysis is
50%). The reported Cohen’s Kappa was .471, indicating a
moderate agreement. For the LOOCV analysis, the DFA
also allocated 50 of the 68 students for an accuracy of
73.5% (see the confusion matrix reported in Table 3). These
results partially confirm our final hypothesis that the degree
of causal cohesion in students’ text responses was related to
their performance on the CINS test. Specifically, students
with higher verb overlap in their responses also had higher

Cohesion Indices Our second research question regarded
whether students in the self-explanation and think-aloud
conditions differed in their use of referential and causal
cohesion within their verbal responses. A MANOVA
analysis was first conducted to investigate whether
referential cohesion differed for students in the two
conditions (see Table 1 for descriptive statistics). This
analysis yielded a non-significant multivariate model,
F(3,64)=2.21, p=.10, with none of the indices
demonstrating significant effects. A similar MANOVA
analysis was conducted to examine whether causal cohesion
differed for the two conditions. This analysis yielded a
significant model, F(3,64)=10.10, p<.001, with all of the
indices demonstrating significant effects: causal ratio
F(1,66)=7.58, p<.01, explicit verb overlap F(1,66)=16.65,
p<.01, and semantic verb overlap F(1,66)=11.25, p=.001.
A follow-up Discriminant Function Analysis (DFA) was
next calculated to investigate whether the three significant
causal indices (i.e., causal ratio, explicit verb overlap,
semantic verb overlap) accurately classified the students
according to whether they were asked to self-explain (SE) or

81

scores on the CINS test. This suggests that the benefits of
self-explanation may be attributable (at least in part) to its
promotion of text processes that emphasize developing
connections among actions and events.

be given explicit instructions on how to engage with the text
in order to benefit from this generation process.
The results from the current study are important because
they indicate that self-explanation can promote beneficial
comprehension processes that can help to increase students’
comprehension of complex science concepts. In particular,
this study suggests that students may not be able to resolve
deep misconceptions by simply reading specific types of
texts (as predicted by the co-activation hypothesis). Rather,
they likely need to be provided explicit instructions that
encourage the generation of inferences and other coherencebuilding processes while they read refutational texts.
Previous research indicates that self-explanation can
enhance students’ understanding of complex concepts (e.g.,
Chi et al., 1989; McNamara, 2004). However, and
somewhat interestingly, there are no previous studies to our
knowledge that directly compare self-explanation to thinkaloud. Hence, this study furthers our understanding of how
self-explanation relates to other comprehension processes
(i.e., thinking-aloud and rereading), as well as in examining
the associated online processes at a more fine-grained level.
This study is, of course, only a first step in answering our
questions. First, additional studies will be necessary to
examine conceptual change more directly by including
knowledge assessments both before and after reading the
text. In the current study, we did not use a pretest-posttest
design and, consequently, we are unable to make inferences
about conceptual change at the level of individual student.
Second, further research is needed to examine the generality
of these effects across different types of texts and different
types of misconceptions.
A final avenue for future research relates to the efficacy
of self-explanation in enhancing conceptual change, and
whether these effects depend on differences in students’
abilities, such as prior knowledge or reading ability.
Although we see here that self-explanation led to more
effective comprehension processes, previous research
suggests that some students struggle to generate coherent
self-explanations (McNamara, 2004). We expect that such
students would need training to use comprehension
strategies in conjunction with self-explanation (McNamara,
2004; Jackson & McNamara, 2013).
Overall, the results of this study are promising and point
to the efficacy of self-explanation to promote conceptual
change. By using a multi-method approach, combining
behavioral methods with computational linguistics, this
study also contributes to a better understanding of why selfexplanation enhances learning, and potentially increases
conceptual change. Misconceptions can pose large
impediments to comprehension and learning. Hence, better
understanding the conceptual change process, and
developing methods to promote conceptual change are
crucial areas of research.

Table 3: Confusion Matrix for DFA classifying CINS
Performance
Whole Set

Low Score
High Score

Low Score
25
8

High Score
10
25

LOOCV

Low Score
High Score

Low Score
25
8

High Score
10
25

Discussion
In the current study, we investigated the differential effects
of self-explaining a refutational text, over thinking aloud or
rereading. Students who self-explained the refutational text
subsequently outperformed their peers on a test of natural
selection knowledge. Additionally, both instructional and
performance differences were significantly linked to the
degree of causal cohesion present within students’ natural
language responses to the text.
We interpret these results to indicate that self-explanation
promotes specific coherence-building processes that are
more conducive to conceptual change than other processes.
All students in this study were randomly assigned to an
experimental condition and were exposed to the same
refutational text. The only manipulation in the study was
whether students were asked to explain the information in
the text to themselves, state what they were thinking at the
moment, or read the text twice. However, despite this
relatively minor manipulation, students in the selfexplanation condition significantly outperformed their peers
on a test of general natural selection knowledge.
Importantly, the CINS did not simply measure students’
comprehension of the specific text context (i.e., it was a
general measure of natural selection knowledge). Thus, selfexplanation of this refutational text enhanced students’
understanding of natural selection more broadly, perhaps by
changing their prior misconceptions about the topic.
Beyond these performance differences, the results from
the current study also provide more fine-grained information
about the online cognitive processes underlying these
conditional differences. In this study, we demonstrated that
causal cohesion was a significant predictor of students’
experimental condition as well as their performance on the
CINS test. These results indicate that instructing students to
self-explain the information in the text led them to engage in
more causal and coherence-building text processing, which
ultimately impacted their performance on the CINS test.
Importantly, these results suggest that simply generating
responses while reading will not necessarily promote
increased understanding of the text. Rather, students need to

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Institute for
Educational Sciences (IES R305A130124) and National

82

Science Foundation (NSF REC0241144; IIS-0735682). Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the IES or NSF.

In S. Vosniadou, A. Baltas, & X. Vamvakoussi (Eds.),
Reframing the conceptual change approach in learning
and instruction. Elsevier.
Mayr, E. (1982). The growth of biological thought.
Diversity, evolution and inheritance. Cambridge, MA:
The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press
McCrudden, M. T., & Kendeou, P. (2014). Exploring the
link between cognitive processes and learning from
refutational text. Journal of Research in Reading, 37,
116-140.
McNamara, D.S. (2004). SERT: Self-explanation reading
training. Discourse Processes, 38, 1-30.
McNamara, D. S., Graesser, A. C., McCarthy, P., & Cai, Z.
(2014). Automated evaluation of text and discourse with
Coh-Metrix. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McNamara, D. S., Jacovina, M. E., & Allen, L. K. (in
press). Higher order thinking in comprehension. In P.
Afflerbach (Ed.), Handbook of individual differences in
reading: Text and context.
McNamara, D. S. & Magliano, J. P. (2009). Towards a
comprehensive model of comprehension. In B. Ross
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation. New
York, NY: Elsevier Science.
Nehm, R. H., & Schonfeld, I. S. (2008). Measuring
knowledge of natural selection: A comparison of the
CINS, an open-response instrument, and an oral
interview. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 45,
1131–1160.
Oakhill, J., & Yuill, N. (1996). Higher order factors in
comprehension disability: Processes and remediation. In
C. Cornaldi & J. Oakhill (Eds.), Reading comprehension
difficulties: Processes and intervention. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Palmer, D. H. (2003). Investigating the relationship between
refutational texts and conceptual change. Science
Education, 87, 663-684.
van den Broek, P. & Kendeou, P. (2008). Cognitive
processes in comprehension of science texts: The role of
co-activation in confronting misconceptions. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 335-351.
Varner, L. K., Jackson, G. T., Snow, E. L., & McNamara,
D. S. (2013). Does size matter? Investigating user input at
a larger bandwidth. In C. Boonthum-Denecke & G. M.
Youngblood (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Flordia Artificial Intelligence Research Society (FLAIRS)
Conference (pp. 546-549). Menlo Park, CA: The AAAI
Press.
Vosniadou, S. (2003). Exploring the relationships between
conceptual change and intentional learning. In Sinatra, G.
M., & Pintrich, P. R. (Eds.), Intentional conceptual
change. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Publishers.
Walker, C. M., Lombrozo, T., Legare, C. H., & Gopnik, A.
(2014). Explaining prompts children to privilege
inductively rich properties. Cognition, 133 343-357.

References
Allen, L. K., Snow, E. L., & McNamara, D. S. (2015). Are
you reading my mind? Modeling students’ reading
comprehension skills with natural language processing
techniques. In P. Nlikdyrin, A. Merceron, & G. Siemens
(Eds.), Proceedings of the fifth annual international
learning analytics and knowledge conference (pp. 246254). Poughkeepsie, NY.
Anderson, D. L., Fisher, K. M., & Norman, G. J. (2002).
Development and evaluation of the Conceptual Inventory
of Natural Selection. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 39, 952-978.
Ariasi, N. & Mason, L. (2011). Uncovering the effect of text
structure in learning from a science text: An eye-tracking
study. Instructional Science, 39, 581-601.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, R., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanation: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145–182.
Diakidoy, I. N., Kendeou, P., & Ioannides, C. (2003).
Reading about energy: The effects of text structure in
science learning and conceptual change. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 28, 335-356.
Dole, J. A. (2000). Readers, texts and conceptual change
learning. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 16, 99-118.
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet: An electronic lexical
database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Feltovich, P., Coulson, R., & Spiro, R. (2001). Learners’
(mis)understanding of important and difficult concepts: A
challenge to smart machines in education. In K. D.
Forbus, & P. J. Feltovich (Eds.), Smart machines in
education. MenloPark, CA: AAAI/MIT Press.
Guzzetti, B. J., Snyder, T. E., Glass, G. V., & Gamas, W. S.
(1993). Promoting conceptual change in science: A
comparative meta-analysis of instructional interventions
from reading education and science education. Reading
Research Quarterly, 28, 116-159.
Jackson, G. T., & McNamara, D. S. (2013). Motivation and
performance in a game-based intelligent tutoring system.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 105, 1036-1049.
Kendeou, P., Muis, K. R., & Fulton, S. (2011). Reader and
text factors in reading comprehension processes. Journal
of Research in Reading, 34, 365-383.
Kendeou, P., & van den Broek, P. (2007). Interactions
between priork knowledge and text structure during the
comprehension of scientific texts. Memory and Cognition,
35, 1567-1577.
Legare, C. H., & Lombrozo, T. (2014). Selective effects of
explanation on learning during early childhood. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 126, 198-212.
Mason, L. & Gava, M. (2007). Effects of epistemological
beliefs and learning text structure on conceptual change.

83

