Children’s Trust in Technological and Human Informants
Nicholaus S. Noles (n.noles@louisville.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA

Judith H. Danovitch (j.danovitch@louisville.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA

Patrick Shafto (patrick.shafto@gmail.com)
Department of Math & Computer Science, Rutgers University – Newark
Newark, NJ 07102 USA
Abstract
Children understand early in development that different
people know different things, and they are adept at using
this information to select appropriate sources of
information (Lutz & Keil, 2002). However, in the current
digital age, information may be gathered from both
humans and technological sources that select and present
information as humans do. Using methods designed to
study epistemic trust in human informants (e.g., Koenig,
Clement, & Harris, 2004), the current study investigates
children’s and adults’ selective trust in a technological
and human informant. Children (ages 4 and 5) and adults
were presented with queries designed to probe their
willingness to seek out and accept information from
human versus technological informants. The results
demonstrate that 4-year-olds prefer to seek information
from a human informant, but by age 5, children show an
increasing preference for the technological informant.
The relationship between children’s trust and their
experience with technology is also discussed.
Keywords: epistemic trust; technology; information

A mere generation ago, an individual wondering why
the sky is blue or who invented the typewriter would
find that the boundaries of their intellectual world did
not extend far beyond the local library or the best guess
of a community member. Today, we interact with a
world wide web of information that represents a new
level of interactivity, ease of access, and volume to
information searches. Less than 10 years after the web
was created, the majority of American adults had
accessed the Internet at least once (Pew Research
Project, 2000) and today over 42% of the earth’s
population has access to the Internet. 1 This level of
information access raises important questions about
how technology affects learning and understanding,
particularly among children raised in this informationrich, highly technological environment. To date, there
have been no studies examining how children’s
interactions with technological informants converge
with or diverge from interactions with human
1

http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm

informants, particularly early in development when
children’s epistemological concepts are still rapidly
changing.
The study described below examines children’s
epistemological judgments about a human and a
technological informant. For our purposes, a
technological informant is a device or program that
selects information from a very large knowledge base,
such as the World Wide Web, and presents it to a user.
One common example of this is a search engine, such
as Google, that answers questions or provides links in
response to a specific query. Thus, much like human
informants, technological informants act as a selection
mechanism for information. However, what makes
technological informants unique from humans is that
they are mechanical devices that presumably lack
beliefs and intentions. Thus, the information a
technological informant provides is not selected with
the goal of facilitating learning, but rather it is likely to
be driven by algorithms based on location, sponsorship,
website popularity, etc.
The existing literature on young children’s
understanding of search engines and the Internet is
extremely limited, or largely anecdotal; however, the
literature on children’s understanding of computers
provides a starting point for considering how children
may view technological informants. By age 5, children
understand the basic biological and psychological
differences between humans and computers, such as the
fact that computers are not alive and do not experience
emotions (Scaife & van Duuren, 1995; Mikropoulos,
Misailidi, & Bonoti, 2003). However, not until later in
elementary school do children understand what
computers can do (e.g., store information;
Subrahmanyan, Gelman, & Lafosse, 2002) and what
kinds of questions they can and cannot answer
(Danovitch & Keil, 2008). Although these experimental
results are informative, the computers referenced in
these studies were not described as providing access to
the Internet and it is unclear whether participants were
familiar with the Internet. By accessing the Internet,

1721

technological informants can draw from a vast amount
of information and they are much more interactive than
previous generations of technology, yet even children
with extensive experience using the Internet fail to
appreciate its structure and complexity (Yan, 2005,
2006, 2009). These findings provoke an important
question: If children do not understand the nature of the
Internet, then how do they evaluate the information
provided by technological informants that primarily
draw information from Internet sources? Do they
conceptualize them as they do human informants,
granting them the properties of psychological agents, or
do they view them as non-agents, as they might a noninteractive, non-human information source, such as a
book?
Recent advances in understanding the development of
children’s social cognitive skills inform our approach.
For the vast majority of human history, the main way to
obtain information that could not be directly observed
has been to consult other people, who would then select
evidence for you. Given that children acquire much of
their information about the world from others, it is not
surprising that young children quickly develop
relatively sophisticated means of judging potential
informants and the information that they provide.
Children as young as age 3 consider individuals’ prior
accuracy when determining who to consult or whose
testimony to believe (e.g., Koenig, Clement & Harris,
2004; Birch, Vauthier, & Bloom, 2008). Children also
take into account factors such as familiarity (Corriveau
& Harris, 2009), group membership (Elashi & Mills,
2014), and access to relevant information (Nurmsoo &
Robinson, 2009) when determining whom to trust.
Although the vast majority of epistemic trust research
has involved comparisons between human sources,
recent work has shown that children apply some
principles of epistemic trust to non-human informants,
such as animated characters encountered in the media
(Danovitch & Mills, 2014) and computers with
differing rates of prior accuracy (Danovitch &
Alzahabi, 2013).
Here we examine children’s epistemic trust in
technological and human informants. Our design is
based on established methods for measuring epistemic
trust (e.g., Koenig, Clement, & Harris, 2004), where
participants must choose between two people that vary
on some dimensions (including familiarity, knowledge,
etc.) in order to learn a piece of novel information.
Based on prior findings that 4-year-olds hold a fragile
view of the differences between people and computers
and the function of computers, and our assumption that
5-year-olds have more exposure to and experience
using technology, we expected to find developmental
differences where older children would show greater
trust in a technological informant than their younger
counterparts.

Method
Participants
Twenty 4-year-olds ranging from 3.99 to 4.96 (Mage =
4.34, 12 males) and 20 5-year-olds ranging from 5.03 to
6.03 (Mage = 5.48, 12 male) participated at preschools or
a university laboratory in an urban area. The majority of
the children’s parents (n = 28) also completed a brief
survey about their child’s experience with and access to
technological devices. The majority of the children
were identified by their parents as Caucasian-American
and non-Hispanic. Twenty-one undergraduates (Mage =
23, 5 male) at an urban university also participated.
Adults were tested individually in a university lab
following the same procedures as the children.

Materials & Procedure
For this experiment, we elaborated on the standard
selective trust paradigm developed by Koenig and
colleagues (e.g., Koenig, Clement, & Harris, 2004). In
order to control for the differences in how questions are
typically presented to human and technological
informants (verbal vs. typed on a keyboard) and the
medium in which answers are provided (e.g., humans
speak but computers provide printed responses), we
used presentation software to display information from
both informants in windows on a laptop computer with
a 15 inch screen. The windows were the same size and
they featured editable text boxes with adjacent question
mark buttons (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Screenshot of desktop with editable windows
featuring the human and technological informant.
The technological informant was represented using a
“search” window containing a magnifying glass icon.
The experimenter typed questions into a blank box
underneath the icon, and when the button was pushed,
the icon disappeared and was replaced by a large
rotating hourglass. After rotating for 5 seconds, the
hourglass was replaced by an image representing the
program’s response to the query (e.g., an image of a
rabbit in response to the query “what animal eats

1722

carrots?”). The human informant was presented in a
schematically similar manner in a window labeled
“chat.” The icon in this window was the silhouette of a
person, and when a question was entered and the
question mark button was pressed, it was replaced with
video of an adult male. The man initially looked down
(off screen) for approximately 5 seconds before looking
back up as he presented his response by holding up an
image printed on a sheet of paper. For each set of
responses, the images were approximately the same size
on the screen, and the hourglass spun in the search
window for exactly as long as it took the actor to lift his
image, so that the timing was equivalent between
informants.
Other materials included line drawings and digital
images that the informants presented as their answers to
queries. Colored line drawings of familiar animals (e.g.,
rabbits, cows, etc.) were used during familiarization
trials. Digital images or colored line drawings were
used as needed to represent the options presented in
endorse trials.

Ask Trials The three ask trials consisted of questions
about unfamiliar animals that most children would not
be able to answer (e.g., where do pangolins sleep?). The
experimenter read each question, and then asked the
participant “where should I go for an answer?” These
trials were designed to probe participants’ preference
for seeking out information from the human versus the
technological informant.

Procedure

Technology Questionnaire Parents of child
participants completed a brief questionnaire with 4
sections. In the first section, parents indicated how
often their child had observed adults (including the
parent) interacting with different types of websites or
apps on a device that could access the Internet.
Responses ranged from “never” (0 points) to “every
day” (4 points). Parents provided ratings for 5 specific
types of websites or apps: educational sites, games,
sites for looking at pictures or videos (e.g. Youtube),
sites for looking up information (e.g., Google), and sites
for video conferencing with another person (e.g.,
Skype). In section two, parents used the same scale to
rate how often their child had personally used each type
of website or app, for the same 5 categories. In section
three, parents were provided with a list of 12
technological devices, including computers with
Internet access, smartphones, and tablets (e.g., iPad),
and were asked to indicate which ones were present in
their home. In section four, parents were asked to
indicate the age at which their child first heard a book
being read to them, first experienced “screen time”
(watching TV, movies, or other screen based media),
first actively interacted with a technological device, and
first experienced a video conference with another
person.

At the beginning of the experimental session, the
experimenter informed each participant that he or she
would be learning about animals from two different
sources and explained that one source was “a computer
program that can look for answers to questions on the
Internet” and the other source was “a live video chat
with a person who lives in another city.” During the
introduction, the experimenter opened and displayed
the windows corresponding to each source.
Familiarization Trials Each session continued with 4
familiarization trials that involved questions about
information familiar to young children (e.g., what
animal says moo?). The experimenter read each
question aloud as she typed the question into each
informant’s text box and each informant gave an
answer in turn. The first informant’s response remained
on screen while the other informant presented a
response so that both responses would be available at
the end of each trial. Children were then asked to state
the correct answer to each question. In order to
establish that both informants were accurate but fallible,
each informant responded to 75% of the familiarization
questions accurately (i.e., each was wrong on one item
that the other answered correctly). The order in which
the informants were queried was counterbalanced so
that half of the participants always saw the human
informant answer first, and the other half always saw
the technological informant answer first. Following the
familiarization trials, participants were presented with
three ask trials followed by three endorse trials.

Endorse Trials In each of three endorse trials, the
experimenter read a question about a novel animal (e.g.,
What do blickets have on their bodies?). She then
submitted it to each informant by typing into the text
box in each window and each informant presented a
different, conflicting answer (e.g., fur or feathers).
Participants were then asked to endorse one answer.
The purpose of these questions was to examine
participants’ selective trust in information received
from the human and technological informants. The
answer
presented
by
each
informant
was
counterbalanced across participants.

Results
In order to establish that participants were paying
attention to the informants and were sufficiently
knowledgeable to detect errors in the evidence
presented by each informant, we examined children’s
and adult’s accuracy on the familiarization trials. Adults

1723

were perfect (M=100%) on this task, and children’s
accuracy (M4yo = 96%; M5yo = 98%) did not
significantly differ from adult accuracy. Thus,
participants were sufficiently attentive to encode the
accuracy of each informant.
For ask and endorse trials, we coded preferences for
the technological informant as a “1” and human
informant as a “0,” and we averaged these responses in
order to generate a composite scores ranging from 0
(privileging the human informant) to 1 (privileging the
technological
informant).
A
repeated-measures
ANOVA with Age as a between-subjects factor and
Trial-type as a within-subjects factor revealed a
significant main effect for Age, F(2,57) = 23.2, p <
.001, ηp2 =.45, as well as a significant Age x Trial-type
interaction, F(2,57) = 9.0, p < .001, ηp2 =.24. The main
effect of Age was embedded in the Age x Trial-type
interaction, which we further explored with post-hoc
Bonferroni-corrected analyses. These analyses revealed
that, when presented with ask questions, adults
preferred to ask technological informants significantly
more often than children (M = .95), ps < .001, but 4year-olds (M = .28) did not significantly differ from 5year-olds (M = .45, see Figure 2). Endorse trials
revealed a slightly different pattern, where adults (M =
.67) and 5-year-olds (M = .68) endorsed technological
informants at rates significantly higher than 4-year-olds
(M = .40), ps < .05, yet the responses provided by
adults and 5-year-olds did not significantly differ from
each other.
When we examined these results across Trial-type by
Age, a different pattern emerged for each age group.
There was no significant difference in 4-year-olds’
informant preferences across ask and endorse trials.
Five-year-olds responded differently to each trial type.
On ask trials, they showed no preference for asking
either informant, but their preferences shifted
significantly towards trusting the technological
informant for endorse trials, p < .05. Adults exhibited
yet another pattern, revealing a strong preference for
the technological informant on ask trials, but a
significantly reduced preference for it on endorse trials,
p < .01.
Ask and endorse questions probe potentially different
intuitions, and thus it is interesting that participants’
responses differ. To facilitate interpretation, it is also
important to identify where response patterns differ
from chance levels. We evaluated response patterns by
Age and Trial-type using one-sample t-tests to compare
scores to chance responding (chance = .5).
On ask trials, 4-year-olds preferred to ask human
informants (M = .28) at a rate significantly greater than
chance, p < .01. However, 5-year-olds did not show a
significant preference for either informant (M = .45),
and adults overwhelmingly preferred to ask the

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Age 4
Ask Trials

Age 5

Adults

Endorse Trials

Figure 2: Proportion of trials where participants
selected the technological informant. Values range from
0 (always selecting the human informant) to 1 (always
selecting the technological informant). Error bars are
standard error.
technological informant (M = .95), p < .001. It is
important to note that these group means were
representative of individual responses patterns within
each age group. For example, most individual adults
and 4-year-olds showed a pattern of preference for
technological and human informants, respectively, and
five-year-olds’ mixed responses were truly variable and
did not reflect a bimodal distribution where children
were split between strongly favoring the technological
informant or the human. On the endorse trials, 4-yearolds exhibited no significant tendency to endorse either
informant (M = .40), while 5-year-olds (M = .68) and
adults (M = .67), were significantly more likely to
endorse answers they received from the technological
informant, ps < .05.
With respect to the technology questionnaire, of the
28 children who had a parent complete the
questionnaire, all reported that their child interacted
with technological devices at least a few times per
month. All children also had at least 3 types of
technological devices present in their home (M = 7.61).
Notably, 89 percent of children observed adults
searching for information on the Internet at least a few
times per month and 32% of the children observed this
behavior at least a few times per week. In addition, 75%
of children had experience observing adults video
conferencing and 61% had personally engaged in video
conferencing at least once. Parents reported that their
children had first experienced screen time at a mean age
of 13 months old (range = 0 months to 2 years) and
interacted with technology at a mean age of 22 months
old (range = 6 months to 3 years, 5 months old).

1724

Discussion
We presented 4- and 5-year-old children and adults
with opportunities to express their preferences for a
human versus a technological informant in two
situations: when deciding which informant to consult in
order to answer a question, and when deciding which
informant’s information to endorse. Two interesting
patterns emerged. First, preferences for seeking
information from the technological informant increased
with age, beginning with a strong preference for the
human informant at age four that transitioned into no
preference by age five, and then a strong preference for
the technological informant among adults. It is notable
that responses were fairly consistent among individuals
in each age group. This overall pattern suggests that a
dramatic shift in preferences for technological
informants between childhood and adulthood. Second,
4-year-olds
endorsed
answers
provided
by
technological and human informants equally, yet 5year-olds and adults endorsed statements by the
technological informant significantly more often. This
suggests that the sharp increase in the endorsement of
technological informants between ages 4 and 5 is
maintained into adulthood.
One factor that may have influenced children’s
responses was their actual experience using
technological informants. According to their parents,
most of the children in our sample had exposure to
technological devices and most of them had observed
adults using a technological device to obtain
information. In addition, the children’s exposure to
technology had typically begun by their second
birthday. What is interesting, though, is that despite
having been exposed to technology early in life, young
children did not show a strong preference for the
technological informant; in fact, at age 4, they often
trusted the person over the Internet search engine. In
contrast, by age 5, children began to shift their trust
towards the technological informant.
One potential explanation for this shift is that it is
linked to children’s growing awareness that print can be
used to convey information. Recent findings
demonstrate that as children learn how to read, they
begin to prioritize printed information over oral
testimony (Eyden, Robinson, Einav & Jaswal, 2013;
Robinson, Einav, & Fox, 2013). Because technological
devices that access the Internet typically provide textbased information, children may need to understand the
value of text in order to appreciate the value of
technological informants. Another possibility is that at
age 5 children become more attuned to the range of
information that can be accessed by the technological
informant and the fact that human knowledge is more
limited (Danovitch & Keil, 2008). Children may also
solidify their awareness that technological devices are
not intentional agents and that, consequently,

technological devices are not subject to the influences
that could undermine a human agent’s reliability (e.g.,
an intention to deceive). Thus, children may begin to
believe that information obtained from the Internet is
more likely to be accurate. Future research is necessary
to explore these possibilities.
Our current findings suggest that, when given the
choice between obtaining information from an Internet
search engine or a person, children exhibit a strong bias
in favor of human informants early in development.
Over time, children’s trust in information provided by
an Internet search engine grows, but their desire to seek
out information from a technologically driven
information source lags behind their reliance on the
information that the source provides. This is a
provocative narrative, but in order to test it effectively
more information is needed about children’s exposure
to technology, and how these experiences shape their
understanding of technological informants as targets of
epistemic trust.
Our findings also raise questions about the broader
consequences of obtaining information from
technological informants. For instance, it remains
unclear to what extent we treat technological
informants as we do human informants, using the
information that they present to us to shape our
knowledge and inductions. If we treat technological
informants as we would human teachers, is it
problematic that we make pedagogical assumptions
about them that are unfounded? For example, a teacher
presents information to learners designed to aid
learning and to highlight key concepts, but
technological informants (e.g., search engines) employ
algorithms that lack the intentions and beliefs that are
inherent in human-to-human pedagogical experiences.
As the Internet becomes a more ubiquitous part of our
lives and we consult it more frequently to find answers
to our questions, it is critical to explore the assumptions
we make about technological informants, and
investigate the consequences that these assumptions
may have for our understanding. Given children’s
increasingly early exposure to technological informants,
it is also essential that we understand their early
intuitions about the capacities and limitations of
technological devices in terms of obtaining information.
Our study represents an important first step in
evaluating how we learn from and relate to
technological information sources in the modern digital
age, and the timescale over which this relationship
develops.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by funding from the
National Science Foundation, CAREER grant DRL1149116 to PS. We thank the children and parents who
visited the KID Lab, as well as the staff, children, and

1725

parents at Keneseth Israel Preschool, Newburg
Kindercare, Shelbyville Kindercare, and St. Paul
School for their support. Thank you also to Emma
Groskind, Brittani Loeser, Kristain Pile, Kayla Renner,
and Aubrey Williams for their assistance in data
collection.

References
Birch, S. A., Vauthier, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2008).
Three- and four-year-olds spontaneously use others’
past performance to guide their learning. Cognition,
107, 1018–1034.
Corriveau, K. H., & Harris, P. L. (2009). Choosing your
informant: Weighing familiarity and recent accuracy.
Developmental Science, 12, 426–437.
Danovitch, J. H., & Alzahabi, R. (2013). Children show
selective trust in technological informants. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 14, 499-513.
Danovitch, J. H., & Keil, F. (2008). Young Humeans:
the role of emotions in children's evaluation of moral
reasoning abilities. Developmental Science, 11(1),
33-39.
Danovitch, J. H., & Mills, C. M. (2014). How familiar
characters influence children’s judgments about
information and products. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 128, 1-20.
Elashi, F. B., & Mills, C. M. (2014). Do children trust
based on group membership or prior accuracy? The
role of novel group membership in children’s trust
decisions. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
128, 88-104.
Einav, S., Robinson, E. J., & Fox, A. (2013). Take it as
read: Origins of trust in knowledge gained from print.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 114(2),
262-274.
Eyden, J. Robinson, E. J., Einav, S., & Jaswal, V. K.
(2013). The power of print: Children’s trust in
unexpected printed suggestions. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 16(3), 593-608.
Koenig, M. A., Clément, F., & Harris, P. L. (2004).
Trust in testimony: Children’s use of true and false
statements. Psychological Science, 15, 694–698.
Lutz, D. J., & Keil, F. C. (2002). Early understanding of
the division of cognitive labor. Child Development,
73, 1073–1084.
Mikropoulos, T. A., Misailidi, P., & Bonoti, F. (2003).
Attributing human properties to computer artifacts:
developmental changes in children's understanding of
the animate-inanimate distinction. Psychology: The
Journal of the Hellenic Psychological Society, 10,
53-64.
Nurmsoo, E., & Robinson, E. J. (2009). Identifying
unreliable informants: Do children excuse past
inaccuracy? Developmental Science, 12, 41-47.

Pew Research Project. (2000). Internet adoption.
Retrieved from http://pewinternet.org/TrendData/Internet-Adoption.aspx.
Scaife, M., & Van Duuren, M.A. (1995). Do computers
have brains? What children believe about intelligent
artifacts. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 13, 367–377.
Subrahmanyam, K., Gelman, R., & Lafosse, A. (2002).
Animate and other separably moveable things. In G.
Humphreys (Ed.), Category-specificity in Brain and
Mind (pp. 341–371). London: Psychology Press.
Yan, Z., (2005). Age differences in children’s
understanding of the complexity of the Internet.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 26,
385-396.
Yan, Z., (2006). What influences children’s and
adolescents’ understanding of the complexity of the
internet? Developmental Psychology, 42, 418-428.
Yan, Z., (2009). Limited knowledge and limited
resources: Children’s and adolescents’ understanding
of the internet. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 30, 103-115.

1726

