Cognitive Factors and Representation Strategies in Sketching Math Diagrams
Damian R. Morden-Snipper (damian.morden-snipper@temple.edu)
Department of Psychological, Organizational, and Leadership Studies, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Ting Dai (tdai@illinois.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1310 S. Sixth St., 10E Education Building
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Julie L. Booth (julie.booth@temple.edu)
Department of Psychological, Organizational, and Leadership Studies, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Briana L. Chang (briana.chang@temple.edu)
Department of Psychological, Organizational, and Leadership Studies, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Jennifer G. Cromley (jcromley@illinois.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1310 S. Sixth St., 10D Education Building
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Nora S. Newcombe (newcombe@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA
identified in students’ drawing – often schematic
versus pictorial representations – it is not clear which
one(s) seem to be the most useful for successful
problem solving and math learning. Some research
indicates that pictorial sketches, which include
extraneous and decorative detail, are associated with
lower answer accuracy than sketches that focus on
schematic relationships in the problem (e.g. Hegarty
& Kozhevnikov, 1999; Van Garderen & Montague,
2003). Edens and Potter (2008) examined upper
elementary school students’ sketches, finding that
more schematic-like representations were positively
associated with answer success compared to more
pictorial sketches. In their study, sketches were rated
as schematic versus pictorial, with the two categories
as opposite ends of a single dimension. Thus, it is not
clear whether pictorial representations themselves,
rather than extraneousness or lack of attention to the
components of the problem, are detrimental to
problem solving.
In addition, individual differences in cognitive
ability might also affect how different types of
drawing influence students’ problem solving in math.
Working memory, for example, has been shown to
affect the amount of new information that can be
integrated into a working mental model (Seufert,
Schutze, & Brunken, 2009), the quality of which may
affect whether a student could represent the model
diagrammatically. Prior content knowledge has also

Abstract
Previous research has shown sketching to be useful to
students solving math problems. The present study
examines which aspects of middle school students’
sketching are related to, or predict, successfully
answering math problems. The effects of individual
differences in cognitive factors – working memory,
spatial ability, and prior math knowledge – on answer
accuracy are also analyzed. Stepwise regression
analysis indicates that prior math knowledge and the
inclusion of numerical representations of key problem
relationships in sketches positively predict answer
accuracy, whereas including irrelevant relationships in
a sketch is associated with lower answer accuracy.
Methodological implications for future research are
discussed.
Keywords: sketching; working memory; spatial
ability; diagrams; middle school; mathematics

Introduction
Sketching or drawing is an important technique
students use to solve math problems (Jee et al., 2014;
Van Meter & Garner, 2005). Prior research has
shown sketching to facilitate reasoning (Ruchti &
Bennett, 2013) and communication of students’
thinking (Haltiwanger & Simpson, 2013). Calculus
teachers frequently include sketching in their
instruction, as do students when solving calculus
problems (Haciomeroglu, Aspinwall, & Presmeg,
2010). However, in the few types of representations

1637

been shown to affect the extent to which
representations of a problem contain extra details;
those with more expertise tend to include more
“embellishments” in their problem representations
(Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). And research on
spatial ability suggests that answering certain
problems requires mental transformations not
provided by text or visualization alone (Trafton &
Trickett, 2001).
The present study set out to identify associations
between types of representation in student’s drawing
and performance in problem solving. In particular,
we examined middle-school students’ drawing while
they engaged in math problem solving, identified
different representation strategies in these drawings –
words,
numbers
or
numerical
operations,
schematic/diagrammatic relationships, or decorative
pictures – and explored whether there is any
association between the prevalent representational
strategies of drawings and students’ performance in
solving math problems. We also sought to test
whether the effects of representation strategies
operate independently of the effects of cognitive
factors. Thus, we sought to answer the following
research questions: does using one type of
representation predict or relate to answer accuracy,
what effect does representing irrelevant components
have on answer accuracy, and what relationships do
cognitive abilities have to answer accuracy?

approximately 25 minutes each. Students received
one pen and one pencil each as compensation for
participation. Students also participated in a group
testing session in which they completed the paper and
pencil measure of dynamic spatial ability (mental
rotation test) and a test of prior math knowledge.

Measures
Math Stimuli Four math stimuli were constructed
on the topics characteristic of middle school
mathematics curricula; these topics included basic
arithmetic/mathematical reasoning, algebra, area, and
volume. Each stimulus included instructional text and
a challenging problem that is amenable to solving
with diagrams. Students were directed to “make a
diagram,” and researchers emphasized that the
diagrams did not “have to be pretty,” but that they
should include the important parts of the problem,
and should help them solve it. See Figure 1 for a
sample stimulus.
Figure 1: Sample stimulus and student work.

Methods
Participants
Participants included 47 sixth graders from two
diverse middle schools in the mid-Atlantic US. The
sample was 60% female and was racially diverse
(53% White, 15% Black, 13% Asian, 11% Latino,
4% Middle Eastern, 4% declining to identify their
race, and 11% more than one race). Participants were
also socioeconomically diverse, with 23% coming
from families where neither parent had earned a
Bachelor’s degree, and 47% coming from families
where at least one parent had earned a Bachelor’s
degree or higher (30% of the sample did not know
the level of education their parent/guardian had
obtained). The mean age for the students was 11.5
years.

Prior Knowledge in Mathematics To assess
students’ mathematics conceptual knowledge, we
used 21 researcher-constructed items that measured
students’ prior knowledge of the topics/skills
required to complete the mathematics stimuli
accurately. For example, one item asks participants
to identify whether an expression represents area,
perimeter, volume, or none of these for given
dimensions of a rectangular prism (e.g., four times
seven – length times height). This measure was not
timed. Scores ranged from 29% to 100% (M=64%).
Internal consistency was computed using Cronbach’s
alpha; α=.70.

Procedure
Students were recruited from their homeroom classes.
After obtaining parental consent and student assent,
participants provided basic demographic information,
completed 4 of the paper and pencil math stimuli and
completed a computer-based task for visuo-spatial
working memory during two individual sessions of

Visuo-spatial Working Memory Participants’
working memory was assessed using a computerized
and spatial version of a complex-span working

1638

memory task. In this task, participants recall the order
and location of squares in a grid while making
decisions about the symmetry of images presented.
Previous research shows the test to be reliable using
Cronbach’s alpha; α = .80 (Unsworth, Heitz,
Schrock, & Engle, 2005).

received credit for both a word representation and a
numerical representation if they wrote “length times
width times height equals volume” and also wrote the
equation for volume with the numerical dimensions
listed in the problem.
Any element or relationship represented – in any
form – that was not necessary and sufficient to solve
the problem was scored as “irrelevant.” These did not
include arithmetical errors or diagrammatic size
inconsistencies, which, if part of a necessary and
sufficient representation, were considered relevant
and credited by representation type.
Participants’ scores for each representation type –
words, numbers/numerical operations, diagrammatic
relationships, or picture – were averaged across all
problems. The sums of participants’ irrelevant
elements/relationships were also averaged across all
problems.
One of the authors coded all participant sketches,
and a second coder was trained on data other than
those used for calculating inter-rater statistics and
recoded 35% of the corpus. Intra-class correlations
were used to calculate inter-rater reliability;
correlations for each stimulus were greater than .76.

Spatial Ability Participants’ spatial ability was
assessed using the Mental Rotation Test from the
Primary Mental Ability Battery (Thurstone, 1974).
Participants select from four shapes one that, when
rotated and combined with a target shape, creates a
square. Colom et al. (2004) report reliability using
Cronbach’s alpha: α = .73.
Diagram coding scheme A fine-grained coding
scheme was developed to capture the participants’
sketches in as much detail as possible. This first
required that the problems themselves be broken
down into their basic components. For each problem,
faculty and graduate students in Temple University’s
College of Education were asked to write out all their
work to answer the question. Their solution steps
were broken down into the necessary and sufficient
components of the problem (e.g. each individual
dimension of a rectangular prism), and the necessary
and sufficient relationships between components
(e.g., the area of one plane equals one dimension
times another dimension). These key elements and
relationships were compiled as a coding rubric for
each problem, which was used to score each
participant’s sketch.
In order to explore the relationship between
representational strategies and successfully solving
the problem, each element/relationship was scored by
the type of representation: as words, as numbers or
numerical operations, as schematic/diagrammatic
relationships, or as a decorative picture. Each
instance of a representation of a key element or
relationship was given credit based on its
representation type. For example, a participant

Answer Accuracy Answer accuracy was scored as
its own dimension, independent of irrelevant features
included in the sketches, and representational
strategies. This permitted testing of the effects of
correctness separately from the effects of relevant or
irrelevant
features,
and
from
different
representational strategies. Student answers for each
stimulus were rated as 0 (incorrect), 1 (partiallycorrect), and 2 (correct). Scores for each problem
were then averaged across all problems the
participant completed. Two of the authors rated
student answers; ratings were found to be highly
reliable, with intra-class correlations for each
stimulus greater than .90.

Table 1: Correlations between representation strategies, cognitive factors, and answer accuracy

Element representation type
Numerical
Words
Diagram
Picture
Irrelevant Elements
Relationship representation type
Numerical
Words
Diagram
Picture
Irrelevant Relationships
Working Memory
Mental Rotation
Prior Math Knowledge
~ p < .1, *p < .05, ** p < .01

Working
Memory

Mental
Rotation

Prior Math
Knowledge

Answer
Accuracy

.129
-.068
.141
.124
.340*

.248~
.049
.105
.050
-.048

.374*
-.115
.049
.072
.142

.465**
-.257~
-.129
.089
-.006

.198
-.233
.270~
.197
-.101
--

.233
.001
.297*
.159
-.367*
.556**
--

.452**
-.070
.264~
.252~
-.190
.405**
.364*
--

.553**
-.197
.253~
.090
-.471**
.192
.227
.494**

1639

Stepwise multiple regression analysis was then
conducted to examine the predictive values of
representational strategies for key problem
relationships and cognitive abilities on answer
accuracy. Stepwise regression, rather than simple
linear regression, was chosen for these analyses given
the exploratory nature of the diagram coding scheme,
and the inter-relationships among independent
variables. However, the choice was made to focus
regression analyses on relationship representations,
rather than element representations or the
combination of both, because the inclusion of
relationships presupposes the inclusion of
corresponding problem elements, i.e. calculating the
volume of a rectangular prism necessarily involves
each individual dimension.
Given the correlations observed in Table 1,
numerical representations, diagrammatic, and
irrelevant representations of relationships were used
in the regression analysis, as were all three cognitive
factors. The final model was reached in three steps
with no variables removed, and contained three out of
the six variables examined: numerical representations
of relationships, prior math knowledge, and irrelevant
representations of relationships – each entered
respectively in the three steps. The regression
equation was statistically significant, F (3, 46) =
11.377, p < .001, with the model accounting for 40%
of the variance in accuracy (R = .442, R2 = .404).
Answer accuracy was predicted both by irrelevant
relationships and numerical relationships, in opposite
directions but of equal effect size in our analyses.
That is, a higher average number of numerical
representations predicts higher answer accuracy, and
a higher average number of irrelevant relationships
represented predicts lower answer accuracy. Prior
math knowledge was also significantly predictive of
answer accuracy (See Table 2 for raw and
standardized regression coefficients).

Results

Bivariate correlations were conducted to explore the
relationships between representational strategies,
inclusion of irrelevant features, cognitive factors, and
answer accuracy.
Representational strategies for key problem
elements were largely not significantly related to
cognitive factors or answer accuracy. The exceptions
were for numerical representations, which were
correlated with spatial ability, prior math knowledge,
and answer accuracy. Irrelevant representations of
elements were significantly correlated with working
memory, though why this should be the case is
unclear (see table 1).
Of the strategies coded for representing
relationships, only the use of words bore no
significant relationship to any cognitive factors or
answer accuracy, though the correlations were in a
consistent direction. Numerical representations
of relationships were strongly related to
answer accuracy (r =.553, p < .01) and prior math
knowledge (r = .452, p < .01). Correlations between
diagrammatic representations of relationships and
were only marginally significant for answer
accuracy and cognitive factors, with the
exception of spatial ability, to which they bore a
statistically significant relationship (r = .297,
p < .05). Of particular relevance to our research
questions were the significant inverse correlations
between representing irrelevant relationships and
answer accuracy (r = -.471, p < .01), and spatial
ability (r = -.367, p < .05).
Correlational analysis of cognitive factors and
answer accuracy indicated that, at least for this
relatively small sample, only prior math knowledge
was significantly related to answer accuracy (r =
.494, p < .01), though both spatial ability and
working memory were significantly related to prior
math knowledge (respectively, r = .364, p < .05; and
r = .405, p < .01).
Table 2: Stepwise regression analysis for cognitive factors and relationship representations
Variable
Entered
Numerical Representations
Prior Math Knowledge
Irrelevant Relationships
Excluded
Diagram Representations
Mental Rotation
Working Memory
Intercept
R2
S.E.E.

B

SE (B)

β

t

Sig.

.138
.037
-.215

.070
.015
.099

.280
.314
-.281

1.972
2.462
-2.183

.055
.018
.035

.346
-.551
-.178
1.572

.731
.585
.859
.123

.043
-.072
-.022
.369

.235
.442
.373

1640

manipulate – and therefore diagram – operative
relationships of a math problem tend to score higher
on spatial ability, working memory, and prior math
knowledge. An important question, then, is whether
the benefits of diagramming, before calculations, on
answer accuracy obtain for all levels of cognitive
ability. To test such a possibility, studies are needed
that compare diagramming to other promising active
learning methods, such as self-explanation, and
against a control group prompted to do neither. These
comparisons would help determine whether the
cognitive
ability
correlates
of
successful
diagramming, or the forced attention to the
relationships of a problem, contribute to answer
accuracy. However, the present study did not entail
such comparisons, and its scope is therefore limited
to the relationships between representational
strategies and cognitive factors.
Another limitation of this study was the lack of
distinction
between
correct
and
incorrect
representations in participants’ sketches. The results
indicate that relevant numerical representations of
relationships predict answer accuracy. This makes
sense because some amount of relevant numerical
representations (i.e. calculations) are necessary to
solve math problems. But the diagram scoring
scheme used in the study made no distinction
between representations with arithmetical errors and
those without. It was therefore not possible to
determine whether the relationship between answer
accuracy and a higher number of numerical
representations
reflects
additional
necessary
calculations after noticing arithmetical errors, or
simply that a certain amount of calculations are
necessary to solve the problems. To correct this,
diagram scoring schemes should account for correct
and incorrect – but relevant – representations. It
would then be possible to differentiate between those
who required many additional calculations than the
minimum necessary, and those who diligently
performed every calculation on paper.
Future studies should also clarify the consistent
inverse, though not statistically significant,
relationship found between the use of words to
represent relationships and working memory and
answer accuracy. The direction of the relationship
with working memory, which was itself positively
related to answer accuracy, hints at the possibility
that the use of words to represent relationships was
merely a note-taking strategy employed to relieve
demands on working memory. Pilot work for this
study showed similar results, but the methodology of
this study precludes definitive interpretations of this
relationship; participants could not designate certain
relationships as notes for themselves, rather than
components of their representation of the problem.

Discussion
The present study sought to explore the relationships
between cognitive abilities and representational
strategies in middle school students’ sketches, and
their answer accuracy when solving math problems.
Contrary to previous research on cognitive ability
correlates of math performance, mental rotation
ability and visuo-spatial working memory were not
related to answer accuracy. Prior math knowledge,
however, was moderately correlated with answer
accuracy. Several interpretations are possible: that
prior math knowledge is particularly important for
these problems, or that working memory and spatial
ability are less salient factors for math performance
for this age group. Future research exploring different
kinds of math problems, and with students of
different ages, would clarify the role of prior
knowledge relative to other cognitive factors.
One of the main questions this study sought to
address was the effect of pictorial representations of
key problem elements and relationships on answer
accuracy; prior research indicated a negative
relationship between pictorial representations and
answer performance. Yet, as the results tentatively
suggest, it may not be pictorial representations per se,
but misunderstanding the operative relationships that
predicts lower performance. For example, a sketch
may properly construe the key relationships of a
problem, but contain additional decorative details that
do not interfere with conceptual understanding – a
possibility indicated by the marginally significant
correlation between pictorial representations of
relationships and prior math knowledge. In other
words, those who possessed sufficient prior
knowledge of math may not have been hindered by
adding decorative details.
The results also suggest that the inclusion of
irrelevant relationships bears a relatively distinct
connection to answer accuracy. Irrelevant features
were scored as a separate dimension from both
overall answer accuracy and different representation
strategies, meaning that discerning and representing
relevant relationships may reflect a different
dimension of mathematical problem solving.
However,
irrelevant
representations’
inverse
relationship with spatial ability may indicate
difficulty grasping and manipulating abstract
relationships. In other words, those who scored
higher on a spatial ability measure may have had less
trouble conceptualizing the ways the problem
elements were related to each other.
This latter interpretation is supported by the
relationships between diagrammatic representations
of relationships, all three cognitive factors, and
answer accuracy. That is, students who can grasp and

1641

Therefore, more research is needed before
implications for instruction, or for students with
lower working memory capacity, become clear.
Overall, these results indicate that knowledge of
formulas or arithmetical procedures may be
necessary but not entirely sufficient for successfully
solving math problems, given the negative effects of
failing to grasp the relevant relationships. Beyond
prior knowledge of math, and showing lots of
calculations, students should also carefully
conceptualize
math
problems’
operative
relationships. These results also corroborate evidence
of
a
connection
between
constructing
schematic/diagrammatic representations of math
problems, and spatial ability, working memory, and
prior math knowledge.

Ruchti, W. P., & Bennett, C. A. (2013). Develop
reasoning through pictorial representations.
Mathematics Teaching In The Middle School,
19(1), 30-36.
Seufert, T., Schütze, M., & Brünken, R. (2009).
Memory characteristics and modality in
multimedia learning: An aptitude—treatment—
interaction study. Learning and Instruction, 19(1),
28-42.
Thurstone, L. L. (1974). The Measurement of Values.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Trafton, J. G., & Trickett, S. B. (2001). A new model
of graph and visualization usage. Proceedings of
the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 1048-1053.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Schrock, J. C., & Engle,
R. W. (2005). An automated version of the
operation span task. Behavior Research Methods,
37(3), 498-505.
Van Garderen, D., & Montague, M. (2003).
Visual‐spatial
representation,
mathematical
problem solving, and students of varying
abilities. Learning Disabilities Research &
Practice, 18(4), 246-254.
Van Meter, P., & Garner, J. (2005). The promise and
practice of learner-generated drawing: Literature
review and synthesis. Educational Psychology
Review, 17(4), 285-325.

Acknowledgments
The research reported here was supported by the
National Science Foundation through a grant to
Temple University.

References
Chi, M., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representations of physics
problems by experts and novices. Cognitive
Science, 5(2), 121-152.
Colom, R., Escorial, S., & Rebollo, I. (2004). Sex
differences on the Progressive Matrices are
influenced by sex differences on spatial ability.
Personality and Individual Differences, 37(6),
1289-1293.
Edens, K., & Potter, E. (2008). How students
“Unpack” the structure of a word problem: Graphic
representations and problem solving. School
Science and Mathematics, 108(5), 184-196.
Haciomeroglu, E. S., Aspinwall, L., & Presmeg, N.
C. (2010). Contrasting cases of calculus students'
understanding of derivative graphs. Mathematical
Thinking and Learning, 12(2), 152-176.
Haltiwanger, L., & Simpson, A. M. (2013). Beyond
the write answer: Mathematical connections.
Mathematics Teaching In The Middle School,
18(8), 492-498.
Hegarty, M., & Kozhevnikov, M. (1999). Spatial
abilities, working memory, and mechnical
reasoning. In J. S. Gero & B. Tversky (Ed.), Visual
and spatial reasoning in design (pp. 221-241).
Cambridge, MA, June, 15-17.
Jee, B., Gentner, D., Forbus, K., Sageman, B., &
Uttal, D. (2009). 2009. Drawing on experience:
Use of sketching to evaluate knowledge of spatial
scientific concepts. Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

1642

