Communicative Efficiency and Miscommunication: The Costs and Benefits of
Variable Language Production
Alexandra Paxton* (paxton.alexandra@gmail.com)
Cognitive & Information Sciences, University of California, Merced
Merced, CA 95343 USA

Jennifer M. Roche* (jroche3@kent.edu)
Speech Pathology & Audiology, Kent State University
Kent, OH 44242 USA

Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@rochester.edu)
Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract

language production throughout an interaction—while less
successful dyads may exhibit more variability in their
communicative efficiency.

Although negotiating joint action through dialogue can be
difficult, dyads may be able to improve collaborative
performance by managing communicative efficiency in
language production, balancing effort (words per turn) with
output (turn-level success). Comparing dyads with high,
medium, and low levels of accuracy in communication, growth
curve modeling revealed a negative relationship between
success and excessive variability in levels of efficiency. Dyads
performed better by maintaining moderately fluid efficiency
(seen in high-success dyads) or minimizing efficiency
variability (seen in medium-success dyads), rather than
scrambling for efficiency only as needed (seen in low-success
dyads). Balancing efficiency variability in language production
may create flexible but relatively stable interaction structures,
laying the groundwork for successful communication.

Balancing the Cost of Communication
One factor that guides conversational choices is the amount
of effort required by both conversation partners (Grice,
1976). Gricean principles hold that a speaker should put
precisely enough effort into her utterances so that her
listeners can navigate the communicative context with ease,
with the intention that neither she nor her partner bears all
the conversational burden (whether in production or
comprehension; Grice, 1976). However, some interlocutors
may be better than others at gauging this minimally
sufficient production effort (e.g., through taking advantage
of common ground; Clark & Brennan, 1991), and this
ability may be an important difference between successful
and unsuccessful communicators.
Research suggests that speakers have the ability to
manage communication costs across various levels of an
interaction. For example, at a local level (e.g., the “word”
level), speakers may achieve efficiency by uniformly
distributing information across an utterance (Jaeger, 2011;
Levy & Jaeger, 2008). At a global level (e.g., the
“interaction” level), using too few words can save time, but
it also increases the likelihood of a misunderstanding,
which must be resolved—requiring the exertion of
additional effort. Ideally, interlocutors should maintain
consistency in information transmission at the global level
to be more communicatively efficient.
One way speakers may do this is by engaging automatic
processes during on-the-fly production planning which can
be fairly “cheap,” requiring fewer cognitive resources
(Houde & Jordan, 1998; Pickering & Garrod, 2004;
Tremblay, Shiller, & Ostry, 2003; Vogel, Fletcher, &
Maruff, 2014). However, production planning required
during crucial points in the conversation is a delicate
balancing act, which may require more cognitively
“expensive” processes (especially at the beginning of a
conversation or during miscommunication resolution).

Keywords: miscommunication; growth curve; production
effort; interaction; joint action

Introduction
What makes some conversations flow successfully while
others simply flounder? Numerous factors undoubtedly
contribute to these outcomes, but the current paper focuses
on one possible contributor: communicative efficiency of
speech production. While we recognize that the term
“efficiency” may have specific implications in some
circles, we operationalize and situate it within the context
of speech production as communicative success relative to
the number of words used per turn in a corpus of turn-based
dyadic interactions (i.e., Bloco® corpus; Paxton, Roche,
Ibarra, & Tanenhaus, 2014; Roche, Paxton, Ibarra, &
Tanenhaus, 2013). While interaction is a complex interplay
between speakers and listeners, we focus here only on
language production. Speakers’ efficiency–broadly defined
for our purposes as the balancing of the costs and benefits
of language planning and production–may be one factor
contributing to communicative success. As we describe
below, we argue that more successful dyads may maintain a
relatively steady level of communicative efficiency in
* Paxton and Roche contributed equally to the preparation of
this manuscript and share first author position.

1847

If a speaker’s strategies are too “cheap,” the interaction is
likely to flail or flounder during miscommunication or
other difficulties. On the other hand, if a speaker’s
strategies are too “expensive,” the interaction may suffer
under heavy cognitive demands. Below, we present two
types of cognitive “cost-saving” strategies along with more
effortful ways that interlocutors may resort to when these
techniques fail. Although exploring speakers’ strategies in
depth is outside of the scope of the current paper, we build
our hypotheses about overall language production using
these specific strategies as guides.

Budgeting Production Costs Engaging effort-saving
strategies not only makes conversation easier but also
promotes adaptation and flexibility. Should the context
require it, interlocutors can switch from cheaper
mechanisms to more expensive ones to adapt to the
language context (Horton & Keysar, 1996). At the local or
short-term level, after realizing that there has been some
miscommunication interlocutors may increase their
production effort until the problem is resolved (e.g.,
repairing an omission). However, adjustment may also
occur at the global or long-term level (e.g., altering
perspective), turning attention to shared history to increase
understanding across the interaction (e.g., Brennan &
Clark, 1996; Clark & Brennan 1991). Speakers must
approach new conversations with relative flexibility to
adapt to constant changes in conversational demands.
These cost-saving strategies may require initial
investment in production effort, since establishing common
ground and conceptual pacts (e.g., Brennan & Clark, 1996;
Clark & Brennan, 1991) may require increased language
production (e.g., during initial negotiations). However, over
time, this investment should lead to “cheaper” production
costs later, allowing speakers to use shared shorthand to
convey even complex concepts. Finding a good method of
responding early may promote communicative success, but
the ability to adapt when something goes wrong may be
just as beneficial. Active monitoring allows for the
interlocutor to clear up miscommunication as needed while
saving effort when possible (Keysar, 2007). However,
conversation is not always so simple: If a speaker has
difficulty communicating effectively (e.g., due to
inexperience or lack of knowledge), she may take longer
and sample many more strategies than others—or the
conversation may simply fail.

Omission and Repair One way in which a speaker may
save effort when producing language is to omit words. This
may reduce some of the constraints of planning a more
complex coherent message (Bock, 1986; Branigan,
Pickering, & Cleland, 2000; Ferreira, & Bock, 2006; Bard,
Anderson, Chen, Nicholson, Harvard & Dazel-Job, 2007).
These seemingly innocuous omissions, however, may
increase the chance of miscommunication. When planning
utterances, a speaker must weigh the cost of potential
miscommunication with the benefit of reduced effort. If the
effort-saving choice results in miscommunication, the
speaker may be required to clarify, which would increase
production effort.
Omission, when used in moderation, may provide some
of the benefits of reduced effort while minimizing the costs
of miscommunication. However, a speaker who too often
omits key words may, over time, increase her overall effort
by repeatedly clarifying herself. This may be evident
through high variability in language production, with the
interlocutor seesawing between short and long utterances.
Egocentric and Other-centric Perspectives Research
suggests that interlocutors differ in perspective-taking style
(egocentric or other-centric; Duran, Dale, & Kreuz, 2011).
Engaging in one style over the other may be directly related
to the anticipated cost of miscommunication relative to the
production effort needed to avoid it. For example, if a
speaker lacks information, she may adopt an egocentric
perspective to quickly and easily obtain necessary
information from her conversation partner. Effort is saved
if her perspective is similar to her partner’s, reducing the
need to mentally represent her partner’s perspective.
Speakers may not always make conscious decisions
about perspective taking. Ego- and other-centrism may not
be a defining characteristic of the speaker but may instead
be a defining characteristic of the context. Duran et al.
(2011) maintain that individuals can switch perspectivetaking strategies if provided the appropriate cues, even if
that perspective is more costly. Context appears to provide
vital cues to guide perspective-taking choices. Without this
information, it may be unclear which perspective would be
most beneficial to a given situation—thus encouraging the
interlocutor to sample various strategies to resolve
communication breakdown and reducing communicative
efficiency.

The Present Study
We explore the context-dependence of communicative
success from the perspective of speech production.
Speakers must balance producing “cheap” (i.e., fewer
words per turn) speech acts with more “costly” (i.e., higher
words per turn) ones based on the needs of the listener and
the current task goals. Effective communication, then, may
perhaps be characterized by an ability to realize when these
cheaper language production choices are useful and when
they need to be abandoned for more resource-intensive
ones. This ability may be evidenced in relatively stable
levels of speech throughout an interaction (cf. Jaeger,
2010): Fewer troughs (i.e., very cheap speech acts) and
peaks (i.e., very costly speech acts) may be a sign that
interlocutors are exploiting context-appropriate strategies.
We predict that—during a cooperative task with
powerful external constraints—higher performance should
be associated with a better ability to predict the necessary
cost of speech acts. This should be evident by a more even
level (i.e., lower variability) of language production
throughout the interaction. Lower-performing dyads, on the
other hand, are predicted to have higher variability during

1848

language production throughout the interaction. These
dyads may vary widely in the amount of speech they
provide or solicit from their partners as they struggle to find
appropriate strategies to complete their task. However,
exploring these specific strategies is outside the scope of
the present paper.
In what follows, we investigate whether task success is
affected by the efficiency of production effort over the
course of a dyadic interaction. We use growth curve
analysis to evaluate word production throughout the
interaction for high-, medium-, and low-performing dyads.
This allows us to look beyond measures of the overall
interaction to explore turn-by-turn dynamics of
performance and language production.

Measures
The dyadic interactions were transcribed and annotated for
various measures (see Table 1 for summary table).
Word Count (WC) was assessed with LIWC (Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count; Pennebaker, Booth, & Francis,
2007). No other LIWC category was considered in the
present study. A total of 80,267 words were produced
across the corpus, with an average of 9.45 words produced
per turn (SD = 11.46).
Turns were coded as soon as a participant began to speak.
During interruptions or overlapping speech, we maintained
the turn structure by first transcribing the speaker who held
the floor at the time of the interruption, and the interrupter
was transcribed second. There were a total 8,491 turns (M =
413 turns; SD = 74.09) across all dyads.

Method
The current project analyzed part of a larger corpus aimed
at capturing the linguistic and behavioral dynamics of
dyadic task performance without shared visual fields
(Bloco® corpus; Paxton et al., 2014; Roche et al., 2013). In
the present subset of the Bloco® corpus, participants
worked together to build individual versions of an identical
three-dimensional puzzle—either a grasshopper or lizard—
using a sequence of pictorial instruction cards, each
depicting a single step in the building process.
To create a sort of “turn-taking” director task, each
participant was each given half of the total instruction cards
required to completely build the figure. The instruction
cards were divided so that the director and listener roles
alternated with each step (i.e., instruction card): One
participant would serve as director for all even-numbered
steps, and their partner would serve as director for all oddnumbered steps. Participants were unable to see their
partner, their partner’s workspace, or their partner’s
instruction cards during the interaction and were only able
to coordinate building through spoken language exchanges.
Each dyad received feedback about their construction
only after completing all of the steps on the instruction
cards. This allowed dyads to discover any instances of
miscommunication, much as miscommunication occurs in
the real world. That is, rather than having an external entity
(e.g., experimenter) identify errors at each stage,
miscommunication emerged naturally as a function of the
building (e.g., inability to complete next step). All but one
dyad correctly built the figure by the end of the interaction,
with only a minor error in the final figure.

Table 1: Summary statistics for mean number of turns,
accuracy, mean word count (WC) per turn, and
communicative efficiency (CE) by performance group.
Success
Level

Mean
Turns

Overall
Accuracy

Mean WC
per Turn

CE

Low
(n = 8)

383.5

52.3%

9.65

0.32

Medium
(n = 8)

498.1

69.9%

9.46

0.21

High
(n = 4)

359.5

87.5%

8.89

0.42

Visual Congruence (VC) was a measure of task success.
We chose VC because it acted as a direct consequence of
the current linguistic context. Contrasting with other
possible measures of miscommunication (e.g., repairs), VC
provided a continuous measure of breakdown, regardless of
whether or not miscommunication was recognized by the
dyad at any given moment.
VC was operationalized as whether the state of the
interlocutors’ workspaces matched (Paxton et al., 2014).
An undergraduate research assistant (RA) coded the dyads’
workspaces as either matching (VC+) or mismatching
(VC-) on a turn-by-turn basis. As a toy example, a speaker
(Ta) may have needed to describe an object’s spatial
orientation to her partner (Tb). If Tb physically moved the
object to the correct orientation (as intended by Ta based on
by Ta’s workspace and instruction card), the current turn
was marked as VC+. However, if Tb failed to put the object
in the correct orientation, the turn was marked as VC-. For
clarity, Figure 1 provides an example of what a VC- turn
may look like. In this turn, Ta instructed Tb to orient the
holes in an upward fashion, but the ambiguous use of “up”
resulted in a VC- turn.

Participants
Twenty dyads of undergraduate students (N = 40; females =
26; mean age = 19 years) from the University of Rochester
participated in interactive communication task in return for
$10. All participants were native speakers of American
English, with normal to corrected vision and no diagnosed
speech or hearing impairments.

1849

VC was evaluated at each turn to better capture the
nuances of task performance and communication. We
checked reliability of the coding by having two additional
blind coders (with no prior knowledge of the experiment)
evaluate 5% (425 turns) of the original visual congruence
determinations. The blind coders were asked to code
agreement/disagreement with the original codes. These
agree/disagree determinations were then subjected to an
inter-rater reliability analysis, and we found high agreement
with the primary coders (kappa = .96). Across the entire
corpus, 5,491 trials were coded as VC+, indicating that
miscommunication (VC-) occurred in 3,000 turns (35.5%)
across the corpus.

effects structure using Accuracy group identity as a random
slope and Dyad and Turn as random intercepts. Overall, as
expected, the High Accuracy group was significantly more
efficient than the Low (ß = .05, SE = 0.01, p < .001) and
Medium Accuracy groups (ß = .03, SE = 0.01, p < .01).
However, these overall differences across groups do not
capture differences in the groups’ unfolding dynamics.
Understanding the moment-to-moment changes in language
production is required to answer questions about how
communicative efficiency affects performance in time. To
explore how time courses of the different dyads differ, the
following analysis looks specifically at efficiency across
the interaction. We used standardized (or normalized) turn
as our measure of time. Using standardized turn instead of
raw turn counts allowed us to compare the dyads despite
the variability in total turns.
Growth Curve Analysis was used to evaluate the patterns
in communicative efficiency over the course of the
interaction. Growth curve analyses afford a finer-grained
evaluation of the progression over time than linear models
because they allow the data to vary in shape and form over
time. Specifically, growth curve models can evaluate data
when it is not necessarily linear. An initial visual analysis
of CE showed a clear nonlinear component to the variable
(see Figure 2). Thus, evaluating the curvature of one’s data
is often more informative than simply stating what the
mean differences are between groups.
We calculated orthogonal polynomials for standardized
turn up to the 5th order, in order to best represent the
conversation data1. Mirman, Dixon, and Magnuson (2008)
explain that using orthogonal polynomials to represent the
time-course data decouples the dependencies in the time
variable, thus making them independent within the model.
The orthogonals provide information about the intercept
(grand mean), linear slope (1st orthogonal), symmetry of
the curvature (2nd orthogonal), and the steepness of the
inflection point (i.e., point of change in the curvature; 3rd+
orthogonal; Mirman et al., 2008).
We then created a mixed-effects model that considered
the effects of group performance on communicative
efficiency (CE). Dyad was set as a random effect with fully
specified random slope, and the random effect for dyad-byaccuracy-group was included with slopes for only the 1st
and 2nd order polynomials (as suggested by Mirman et al.,
2008).2 The results indicated significant main effects for
the 2nd-5th orthogonals and significant interactions for the
4th and 5th orthogonals for the Low and High Accuracy
groups.

Figure 1: Visually incongruent (VC-) orientation for Ta’s
instruction to Tb: “Put the holes facing up.”
Accuracy and Accuracy Groups was calculated as a
running proportion (at the turn level) of VC+ of the
participants’ workspaces throughout the task. Using these
data, dyads were separated into three groups, resulting in
the following categories: High Accuracy (at or above +1
SD accuracy), Low Accuracy (at or below -1 SD accuracy),
and Medium Accuracy (from -1 to +1 SD accuracy).
Evaluation of VC+ by the predictor (dyad) and moderator
(turn) indicated that adding the interaction term resulted in
significantly better fit (F = 4.93, p < .05). A test of simple
slopes indicated that these groups did significantly differ
from zero, t(17) = 559.94Low; 3809.59High (p < .01).
Communicative Efficiency (CE) captured how well each
dyad balanced communication goals with effort over the
course of the interaction. To calculate this measure of
efficiency, we calculated a running average of words per
turn at each turn for each dyad. We then weighted this
running average using the dyad’s raw running accuracy
score until that same turn. Therefore, a higher CE was an
indication of a more efficient dyad, producing relatively
even numbers of words per turn throughout the interaction.
These stable levels of production are taken as a sign that
interlocutors are being effective at locally planning
production (e.g., providing only as much information as
needed) and globally tracking instructions and monitoring
for miscommunication (e.g., catching mistakes quickly).

Results

1

Chosen based on the number of points of inflection in the Low
Accuracy group.
2
The random effects beyond the cubic orthogonal were excluded
because they are computationally expensive and relatively less
informative (cf. Mirman et al., 2008)

As a preliminary analysis, we created a mixed-effects
model to determine whether the accuracy groups
significantly differed in relative efficiency across the course
of the interaction. The model predicted CE with accuracy
group (i.e., High, Medium, Low), a fully specified random

1850

The main effect on the 2nd orthogonal indicates that as
efficiency increases, so does the curvature symmetry (ß =
.08, SE = 0.04, p < .05). This suggests that, overall, dyads
peak in CE partway through the interaction and then
decline in CE until the end. This may have been an effect of
the task: As the dyad progresses towards completion and
the object becomes more concrete, speakers may invest
more effort, realizing that they need to re-establish shared
perspectives and common ground to move forward.

per-turn over an interaction. More stable performance may
be an indication that the dyad is effectively balancing
“cheap” and “costly” communication strategies (Houde &
Jordan, 1998; Pickering & Garrod, 2004; Tremblay, Shiller,
& Ostry, 2003; Vogel, Fletcher, & Maruff, 2014), while
increased variability may be a sign that the dyad may have
had difficulty choosing an appropriate strategy.
We found partial support for our hypotheses. As
predicted, we did find that lower-performing dyads
exhibited significantly higher variability in language
production
than
the
medium-performing
dyads.
Interestingly—and contrary to our expectations—highperforming dyads were also variable in their language
production, although it did not quite reach the statistical
significance seen in the low-performing dyads. The
medium-performing dyads, on the other hand, showed the
steady levels of efficiency that we expected from the highperforming dyads.
These results suggest that variability in language
production in itself may be neither helpful nor harmful.
Viewing this variability as a proxy for employing cheap or
costly communication strategies, the present findings may
suggest that high-performing dyads may simply be better at
switching between cheap and costly strategies as needed.
The low-performing dyads may be unable to settle on the
strategy appropriate to current demands, instead sampling a
wide variety of behaviors. The medium-performing dyads
may have put just enough effort into the interaction to
balance cheap and costly strategies, minimizing variability
while performing adequately. The high-performing dyads’
relatively fluid levels of variability throughout their
interactions may have given them the flexibility to adopt
new strategies as needed. Further research is needed to
examine this possibility.
Beyond the aggregate differences across dyads’
interactions, it is important to note that the dyads also
structured their interactions differently. Overall, the highperforming dyads were more efficient overall than either
the average or low-performing dyads. The high-performing
dyads produced significantly fewer turns than the other
groups, but growth curve analysis preserved the ebbs and
flows of production effort employed by each group,
highlighting the dynamics that characterize each group’s
performance.

Figure 2: Communicative efficiency over standardized time
for each group (High = red; Medium = green; Low = blue).
The other significant main effects indicate a decrease in
inflection points for the 3rd and 5th orthogonals (3rd
orthogonal: ß = -.05, SE = 0.2, p < .01; 5th orthogonal: ß = .01, SE = 0.002, p < .01) but an increase in inflection points
for the 4th orthogonal (ß = .02, SE = 0.004, p < .001).
Taken together, these increased inflection points may
functionally measure variability (i.e., increased peaks and
troughs) in efficiency throughout the interaction.
Comparing other groups to the Medium Accuracy
dyads, CE data were best fit by the fifth orthogonal for the
Low Accuracy dyads (ß = .01, SE = 0.003, p < .01). We
also see a trend towards significance of the 5th orthogonal
in the High Accuracy dyads (ß = .01, SE = 0.005, p = .06)
The results point to steeper and more variable curvature in
effort exerted to produce an instruction throughout the
interaction for both High and Low Accuracy dyads
(relative to Medium).

Future Directions
In the current study, we focused primarily on the amount
of language produced in the interaction as an indication of
production planning and effort but did not consider many of
the other factors that could have influenced performance.
Future analyses will examine how specific lexical choices
(e.g., spatial terminology, disfluencies, repair) affect the
dynamics of the interaction during both production and
comprehension. This may help shed light on the specific
strategies employed by speakers and listeners in
maintaining communicative efficiency.

Discussion
When individuals communicate with one another,
numerous factors contribute to the success of the
interaction—perspective taking, ability to repair,
adaptation, and flexibility (to name a few). The present
study examined just one possible factor: communicative
efficiency in production. Specifically, we investigated
whether dyads produce relatively stable amounts of words-

1851

For example, previous analysis of lexical selection in the
Bloco® corpus showed that groups differed in the numbers
of spatial references used. Low-performers used spatial
terminology more than high-performers, with lowperformers producing roughly 2,500 more spatial terms
overall. Therefore, dyads’ lexical choices directly result in
higher miscommunication and lower communicative
efficiency (Roche et al., 2013). How dyads handle these
breakdowns should mirror their ability to take perspective
and to initiate repair. Understanding the role of multiple
factors in miscommunication gets us one step closer to
understanding why we miscommunicate and how we
recover from it. Once we capture the behaviors leading to
miscommunication, we may be better able to develop more
controlled experiments to assess and address it.

message formulation and utterance planning. Journal of
Memory & Language, 54(4), 592-609.
Duran, N. D., Dale, R., & Kreuz, R. J. (2011). Listeners
invest in an assumed other’s perspective despite
cognitive cost. Cognition, 121(1), 22-40.
Ferreira, V. & Bock, K. (2006). The functions of structural
priming. Language and Cognitive Processes, 21(7-8),
1011-1029.
Grice, H. G. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole &
J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics (pp. 41-58). New
York: Academic Press.
Houde, J. & Jordan, M. (1998). Sensorimotor adaptation in
speech production. Science, 279(5354), 1213-1216.
Horton, W. S. & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive
Psychology, 61(1), 23-62.
Jaeger, T. F. & Tily, H. (2011). Language processing
complexity and communicative efficiency. WIRE:
Cognitive Science, 2(3), 323-335.
Keysar, B. (2007). Communication and miscommunication:
The role of egocentric processes. Intercultural
Pragmatics, 1-7, 71-84.
Levy, R. & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize
information density through syntactic reduction. In B.
Schlökopf, J. Platt, and T. Hoffman (Eds.), Advances in
NIPS 19, 849-856. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mirman, D., Dixon, J. A., & Magnuson, J. S. (2008).
Statistical and computation models of the visual world
paradigm: Growth curve and individual differences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 475-494.
Paxton, A., Roche, J. M., Ibarra, A., & Tananhaus, M. K.
(2014). Failure to (mis)communicate: Linguistic
convergence, lexical choice, and communicative success
in dyadic problem solving. In P. M. Bello, M. Guarini,
M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.) Proceedings of the
36th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Pennebaker, J. W., Booth, R. J., & Francis, M. E. (2007).
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count: LIWC [Computer
software]. Austin, TX: LIWC.net.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a
mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27(2), 169–190.
Roche, J. M., Paxton, A., Ibarra, A., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(2013). From minor mishap to major catastrophe: Lexical
choice in miscommunication. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen,
N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.). Proceedings of the
35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Tremblay, S., Shiller, D. M., & Ostry, D. J. (2003).
Somatosensory basis of speech production. Nature,
423(6942), 866-869.
Vogel, A. P., Fletcher, J., & Maruff, P. (2014). The impact
of task automaticity on speech in noise. Speech
Communication, 65, 1-8.

Conclusions
Successful speakers balance cheaper language acts with
more costly ones, investing just enough to achieve their
goals. Although some pairs never found this equilibrium,
even less-than-successful partners muddled through to
complete their task after substantial time and effort.
However, by being a little more flexible in adapting to the
needs of the moment, speakers may be better able to work
together, improving joint performance while conserving
effort.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks go to Alyssa Ibarra (U. Rochester) for her
contributions to previous work in collecting and analyzing
this corpus. We also thank our undergraduate research
assistants at U. Rochester (Chelsea Marsh, Eric Bigelow,
Derek Murphy, Melanie Graber, Anthony Germani, Olga
Nikolayeva, and Madeleine Salisbury) and UC Merced
(Chelsea Coe and J.P. Gonzales). Preparation of this
manuscript was supported National Institute of Health
grant (RO1 HD027206) to Michael Tanenhaus.

References
Bard, E., Anderson, A., Chen, Y., Nicholson, H., Harvard,
C., & Dazel-Job, S. (2007). Let’s you do that: Sharing
the cognitive burdens of dialogue. Journal of Memory
and Language, 57(4), 616-641.
Bock, J. (1986). Meaning, sound, and syntax: Lexical
priming in sentence production. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 12, 575586.
Branigan, H., Pickering, S. & Cleland, A. (2000). Syntactic
co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75(2), B13-B25.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22(6), 1482–1493.
Brown-Schmidt, S. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006). Watching
the eyes when talking about size: An investigation of

1852

