Comparison and Function in Children’s Object Categorization
Katherine Kimura (kkimura@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Samuel Hunley (shunley@emory.edu)
Laura L. Namy (lnamy@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322 USA

(e.g., in the case of a ball) or a salient part of an object (e.g.,
wings in the case of a bird) may serve as a sound basis for
categorizing. In contrast, the second approach claims that
children form categories by identifying the abstract,
relational properties, such as structural and functional
relations, that bind the categories. This process can be
facilitated by comparing two or more category instances,
thereby realizing that these relations among features and their
associated functions are shared amongst category instances
(e.g., Gentner & Namy, 1999; Namy & Gentner, 2002). For
example, children may base their classification of a kiwi as a
fruit on the fact that it, like other fruit, is edible, sweet, and
grows on trees.

Abstract
Although young children often rely on salient perceptual cues,
such as shape, when categorizing novel objects, children shift
towards deeper relational reasoning when they compare
category members or attend to functional properties. In this
study, we investigated the independent and combined effects
of comparison and function in children’s categorization of
novel objects. Across two experiments, we found that
comparing two perceptually similar category members led
children to discover non-obvious relational features that
supported their categorization of novel objects. Together, these
findings underscore the difficulty in categorizing novel objects
but demonstrate that comparison may aid in this process by
rendering less obvious relational structures more salient, thus
inducing a shift towards a categorical rather than perceptual
response.

Function Information

Keywords: Comparison; function; object categorization;
conceptual development

Introduction
The ability to rapidly form categories is a fundamental
attribute of human cognition that involves remarkable
flexibility and requires surprisingly few examples. Take, for
example, a Dalmatian. We readily categorize a Dalmatian as
a dog, along with German Shepherds, Chihuahuas, and
Poodles despite their obvious differences in size, shape, and
color. However, with just as much ease, we exclude cows
from the category dog even though cows and Dalmatians
have similar black spots and are both considered animals.
This apparent dissociation between perceptual similarity and
category membership raises a series of important questions
about conceptual development: How do children form object
categories and, critically, how do they learn to revise these
categories to incorporate new information and accommodate
novel instances?
Two predominant accounts of category formation have
been proposed, each with empirical evidence to support it.
The first approach suggests that young children rely heavily
on salient perceptual features, such as shape, as a basis for
categorizing (Baldwin, 1989; Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988),
but adapt the perceptual bases for their categorization based
on information about how perceptual features correspond to
and support object functions. Given that an object’s form is
often correlated with its function and goal-based actions
(Kelemen, Seston, & Saint Georges, 2012; McCarrell &
Callanan, 1995; Ware & Booth, 2010), the shape of an object

Children independently utilize both form (e.g., Landau et al.,
1988) and function information (e.g., Kemler Nelson, 1999;
Kemler Nelson, Russell, Duke, & Jones, 2000) as a basis for
object categorization. These factors, however, are
interrelated, enabling children to base their categories on the
most functionally relevant perceptual features. For example,
McCarrell and Callanan (1995) showed that young children
not only recognize the functional affordances of particular
perceptual features but also use these perceptual properties to
make category-based inferences (e.g., generalizing the
property “sees well at night” to animals with large eyes).
Even for novel objects that perform novel functions, children
are adept at identifying key perceptual features that are
functionally relevant (Kemler Nelson, 1999; Kemler Nelson
et al., 2000). For example, after learning that a basket
attached to a handle dispensed balls into an out-of-reach
chute, children who had the opportunity to physically explore
the novel objects reliably identified other objects that could
perform a similar function and generalized the category label
to those functionally similar objects, rejecting those in which
the handle was too short or the basket had a hole.
In some cases, rather than relying exclusively on observed
functional affordances as a basis for categorization
judgments, children may infer the creator’s intended
function, basing their categorization on the features that are
most relevant to the intended function (e.g., Diesendruck,
Markson, & Bloom, 2003; Kelemen et al., 2012; Ware &
Booth, 2010). As a result, children will include a broken
artifact in the object category even though this object no

1105

longer serves its intended function (e.g., a cracked cup that
can no longer hold liquids is still a cup).

Comparison
Comparison, the process of identifying structural and
relational commonalities (and differences) among two or
more entities, is a powerful learning mechanism through
which common relational structures that support deep
reasoning are highlighted (Gentner, 2010; Gentner &
Markman, 1997). In the case of object categorization, surface
level similarities serve as an impetus to align two or more
stimuli, leading to the identification of subtle relational
commonalities that are most relevant for category
membership, such as those that relate to object function.
These relational commonalities are then projected to other
entities, thus supporting inferences about category
membership and facilitating category learning.
The role of comparison in category learning is evident even
in young children’s object categorization. Three- and fouryear-olds who are given opportunities to compare
perceptually similar category members reliably generalize
categories based on conceptually relevant features other than
overall shape. Gentner and Namy (1999; Namy & Gentner,
2002), for example, demonstrated that comparing two
similarly shaped, familiar objects (e.g., a bicycle and a
tricycle) led four-year-olds to inhibit attention to shape as a
basis for categorization and instead extend category
membership to objects sharing relational properties such as
function or role (e.g., a skateboard). However, when children
were presented only one object (e.g., a bicycle), they selected
matches based predominantly on shape (e.g., a pair of reading
glasses). Not only does comparison highlight category
relevant properties in familiar objects, but comparison also
facilitates the discovery of non-obvious perceptual
commonalities among novel objects (Graham, Namy,
Gentner, & Meagher, 2010) and of key perceptual parts (e.g.,
wings) that are necessary for performing functions (e.g.,
flying), (Gentner, Lowenstein, & Hung, 2007). Together,
these studies provide converging support that comparison
highlights non-obvious, functionally relevant structural
properties that are shared across category members.

The Current Investigation
Existing evidence suggests clear roles for form-function
relations and comparison-based structural alignment in
children’s categorization. Although both approaches foster
object categorization, the emphases are subtly different.
Categorization accounts based on form-function relations
would imply that children would focus on those perceptual
features that support object function. Comparison-based
accounts highlight common relations among features
(including those that would support functions). However both
accounts would imply that children move beyond salient
properties such as shape to focus on more category-relevant
features as a basis for categorization.
The current investigation addresses the independent and
combined contributions of these two factors to children's

ability to categorize novel objects as instances of familiar
object categories. When encountering static novel objects,
children must rely on perceptual information to draw
inferences about functional affordances and category
membership, particularly because children lack specific
conceptual knowledge about or experience with these novel
objects. Therefore, the question of interest is whether
children can use comparison of familiar category exemplars
and/or information about the function of the object category
to inhibit attention to shape as a basis for categorization and
instead hone in on those (often subtle) perceptual features that
reliably signal category membership.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 explores the unique and combined roles of
comparison and function information in the categorization of
novel objects into familiar categories. Three-year-olds
viewed either one (No Compare) or two (Compare) pictures
of familiar objects from a target category (e.g., a penny and a
dime from the coin category) and either were (Function) or
were not (No Function) given functional information about
the object(s) to highlight particular form-function relations
(e.g., “You put it in a piggy bank”). Children were then asked
to select a category match from among two novel objects: a
similarly shaped object that belonged to a different target
category (e.g., a compass) and a dissimilarly shaped object
that belonged to the same target category (e.g., a triangular
coin). If either comparison or functional information
highlights functionally relevant perceptual properties of
familiar objects, then children who viewed two objects and/or
were given functional information should extend category
membership to novel category members despite the overall
greater perceptual similarity of the shape-similar foil. Of
particular interest are the relative contributions of
comparison and functional information, independently and
jointly, in facilitating insight into category-relevant
perceptual features of object categories.

Method
Participants Eighty-seven 3-year-olds (M = 3;7, range =
3;0–4;2, 44 girls) from the greater Atlanta area participated.
Eleven additional children were tested but were excluded
from the analysis for showing a side preference on at least
nine out of ten trials (n = 7) or for incorrectly identifying
items that were intended to be familiar on at least half of the
ten trials in a post-experiment naming task (n = 4).
Materials Forty photographs of real objects were organized
into 10 sets of four. Each set included two exemplars and two
choice alternatives (see Figure 1). The exemplars, which
belonged to the same target category, shared similar
perceptual features and were selected to be familiar items to
preschoolers (e.g., a penny and a dime from the coin
category). The choice alternatives, in contrast, varied in their
overall perceptual similarities to the exemplars and were
selected to be unfamiliar to young children. One of the choice
alternatives, the shape match, physically resembled the

1106

exemplars but fell outside the target category (e.g., a
compass), whereas the other choice alternative, the
taxonomic match, differed in shape from the exemplars but
was within the target category (e.g., a triangular coin).
Similarities and dissimilarities in shape between the choice
alternatives and the exemplars were confirmed through adult
ratings, whereas general familiarity with the objects was
verified from pilot data with 3-year-olds.
For each set, a functional description of a unique yet
familiar property of the target category was used to highlight
functional affordances. For example, “You put it in a piggy
bank,” provided child-appropriate key functional information
to describe the general category of coins. To ensure that the
functional descriptions selected to characterize each target
category were ones that children reliably associated with the
categories, 19 3-year-olds (M = 3;8, range 3;1–4;0, 6 girls)
who did not participate in the experiment proper completed a
validation task, reliably matching the functional descriptions
to the correct exemplars with 99% accuracy.
Procedure The procedure consisted of a categorization task
followed by a naming task.
In the categorization task, children were randomly
assigned to either the compare or no compare condition and,
within each of these conditions, were also randomly assigned
to either the function or no function condition. This
combination yielded a total of four conditions: (1) comparefunction, (2) compare-no function, (3) no compare- function,
and (4) no compare-no function.
For children assigned to the no compare-no function
condition, the experimenter began each trial by presenting a
single exemplar (e.g., a penny) and exclaiming, “Look at this
one! Do you see this one?” The experimenter then placed the
two choice alternatives—the shape and taxonomic match—
directly below the exemplar, as shown in Figure 1A, and
asked the child, “Which one of these is the same kind of thing
as this one?” After the child selected either the shape or
taxonomic match, the experimenter removed the pictures and
administered the next trial until all 10 trials were complete.
Which exemplar was presented in each set was
counterbalanced across children, and the left-right placement
of the shape and taxonomic matches was randomized across
trials.
The procedure for the no compare-function condition was
identical to that in the no compare-no function condition with
the exception that the experimenter also provided a functional
description with the exemplar. For example, as illustrated in
Figure 1B, the experimenter said, “Look at this one! Do you
see this one? You put it in a piggy bank.” following the
presentation of the penny.
In the compare-no function condition, the experimenter
presented the child with both exemplars (e.g., a penny and a
dime) to elicit comparisons. As in the no compare conditions,
the trial began with the experimenter laying down the first
exemplar and saying, “Look at this one! Do you see this
one?” The experimenter then placed the second exemplar
directly beneath the first, drawing attention to the picture by

exclaiming, “And now look at this one!” She then pointed
back and forth between the two exemplars to prompt
comparisons, saying, “Do you see how these are the same
kind of thing?” Next, the experimenter placed the two choice
alternatives below the exemplars, as depicted in Figure 1C,
and asked the child, “Which one of these is the same kind of
thing as these?” After the child selected one of the choice
alternatives, the procedure was repeated until the child
completed all 10 trials. Order of presentation of the two
exemplars was counterbalanced across children, and the leftright placement of the choice alternatives was randomized
across trials.
The compare-function condition was identical to the
compare-no function condition except that children heard a
functional description as each exemplar was presented. That
is, for example, the experimenter said, “You put it in a piggy
bank,” after presenting the penny and then repeated the
functional description for the dime, as shown in Figure 1D.
After completing the 10 trials, all children completed a
naming task in which the experimenter re-presented the
stimulus cards one at a time and asked the child to label the
objects in English. If the child failed to provide a label or
indicated that s/he did not know the name, the experimenter
encouraged the child to provide a functional description by
asking, “What do you think we do with it?” In the event that
the child failed to respond even after the prompt, the
experimenter reassured the child that it was fine to say "I
don't know," and continued to the next picture until the child
had attempted to name every object.

1107

Figure 1: Sample stimulus set in no compare–no function
(1A), no compare–function (1B), compare–no function
(1C), and compare–function (1D) conditions.

Coding For each trial of the categorization task, responses
were coded based on whether the child selected the shape or
taxonomic match.
Post-experiment naming responses were transcribed from
video recordings and all were scored as correct or incorrect
by two independent raters. Inter-rater reliability between the
two raters was 99%, and a third independent rater resolved all
discrepancies. Correct responses were defined as any
response demonstrating the child’s knowledge of the object’s
identity or function. These included responding with correct
labels at a subordinate, basic, or superordinate category level
(e.g., “Liberty Coin”, “penny”, and “money” respectively, to
label the penny) or by responding with the name of different
basic level objects within the same superordinate category
(e.g., “nickel” for the penny). Functional descriptions were
also accepted as correct if the child provided enough
information to sufficiently differentiate the target category
from other potential categories (e.g., “You buy things with it”
but not “You take it places” when describing the penny).
Only trials in which the child correctly identified the familiar
exemplars were included for analysis (M = 8.37 trials, median
= 9). To ensure that children had an appropriate baseline
knowledge of categories and objects more generally, children
who incorrectly identified the exemplars on at least half of
the trials were excluded (n= 4).

reliably differ from chance, t(21) = -.33, p = .74. In other
words, when children were given either comparison or
functional information, they, like those who received neither
comparison nor function, reliably selected the shape match
over the taxonomic one. However, when children were given
functional information alongside the presentation of both
exemplars, children failed to show a reliable preference for
the shape match. These findings indicate that children relied
predominantly on shape as a basis for categorizing unless
given an opportunity to compare and functional descriptions.
Surprisingly, highlighting functional information apparently
neither increased categorization based on subtle relational
properties nor decreased attention to functionally irrelevant
salient perceptual features. This experiment suggests that
comparison but not functional information facilitates
inclusion of novel instances into familiar object categories,
although the phenomenon may best be characterized as
shifting children away from shape matching.

Results & Discussion
Figure 2 shows the mean proportion of taxonomic responses
for each condition. To test whether comparison and
functional information highlights key perceptual features that
afford function, thereby increasing taxonomic responding,
we performed a logistic regression analysis with comparison
and function as predictors of taxonomic responses. The
resulting model was statistically significant, χ2(3) = 8.96, p
=.03, suggesting that when accounting for both comparison
and function the model reliably predicted the likelihood that
children selected the taxonomic match. Closer inspection
revealed an effect of comparison, χ2(1) = 7.25, p < .01, with
those in the compare conditions (M = .43, SD = .22) selecting
the taxonomic match significantly more often than those in
the no compare conditions (M = .31, SD = .20). Specifically,
comparison increased children’s odds of selecting the
taxonomic match by 38%, β = .48, SE = .22, p = .03. The
results, however, yielded no main effect of function, χ2(1) =
1.24, p = .27, nor was there an interaction between
comparison and function, χ2(1) = .14, p = .71.
To examine whether children systematically employed a
shape or taxonomic categorization response pattern, we
compared children’s performance in each condition to chance
responding (i.e., .50). The analyses demonstrated that
children in the no compare conditions selected the taxonomic
match significantly less often than expected by chance in both
the function, t(18) = -2.66, p = .016, and no function groups,
t(24) = -4.09, p < .001. Those in the compare–no function
condition also selected the taxonomic match significantly
less often than predicted by chance, t(20) = -2.14, p = .045.
In contrast, those in the compare–function condition did not

Figure 2: Mean proportion of taxonomic responses in
Experiments 1 and 2.

Experiment 2
Although children who compared and were given functional
information were the only ones who did not reliably select
the shape match, the results from Experiment 1 indicate that
comparison, but not function information, influenced
children's correct extension of category membership to a
novel category instance. This outcome is surprising given
children's apparent ability to use functionally relevant
perceptual features as a basis for categorization. One
possibility is that performance on the category extension task
may underestimate children’s reliance on functional
information as a basis for reasoning about object categories,
perhaps due to information processing demands or ambiguity
about the relevance of the functional information to the
category extension task. Experiment 2 addresses this
possibility by explicitly instructing children to extend
functional properties to novel objects, while once again
manipulating opportunities to compare. We reasoned that if
comparison emphasizes and thus encourages children to
attend to functionally relevant perceptual features, then

1108

children should select the taxonomic match more often in the
compare than the no compare condition. However, if children
are adept at judging function generalization to novel objects
in this more direct task, then children may select the
taxonomic match reliably in both the compare and no
compare conditions. Finally, if children are unable to
generalize a function to a novel object in the face of a surfacelevel shape match, then they may reliably select the shape
match in both conditions.

Method
Participants Forty-nine 3-year-olds (M = 3;6, range = 3;0–
4;2, 24 girls) from the same population as Experiment 1
participated. An additional 6 children participated but were
excluded for showing a side preference on at least nine out of
ten trials (n = 5) or for failing to complete the post-experiment
naming task (n = 1).
Materials The stimulus sets and functional descriptions were
identical to those used in Experiment 1.
Procedure As in Experiment 1, children completed a
categorization task followed immediately by a naming task.
In the categorization task, children were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions: (1) compare or (2) no
compare. The procedure was identical to that used in
Experiment 1 with two exceptions. First, every child received
functional descriptions with the presentation of each
exemplar. Second, each child was asked to extend the
functional property to one of the choice alternatives rather
than select a category match.
The experimenter began each trial by presenting either one
or two exemplars for the no compare or compare conditions,
respectively each accompanied by a functional description as
in Experiment 1 (e.g., “You put it in a piggy bank.”) The
experimenter then laid out the shape and taxonomic matches,
randomizing the left-right placement across trials, and asked,
“Which one of these do you put in a piggy bank like these?”
The presentation order of the exemplars as well as the order
of the trials were counterbalanced across children.
After the child completed all 10 trials, the experimenter
administered the naming task by re-presenting the stimulus
cards and asking each child to label the objects in English, as
in Experiment 1.
Coding The coding procedures were identical to those
described in Experiment 1. Inter-rater reliability between two
independent raters was 98%, with a third independent rater
resolving discrepancies. Only trials in which the exemplars
were correctly identified were included in the analysis (M =
8.80 trials, median = 9).

Results & Discussion
The mean proportion of taxonomic responses is illustrated in
Figure 2. To explore the effect of comparison on children’s
responses, we performed a logistic regression analysis with
comparison as the predictor. Consistent with the previous

experiment, the model yielded an effect of comparison, χ2(1)
= 6.36, p =.01, with children in the compare condition (M =
.63, SD = .18) selecting the taxonomic match reliably more
often than those in the no compare condition (M = .50, SD =
.18). An odds ratio further revealed that the odds of selecting
the taxonomic match was 39% greater in the compare
condition than in the no compare condition, β = .50, SE = .20,
p = .01.
As in Experiment 1, we also examined the probability that
children’s responses significantly differed from chance
responding (i.e., .50) to explore whether children reliably
exhibited a shape or taxonomic response pattern. Results
indicated that children in the compare condition selected the
taxonomic match more often than expected by chance, t(21)
= 3.20, p < .01. Children in the no compare condition, in
contrast, did not differ from chance responding, t(26) = .01,
p = .99.
Consistent with Experiment 1, the results from this
experiment revealed a significant difference in children’s
responses as a result of whether they had the opportunity to
compare two exemplars. When shown two exemplars,
children reliably selected the category match, a response that
is consistent with previous studies examining the role of
comparison in object categorization (Gentner & Namy, 1999;
Graham et al., 2010; Namy & Gentner, 2002). In contrast,
when children were shown either exemplar alone, they failed
to show a preference for either the shape or taxonomic match.
These data suggest that comparison highlights subtle
functional properties. Nevertheless, unlike in Experiment 1,
even children in the no compare condition avoided the lure of
reliable shape-based responding, suggesting that children
may more readily attend to functionally relevant perceptual
properties in a function generalization than a category
extension task.

General Discussion
In two experiments, we found that comparing similarly
shaped objects from the same familiar category highlights
non-obvious functional properties that are relevant for
category membership. In Experiment 1, children categorized
unfamiliar objects into familiar categories based
predominantly on shape. However, when children were
prompted to compare, their shape driven responses were
attenuated such that children who compared highly similar
category members were more likely to distribute their
responses between the shape match and the taxonomic match,
presumably based on other, subtler relational commonalities
between objects. This finding underscores the alignment
process elicited by comparison – despite the highly salient
shape similarity between the two exemplars, children who
viewed both objects were less likely to base their
categorization on shape. Experiment 2 replicated this
comparison effect, showing that those who compared two
familiar objects were more likely to privilege the taxonomic
match based on non-obvious relational features when asked
to extend functional properties to novel objects.

1109

Taken together, these findings suggest that comparing two
objects enables children to inhibit attention to salient
perceptual features and allows them to identify subtler
commonalities that are more likely to be related to functional
and relational commonalities among category members. In
the current task, comparison not only highlighted relevant
category information between familiar objects, it also
generated new relational knowledge about unfamiliar items,
thus enabling children to incorporate novel instances into
familiar categories despite their limited experience with the
stimulus items. For example, children who compare a penny
and a dime may shift attention from round shape to categoryrelevant, yet subtle, relational features (e.g., the metal
material, the engraved portrait, or the flatness of the object)
that are better indicators of category membership and,
critically, functional affordances (e.g., putting it in a piggy
bank).
Although this study suggests that comparison reduces
children’s reliance on salient perceptual features by drawing
attention to subtle relational features, this forced-choice task
cannot directly inform which perceptual properties children
utilize as a basis for categorization or why. To better
understand how children's attention is being allocated to
various perceptual features and how that relates to their
understanding of the functional and relational properties of
the objects, we plan to utilize eye-tracking measures in future
research and systematically manipulate the information about
structural relations and form-function correspondences to
which children are exposed during category learning.
Another important direction for future research is how
children's perceptual analysis of object categories varies
depending on whether the objects are artifacts, which are
created for intended functions, or natural kinds, which
arguably are less function-based. Recent work on children’s
teleological reasoning demonstrates that young children often
assign functional properties to natural kinds (e.g., Kelemen,
1999; Kelemen et al., 2012), thus raising questions about
children’s categorization of natural kinds and how it may
differ from artifact categorization.
The current study provides compelling evidence for the
role of both comparison and function in children’s ability to
modulate their attention to perceptual features of novel
objects that are most relevant for category membership.
Although children likely employ a variety of strategies when
learning about unfamiliar objects, the process of comparison
serves as a powerful tool through which they may discover
non-obvious properties that inform category membership.

Acknowledgements
Funding for this project was provided by a Scholarly Inquiry
and Research at Emory grant awarded to KK, and NICHD
Grant No. 1R03HD05877 awarded to LLN. A portion of
LLN's effort on this paper was supported by the National
Science Foundation. Selected results were previously
presented as partial fulfillment of the requirements for KK's
honors thesis at Emory University.

References
Baldwin, D. A. (1989). Priorities in children’s expectations
about object label reference: Form over color. Child
Development, 60, 1291-1306
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11, 356-373.
Diesendruck, G., Markson, L., & Bloom, P. (2003).
Children’s reliance on creator’s intent in extending names
for artifacts. Psychological Science, 14, 164-168.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34, 752775.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Hung, B. (2007).
Comparison facilitates children’s learning of names for
parts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8, 285-307.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Graham, S. A., Namy, L. L., Gentner, D., & Meagher, K.
(2010). The role of comparison in preschoolers’ novel
object categorization. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 107, 280-290.
Kelemen, D. (1999). The scope of teleological thinking in
preschool children. Cognition, 70, 241-272.
Kelemen, D., Seston, R., & Saint Georges, L. (2012). The
designing mind: Children’s reasoning about intended
functions and artifact structure. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 13, 439-453.
Kemler Nelson, D. G. (1999). Attention to functional
properties in toddlers’ naming and problem-solving.
Cognitive Development, 14, 77-100.
Kemler Nelson, D. G., Russell, R., Duke, N., & Jones, K.
(2000). Two-year-olds will name artifacts by their
functions. Child Development, 71, 1271-1288.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Child
Development, 62, 449-516.
McCarrell, N. S., & Callanan, M. A. (1995). Form-function
correspondences in children’s inference. Child
Development, 66, 532-546.
Namy, L. L., & Gentner, D. (2002). Making a silk purse out
of two sow’s ears: Young children’s use of comparison in
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
131, 5-15.
Ware, E. A., & Booth, A. E. (2010). Form follows function:
Learning about function helps children learn about shape.
Cognitive Development, 25, 124-137.

1110

