The Cognitive and Mathematical Profiles of Children in Early Elementary School
Adam T. Newton (anewton9@uwo.ca)
Marcie Penner-Wilger (mpennerw@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, King’s University College at Western University, London, ON, N6A 2M3, Canada
Abstract
The present study investigated the diverse cognitive profiles
of children learning mathematics in early elementary school.
Unlike other types of learning difficulties, mathematics
impairments are not characterized by a single underlying
cognitive deficit, instead multiple general and numeracyspecific cognitive skills have been proposed to underlie
mathematics ability. Combining theory- and data-driven
approaches, the study investigated cognitive mathematics
profiles. Participants for this study were 97 children tracked
from senior kindergarten to grade two, as part of the Count
Me In Study. Using numeracy, working memory, receptive
language, and phonological awareness factors, a two-step
cluster analysis revealed a three-cluster solution. The groups
were characterized as (1) above average overall, (2) average
overall with weak visuospatial working memory, (3) poor
overall with strong visuospatial working memory. Cluster 1
demonstrated strengths in mathematics and reading,
compared to clusters 2 and 3. Developmental trends and
potential interventions are discussed.

Introduction
What makes some children better at math than others? At
the far end of the ability spectrum, there is specific learning
disability – mathematics, characterized by an individual
having significantly lower math performance than their
general performance predicts (Mash & Wolfe, 2013).
Mathematics disability is characterized by core deficits,
enumerating sets, comparing quantities, and other features
(Butterworth & Reigosa, 2008). The reading comparison of
mathematics disability, specific learning disability –
reading, is connected to a core deficit in phonological
processing. Interventions for reading disability can target
this core deficit and improve reading ability (Mash &
Wolfe, 2013). There is no agreed upon core deficit in
mathematics disability. Instead, several underlying factors
have been investigated, suggesting the existence of math
disability subtypes (Szucs et al., 2013) and distinct
pathways to mathematical success (Lefevre et al., 2010;
Sowinski et al., 2015). Theoretical approaches describe
mathematics ability with domain-general and domainspecific explanations. Domain-general explanations involve
individuals’ skill in more general cognitive structures (e.g.,
visuospatial working memory, working memory). Domainspecific explanations emphasize underlying numeracy
abilities (e.g., subitizing and magnitude representation;
Butterworth & Reigosa, 2008).
These theoretical frameworks have led to the suggestion
of mathematics difficulty subtypes (e.g., Hassinger-Das et
al. 2014; Jordan, 2007; McCloskey et al., 1985; Temple,

1997) and the investigation of subtypes through data-driven
approaches (Archibald et al., 2013; Bartelet et al., 2014).
The present study combined these approaches to explore the
cognitive profiles of elementary school children, tracked
longitudinally from senior kindergarten (SK) to Grade 2,
learning mathematics.
Domain-specific explanations of mathematics difficulty
address specific impairments in numeracy abilities proposed
to underlie mathematics ability, including subitizing and
estimation, and neuroabnormalities in numeracy-dominated
brain areas (Davis et al., 2009; Landerl, 2013). In subitizing
tasks, individuals enumerate sets of dots as quickly as
possible without counting. Typically, children can subitize
(enumerate without counting) three or four dots. Children
with mathematics impairments typically show greater
increases in response time (RT) as the size of the set
increases. Children with typical mathematics skill usually
display similar RTs for sets of 1-3 dots (Landerl, 2013).
Performance on subitizing tasks has been proposed as a key
discriminator of math ability (Penner-Wilger et al., 2007).
Among children with poor mathematics skill, subitizing
slopes are much steeper (Landerl, 2013).
In contrast, domain-general explanations involve
processes not specific to mathematics (e.g., executive
control, language systems, the visuospatial system,
Butterworth & Reigosa, 2008; Szucs, et al., 2013).
Examining children with “pure developmental dyscalculia,”
Szucs et al. (2013) contrasted five theories of developmental
dyscalculia (magnitude representation, working memory,
inhibition, attention and spatial processing). Using a variety
of math-specific and general cognitive measures, the
researchers supported deficits in working memory,
inhibition, attention, and spatial processing, but did not find
support for deficits in magnitude representation – which has
been the dominate domain-specific explanation of
mathematics difficulty (De Smedt & Gilmore, 2011; Piazza
et al., 2010; Rouselle & Noel, 2007). Neuroimaging data
supports Szucs et al.’s (2013) assertion (Davis et al., 2009).
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
Davis et al. (2009) illustrated neural activation differences
in spatial working memory areas, not in magnitude
representation areas, among children with mathematics
difficulties, compared to matched children. Additionally,
Davis et al. (2009) suggests children with mathematics
learning difficulties use developmentally immature
strategies to solve mathematics problems, compared to their
non-impaired peers (as a result of their spatial memory
deficits) leading to slower RTs in arithmetic fluency tasks.
Data-driven approaches have used cluster analysis to
investigate the cognitive profiles of children with
mathematics difficulties. Bartelet et al. (2014) used a variety

1709

of math-specific and general cognitive measures and
identified six profiles of mathematics difficulty: (1) weak
mental number line (poor number line task performance),
(2) weak approximate number system (poor non-symbolic
performance), (3) spatial difficulties (poor spatial working
memory), (4) access deficit (poor symbolic knowledge and
counting skills), (5) no numerical cognitive deficit (strong
verbal working memory skills without concurrent deficits in
numeracy measures), (6) garden variety (many numeracy
and general cognitive deficits). These profiles are similar to
many of the subtypes suggested by theory-driven research.
Archibald, et al. (2013) investigated the cognitive profiles of
children with language, reading, and math learning
difficulties using a large epidemiological sample. Children
were given a battery of standardized tests measuring
language, reading fluency, phonological awareness, general
intelligence, working memory, and arithmetic ability.
Archibald et al., (2013)’s profiles were characterized by: (1)
below average across most measures, (2) below average
sentence recall (3) below average reading efficacy, (4)
below average math and reading, (5) below average math
fluency, (6) and above average overall. The math
impairment group displayed high performances in general
intelligence, despite arithmetic weaknesses. Since Archibald
et al. (2013) did not include wider range of general (e.g.,
processing speed, nonverbal reasoning) and math-specific
(e.g., subitizing, estimation) variables, these numeracy and
cognitive skills within these profiles cannot be evaluated.
However, Archibald et al. (2013) identified comorbidity
between reading and mathematics difficulty, and the
absence of comorbidity between mathematics difficulty and
specific language impairments, suggesting the possible
contribution of low reading skill to mathematics difficulty.
Investigating children of all math performance levels,
LeFevre et al. (2010) tested a model of associations between
early cognitive precursors, numeracy skill, and math
outcomes. This model identifies three pathways that precede
math ability: quantitative (numeracy), linguistic (receptive
vocabulary and phonological awareness), and spatial
attention (visuospatial working memory). These pathways
contribute independently to numeracy skills during the early
years of formal education and are differently related to
performance on many math outcome measures. Each of the
pathways were related to performance on numeration and
calculation ability, as well as symbolic number line
estimation, but the spatial pathway was not involved in
magnitude comparison. Least surprisingly, the linguistic
pathway was the only pathway to account for variability in
word reading, but more surprisingly, it was the only
pathway to be involved in all mathematics outcomes. This
research indicates the diversity present in math performance
and suggests that an individual may compensate for
weaknesses in one area of performance with strengths in
other pathways. This research also highlights the importance
of considering the role of linguistic skill in math
performance, as indicated by the relation of the linguistic
pathway to each of the math outcomes.

Recently, Sowinski et al. (2015) revised the Pathways
Model (LeFevre et al., 2010) by considering more
quantitative measures. In the refined model, only the
quantitative and linguistic pathways, and not the working
memory pathway, accounted for unique variance in
calculation and number knowledge, suggesting the
contribution of pathways depends on the cognitive task.
Mathematics ability cannot be explained by a singular
factor. Rather, independent pathways to mathematics
success exist along with distinct profiles of mathematics
ability characterized by a range of deficits in numeracy and
general cognitive abilities. Building from previous
theoretical and data-driven approaches, the present study
investigates the cognitive profiles of children by following
clusters of children longitudinally from SK to grade two and
evaluating their performance on mathematics, reading and
general cognitive measures. It is proposed that cognitive
profiles will be formed based on SK subitizing, language
skills, and visuospatial working memory and that these
profiles will have distinct math and reading outcomes in
Grades 1 and 2, based on the models tested by Lefevre et al.,
(2010), additionally, profiles are not expected to differ on
processing speed or phonological working memory (e.g.,
Bartelet et al., 2014).

Methods
Participants
Participants were 97 children (51 male, M = 71.7 months,
SD = 3.98 months, range = 18 months) tracked
longitudinally over three years from SK to Grade Two.
Participants were drawn from the Count Me In project, a
large longitudinal study, and were recruited from seven
schools in three Canadian cities. Parental consent was
attained for all children who participated in the study.

Materials
Screening Variables (Senior Kindergarten)
Subitizing. Children’s ability to enumerate sets without
counting was measured using a subitizing task. In this task,
1-6 dots are displayed on a computer screen. Three trials
were presented for each dot array, for a total of 18 trials.
The dots for each trial were displayed in pseudo-random
arrangements. Subitizing slopes were computed using the
median RTs for 1-3 dots and the best fitting regression line
was calculated for each child. This RT slope was used as the
measure of subitizing. A higher slope suggests the child is
counting the three dot display while a lower slope suggests
that the child is subitizing the dot display.
Visuospatial Working Memory. A computerized variant of
the Corsi Block task was used to measure of visual-spatial
working memory. In this task, children viewed a frog
jumping in sequence from one lily pad to another and
included nine lily pads dispersed on the laptop screen
(DeStefano & LeFevre, 2003; αc = .699, N = 191). Children
completed one practice trial and 12 experimental trials, with

1710

the length of the span ranging from 2 to 7. The task was
stopped when the child made two consecutive errors.
Children’s maximum span was used as the measure of
visuospatial working memory.
Phonological Awareness. Phonological awareness was
measured using the Elision subtest of the Comprehensive
Test of Phonological Processing (CTOPP; Wagner,
Torgesen, Rashotte, 1999). Children heard a word and were
asked to say the word again, but omit a sound (e.g., brat
without the ⁄ r ⁄). Children’s Elision grade standardized
scores from SK (M = 10, SD = 3) were used as the measure
of phonological awareness.
Receptive Language. The Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test – Revised – Form B (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn, 1997) was
used to measure receptive language. Children were shown a
set of four pictures and chose the picture that corresponded
with a verbally presented vocabulary word. The words
increased in relative difficulty as the test progressed. The
task was terminated after the child made six errors in eight
consecutive questions. Due to the high performance level of
the children participating in Count Me In, the starting set for
the PPVT was raised to one set higher than suggested by
Dunn and Dunn (1997). PPVT SK scores, standardized by
grade (M = 100, SD = 15), were used as the measure of
receptive language.
Evaluation Variables (Grades 1 & 2)
Mathematics Achievement (KeyMath Numeration). The
Numeration subtest of the KeyMath Test-Revised
(Connolly, 2000) covers concepts including quantity, order,
and place value. Raw Numeration scores from Grade 1 and
2 were used as measures of mathematical achievement.
Mathematics
Achievement
(Woodcock-Johnson
Calculation). The Calculation subtest of the WoodcockJohnson Tests of Achievement (WJ-Math; Woodcock &
Johnson, 1989) covers mathematical problems that increase
in difficulty from basic addition (i.e., 1 + 1) to matrix
algebra. The test was stopped once the child made six
sequential errors or believed that they could not answer any
more questions. Children’s Grade 1 and 2 raw scores were
used as measures of mathematical achievement.
Arithmetic Fluency. Children’s arithmetic fluency was
measured in a single digit addition task. Children were
instructed to sum single digit addends as quickly as possible
without making many errors. Children’s Grade 1 and 2
median RT were used as measures of arithmetic fluency.
Reading Skill. The Word Identification subtest of the
Woodcock Reading Mastery Test – Revised/ Normative
Update, Form G (WJ-Reading; Woodcock, 1998) was used
to assess reading skill. Children were shown a set of words
(e.g., cat) and were asked to read each word. The words

increased in relative difficulty as the test progressed. The
test was terminated when the child made six consecutive
errors, including errors of pronunciation. Children’s Grade 1
Word Identification Scores (M = 100, SD = 15) were used as
the measure of reading skill. Reading measures were not
collected in Grade 2.
Nonverbal Reasoning. The analogy subtest of the
Cognitive Intelligence Test (CIT; Gardner, 1990) was used
to assess children’s nonverbal reasoning. Children were
presented with a pattern of blocks with one missing block.
Children were asked to select the correct response from a set
of possible solutions arranged across the bottom of the page.
The task was stopped after six consecutive errors. Using the
KR-20, the total reliability of the CIT was determined to be
.90. Children’s standardized Grade 2 scores were used as the
measure of nonverbal reasoning. Non-verbal reasoning
measures were not collected in Grade 1.
Phonological Working Memory. Children completed a
reverse digit-span task as a measure of working memory.
Children were asked to recall a series of spoken digits
presented by an on-screen dog character. Children repeated
the numbers in the reverse order to which they were
presented (14 trials; Orsini et al., 1987). Children must hold
and manipulate the numbers, rather than simply storing the
numbers in this task. Digit lengths started at two and
increased in length until the child was inaccurate for both
trials of a certain length. Participants’ Grade 1 maximum
reverse span was used as the measure of phonological
working memory. Phonological working memory measures
were not collected in Grade 2.
Processing Speed. Children completed a simple choice
reaction time task as a measure of processing speed.
Children were presented with one of two types of stimuli (X
or O). Children then had to press the appropriate key as
quickly as possible without making an error. Children
completed 24 trials in one minute. Children’s mean RT from
SK to Grade 2 was used as the measure of processing speed.

Procedure
In May of each year (Kindergarten – Grade 2), children
were tested by trained research assistants. Computer tasks
and pencil-and-paper tasks were given in two separate
sessions lasting between 15 and 30 minutes, with sessions
extended as necessary. The order of tasks was consistent
each year. In the first session, children completed the
subitizing, arithmetic fluency, Corsi, processing speed, and
digit span measures. During the second session, children
completed the CIT, KeyMath, WJ-Math, PPVT, CTOPP,
and WJ-Reading measures. Each year, children were
engaged in approximately one hour of testing time.

1711

Results
Cluster Analysis
Four screening variables (subitizing, visuospatial working
memory, phonological awareness, and receptive language)
were entered into a two-step cluster analysis, with the loglikelihood as the distancing measure and Schwarz’s
Bayesian Criterion (BIC) as the clustering criterion. The
two-type cluster analysis revealed a three-factor solution
with an average silhouette statistic of 0.4. Descriptive
statistics for the clusters are reported in Table 1. The
clusters were characterized by (1) above average overall, (2)
average overall with weak visuospatial working memory,
(3) poor overall with strong visuospatial working memory.
More specifically, cluster one displayed average subitizing
(approximately at median), very strong visuospatial working
memory (cluster mean at 75th percentile of sample), very
strong phonological awareness (cluster mean at 75 th
percentile of sample), and strong receptive language. Cluster
two showed very weak visuospatial working memory
(cluster mean at 25th percentile of sample), average
phonological awareness (cluster mean at sample median),
slightly below average receptive language, and average
subitizing. Cluster three was characterized by very strong
visuospatial working memory (cluster mean at 75th
percentile of sample), very weak phonological processing
(cluster mean below the 25th percentile of sample), very
weak receptive language (cluster mean below the 25th
percentile of sample), and slightly below average subitizing.

in grade two (M = 11.7, SD = .30) than they did in grade one
(M = 8.0, SD = .28), F(1,85) = 128.09, p < .001, 2 = .60,
power = 1.0. There was also a main effect of cluster
membership, F(2,85) = 13.63, p < .001, 2 = .24, power =
1.0. Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test revealed that children in
cluster 1 correctly solved more questions (M = 11.4, SD =
.31) than those in cluster 2 (M = 9.1, SD = .36, t(74) = 3.21,
p < .001) or those in cluster 3 (M = 9.1, SD = 54., t(56) =
2.92, p = .002).
For addition fluency, a main effect of grade was observed.
When in grade two, children were faster to solve small
addition problems (M = 2347 ms , SD = 75.6 ms) than when
in grade one (M = 4138 ms , SD = 182.4 ms), F(1,85) =
125.96, p < .001, 2 = .60, power = 1.0. Additionally, there
was a main effect of cluster membership, F(2,85) = 8.73, p
< .001, 2 = .17, power = .97. Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test
revealed children in cluster one were faster (M = 2646 ms ,
SD = 148.6 ms) than children in cluster two (M = 3364 ms,
SD = 170.2 ms, t(74) = 3.21, p < .001) or those in cluster
three, (M = 3719.3, SD = 257.4, t(56) = 3.25, p < .001).
Third, a quantitative interaction between cluster
membership and grade was observed, F(2,85) = 7.50, p =
.001, 2 = .15, power = .94. As illustrated in Figure 1,
although slower in grade one than their cluster 2 peers,
children in cluster 3 reached the same level of addition
fluency in grade 2 as there their cluster 2 peers. However,
children in clusters 2 and 3 did not reach the addition
fluency levels of their cluster 1 peers in grade two.

Analysis of Mathematical Outcomes
To assess the longitudinal mathematical outcomes of the
different clusters, a 2(Grade: one, two) x 3(cluster
membership: one, two, three) mixed factorial ANOVA was
performed with KeyMath, WJ-Math, addition fluency as
dependent variables.
For KeyMath Numeration, there was a main effect of
grade; children correctly answered more questions in grade
two (M = 13.9, SD = .33) than they did in grade one (M =
10.8, SD = .32), F(1,85) = 99.25, p < .001, 2 = .54, power
= 1.0. Additionally, there was a main effect of cluster
membership, F(2,85) = 9.09, p < .001, 2 = .18, power =
.97. Using Tukey’s HSD, post-hoc analyses revealed that
children in cluster one performed better on the KeyMath (M
= 13.9, SD = .38) than children in cluster 2 (M = 12.2, SD =
.43, t(74) = 2.38, p = .008) or those in cluster 3 (M = 11.1,
SD = .65, t(56) = 3.24, p = .001.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for clusters

Figure 1: Interaction between cluster and grade for addition
fluency.

Analysis of Reading Outcomes
To assess the reading outcomes of the different clusters, a
one-way between subjects ANOVA was performed with
Grade
1
standardized
Woodcock-Johnson
Word
Identification scores as the dependent variable. Reading
scores were not available for Grade 2. There was a main
effect of cluster membership, F(2,86) = 7.90, p = .001.
Using Tukey’s HSD, post-hoc analyses revealed that
children in cluster one had stronger reading skills (M =
124.2, SD = 12.02) than cluster two (M = 117.6, SD = 12.01,
t(74) = 1.67, p = .048) or cluster three (M = 110.4, SD =
12.70, t(56) = 3.25, p = .001).

Analysis of General Cognitive Outcomes
For Woodcock-Johnson Calculation, there was a main
effect of grade; children correctly answered more questions

1712

To determine if the clusters differ on more general
cognitive outcomes, two separate one-way between subjects
ANOVAs were conducted with nonverbal reasoning and
phonological working memory as dependent variables.
Additionally, a 3(grade: SK, one, two) x 3(cluster
membership: one, two, three) mixed factorial ANOVA was
used to assess potential differences in processing speed.
The clusters were found to differ in their nonverbal
reasoning ability, F(2,94) = 4.62, p = .012. In post-hoc
analysis, Tukey’s HSD revealed that children in cluster one
had stronger nonverbal reasoning skills (M = 106.8, SD =
12.52) than cluster two (M = 97.9, SD = 14.24, t(80) = 1.99,
p = .013), but not stronger than cluster three (M = 99.4, SD
= 14.77, t(62) = 1.67, ns). The clusters were not found to
differ in their phonological working memory, F(75) = .45,
ns.
In the mixed design factorial ANOVA, a main effect of
grade was observed for processing speed, F(2,85) = 26.20, p
< .001, 2 = .24, power = 1.0. Tests of within-subjects
contrasts revealed a linear trend, indicating that children’s
processing speed decreased as they moved into older grades,
F(1,84) = 56.45, p < .001, 2 = .40, power = 1.0. There was
no main effect of cluster membership, indicating that
processing speed did not differ by cluster, F(2,84) = 1.12,
ns, 2 = .03, power = .24. Nor was there an observed
interaction, F(4,83) = .79, ns, 2 = .02, power = .25.

Discussion
The present study investigated cognitive profiles of
children in kindergarten, formed using cluster analysis
based on subitizing, visuospatial working memory,
phonological awareness and receptive language, and the
associated learning outcomes for the different cluster groups
in Grade 1 and 2. The clusters were characterized as (1)
above average overall, (2) average overall with weak
visuospatial working memory, and (3) poor overall with
strong visuospatial working memory. Across a variety of
outcome measures, children in cluster one outperformed
their peers, longitudinally in both Grade 1 and 2. These
children displayed strong math scores (arithmetic ability,
arithmetic fluency, numeration and calculation skills), and
stronger reading skills than their peers in clusters two and
three. Encouragingly, these children represented the largest
portion of the sample (47%). However, over half the
sample, underperformed in comparison to cluster one.
Children in these clusters present with distinct cognitive
profiles with unique strengths and weakness. Successful
interventions may draw on the strengths of these children, to
compensate for their weaknesses and to improve their
achievement outcomes.
Longitudinal trends for arithmetic ability and fluency
indicate that children in cluster one maintained their
advantage over the next two years. In the present study,
children in clusters two and three did not compensate for
their early performance deficits as formal education
continued. In arithmetic fluency, children in cluster three,
who were slower to accurately complete addition problems
in grade one than their peers, reached the performance level

of their cluster two peers by grade two. Despite these rapid
performance increases, neither children in cluster two nor in
cluster three reached the performance level of children in
cluster one. In this study and in other work (Aunola et al.,
2004), we see evidence that children who start school with
poor numeracy skills do not catch up to their peers as formal
education progresses. Therefore, there is a need for early
identification of at-risk children and interventions targeted
to children’s pattern of strengths and weaknesses to increase
performance outcomes.
Children in cluster two showed weakness in their
visuospatial working memory, but average phonological
processing, receptive language, and subitizing. Leferve et al.
(2010)’s Pathways Model would suggest that the strengths
in the linguistic and quantitative pathways can be targeted to
maximize the success of these students. Conversely,
children in cluster three, who displayed weaknesses in in
phonological awareness and receptive language, but strong
visuospatial working memory systems might benefit from
interventions targeted to utilize their visuospatial
competence. Interventions targeted toward children’s
strength may offer greater likelihoods of success (Gary et
al., 2012).
It is possible that the differences in cognitive profiles
observed in the present study and in previous work (e.g.
Archibald et al., 2013, Bartelet et al., 2014) are due to
underlying differences in processing speed or general
working memory capacity. However, no differences in
processing speed or phonological working memory were
seen between the clusters, suggesting it is visuospatial
working memory, specifically, and subitizing abilities that
underlie math ability, rather than broader processes
involving pure speed or general working memory resources.
Some researchers suggest that differences in mathematical
ability stem from core differences in magnitude comparison
(De Smedt & Gilmore, 2011, Piazza et al., 2010; Rouselle &
Noel, 2007), others suggest differences in visuospatial
working memory better account for differences in math
ability (Davis et al., 2009; Szucs et al., 2013).
Unfortunately, our study did not include a magnitude
comparison task during SK, however our study does
indicate the importance of the visuospatial system, along
with quantitative and linguistic skills in math performance.
The results of the current study suggest (1) early
identification measures to determine which students are at
risk for math difficulties and (2) cluster-based interventions
that target children’s strengths as a means to improve their
math outcomes. Our lab is currently designing such
interventions.

Acknowledgments
The Count Me In project was funded by the Canadian Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC). The
authors would like to thank the children, parents, teachers,
and schools that participated in the study and the research
assistants involved in data collection and entry.

1713

References
Archibald, L. M. D., Cardy, J. O., Joanisse, M. F., Ansari,
D. (2013). Language, reading, and math learning profiles
in an epidemiological sample of school age children.
Aunola, K., Leskinen, E., Lerkkanen, M., & Nurmi, J.
(2004). Developmental dynamics of math performance
from preschool to grade 2. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 96(4), 699-713.
Bartelet, D., Ansari, D., Vaessen, A., & Blomert, L. (2014).
Cognitive subtypes of mathematics learning difficulties in
primary
education. Research
in
Developmental
Disabilities, 35, 657-670.
Butterworth, B., & Reigosa, V. (2008). Why is math so hard
for some children: The nature and origins of
mathematical learning difficulties and disabilities. (pp.
65-81). Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.
Connolly, A. J. (2000). KeyMath: Revised/ Updated
Canadian Norms. Richmond Hill, ON: Psycan.
Davis, N., Cannistraci, C. J., Rogers, B. P., Gatenby, J. C.,
Fuchs, L. S., Anderson, A. W., & Gore, J. C. (2009).
Aberrant functional activation in school age children atrisk for mathematical disability: A functional imaging
study
of
simple
arithmetic
skill.
Neuropsychologia, 47(12), 2470-2479.
De Smedt, B., & Gilmore, C. K. (2011). Defective number
module or impaired access? Numerical magnitude
processing in first graders with mathematical
difficulties. Journal
of
Experimental
Child
Psychology, 108(2), 278-292.
DeStefano, D. & LeFevre, J. (2003). Strategy in the corsi
blocks test of spatial memory. Poster presented at the
Thirteenth Annual meeting of the Canadian Society for
Brain, Behaviour, and Cognitive Science, Hamilton.
Dunn, L. M. & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody picture
vocabulary test, 3rd edition. Circle Pine, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Gardner, M. (1990). Cognitive (Intelligence) Test:
Nonverbal. Burlingame, CA: Psychological and
Educational Publications.
Gray, S. A., Chaban, P., Martinussen, R., Goldberg, R.,
Gotlieb, H., Kronitz, R., . . . Tannock, R. (2012). Effects
of a computerized working memory training program on
working memory, attention, and academics in adolescents
with severe LD and comorbid ADHD: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 53(12), 1277-1284.
Gross-Tsur, V., Manor, O., & Shalev, R. S. (1996).
Developmental dyscalculia: Prevalence and demographic
features.
Developmental
Medicine
&
Child
Neurology, 38(1), 25-33.
Hassinger-Das, B., Jordan, N. C., Glutting, J., Irwin, C., &
Dyson, N. (2014). Domain-general mediators of the
relation between kindergarten number sense and firstgrade mathematics achievement. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 118, 78-92.
Holloway, I. D., & Ansari, D. (2009). Mapping numerical
magnitudes onto symbols: The numerical distance effect
and individual differences in children’s mathematics
achievement. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
103, 17-29.

Jordan, N. C. (2007). Do words count? connections between
mathematics and reading difficulties. Why is math so hard
for some children? the nature and origins of
mathematical learning difficulties and disabilities. (pp.
107-120) Paul H Brookes Publishing, Baltimore, MD.
Landerl, K. (2013). Development of numerical processing in
children with typical and dyscalculic arithmetic skills – a
longitudinal study. Frontiers in Psychology, 459, 1 -14.
LeFevre, J., Fast, L., Skwarchuk, S., Smith-Chant, B.,
Bisanz, J., Kamawar, D., & Penner-Wilger, M. (2010).
Pathways to mathematics: Longitudinal predictors of
performance. Child Development, 81(6), 1753-1767.
Mash, E. J. & Wolfe, D. A. (2013). Abnormal child
psychology. (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage
Advantage.
McCloskey, M., Caramazza, A., Basili, A. (1985) Cognitive
mechanisms in number processing and calculation:
evidence from dyscalculia. Brain and Cognition 4, 171196.
Piazza, M., Facoetti, A., Trussardi, A. N., Berteletti, I.,
Conte, S., Lucangeli, D., . . . Zorzi, M. (2010).
Developmental trajectory of number acuity reveals a
severe
impairment
in
developmental
dyscalculia. Cognition, 116(1), 33-41.
Penner-Wilger, M., Fast, L., LeFevre, J., Smith-Chant, B.
L., Skwarchuk, S., Kamawar, D., & Bisanz, J. (2007). The
foundations of numeracy: Subitizing, finger gnosia, and
fine-motor ability. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1385-1390). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society
Orsini, A., Grossi, D., Capitani, E., Laiacona, M., Papagno,
C., & Valler, G. (1987). Verbal and spatial immediate
memory span: Normative data from 1355 adults and 1112
children. Italian Journal of Neurological Science, 8, 539548.
Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of
numerical
estimation:
Evidence
for
multiple
representations of numerical quantity. Psychological
Science, 14, 237-243.
Szucs, D., Devine A., Soltesz, F., Nobes, A., & Gabriel, F.
(2013). Developmental dyscalculia is related to visuospatial memory and inhibition impairment. Cortex, 49,
2674-2688.
Temple,
C.
(1997)
Developmental
Cognitive
Neuropsychology. East Sussex: Psychology Press.
von Aster, M. (2000). Developmental cognitive
neuropsychology of number processing and calculation:
Varieties of developmental dyscalculia. European Child
& Adolescent Psychiatry, 9(2), 41-57.
Wagner, R., Torgensen, J., & Rashotte, C. (1999).
Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing. Circle
Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Woodcock, R. W. (1998). Woodcock Reading Mastery TestRevised NU. Circle Pines: MN: American Guidance
Services.
Woodcock, R. W. & Johnson, M. B. (1989). WoodcockJohnson Psycho-Educational Battery-Revised. Allen, TX:
DLM Teaching Resources.

1714

