Cross-Cultural Comparison of Peer Influence on Discovery Rate during Play
Shirlene Wade (swade@bcs.rochester.edu) & Celeste Kidd (ckidd@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, Center for Visual Science
University of Rochester, Meliora Hall, Rochester, NY 14627 USA
dren with visual or auditory access to their mothers increase
exploratory play and duration of play relative to children
who are provided with comparable access to an unfamiliar
woman (e.g., Passman & Erck, 1978; Adams & Passman,
1979; Passman & Longeway, 1982). Although ignored by
the literature as an influence on play behavior, siblings offer
a unique source of social learning—older siblings enhance
younger siblings’ theory of mind (e.g., Perner, Ruffman,
Leekam, 1994; Jenkins & Astington, 1996) and empathy
(e.g., Tucker, Updegraff, McHale, & Crouter, 1999). It is
less certain how the presence of siblings or familiar peers
influences curiosity, exploration, and learning during play.

Abstract
Previous literature has explored how factors such as maturation, attachment style, and security influence children’s freeplay behavior. The present study investigates a previously unexplored factor: peer presence. This is an important consideration because much of children’s play and early learning occurs in a social context with siblings and friends. We tested
children (ages 2 to 11) from two different cultural environments: the lowlands of Bolivia, the home of a group of Amazonian farmer-foragers called the Tsimane’ (Experiment 1),
and the United States (Experiment 2). We presented groups of
children from both cultures with a set of toys hidden in envelopes to explore and discover either with a familiar peer or
without. Tsimane’ children discovered significantly more objects in the presence of a peer, over and above the effect that
would be expected from simply having two children search
the toys independently in parallel. Additionally, Tsimane’
children discovered more objects as a function of age. The
United States children did not exhibit the same pattern of behavior. Peer presence facilitated exploration in younger children but inhibited exploration in older children, relative to
exploration rate without the peer. Taken together, peer presence facilitates exploration among young children across both
cultures. However, among older U.S. children, peer presence
inhibited exploration. We propose that the positive effect of
peer presence on discovery rate may be driven by an increase
in competition for resource control. The differences among
older children across cultures may be an artifact due to experience with formal schooling.

Peer Influence Shifts during Development

Keywords: Developmental psychology; developmental experimentation; cross-cultural analysis; exploration; discovery;
learning; play; social development.

Play in a Social Context
Play and exploration are important for social development
and learning in humans and mammals alike (Weisler &
McCall, 1976). While there is a relatively large literature on
how maternal presence and attachment style affect play behavior, relatively little research investigates the role of peer
presence on play and exploration throughout childhood. The
social framework in which play spontaneously occurs is
important for scientific consideration because the majority
of children interact with other children on a daily basis, in
either their homes (e.g., siblings) or communities (e.g.,
nearby children, classmates). Furthermore, the majority of
play occurs in a social context involving siblings, peers, or
caretakers. This context is believed to be critical for the development of social learning (e.g., Youniss, 1982; SuttonSmith & Rosenberg, 1970).
Research about the effect of maternal presence on play
behavior overwhelmingly demonstrates that social contexts
do alter both the quality and quantity of play (e.g., Passman,
1977; Adams & Passman, 1979). Two- to 4-year-old chil-

How does the presence of a peer influence children’s exploration and learning during play? Some evidence suggests
that children younger than 2 years of age inhibit their play
behavior in the presence of peers (e.g., Turkheimer, Bakeman, & Adamson, 1989). In a study that assessed play behavior in 1-year-old infants across three different social contexts, infants were most unengaged with their toys in the
presence of a familiar peer (57% of the time), in comparison
to with their mothers (30%) or alone (45%) (Turkheimer et
al., 1989). Turkheimer et al. (1989) also found that children
engage in less complex play with peers than with mothers.
They also engaged in less functional object play with a peer
than alone. Similarly, Gunnar, Senior, and Hartup (1984)
reported that 1.5-year-olds play less and get bored faster in
the presence of a peer.
Between 2 and 3 years, children appear to exhibit a shift
in their response to peer presence. At 2.5 years, infants engaged in more social play with an unfamiliar peer, as compared to their behavior a year earlier (Gunnar et al., 1984).1
In sum, the effect of peers on play interaction seems to shift
from inhibitory to facilitative as children age.

Children Interact with Peers in Social and Education Contexts
Due to a small literature with a limited developmental focus,
it is unclear how peer presence may affect play behavior and
exploration in children older than 2 years of age. Exploration is an important yet understudied behavior that provides
new information about objects or environments. Ascertaining the relationship between peer presence, learning, and
exploration is critical because of how much learning occurs
in a social context. By 3 or 4 years of age, learning with
1
Gunnar et al. (1984) only included unfamiliar peers in the
study. To our knowledge, no equivalent study was conducted with
familiar peers or siblings. Therefore it is unknown whether the
same shift in the effect of peer presence between 18 and 30 months
would be observed for familiar peers or siblings.

2535

other children—particularly unrelated peers—becomes an
integral part of a child’s daily life as children begin to attend
daycare and preschool. Previous studies on speech content
and pretend play dynamics for 4- and 5-year-olds suggest
that play has benefits for literacy (e.g., Roskos & Christie,
2004), mathematic development (e.g., Seo & Ginsburg,
2004), social competence (e.g., Connolly & Doyle, 1984),
and emotional self-regulation (e.g., Howes & Matheson,
1992)—effects that may be causally linked to the social
interactions common in peer play among children. However,
there has been no research on how peer presence shapes
exploration behaviors in school-aged children. Furthermore,
while children from Western societies begin to attend preschool or kindergarten, children in other societies may begin
to learn important life skills (e.g., hunting, cooking) with
their peer group in an indigenous community setting. Since
the majority of the literature focuses on children from Western societies, it is uncertain whether the effects in the literature depend on particular cultural factors or if they extend
more broadly across cultures.
Experiment 1 evaluates the role of peer presence on exploration in Tsimane’ children between the ages of 2 and 11.
The Tsimane’ children come from a farming and foraging
society, comprised of small villages in the lowlands of Bolivia. Experiment 2 uses a similar paradigm to investigate
peer presence on exploration in U.S. children between the
ages of 2 and 9. By examining the impact of social context
on exploration behavior across cultures and development,
the study will provide new insights on how the nature of the
social context modifies play behavior. If peer presence facilitates exploration across development, we expect to find that
exploratory behavior increases when children play with another peer relative to when they play alone. If exploration
and discovery rate changes across development irrespective
of peer presence, we expect that older children will discover
more toys than younger ones across both play conditions.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants Seventy-five Tsimane’ children between the
ages of 2 and 11 (M=5;10) were recruited from the villages
of Cara Cara, Las Minas, Puerto Mayera, and Limoncito
surrounding San Borja, Bolivia during the summer of 2014.
Forty-eight children participated as pairs in the dyad condition (M=5;2, range=2-11) and 27 children participated in
the solo condition (M=4;10, range=2-11). Three children
were excluded from the study due to shyness (as determined
by the criteria described in “Procedure” below).
Conditions Children participated in one of two conditions:
dyad or solo. Children in the dyad condition participated
with a sibling or unrelated friend. Due to little demographic
documentation from the participants, it was not always clear
whether dyads were siblings or unrelated, familiar peers.
However, the Tsimane’ social structure is communityoriented compared to the nuclear family structure common
in the United States. In the solo condition, children participated in the task by themselves. In both conditions, an experimenter was also present during the task.

Procedure Participants in the villages of Cara Cara, Las
Minas, and Limoncito were tested in schoolhouses. Prior to
the study, the participants were encouraged to play in the
space in which the experiment occurred. A large tent was
used to isolate the participants from other children so that
others would not be able to see the study. Participants were
seated on the floor next to the experimenter. Eleven envelopes were placed in a pile in front of the child(ren). Each
envelope contained one toy from a set of toys that were selected to appeal to children across a broad range of ages and
cultural backgrounds (e.g., shakers, toy animals, wooden
vehicles) in order to increase the likelihood that the toys
would be of equivalent interest to both U.S. and Tsimane’
children. The experimenter only spoke English, a language
that the Tsimane’ children did not understand, and thus refrained from speaking for the duration of the study after a
translator introduced the child and the experimenter to each
other. To begin, the experimenter held up one envelope,
opened it to expose the toy inside, and offered the open envelope to the participant(s). The experimenter motioned at
the participant(s) to take out the toy. Children who did not
take the toy from the envelope offered by the experimenter
were excluded from the experiment and the session was
terminated. Participants were given two minutes to play
with the toys, starting at the point they reached for their first
closed envelope. If children hesitated, the free-play period
started ten seconds before an envelope was moved towards
the child by the experimenter. Discovery rate was operationally defined as the number of toys found within the twominute period from within the ten unopened envelopes at
the start of the experiment. At the end of the play period, the
experimenter and child(ren) put the toys back in the envelopes.

Results
Figure 1 plots the results for Tsimane’ children. A linear
regression with social condition (dyad, solo), age, and their
interaction as predictors was used in order to evaluate the
role of peer presence on Tsimane’ children’s exploration.
Tsimane’ children discovered significantly more toys in
the dyad condition (M=8.2±0.25) than in the solo condition
(M=1.4±0.35)—ß=3.43, t(68)=15.88, p<0.001. This result
supports the hypothesis that Tsimane’ children explored
more in the presence of a peer than alone. Older children
discovered significantly more toys than younger children, as
revealed by the main effect of age (ß=0.33, t(68)=3.45,
p<0.001). The regression also yielded a significant interaction of age and condition (ß=0.22, t(68)=2.25, p<0.03), such
that peer presence yielded an additional boost in discovery
rate for older kids. Taken together, peer presence and age
facilitate exploration and increase discovery rate.
Table 1: Regression coefficients for Tsimane’ analysis
Term
Intercept
Age
Condition
Age*Cond

2536

Coef.
3.05
0.33
3.43
0.22

SE
0.55
0.10
0.22
0.10

t
5.52
3.45
15.88
2.25

p<
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.028*

guage other than English (that the child did not speak, according to parental report) in order to keep the procedure
similar to that in Experiment 1. After the experiment, children were debriefed and told that the experimenter not only
spoke a different language (either Spanish or German), but
also spoke English.

Results

Figure 1: Discovery rate for Tsimane’ children by age and
condition. Linear regression lines plotted for dyad (red solid) and solo conditions (blue dashed).

Discussion
Across all ages, Tsimane’ children playing with a peer
consistently explored at a faster rate than children playing
alone. These results indicate that peer presence facilitates
exploration across development. One mechanism that may
explain the relationship between peer presence and discovery rate is resource competition. Two children discovering
toys from the same source may increase each child’s awareness of the possibility that more interesting toys exist. This
may lead to an increase in the discovery rate as each child
searches for a more interesting toy.
In Experiment 2, we use the same paradigm as Experiment 1 to investigate the effect of peer presence on discovery rate in children from the United States.

Figure 2 plots the discovery rate for U.S. children. Similar
to Experiment 1, a linear regression predicting discovery
rate was run with social condition (dyad, solo), age, and
their interaction as predictors (Table 2). Among the U.S.
children, age was not a significant predictor of discovery
rate, but condition was marginally significant (ß=0.72,
t(45)=1.88, p<0.07). U.S. children in the dyad condition had
discovered more toys overall (M=3.91±0.45) as compared to
children in the solo condition (M=2.46±0.62). There was
also a significant interaction of age and condition (ß=-0.39,
t(45)=-2.03, p= .048). Younger children in the dyad condition discovered more than younger children in the solo condition, while older children in the dyad condition discovered
less than older children in the solo condition.
Table 2: Regression coefficients for U.S. analysis
Term
Intercept
Age
Condition
Age*Cond

Coef.
4.20
-0.21
0.72
-0.39

SE
0.98
0.19
0.38
0.19

t
4.29
-1.10
1.88
-2.03

p<
0.001***
0.277
0.066 
0.048*

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants Fifty-three U.S. children between the ages of 2
and 9 (M=4;7) recruited from the Rochester, NY area participated in the study. Thirty-two children participated in the
dyad condition (M=4;10, range=2-8) and 17 children participated in the solo condition (M=4;5, range=2-9). Four additional children were excluded due to shyness (n=2), speaking the non-English language of the experimenter (n=1), and
session interruption (n=1).
Conditions Similar to Experiment 1, children participated
in the dyad condition or the solo condition. However, children in the dyad condition always participated with a sibling. In the solo condition, children participated in the task
by themselves. Across all conditions, an experimenter was
present during the task.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1.
However, because the children in Experiment 2 spoke English, children were told that the experimenter spoke a lan-

Figure 2: Discovery rate for U.S. children by age and
condition. Linear regression lines plotted for dyad (red solid) and solo conditions (blue dashed).

Discussion
In Experiment 2, the effect of peer presence on discovery
rate was moderated by age. In young U.S. children, peer
presence facilitated exploration and increased the discovery
rate of toys. However, in older children, peer presence inhibited discovery rate. One explanation for the change in the
effect of peer presence on exploration behavior is that chil-

2537

dren may engage in more social play as they get older. Siblings in the dyad condition may focus on playing with a
small set of toys within the context of a play narrative. If
greater social play in the dyad condition accounts for the
decline in the discovery rate in older children, this would
explain why children’s play behavior in the solo condition
was unaffected.
Alternately, children may engage with the toys together
rather than explore independently. For instance, children
may be discovering toys at a slower rate because they are
demonstrating and sharing toys with each other. By focusing on a single toy together, it is possible that the children
are exploring more properties of a single toy rather than
discovering multiple toys. This form of exploratory behavior may emerge with age in the presence of a peer and explains our pattern of results. Since Experiment 2 did not
investigate exploration of toy functions and properties, this
is an important topic for future research.
A final possibility is that older children may have made
inferences about the pedagogical context and nature of the
task. Despite the fact that children were aware that the experimenter did not speak their language, the children may
have made inferences about the task based on their experiences in pedagogical contexts. For instance, if older children
had thought that the task involved following the directions
of the experimenter, they may have inferred that they should
only play with toys that the experimenter offered to them.
Therefore, pedagogical inferences about the task may have
inhibited older children from discovering more toys. However, it is unclear why older children in the dyad condition
discovered less toys than children in the solo condition. One
explanation is that the presence of another child in a relatively unfamiliar room more closely mimicked an educational setting. Since most children learn in classrooms with
many other children, older children participating with a sibling may have made a stronger inference that the task was
about following directions. These inferences would result in
less self-directed play among older children in the dyad
condition.

General Discussion
Experiments 1 and 2 examined the effects of age and peer
presence on exploratory behavior among Tsimane’ and U.S.
children. Since the majority of the literature has focused on
factors that affect play in the U.S. or Western societies, this
is the first study to our knowledge that evaluates the influence of social context on play and discovery in children
from a non-Western society. Across both cultures, peer
presence facilitated exploration and discovery during play
for younger children. Although older Tsimane’ children had
a higher discovery rate when accompanied by a peer, older
U.S. children explored less when in the presence of a peer.
One possibility is that play dynamics differ when children
played with a sibling relative to when they played with a
familiar peer (e.g., Brody, Stoneman, & MacKinnon,
1982).This may influence children’s degree of sharing or
competition (e.g., sibling rivalry), which may in turn influence how children explore an environment. However, sib-

lings and peers in the Tsimane’ villages are raised in close
proximity with unrelated children such that their relationships with familiar peers may be more similar to U.S. children’s relationships with their siblings.
A more likely explanation for the differences in observed
behavior across older children in Experiments 1 and 2 is the
difference in levels of formal education across groups. Children who have more experience in a formal educational
setting may have strong perceptions about how they should
behave in the presence of a peer and an unfamiliar adult in
the context of the study.
An alternative possibility is that the effect of peer presence on exploration could differ as a function of the age
difference between peers. For example, the presence of an
older peer may facilitate exploration more than a younger or
same-aged peer. In our dyad sample, there is not enough
variance in age to address this question. However, future
studies should consider the contribution of a peer’s age on
the influence of peer presence on exploration.

Underlying Mechanisms Explaining the Role of
Peer Presence on Rate of Discovery
One mechanism that may explain the effect of peer presence
on discovery rate is competition for resource control. The
struggle between social and agentic resources has been
largely discussed in the framework of game theory (e.g.,
von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944). More recently, this
conflict-in-needs has been used to analyze social aggressive
behavior in children and adolescents (e.g., Vaughn & Santos, 2007), as well as bistrategic resource control and peerregard in preschoolers (Roseth et al., 2011). In the framework of our free-play task, children in the solo condition
had complete control over the set of toys in the task. In the
dyad condition, two children played with toys belonging to
the same set. The presence of another child may have
heightened each child’s drive to discover toys in an effort to
assert temporary control or dominance over a larger subset
of toys from the available pool.
If resource control is the underlying mechanism driving a
high discovery rate in the presence of peers, it would seem
that the drive for resource control increases with age for
Tsimane’ children, but decreases with age for U.S. children.

Influence of Learning Context
A final consideration that may contribute to the results of
Experiments 1 and 2 is the amount of experience children
had in an educational context. While U.S. children begin
formal schooling as early as 5 years of age, Tsimane’ children begin at highly variable, generally older ages because
the educational system is largely optional and unstandardized. Thus, children of the same age possess varying degrees
of education. Furthermore, the educational context and curriculum is considerably different across societies. This difference could have contributed to the different patterns of
results across the Tsimane’ and U.S. children if children
made different inferences about the intentions of the experimenter and the nature of the task. There is evidence that

2538

children are able to use people’s knowledge states and pedagogical intentions to make inferences about what actions to
imitate (e.g., Buchsbaum, Gopnik, Griffiths, & Shafto,
2011; Butler & Markman, 2010; 2012; Schulz, 2012). At as
young as 3 years of age, children can make inductive inferences based on the perceived intentionality of an action by
the experimenter (Butler & Markman, 2012). At 4 years old,
U.S. children are sensitive to not only the intentionality of
an action, but also whether the action was performed pedagogically for the child’s benefit. Children make weaker inferences about the generalizability of the property when it
was demonstrated intentionally compared to when it was
demonstrated pedagogically. These studies reveal how older
U.S. children may have different expectations about actions
and learning environments, which may have affected their
performance on our task.
School-aged U.S. children in our study could be more
sensitive to the perceived intentions of the experimenter and
the overall context in which the experiment occurred relative to the Tsimane’ children. In the study, the experimenter
showed participants an open envelope containing a toy
which was offered to the participants. Participants could
have made an inference that the experimenter was leading
the interaction as an instructor. Because the experimenter
did not open up any other envelopes, children may have
inferred that they should only play with the toys offered to
them. This may have resulted in older children solely playing with the toys that the experimenter offered. Other envelopes that were not touched by the experimenter may have
been considered “out of bounds.” Therefore, greater experience with pedagogical contexts may have contributed to the
low discovery rate in U.S. children. It is unclear why the
discovery rate in older children was lower in the dyad condition than the solo condition, but one possibility is that the
presence of another child in the context of an unfamiliar
room and adult may have heightened the similarity of the
study to a school context.

Conclusion
Learning does not primarily occur in a “social vacuum”
(Hay, 1981): Children play and learn in the context of social
partners, such as parents, siblings, and peers. Therefore, it is
important to understand the development of play and exploration in a social context. The present study provides evidence that peer presence facilitates discovery of new toys in
young children across two cultures. In contrast, peer presence facilitated discovery in older Tsimane’ children but
inhibited discovery in U.S. children. We propose that the
effect of peer presence on discovery rate may be driven by
an underlying drive for resource control. Furthermore, different social dynamics and relationships between peers and
siblings may explain the different pattern of results in Experiments 1 and 2. A further investigation of the difference
in play dynamics among siblings and peers is warranted to
fully understand how peer presence influences exploratory
play. Finally, additional research should explore how expe-

rience with formal education modifies play behavior and
discovery rate.

Acknowledgements
We thank Edward Gibson for organizing the trip to Bolivia;
Julian Jara-Ettinger for help acquiring stimuli and running
subjects in Bolivia; Tomas Huanca for logistical help with
visiting the Tsimane' villages; Steve Piantadosi for helpful
discussions and feedback; Dino Nate Añez, Robertina Nate
Añez, and Salomon Hiza Nate for help translating; Holly
Palmeri, Madeline Pelz, and Eric Partridge for help running
subjects in the U.S.; Claire Hart, Anetaija Porter-Monroe,
Ashley Rizzieri, Emily Roemer, Kelsey Spear, and Emily
Sumner at the Rochester Baby Lab for scheduling participants; Habiba Azab, Carol Jew, Shraddha Shah, and members of the Kidd Lab for helpful comments and suggestions;
and the University of Rochester for funding in support of
this project. This work was also supported by an award from
the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program (Grant No. DGE-1419118) to the first
author.

References
Adams, R. E., & Passman, R. H. (1979). Effects of visual
and auditory aspects of mothers and strangers on the play
and exploration of children. Developmental Psychology, 15(3), 269-274.
Buchsbaum, D., Gopnik, A., Griffiths, T. L., & Shafto, P.
(2011). Children’s imitation of causal action sequences is
influenced by statistical and pedagogical evidence. Cognition, 120(3), 331-340.
Butler, L. P., & Markman, E. M. (2010). Pedagogical cues
influence children’s inductive inference and exploratory
play. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual conference of the
cognitive science society.
Butler, L. P., & Markman, E. M. (2012). Preschoolers use
intentional and pedagogical cues to guide inductive inferences and exploration. Child development, 83(4), 14161428.
Brody, G. H., Stoneman, Z., & MacKinnon, C. E. (1982).
Role asymmetries in interactions among school-aged
children, their younger siblings, and their friends. Child
Development, 1364-1370.
Gunnar, M. R., Senior, K., & Hartup, W. W. (1984). Peer
presence and the exploratory behavior of eighteen-and
thirty-month-old children. Child development, 1103-1109.
Connolly, J. A., & Doyle, A. B. (1984). Relation of social
fantasy play to social competence in preschoolers. Developmental Psychology, 20(5), 797-806.
Hay, D. F. (1985). Learning to form relationships in infancy:
Parallel
attainments
with
parents
and
peers. Developmental Review, 5(2), 122-161.
Howes, C., & Matheson, C. C. (1992). Sequences in the
development of competent play with peers: Social and social pretend play. Developmental Psychology, 28(5), 961974.

2539

Jenkins, J. M., & Astington, J. W. (1996). Cognitive factors
and family structure associated with theory of mind development in young children. Developmental psychology, 32(1), 70-78.
Passman, R. H. (1977). Providing attachment objects to facilitate learning and reduce distress: Effects of mothers
and security blankets. Developmental Psychology, 13(1),
25-28.
Passman, R. H., & Erck, T. W. (1978). Permitting maternal
contact through vision alone: Films of mothers for promoting play and locomotion. Developmental Psychology, 14(5), 512-516.
Passman, R. H., & Longeway, K. P. (1982). The role of
vision in maternal attachment: Giving 2-year-olds a photograph of their mother during separation. Developmental
Psychology, 18(4), 530-533.
Perner, J., Ruffman, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of
mind is contagious: You catch it from your sibs. Child
development, 65(4), 1228-1238.
Roseth, C. J., Pellegrini, A. D., Dupuis, D. N., Bohn, C. M.,
Hickey, M. C., Hilk, C. L., & Peshkam, A. (2011). Preschoolers' bistrategic resource control, reconciliation, and
peer regard. Social Development, 20(1), 185-211.
Roskos, K., & Christie, J. (2001). Examining the play–
literacy interface: A critical review and future directions. Journal of Early Childhood Literacy, 1(1), 59-89.
Schulz, L. (2012). The origins of inquiry: inductive inference and exploration in early childhood. Trends in cognitive sciences, 16(7), 382-389.
Seo, K. H., & Ginsburg, H. P. (2004). What is developmentally appropriate in early childhood mathematics education? Lessons from new research. Engaging young children in mathematics: Standards for early childhood
mathematics education, 91-104.
Sutton-Smith, B., & Rosenberg, B. G. (1970). The sibling.
New York: Hot, Rinehart, and Winston.
Tucker, C. J., Updegraff, K. A., McHale, S. M., & Crouter,
A. C. (1999). Older siblings as socializers of younger siblings’ empathy. The Journal of Early Adolescence, 19(2),
176-198.
Turkheimer, M., Bakeman, R., & Adamson, L. B. (1989).
Do mothers support and peers inhibit skilled object play
in infancy?. Infant Behavior and Development, 12(1), 3744.
Vaughn, B. E., & Santos, A. J. (2007). An evolutionary/ecological account of aggressive behavior and trait
aggression in human children and adolescents.Aggression
and adaptation: The bright side to bad behavior, 31-63.
Von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (2007). Theory of
games and economic behavior (60th Anniversary Commemorative Edition). Princeton university press.
Weisler, A., & McCall, R. R. (1976). Exploration and play:
Resume and redirection. American Psychologist, 31(7),
492-508.
Youniss, James. Parents and peers in social development: A
Sullivan-Piaget perspective. University of Chicago Press,
1982.

2540

