Daxing with a Dax: Evidence of Productive Lexical Structures in Children
Sara Al-Mughairy (sara.m@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley

Ruthe Foushee (foushee@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley

David Barner (barner@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego

Mahesh Srinivasan (srinivasan@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Abstract

follow patterns, children could form generalizations about
these patterns and spontaneously apply them to novel words.
This would promote word learning, because children would
only need to learn one phonological form to express multiple
meanings. For instance, if children learned the pattern that
labels of artifacts can also describe the uses of those artifacts,
they could infer that a new artifact name would also apply to
the artifact’s functional use. Children could form such generalizations early in life, thus facilitating early word learning.
This would be especially plausible if patterns of flexibility
marked conceptual relations that children find salient, like
the relationship between an artifact and its function (Caslet
& Kelemen, 2007).
An alternative possibility—borrowing from usage-based
theories of language development (e.g., Tomasello, 2003)—is
that children only gradually form generalizations about flexibility, instance by instance. By this account, children might
initially treat the noun and verb meanings of words like shovel
and hammer as homophones. After this, they would separately represent the relationships between shovel/shovel and
hammer/hammer as “islands of flexibility”, prior to uniting
them under the same abstract linguistic principle. Critically,
on this account, children only form productive generalizations after exposure to many pairs of flexible words, limiting
the potential of such generalizations to constrain children’s
hypotheses about word meaning.
One approach to distinguish between these two possibilities is to explore whether young children spontaneously expect words to be used flexibly: e.g., for words that label tools
to also label their functional uses, and vice versa. Although
studies have provided evidence that young children comprehend the relationship between flexible nouns and verbs
(Berman, 1999; Bushnell & Maratsos, 1984; Lippeveld &
Oshima-Takane, 2010), and even produce new ones—e.g.,
”Don’t broom my mess” (example from Clark, 1982), they do
not provide unequivocal evidence that children expect verbs
to be formed from nouns.
For example, in one study (Lippeveld & Oshima-Takane,
2010), two-and three-year-old children watched a video in
which a bottle opener was used to open a bottle, while a novel
noun vop was used to refer to the bottle opener—e.g., “This

In English, many words can be used flexibly to label artifacts, as nouns, or functional uses of those artifacts, as verbs:
We can shovel snow with a shovel and comb our hair with a
comb. Here, we examine whether young children form generalizations about flexibility from early in life and use such
generalizations to predict new word meanings. When children learn a new word for an artifact, do they also expect it
to label its functional use, and vice versa? In Experiment 1,
we show that when four- and five-year-olds are taught a first
novel word to label a familiar action—e.g., that bucking means
shoveling—they exclude the artifact involved in this action—
i.e., the shovel—as the meaning of a second novel word (e.g.,
gork). This suggests that children spontaneously expected the
first novel word—which referred to the action—to also refer to
the artifact. In Experiment 2, we show that this pattern extends
to words that label novel actions involving novel artifacts, suggesting that children expect any word for an action to label the
artifact that helps carry out that action. Experiment 3 traces
how such generalizations may arise in development. In particular, we show that while four- and five-year-olds each expect
words to label artifacts and their functional uses, three-yearolds may not.
Keywords: Language acquisition; polysemy; mutual exclusivity; class-extension rules

Introduction
Language gifts us with the resources to innovate in order to
express our ideas. One such resource is the potential to flexibly extend words to new meanings (Copestake & Briscoe,
1995; Pustejovsky, 1995). For example, many verbs in English have been formed from nouns (see Clark & Clark,
1979): when we shovel the snow, bike to school, or comb
our hair, we describe our actions in terms of the artifacts that
help us carry out those actions. Similarly, there are many
instances of nouns in English that have been derived from
verbs: when we take a long walk, use an eraser, or cheer
for a wrestler, we use nouns defined by their corresponding
actions. Adult speakers have productive knowledge of these
patterns, and can use them in a systematic way to meet communicative demands—e.g., She will Wikipedia the answer.
But when and how does this generative talent arise?
The present study explores whether productive knowledge
of flexibility emerges early in life, and might allow children
to predict new word meanings, thereby supporting lexical development. When flexible words, like shovel, bike, and comb,

66

Experiment 1

is a vop! Look at what it can do to the bottle!” Later, children were tested on their interpretation of the innovative verb
formed from this noun—e.g., children were asked to “find
the one that is voping.” The three-year-olds (but not the twoyear-olds) responded in a way suggesting that they understood the new verb—they looked longer at an action that depicted bottle-opening than a different action. However, it is
possible that although children seemed to identify the bottleopening action as the likely referent of the verb “voping,”
they may not have expected the bottle-opening event to be referred to as voping—they may only have formed a verb from
vop when asked to “find voping.” Further, children could have
succeeded even without forming a verb from a noun. When
children were taught what a vop was, they could have initially
linked vop not just to the bottle-opener but also to the bottleopening event that it participated in, looking then at that event
due to the phonological overlap between vop and voping.

Here, we examine whether children have formed lexical
structures to allow familiar words like shovel to be extended between their different uses. Using familiar words allowed us to test whether children treat existing corresponding
noun/verb pairs as unrelated lexical items, like homophones
such as bat/bat. Such a lack of distinction between these two
varieties of phonological overlap would be expected according to a usage-based account in the period prior to having
formed “islands of flexibility.” Previous studies using a similar method to the one used here have shown that when children learn that a novel word labels one homophone (e.g., that
dax labels a baseball bat), they do not expect the novel word
to also label the other homophone (e.g., an animal bat; Srinivasan & Snedeker, 2011). Thus, we reasoned that if children treat familiar noun and verb meanings as unrelated homophones, they should not expect a novel label for a verb
meaning (e.g., dax to label hammering) to also label the corresponding noun meaning (e.g.,dax to label a hammer). In
contrast, if familiar noun and verb meanings arise from a
common, generative structure, children should expect a novel
label for the verb meaning to also label the noun meaning.

The present studies address the limitations of previous
work by adapting a mutual exclusivity method to probe children’s expectations of how words can be used. In one form
of a mutual exclusivity task (e.g., Diesendruck & Markson,
2001), children are presented with two items for which children do not know labels, and are taught that a novel word
labels one of those items (e.g., blicket). They are then asked
to choose the referent of a second novel word (e.g., Give me
the wug). Children tend to choose the item that has not yet
been labeled, excluding the item that already has a label on
the grounds that it should not have a second.

Methods
Participants The participants were 20 children (7 girls) between the ages of 4;1 and 5;11 (M = 59 months). Four additional children participated but were excluded due to missing
the initial trials that gauged their understanding of the task
(1), for failing to identify any critical noun-verb pairs during
the warm-up (1), or because they didn’t want to continue (2).
All children were either brought into the lab or recruited from
daycares in the San Diego area. All children received a small
gift for participating.

Here, we adapt this method to explore whether children expect that a novel verb—e.g., daxing—that is taught to refer to
an action will also refer, as a noun, to the artifact that helps
carry out that action. If so, children should expect that a second novel word—e.g., blicket—cannot refer to the artifact,
because the first novel word already does. This would be predicted if children have formed productive lexical structures to
support flexible uses of verbs as nouns. If, on the other hand,
children treat words for actions and words for artifacts as separate lexical items, they should not exclude artifacts as the
meanings of the second novel words. Critically, this method
probes children’s own expectations about the extension of the
novel verb—children are given no evidence that this word can
be shifted, as in previous studies.

Materials and Procedure We used a mutual exclusivity
task to examine whether children spontaneously extend novel
labels between the noun and verb uses of words like shovel.
We familiarized the children to the task by first introducing
them to a character named Monkey (by showing them a picture of Monkey). We told the children that one special thing
about Monkey is that, because he is a Muppet, he speaks a
special Muppet language. We told the children that in the
game, they would learn some Muppet words.
Each of the trials included a training phase and a judgment
phase. We initiated the training phrase of each critical trial by
asking the children if they knew the meaning of a novel Muppet verb—e.g., “Sometimes, Monkey likes to buck stuff from
one place to another. Do you know what bucking is?” Having established that the novel verb was an unfamiliar word
from Muppet language, we showed them a video in which the
novel verb was used to refer to a familiar action. For example,
children were shown a video in which Monkey was shoveling
sand from a plate into a bowl, while hearing the verb buck
used to describe the action in a number of ways. Children
heard the verb used in the infinitive to refer to what Monkey
was going to do (“He’s going to use it to buck something into

Using this method, we explore the productivity of the lexical structures three-, four-, and five-year-old children have
formed to support corresponding noun and verb pairs. In Experiment 1, we assess whether children treat nominal and verbal uses of familiar words as separate lexical items by examining whether children expect a novel word that refers to a
familiar action—e.g., shoveling—to also refer to the artifact
that carries out that action—e.g, a shovel. In Experiment 2,
we explore whether this tendency also extends to novel actions performed by novel artifacts. In Experiment 3, we investigate how knowledge of and expectations about flexible
words change throughout early development.

67

the bowl”), in the progressive to refer to the action as it was
ongoing (“Wow, Monkey’s bucking it into the bowl”), and in
the past tense to refer the completed action (“Monkey bucked
some stuff into the bowl”). The video also described how the
affordances of the artifact facilitate the action (“What Monkey has is pretty long and it can carry the stuff well”). Critically, children did not receive any evidence that the novel
word could refer to the artifact itself (e.g., the shovel).

item were given feedback, but all children had to get two out
of three of these items correct without feedback to proceed.
Children also received one foil warm-up trial that required
them to choose between two items that were different from
the one they were trained on. For example, in one trial, children were taught that spado referred to a knife and then had
to decide whether a table or chair was the referent of parma.
These items were included to prevent children from expecting that the first novel word could always be extended to one
of the two pictures presented in the judgment phase.

Immediately following the video, the experimenter initiated the judgment phase of the trial: e.g., “So that’s what
bucking is. Now we know what bucking is. But now, I
want the gork. Show me the gork!” The child was then presented with a slide containing two pictures. The pictures
included an instance of (1) the artifact used in the video
(e.g., a shovel of a different color) and (2) the patient object/substance that had been acted upon (e.g., a second exemplar of sand). This was to ensure that children were using the novel words to refer to categories, rather than individual tokens. The child’s choice—which they indicated by
pointing—was then recorded. We reasoned that if children
expect a word for an action to also refer to the artifact that
carries out that action, they should exclude the artifact as the
referent of the second novel word and instead choose the patient. Critically, the English names of artifact and the patient
were not provided during the training phase, such that they
could each serve as candidate referents of the second novel
word (e.g., we referred to the shovel as a “thing” or “what
Monkey has,” and referred to the sand as “stuff” or “something”).

Table 1: Experiment 1 Critical Items.
Training Phase Event
Moop (bike) to school
Dax (hammer) nail into wood
Buck (shovel) sand into bowl
Tig (brush) hair on head
Wug (tape) picture to box
Kraz (lock) box
Lorp (button) sweater
Jop (comb) hair on head

Judgment Phase
Tima = bike or school
Kiv = hammer or nail
Gork = shovel or sand
Lum = brush or hair
Koon = tape or picture
Bip = lock or box
Zot = button or sweater
Raj = comb or hair

After the warm-up items, the children were shown between
one and four critical items, depending on how many nounverb pairs they had produced in the pre-test. These items
were administered in a fixed order; see Table 1 for a description of the training and judgment phases of the critical items.
On average, children received 3.8 critical items, with 6 tested
on biking, 19 tested on hammering, 9 tested on shoveling, 14
tested on brushing, 12 tested on taping, 2 tested on locking,
10 tested on buttoning, and 4 tested on combing. Because
the three mutual exclusivity warm-up trials provided a ceiling measure of children’s ability to make mutual exclusivity
judgments, we report children’s performance on these trials
below. Finally, we constructed two versions of the task that
varied with respect to whether the pictures in the judgment
phases of the trials were presented to the left or right of the
child.

Children only received a particular critical item if they had
been able to accurately produce the English noun and verb
uses related to that particular item in an earlier pre-test (e.g.,
use shovel as both a noun and verb). In the pre-test, we tested
children’s knowledge of the critical nouns by showing them
pictures of the artifacts and asking them to name them. After
testing the critical noun uses, we tested children on the critical
verb uses, by showing them pictures of people using those
artifacts and asking them to describe what the people were
doing. If children did not immediately name these actions,
we prompted them—e.g., for the shoveling item: “What is
she doing to the sand?” We only accepted responses that used
the target artifact verb—e.g., “She’s picking up the sand with
a shovel” wasn’t accepted. Children were tested on the noun
and verb forms of comb, shovel, tape, bicycle, button, brush,
hammer, and lock.

Results and Discussion
Because of our small number of items and the categorical nature of our data, we present only non-parametric analyses.1
On the warm-up trials, children reliably chose the differenttype foils, M = .80, SE = .08, Wilcoxon T = 174.5, N = 20,
p < .005. This indicates that the children were readily able
to make mutual exclusivity judgments when doing so simply
required shifting a noun between two exemplars of the same
type— e.g., between two books.
Would children also make mutual exclusivity judgments on
the critical trials, when doing so would require shifting between a verb and noun? Our dependent measure on the criti-

Before receiving any critical trials, the children received
three mutual exclusivity warm-up items to measure children’s
ability to make mutual exclusivity judgments when doing
so only required shifting a noun between two exemplars of
the same type. For example, in one trial, children were
taught that blicket referred to a book, and then had to choose
whether tima referred to another book (same-type) or to a
CD (different-type). We expected that children would reliably choose the foil item (e.g., the CD) on these trials if they
understood the task. Children that did not do so on the first

1 Preliminary analyses for Experiments 1 and 2 did not find significant effects of gender, age, or side of presentation. We have thus
excluded these factors from the analyses reported here.

68

cal trials was the proportion of times children excluded the artifact and chose the patient of the event—the object/substance
the artifact was used to act upon. Children chose the patient
reliably more than chance (.5), M = .73, SE = .07, Wilcoxon
T = 148.5, N = 20, p < .005. This suggests that children
expected the first novel word—which had referred, as a verb,
to the action (e.g., shoveling)—to also refer, as a noun, to the
artifact that helped carry out the action (e.g., to the shovel).
Due to this expectation, children may have excluded the artifact as the meaning of the second novel word, believing that
the first novel word already referred to it. This finding suggests that children do not represent the nominal and verbal
uses of familiar words like shovel as separate lexical items.
Rather, children have formed lexical structures to support the
flexible extension of these words across their noun and verb
meanings.
Critically, children could not have succeeded on the critical trials simply by mapping the first novel word to the entire
event they watched in the training video. Although such a
mapping would allow the first novel word to apply to the artifact of the event, it would also allow it to apply to the patient
of the event. Thus, the fact that children preferentially extended the first novel word to the artifact and not the patient
suggests that children expect a verb for a familiar event (e.g.,
shoveling) to refer to a specific constituent of that event—its
artifact (e.g., the shovel) but not its patient (e.g., the sand).

Figure 1: Experiment 2 Critical Items (The pictures shown
were displayed during the judgment phases of the trials).

Each of the critical artifacts and patients appeared unique
in shape and color, and also possessed novel functions (see
Figure 1). Children learned of the functions of the novel artifacts when the novel verbs were modeled in the videos. As
before, children heard the novel verb used in the infinitive to
refer what Monkey was going to do (“He’s going to use it to
wug this stuff to make a shape out of it”), in the progressive
to refer to the action as it was ongoing (“Monkey’s wugging
the stuff”), and in the past tense to refer the completed action (“Monkey wugged the stuff and made a shape out of it”).
The video also described how the affordances of the artifact
facilitate the action: e.g., “What monkey has is sharp on the
bottom and it has a handle that Monkey can hold onto.”2 Immediately after the training phase, we initiated the judgment
phase of the trial: e.g., “So that’s what wugging is. Now we
know what wugging is. But now I want the lum. Show me
the lum!” The pictures of the artifact and patient were then
presented and the child’s choice was recorded. To see how
robust these extensions are, the pictures depicted different tokens of artifacts and patients of the same category as those
used in the videos. For example, the artifact in the wugging
item had different colored blocks attached to it, and the patient in the daxing item was composed of a different-colored
clay (see Figure 1).

Experiment 2
Here, we examine whether the structures that encode the relations between the nominal and verbal uses of familiar words
are productive. If they are, children should expect any word
for an action to also refer to the artifact that helps carry out
that action. To test this possibility, we taught children novel
words for actions involving novel artifacts that acted on novel
patients. Would children expect the novel words for the actions to also refer to the artifacts? If so, they should exclude
the artifacts and choose the patients when asked to determine
the referents of the second novel words.

Methods
Participants The participants were 20 children (8 girls) between the ages of 4;0 and 5;10 (M = 58 months). Four additional children participated but were excluded for failing the
initial trials that gauged their understanding of the task.

Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 1, children were readily able to make mutual exclusivity judgments when doing so required shifting a
noun between exemplars from the same type. On the trials
where there was a same-type option, children reliably chose
the different-type foils over the same-type matches, M = .94,
SE = .03, Wilcoxon T = 136, n = 17, p < .001. Our dependent measure on the critical trials was the proportion of

Materials and Procedure All aspects of the materials and
the procedure were the same except that different critical
items were used. Rather than depicting actions involving familiar artifacts (e.g., shovels) acting upon familiar patients
(e.g., sand), the critical items depicted novel artifacts that
acted upon novel patients. Because the critical items did not
involve familiar artifacts, we did not pre-test children on their
knowledge of the nominal and verbal uses of familiar artifact
words. Thus, the critical trials that children received were
not restricted by their performance on an earlier pre-test—all
children in Experiment 2 received the same four critical trials.

2A

control condition was run to rule out the possibility that the
active artifact was more salient, leading the child to associate it with
the novel word and succeed at test even without attending to the
syntax of the narration. In this condition, the same videos were presented with alternate narrations in which the patient was labeled with
the novel word. When asked to identify the referent of the second
novel label at test, children reliably chose the artifact (Wilcoxon T =
37, n = 16, p =.06)

69

times children excluded the novel artifact and chose the novel
patient of the event. Children chose the patient reliably more
than chance (.5), M = .78, SE = .06, Wilcoxon T = 126, n =
17, p < .005. Children may have excluded the novel artifacts because they expected the first novel words to instead
refer to them. This suggests that children expect a word that
labels a novel action to also label a particular constituent of
that action—the novel artifact that helps carry it out. This
finding strengthens the conclusions of Experiment 1, by suggesting that the structures that support familiar flexible pairs
are productive and generalize to novel cases. Such productivity could facilitate children’s initial acquisition of corresponding noun/verb pairs, and could help explain why lexical
innovations—like to Wikipedia—are often created.

noun/verb pairs in parental input.

Results and Discussion
The data were entered into a mixed effects logistic regression
with Age and Vocabulary (parent-reported familiarity with instrument noun/verb pairs) as between-subjects variables, and
Trial Type (Control or Critical) as a within-subjects variable.
Age (X2 (1, N=74) = 10.10, p < 0.01)) and Trial Type (X2
(1, N=74) = 9.61, p < 0.01)) emerged as significant on this
analysis, indicating that children’s performance on the task
improved as they got older, and differed on Critical and Control trials. Given the number of children for whom we did not
have a vocabulary measure (10), and its lack of influence, we
removed this variable, enabling us to analyze all the children
tested in Experiment 3 (n=84). This new model found significant effects of Age (X2 (1, N=84) = 17.2, p < 0.001)) and
Trial Type (X2 (1, N=84) = 17.40, p < 0.001)), as well as an
interaction between the two (X2 (1, N=84) = 4.28, p < 0.05)).
The interaction captures the difference in rate of improvement
across this age range for the two trial types. While performance on control trials dramatically improved from three to
five years, critical trial performance did so much more slowly.
A one-way ANOVA revealed that though the vocabulary measures were not predictive of trial performance, they did improve significantly with age F(1, 74) = 2.54, p < 0.001.
Non-parametric tests confirm the success of later ages on
the task. While four- and five-year-olds reliably chose the
patient of the verb, rather than the artifact (four-year-olds:
Wilcoxon W = 16240, n = 29, p < 0.001; five-year-olds: W
= 13802, n = 26, p < 0.001), three-year-olds performed at
chance on the critical trials (0.5). That three-year-olds performed above chance for the controls (Wilcoxon W = 16472,
n = 29, p < .01) suggests either that our task was not sensitive enough to reflect their knowledge of this productive relationship, or that the expectation of this predictable lexical
extension might emerge sometime in the third year of development.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 2, we established that four- and five-year-olds
are able to extend a novel word that labels a novel action to
the artifact performing that action, suggesting that the structures that encode the relationships between the nominal and
verbal uses of familiar words are productive. Here, we examine the developmental trajectory of this generative ability
and explore whether it may be linked to prior experience with
flexible noun/verb pairs, like hammer and shovel.

Methods
Participants The participants were 84 monolingual children (42 girls) between the ages of 3;0 and 5;11 (M = 53.8
months, SD = 10.2), including 29 three-year-olds (M = 42.6
months, SD = 3.9), 29 four-year-olds (M = 53.8 months, SD
= 3.2), and 26 five-year-olds (M = 66.4 months, SD = 3.8).
Fourteen participants were excluded due to experimenter or
technical error (10), interference resulting from a distracting
testing environment (3), or because they had witnessed another child participate previously (1).
Materials and Procedure The procedure for this experiment was identical to Experiment 2, with the following alterations. An additional mutual exclusivity warm-up trial was
added. These four warm-up trials were instead used as control trials, serving as a predictor of children’s understanding
of the task in our analyses. Consequently, unlike in Experiments 1 and 2, children did not receive feedback on any of
their choices in these trials, and children were not excluded
on the basis of their performance. A final distinction in the
procedure for Experiment 3 is that the majority of the parents
of participants filled out a vocabulary survey, which consisted
of 33 flexible noun/verb pairs (derived in part from Clark &
Clark, 1979). The survey probed parental report of production and comprehension separately (e.g., for the noun/verb
pair bike, parents were asked to report whether their child
understood the noun form bike, the verb form to bike, and
whether they produced each of these forms). The addition
of this survey was motivated by the finding in Lippeveld and
Oshima-Takane (2010) that extension between verb and artifact labels could be correlated with frequency of flexible

Figure 2: Proportion of patient and different-type choices on
critical and control trials, respectively, by age.

70

General Discussion

referent of the second novel word. If we find that younger
children do not perform these spontaneous generalizations,
we could then examine whether children understand the relationship between the different meanings of familiar flexible verb/noun pairs or whether they treat these words as unrelated homophones (as we did in Experiment 1). In doing
so, we will investigate whether children initially form usagebased “islands of flexibility” or whether these productive lexical structures are present to support word-learning.

English includes many examples of words that label artifacts,
as nouns, and functional uses of those artifacts, as verbs. The
present studies indicate that these examples are not etymological relics, but instead reveal a productive linguistic structure.
In Experiment 1, we showed that four-and five-year-old
children do not represent the nominal and verbal uses of familiar words as separate, unrelated words, but instead derive them from common lexical structures. Specifically, after
learning that a novel verb referred to a familiar action, children excluded the artifact involved in that action when determining the referent of a second novel word. Children instead
chose the patient of the action, suggesting that they expect the
word labeling an event to also refer to a specific constituent of
that event—its artifact. In Experiment 2, we showed that the
structures four-and five.year-olds deploy to capture the flexibility of familiar verbs are productive: after learning that a
novel verb referred to a novel action, children in Experiment
2 excluded the novel artifact of that action as the meaning of
a second novel word. This suggests that four-and five-yearolds spontaneously expect any word for an action to also refer to the artifact that helps carry out that action. Finally,
in Experiment 3, we found that while four-and five-year-olds
seem to have this productive expectation, three-year-olds do
not. However, given that we observed a significant relationship between age and performance on the control trials, it is
possible that three-year-olds, and even younger age groups
are able to generalize between noun and verb meanings, but
that our experimental measures were not sensitive enough to
detect this. One reason to believe that three-year-olds may
be capable of forming such generalizations is that children of
this age often create new verb from nouns (and nouns from
verbs) in their spontaneous speech (e.g., Clark, 1982).
At stake in the question of when children begin to form
generalizations about flexible word use is whether such generalizations could play a role in facilitating lexical development. As noted in the Introduction, if children recognize the
special relationship between shared labels for actions and artifacts early on, this could be quite powerful for language acquisition because children would need to learn only one word
to express multiple meanings. If, on the other hand, such
inferences arise only later in life—and are constructed only
gradually after exposure to several instances of such flexible
word pair patterns—they will not play as large of a role in
lexical development.
In future research, we intend to explore how children come
to form generalizations about flexible word use, by using a
more sensitive dependent measure, such as preferential looking. For example, we could teach children a novel word to
label a novel action (as in Experiments 2 and 3), and then
instruct them to look at the referent of a second novel word.
If children are able to spontaneously generalize that the first
novel word can refer to both the action and the artifact performing that action, then we would expect them to gaze at
the acted-upon item (not the artifact) when told to look at the

Acknowledgments
We thank our undergraduate researchers at UC Berkeley and
UC San Diego for assistance with stimuli construction, participant recruitment, and data collection. We are grateful to the
families of the children who participated in the San Diego,
Vancouver Island, and Berkeley areas. This work was supported by a grant from the James S. McDonnell Foundation
to DB.

References
Berman, R. (1999). Children’s innovative verbs versus
nouns: Structured elicitations and spontaneous coinages.
In L. Menn & N. B. Rattner (Eds.), Methods for studying
language production (pp. 69–93). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bushnell, E. W., & Maratsos, M. P. (1984). Spooning and
basketing: Children’s dealing with accidental gaps in the
lexicon. Child Development, 55, 893–890.
Caslet, K., & Kelemen, D. (2007). Reasoning about artifacts at 24 months: The developing teleo-functional stance.
Cognition, 103(120–130).
Clark, E. V. (1982). The young word maker: A case study of
innovation in the child’s lexicon. In E. Wanner & L. Gleitman (Eds.), Language acquisition (pp. 390–428). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, E. V., & Clark, H. H. (1979). When nouns surface as
verbs. Language, 55(4), 767–811.
Copestake, A., & Briscoe, T. (1995). Semi-productive polysemy and sense extension. Journal of Semantics, 12, 15–
67.
Diesendruck, G., & Markson, L. (2001). Children’s avoidance of lexical overlap: A pragmatic account. Developmental Psychology, 37(5), 630–641.
Lippeveld, M., & Oshima-Takane, Y. (2010). The dax is daxing the cheese: When do children acquire class extension
rules for denominal verbs? Boston, MA: Paper presented
at the 35th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development.
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The generative lexicon. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Srinivasan, M., & Snedeker, J. (2011). Judging a book by
its cover and its contents: The respresentation of polysemous and homophonous meanings in four-year-old children. Cognitive Psychology, 62, 245–272.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usagebased theory of language acquisition. Harvard University
Press.

71

