Defeasible Reasoning with Quantifiers
Lupita Estefania Gazzo Castañeda (Estefania.Gazzo@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Markus Knauff (Markus.Knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Department of Experimental and Cognitive Psychology, Otto-Behaghel-Straße 10F
D-35394 Gießen, Germany

2002; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002). For instance, in the
example above, participants might refuse to conclude that
the person gets a sunburn although the person is standing in
the sun if they consider the possibility of using sunscreen or
already having a good tan. In everyday reasoning people
withdraw otherwise valid conclusions if they can think of
information which prevents the consequent q to occur although the antecedent p is given. This consideration of exceptions shows that contrary to classical logic, everyday
reasoning is defeasible (e.g., Oaksford & Chater, 2001). The
more exceptions people consider during reasoning and the
more semantically associated these exceptions are to the
consequent of the conditional, the more an otherwise valid
conclusion is rejected (Cummins et al., 1991; DeNeys et al,
2003a; 2003b; Quinn & Markovits, 1998). In this way, the
more exceptions a person can think of, the less he or she
perceives the conditional probability of q given p (Weidenfeld, Oberauer, & Hörnig, 2005; see also Oaksford & Chater, 2001; 2013; Oaksford, Chater, Larkin, 2000).
Still, as far as we know, all research on the consideration
of exceptions in defeasible reasoning has been done with
conditionals with the classical logical connective if-then.
But are exceptions also considered when reasoning with
quantifiers such as in “All people standing in the sun get a
sunburn” or “Some people standing in the sun get a sunburn”? Some directions can be found in Chater and Oaksford (1999); however the question is still particularly interesting because of the distinction between universal (i.e., All
As are Bs) and existential (i.e., Some As are Bs) quantifiers,
with the latter already suggesting the existence of exceptions. Is it therefore possible that the effect of exceptions in
defeasible reasoning is moderated by the quantifier used in
the rule?
The aim of this paper is to investigate 1) whether exceptions are considered when reasoning with quantifiers, and 2)
to which extent different quantifiers (universal vs. existential) affect the consideration of exceptions. In our reasoning
problems we expected people to consider exceptions when
reasoning with quantifiers; making reasoning with quantifiers defeasible. However, we hypothesize that the kind of
quantifier used in the rule influences the extent to which
exceptions are considered. Based on the logical and linguistic implications of universal and existential quantifiers, we
suppose that existential quantifiers trigger the consideration
of exceptions in such a way that participants show higher
reluctance to accept logically valid conclusions when the
rule is phrased with an existential compared to a universal
quantifier. Showing that reasoning with quantifiers is defeasible, and that defeasibility depends on the kind of quan-

Abstract
Human conditional reasoning is defeasible: people withdraw
logically valid conclusions if they are aware of situations (i.e.,
exceptions) that prevent the consequent of the rule to happen
although the antecedent is given. In this paper we investigate
defeasible reasoning with quantified rules. In two experiments
we rephrased conditionals from the literature (Experiment 1)
and rules from penal code (Experiment 2) as either universal
or existential rules and embedded them into Modus Ponens
and Modus Tollens inference problems. We show that defeasible reasoning also exists for quantified rules. However, the
kind of quantifier (universal vs. existential) did not affect inferences. This last finding conflicts with theories highlighting
the importance of logic in human reasoning.
Keywords: Quantifiers; defeasible reasoning; exceptions

Introduction
How do humans reason? This question has kept cognitive
psychology busy for several decades. In the beginning this
question was investigated by analyzing people’s capacity to
reason according to classical logic (Evans, 2002). People
were confronted with conditional inference tasks and asked
to make logical inferences. If they were able to draw logically valid conclusions they were considered rational. Responses not corresponding to classical logic were considered
“errors” and a sign of irrationality (Evans, 2002; Oaksford
& Chater, 2001). For instance, when people were confronted
with a conditional rule such as “If a person stands in the sun
(p), then the person gets a sunburn (q)” together with the
fact that the antecedent p is given (i.e., a person standing in
the sun), then participants had to conclude that the consequent q follows (i.e., the person getting a sunburn). This is
the valid inference of Modus Ponens (MP) from classical
logic. The same was the case for the valid inference of
Modus Tollens (MT): when participants were confronted
with the same conditional but then with the fact that the
consequent is not the case (⌐q; i.e., the person does not get a
sunburn), then they should conclude that the antecedent is
also not the case (⌐p; i.e., the person is not standing in the
sun).
However, over the years researchers have recognized that
when participants deny logically valid conclusions it is not
necessarily because of “irrationality”, but because everyday
reasoning often does not follow the rules of classical logic
(Evans, 2012; Oaksford & Chater, 2001). In everyday reasoning also the content of the conditional matters and people
introduce their content related background knowledge to
inference tasks (Cummins, Lubart, Alksnis, & Rist, 1991;
De Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle 2003a; 2003b; Evans,

770

tifier used, would have important implications for (1) theories highlighting the defeasible nature of human reasoning,
and (2) theories emphasizing the role of logics in reasoning.
Our hypotheses are also related to the dual source model
of Klauer, Beller, and Hütter (2010). Klauer and colleagues
argue that the inferences participants draw depend on their
background knowledge about the content of the task and its
logical form. Whereas the background knowledge component is influenced by the conditional probability of q given
p, the form component depends on the subjective probability
of the logical inference presented in the task, but also on the
form of the rule and its validity (Klauer et al., 2010; Singmann, Klauer and Over, 2014). For instance, when Klauer et
al. (2010) asked participants to estimate how probable it is
that q follows from p, participants gave higher ratings when
they were first confronted with the corresponding “if-then”
conditional rule than when they were asked (directly) without being presented with a rule before. Changes in the form
of the rule by comparing “if p then q” with “p only if q”
rules also affected inferences (Klauer et al., 2010). All these
findings suggest that phrasing rules as either universal or
existential should affect inferences.
In the following, we present two experiments on defeasible reasoning with quantifiers. In Experiment 1 we phrased
conditionals from the literature as quantified rules and tested
the participants’ consideration of exceptions in a classical
inference task. In Experiment 2 we use legal rules to investigate whether quantifiers also influence the inferences with
emotionally charged content.

Table 1: Rephrasing conditionals with many and few exceptions to universal or existential rules in Experiment 1.
Rule
Conditional

Universal

Existential

Exceptions
Many
Few
If a person studies
If a person jumps into
hard, then this perthe pool, then the
son will do well on
person gets wet.
the test.
All persons that
All persons that jump
study hard will do
into the pool get wet.
well on the test.
There is at least one
There is at least one
person that studies
person that jumps
hard and does well
into the pool and gets
in the test.
wet.

Each quantified rule was presented twice, once as a MP
inference:
Rule (universal/ existential):
All persons that jump into the pool will get wet. /
There is at least one person that jumps into the pool and gets
wet.
Fact:
Person X jumps into the pool.
Conclusion:
Person X gets wet.
And once as a MT inference:

Experiment 1

Rule (universal/ existential):
All persons that jump into the pool will get wet. /
There is at least one person that jumps into the pool and gets
wet.
Fact:
Person X does not get wet.
Conclusion:
Person X did not jump into the pool.

Methods
Participants 41 participants took part in the experiment.
One of them had to be excluded because he or she stated
after the experiment to have had prior knowledge on formal
logic. The remaining 40 participants were on average 21.50
years old (SD = 2.82).
Materials and Design For Experiment 1 we took 12 conditionals from the existing literature and phrased them with
universal or existential quantifiers. 8 of the 12 conditionals
came from De Neys, Schaeken and d’Ydewalle (2002), and
4 from Verschueren, Schaeken and d’Ydewalle (2005).
According to the authors half of the conditionals have many
exceptions, the other half few exceptions1. We rephrased
these 12 conditionals either as statements with universal or
existential quantifiers by adding either an “All” or a “There
is at least one Z that” (replacing Z by the object of the rule)
in the beginning of each statement. For an illustration see
Table 1.

The person or object described in the fact was always labeled “X” (e.g., Person X, girl X, apple X) to emphasize
that we are referring to one particular person or object. Participants had to indicate how strongly they accept the conclusion. The kind of quantifier was varied between individuals: 19 participants were confronted with universal quantifiers and 21 with existential quantifiers. Experiment 1 thus
followed a 2 (exception: many vs. few) x 2 (inference: MP
vs. MT) x 2 (quantifier: universal vs. existential) mixed
design. The amount of exceptions and the kind of inference
was varied within individuals. In total, participants solved
24 problems.
In addition to the inference task, we also included a generation task. Similar to De Neys et al. (2002; 2003a) and
Cummins et al. (1991) participants had 1.5 minutes to generate exceptions for the different rules we used in the inference task (“A person jumps into the pool but does not get
wet.” [Why?]). This served to corroborate that our German

1

In the literature authors make the distinction between disablers
and alternatives. The former refers to situations that hinder the
causal relationship between p and q. The latter refer to alternative
situations which also bring about q, without the necessity of p. We
selected our items only on the basis of disablers, because the
amount of alternatives does usually not influence MP and MT
inferences (cf. Cummins, 1995).

771

translation of the rules did not alter the amount of exceptions participants can generate for each rule.
Procedure The experiment was programmed with Superlab
4.5 from Cedrus Cooperation. Participants were tested individually. In the instructions participants were told that they
will be presented with statements containing some general
rule and that their task is to indicate how strongly they accept a certain statement given the previous rule. Participants
gave their answers on a 5-point-Likert scale ranging from no
acceptance to full acceptance (the order of the extremes was
counterbalanced). Each statement (the quantified rule, the
fact, and the conclusion) was presented on a separate screen.
Participants could switch to the next screen by pressing the
space bar. The conclusion was written in red font and was
followed – on a separate screen – by a figure of the 5-pointLikert scale where participants had to indicate their acceptance of the conclusion. We measured acceptance ratings
and decision times. Participants were told to answer intuitively and that right or wrong answers do not exist (cf.
Cummins, 1995; De Neys et al. 2003b). The 24 inference
problems were presented in a random order after a short
practice trial. After the inference task participants completed
the generation task.

Table 2: Acceptance ratings (AR) and decision times in
seconds (DT) for universal and existential rules with many
and few exceptions for Modus Ponens (MP) and Modus
Tollens (MT) inferences in Experiment 1. Standard deviations are shown in brackets.
Rule
Universal
AR
DT
Existential
AR
DT

Many exceptions
MP
MT

Few exceptions
MP
MT

3.8 (0.8)
1.6 (0.8)

3.1 (1.1)
1.7 (0.7)

4.6 (0.4)
1.2 (0.8)

4.1 (0.8)
1.5 (0.6)

3.5 (0.7)
2.2 (1.5)

3.0 (0.7)
2.7 (2.0)

4.4 (0.4)
2.2 (2.6)

3.8 (0.7)
2.7 (2.4)

Discussion
Our results show that defeasible reasoning also exists
when reasoning with quantifiers: participants accepted conclusions following from quantified rules with many exceptions less strongly than from quantified rules suggesting few
exceptions. In addition, in accordance with the existing
literature (Evans, 2002), participants accepted conclusions
for MP inferences more often than for MT inferences. However, the kind of quantifier used in the initial rule did not
affect acceptance ratings, but decision times: participants
needed more time to select conclusions for existential than
for universal quantifiers. One explanation for the similar
acceptance ratings but different decision times is that existential quantifiers do not trigger a higher consideration of
exceptions. Instead, the higher decision times for existential
quantifiers might only reflect some kind of “translation”
process. The wording “There is at least one person that…”
might sound awkward in everyday language and thus participants probably needed extra time to “translate” the phrase
into a more common wording. This translation might have
resulted in the same inference pattern found for universal
quantifiers. Another explanation is that, in a first step, the
existential quantifier actually triggered a higher consideration of exceptions. However, since the existential quantifiers
are known to create confusions and are difficult to understand (see Newstead, 1989), participants might have finally
decided to ignore the quantifier and to answer in the way
they usually do, e.g. calculating the conditional probability
of q given p. To clarify this mismatch between acceptance
ratings and decision times, in Experiment 2 we phrased the
existential rules more naturally.

Results
Generation Task (Manipulation Check) Participants generated more exceptions for rules classified as having many
exceptions (M = 4.9, SD = 1.3) than for those classified as
having few exceptions (M = 3.3, SD = 1.0), t(39) = 13.45, p
< .001, d = 1.36. In addition, the time needed to generate the
first exception correlated significantly with the amount of
exceptions generated, r(38) = ‒.52, p ≤ . 01.
Inference Task We conducted two separate 2 (exception:
many vs. few) x 2 (inference: MP vs. MT) x 2 (quantifier:
universal vs. existential) mixed Analyses of Variance
(ANOVAs), once for acceptance ratings and one for decision times. Descriptive statistics are in Table 2.
For the ANOVA for acceptance ratings we coded full acceptance with 5 points and no acceptance with 1 point. We
found a main effect of amount of exceptions, F(1, 38) =
76.06, p < .001, ηp2 = .67, and a main effect of inference,
F(1, 38) = 49.95, p < .001, ηp2 = .57. Acceptance ratings
were higher for rules with few exceptions (M = 4.2, SD =
0.5) compared to those with many exceptions (M = 3.3, SD
= 0.7). And acceptance ratings were higher for MP (M =
4.1, SD = 0.5) than for MT inferences (M = 3.5, SD = 0.7).
All other effects were not significant (F ≤ 1.52, p ≥ .225).
The ANOVA for decision times showed a main effect of
inference, F(1, 38) = 16.63, p < .001, ηp2 = .30, and a main
effect of quantifier, F(1, 38) = 4.77, p = .035, ηp2 = .11.
Participants needed more time to decide for MT inferences
(M = 2.2s, SD = 1.54) compared to MP inferences (M =
1.83s, SD = 1.36). They also needed more time to make a
decision when the initial rule contained an existential quantifier (M = 2.45s, SD = 1.76) compared to a universal quantifier (M = 1.51s, SD = 0.60). All other effects were not
significant (F ≤ 3.73, p ≥ .061).

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we investigated the role of quantifiers in
defeasible reasoning with legal rules. The legal rules could
consist of either universal or existential quantifiers. We
selected legal rules because such rules typically have exceptions. In law such exceptions are known as exculpatory
circumstances and are reasons for voiding punishment, such
as e.g., self-defense. Yet, recent studies show that laypeople
usually ignore such exculpatory circumstances when an
offence is highly morally outraging (e.g., Gazzo Castaneda

772

& Knauff, 2013). But what happens when the legal rules
already suggest the possibility of exceptions? If the quantifiers used in the initial rule are considered during reasoning, then legal rules with existential quantifiers like “Some
persons who kill another human being should be punished”
should bring participants to apply the initial legal rule less
often (and consider thus more exceptions) compared to rules
with universal quantifiers like “All persons who kill another
human should be punished”.

n = 21 with existential quantifiers) and each quantified rule
was presented twice, once as a MP:
Rule (universal/ existential):
All persons that kill another human should be punished for
manslaughter/
Some persons that kill another human should be punished
for manslaughter.
Fact:
A person kills another human.
Conclusion:
Should the person be punished for manslaughter?

Methods
Participants 43 participants took part in the experiment.
Two participants had to be excluded because of technical
problems and another one because the participant afterwards
reported to study law. The remaining 40 participants were
on average 23.08 years old (SD = 3.24).
Materials and Design For Experiment 2 we selected from a
pilot study (N = 87 and N = 82) 6 high and 6 low morally
outraging offences. These offences were embedded into
quantified legal rules by either adding an “All” or a “Some”
in the beginning of each statement (for an illustration see
Table 3). We changed the phrasing of the existential quantifier compared to Experiment 1 to make the legal rules
sound more naturally and thus avoid confounds with comprehension problems.

And once as a MT inference:
Rule (universal/ existential):
All persons that kill another humans should be punished for
manslaughter/
Some persons that kill another human should be punished
for manslaughter.
Fact:
A person is not punished for manslaughter.
Conclusion:
Did this person kill another human?
Note that contrary to Experiment 1 we phrased the conclusion as a question. After each inference, participants were
told to rate their certainty on a 3-point-Likert scale (uncertain – neutral – certain). In total, participants were confronted with 24 problems. Experiment 2 followed thus a 2
(moral outrage: high vs. low) x 2 (inference: MP vs. MT) x
2 (quantifier: universal vs. existential) mixed design.
Procedure The experiment was programmed in Superlab
4.5 from Cedrus Cooperation. Participants were tested individually. In the instructions participants were told that we
will confront them with statements describing legal cases,
including some general rule about the offence and that they
have to decide for each case whether they would apply the
initial legal rule or not. Each statement (the quantified legal
rule, fact, and conclusion) was presented on a separate
screen. Participants could switch to the next screen by pressing the space bar. They gave their answer about the conclusion – which was written in red font – by either pressing a
“Y” (yes) or “N” (no) key on the keyboard. The certainty
ratings were given by pressing one of three keys from the
numerical pad. We measured participant’s conclusions, the
decision times, and the certainty ratings. Participants were
told to answer intuitively and that right or wrong answers do
not exist. The 24 inference problems were presented in a
random order after a short practice trial.

Table 3: Rephrasing high and low morally outraging legal
rules as universal or existential rules in Experiment 2.
Rule
Legal Rule

Universal

Existential

Moral Outrage of Offence
High
Low
Whoever kills a
Whoever organizes
human being, withwithout governmental
out being a murderpermission a game of
er, is punished for
chance or provides the
manslaughter with
facilities for this, is
imprisonment for
punished with imprinot less than five
sonment up to two
years
years or with fine.
All persons that kill All persons that organanother human
ize a game of chance
should be punished
without governmental
for manslaughter.
permission should be
punished for unauthorized organization of
games of chance.
Some people that
Some persons that
kill another human
organize a game of
should be punished
chance without gofor manslaughter.
vernmental permission
should be punished for
unauthorized organization of games of
chance.

Results
We conducted three separate 2 (moral outrage: high vs.
low) x 2 (inference: MP vs. MT) x 2 (quantifier: universal
vs. existential) mixed ANOVAs, one for conclusions, one
for decision times (corrected for sentence length) and one
for certainty ratings. Descriptive statistics are in Table 4.
For the ANOVA for the conclusions we computed the
percentage of logically “correct” responses per category

As in Experiment 1, the kind of quantifier was varied between individuals (n = 19 got the rules with universal, and

773

(i.e., “yes” for MP and “no” for MT inferences). We found a
main effect of moral outrage, F(1, 38) = 28.37, p < .001, ηp2
= .43, but also an interaction between moral outrage and
inference, F(1, 38) = 34.87, p < .001, ηp2 = .48. For MP
inferences, when the offence was of high moral outrage,
participants selected significantly more often to apply the
initial rule and to conclude that the offender should be punished compared to when the offence was of low moral
outrage, t(39) = 7.03, p < .001, d = 1.47. In contrast, for MT
inferences moral outrage did not affect the participants’
conclusions, t(39) = 0.80, p = .430, d = 0.08. All other effects were not significant (F ≤ 2.75, p ≥ .106).
The ANOVA for decision times showed a main effect of
inference, F(1, 38) = 25.82, p < .001, ηp2 = .41. Participants
needed more time to decide for MT inferences (M = 3.95s;
SD = 1.56) than for MP inferences (M = 2.80s; SD = 1.08).
We also found an interaction between inference and moral
outrage, F(1, 38) = 4.68, p = .037, ηp2 = .11. For MP inferences participants were faster when the offence was of high
moral outrage, but for MT it was the other way around.
However, both post hoc t-tests did not reach the Bonferroni
adjusted alpha level of .025 (ts ≤ 2.22, p ≥ .033). All other
effects were not significant (F ≤ 3.31, p ≥ .077).
The ANOVA for certainty ratings revealed a main effect
of moral outrage, F(1, 38) = 8.48, p = .006, ηp2 = .18, a main
effect of inference, F(1, 38) = 47.92, p < .001, ηp2 = .56, and
an interaction between moral outrage and offence, F(1, 38)
= 35.25, p < .001, ηp2 = .48. For MP inferences participants
were more certain when the rule contained a high moral
outrage offence compared to when it contained a low moral
outrage offence, t(39) = 6.08, p < .001, d = 1.34. For MT
inferences, however, differences in certainty ratings for
offences with high and low moral outrage did not reach the
Bonferroni adjusted alpha level of .025, t(39) = ‒2.14, p =
.039, d = 0.21. All other effects were not significant (F ≤
2.01, p ≥ .164).

rences with low morally outrageous offences participants
defeated more often the logically valid conclusion to punish
the offender than when the offence was of high moral outrage (and were less certain). MT inferences were not influenced by moral outrage. Moral outrage probably only affected MP but not MT inferences because only the conclusion of the former may activate personal values of the reasoner by asking what should happen to an offender. Contrary, the structure of MT inferences is less emotionally
charged, because participants are only asked whether an
offence was committed or not.
However, despite these results, we found no effects of
quantifiers; not even in decision times. This lets us assume
that the differences in decision times we found in Experiment 1 only resulted from the way in which we phrased the
existential quantifiers and that the actual quantifier does not
influence inferences at all.

General Discussion
Our results show that defeasible reasoning also exists with
quantified statements. When a quantified rule suggests
many exceptions people accept conclusions which are valid
according to classical logic less often than when those rules
suggest only few exceptions (Experiment 1). At the same
time, the defeasibility of conclusions also depends on how
emotionally attached one is to the initial rule (Experiment
2). However, contrary to our expectations, the consideration
of exceptions was not moderated by the quantifier used in
the rule. In fact, the kind of quantifier used in our tasks did
not affect inferences. It seems that participants ignored the
exact wording of the rule, but only extracted the topic of the
task and used prior knowledge to indicate how highly they
accept a certain conclusion. This interpretation would fit
with the idea of what is known in the literature as System 1:
a non-analytic and fast way of reasoning (e.g., Kahneman,
2011). However, such an explanation – as well as our results
– conflicts with Klauers et al. (2010) dual source model,
because the dual source model argues that the logical form
influences inferences.
One explanation for the mismatch between our results and
the ones observed by Klauer et al. (2010) is that the dual
source model perhaps is simply not appropriate for quantified rules. Maybe, people do not represent the logical differences between universal and existential quantifiers mentally
or at least not in a way it could affect inferences. Already
Singmann et al. (2014) said that the component “logical
form” of the dual source model does not refer to the actual
logical status but to the “belief in the logicality of logical
forms” (Singmann et al., p. 4). However, this explanation is
not plausible because in our everyday lives we draw a distinction between all and some – even though this distinction
does not perfectly correspond to the logical meanings of the
quantifiers (Newstead, 1989).
Another explanation could be that the response formats we
used in our experiments differ from the ones used in Klauer
et al. (2010). In Klauer et al. participants had to rate how
probable a certain conclusion is. In contrast, we asked our

Table 4: Logically correct responses in percent (C), decision
times in seconds (DT) and certainty ratings (CR) for high
and low morally outraging universal and existential rules for
Modus Ponens (MP) and Modus Tollens (MT) inferences in
Experiment 2. Standard deviations are shown in brackets.
High Moral Outrage
MP
MT

Rule
Universal
C
DT
CR
Existential
C
DT
CR

Low Moral Outrage
MP
MT

92.1(11.6) 84.2 (26.3) 60.5 (25.6) 89.5 (17.8)
2.9 (1.1)
4.4 (1.6)
3.2 (0.8)
4.3 (2.3)
2.9 (0.2)
2.1 (0.5)
2.4 (0.3)
2.2 (0.3)
96.0 (9.0) 78.6 (34.6) 67.2 (26.3) 78.6 (33.8)
2.2 (1.1)
3.8 (1.4)
2.8 (1.6)
3.4 (1.7)
2.9 (0.2)
2.0 (0.7)
2.6 (0.4)
2.1 (0.6)

Discussion
Our results show that defeasible reasoning also exists
when reasoning with quantified legal rules. For MP infe-

774

participants in Experiment 1 to indicate how highly they
accept the conclusion, and in Experiment 2 to answer the
conclusion by either selecting yes or no. Already Markovits,
Forgues and Brunet (2010) showed that the response modality affects inferences. Yet, the fact that we found the same
results in Experiment 1 and 2 – both using different response modalities – indicates that our findings are independent from response modality.
A third explanation for the mismatch between our findings
and the ones from Klauer et al. (2010) is that maybe the
form component postulated by the dual source model is less
strong for quantified rules than for conditional rules. It is
possible that the effect of quantifiers is too weak to be measurable with acceptance ratings. Further studies with mathematical models may help clarifying this question.
Investigating defeasible reasoning with quantifiers is novel and requires further investigation. For instance, in this
study we only used the logically valid inferences MP and
MT. Further studies could test the role of quantifiers in
reasoning with inferences like the Acceptance of the Consequent and Denial of the Antecedent – which are often classified as valid by laypeople although being invalid according
to classical logic. One could also manipulate the kind of
quantifier within subjects. We decided to work with a between subjects design to avoid artefacts because of demand
characteristics. However, if demand characteristics indeed
evoke differences between universal and existential quantifiers, this would show that people know the differences
between both quantifiers but that they do not care about
these differences spontaneously.
We are aware that there are still open questions. However,
we think that varying the wording and logical meaning of
rules in inference tasks is promising: as we show in our
experiments, it allows for testing the relative impact of
background knowledge and logics in human reasoning.

Every counterexample counts. Memory and Cognition,
31, 581-595.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2003b).
Causal conditional reasoning and strength of association:
The disabling condition case. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 15, 161-176.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2002). Logic and human reasoning: An
assessment of the deduction paradigm. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 978-996.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2012). Questions and challenges for the
new psychology of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 18,
5-31.
Gazzo Castaneda, L. E., & Knauff, M. (2013, March). The
effect of moral outrage and perspective on conditional legal reasoning. In U. Ansorge, E. Kirchler, C. Lamm, & H.
Leder (Eds.), Abstracts of the 55th Conference of Experimental Psychologists (p. 93). Lengerich: Pabst.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Conditionals: A Theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference.
Psychological Review, 109, 636-678.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. London:
Allen Lane.
Klauer, K. C., Beller, S., & Hütter, M. (2010). Conditional
reasoning in context: A dual-source model of probabilistic
inference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 36, 298-323.
Markovits, H., Forgues, H. L., & Brunet, M.-L. (2010).
Conditional reasoning, frequency of counterexamples,
and the effect of response modality. Memory & Cognition, 38, 485-492.
Newstead, S. E. (1989). Interpretational errors in syllogistic
reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 78-91.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2001). The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. TRENDS in Cognitive
Sciences, 5, 349-357.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2013) Dynamic inference and
everyday conditional reasoning in the new paradigm,
Thinking & Reasoning, 19, 346-379.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Larkin, J. (2000). Probabilities
and polarity biases in conditional inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 883-899.
Quinn, S., & Markovits, H. (1998). Conditional reasoning,
causality and the structure of semantic memory: Strength
of association as a predictive factor for content effects.
Cognition, 68, B93-B101.
Singmann, H., Klauer, K. C., & Over, D. (2014). New normative standards of conditional reasoning and the dualsource model. Frontiers in Psychology, 5:316. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00316
Verschueren, N, Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2005). A
dual-process specification of causal conditional reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, 11, 239-278.
Weidenfeld, A., Oberauer, K., & Hörnig, R. (2005). Causal
and noncausal conditionals: An integrated model of interpretation and reasoning. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58A, 1479-1513.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by DFG grants KN 465/10-1 and
KN 465/10-2 to Markus Knauff within the DFG Priority
Program “New Frameworks of Rationality”. We thank
Jessica Ewerhardy and Katharina Horn for data collection.

References
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (1999). The probability heuristics model of syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive Psychology
38, 191-258.
Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naive theories and causal deduction. Memory & Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Cummins, D. D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991).
Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory and Cognition, 19, 274-282.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2002).
Causal conditional reasoning and semantic memory retrieval: A test of the semantic memory framework. Memory & Cognition, 30, 908-920.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2003a).
Inference suppression and semantic memory retrieval:

775

