Do potential past and future events activate the Lateral Mental Timeline?
Roberto Aguirre (raguirre@psico.edu.uy)
Centre of Basic Research in Psychology. Av. Tristan Narvaja, 1674, 11200-Montevideo, Uruguay

Julio Santiago (santiago@ugr.es)
Mind, Brain, and Behavior Research Center. University of Granada. Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071-Granada, Spain

Abstract
Current evidence provides support for the idea that time is
mentally represented by spatial means, as a lateral mental time
line. However, available studies have tested only factual events,
i.e., those which have occurred in the past or will occur in the
future. In the present study we tested whether past and future
potential events are also represented along the lateral mental
timeline. In Experiment 1 participants categorized the temporal
reference (past or future) of either factual or potential events and
responded by means of a lateralized (left or right) keypress.
Factual events showed a space-time congruency effect that
replicated prior findings: participants were faster to categorize
past events with the left hand and future events with the right
hand than when using the opposite mapping. More importantly,
this also ocurred for potential events. Experiment 2 replicated
this finding using blocks comprising only potential events. In
order to assess the degree of automaticity of the activation of the
mental timeline in these two kinds of events, Experiment 3 asked
participants to judge whether the expressions referred to factual
or potential events. In this case, there was no space-time
congruency effect, showing that the lateral timeline is active
only when relevant to the task. Moreover, participants were
faster to categorize potential events with the left hand and factual
events with the right hand than when using the opposite
mapping, suggesting for the first time a link between the mental
representations of space and potentiality.
Keywords: Mental timeline; time; space; potentiality; factuality.

A large number of studies support the suggestion by Lakoff
and Johnson (1980) that space is used to conceptualize time.
Among other possibilities, time can be represented as flowing
from left to right in space, at least in languages with a left-toright orthography (see Santiago, Lupiáñez, Pérez, & Funes,
2007, for Spanish; Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter, 1991, for
English; Ulrich & Maienborn, 2010, for German. Santiago et
al (2007) presented words referring either to the future or to
the past, and participants categorized their temporal reference
by pressing either a left or right response key. Responses were
faster when past words were responded to with the left hand
and future words with the right hand in comparison to a
reversed mapping condition. This space-time congruency
effect has been interpreted as evidence of the use of an
underlying left-to-right mental timeline.
All available studies of this lateral mental timeline have used
past and future factual events. Some studies have used single
words (temporal adverbials and tensed verbs: Flumini &
Santiago, 2013; Ouellet, Santiago, Funes, & Lupiañez, 2010;
Ouellet, Santiago, Israeli, & Gabay, 2010; Santiago et al, 2007;
Torralbo, Santiago, & Lupiáñez, 2006; Weger & Pratt, 2008).
Others have used short adverbial phrases (Casasanto & Bottini,

2014) or whole sentences (Ulrich & Maienborn, 2010). Still
others have used sequences of events which can be objectively
placed in temporal succession (Furhman & Boroditsky, 2010;
Santiago et al, 2010).
The aim of the present research is to test whether potential
events are also able to activate the left-right mental timeline.
To our knowledge, no prior study has tapped onto this
question. The ability to represent potential events is central to
human cognition. Representing future potential events
supports the manipulation of alternative scenarios and the
evaluation of their consequences in order to make decisions
about courses of action (Baumeister & Masicampo, 2010;
Hegarty, 2004; Johnson-Laird, 1983). Past potential events are
a necessary component of counterfactuals (e.g., “If I had been
your father, I hadn’t allowed you to do it”; (see Gilead,
Liberman, & Maril, 2012), and they are directly related to
studies of the processing of negation (as any potential past
event is something that did not happen). The mental
representation of uncertain and negated events has recently
received strong interest from the perspective of embodied
approaches to language comprehension (De Vega et al, 2014;
Ferguson, Tresh & Leblond, 2013; Kaup et al, 2007; Orenes,
Beltrán & Santamaría, 2014). If comprehension is mediated by
detailed, modal mental simulations of linguistic content,
uncertain and negated events pose an important theoretical
challenge.
Prior research has shown that the mental simulations of
concrete factual events activate a lateral mental timeline. The
present study will shed light on whether potential events are
also mentally arranged along a left-right axis. In order to
answer this question, the present study used a standard spacetime conceptual congruency task along the lines of Santiago et
al (2007). In Experiment 1, factual past and future events were
mixed with potential past and future events. Events were
presented by means of short Spanish sentences containing a
pronoun and a conjugated verb. The conjugation of the verb
indicated whether the event was factual or potential. The
factual past condition used verbs in Indicative Past form (“ella
despertó” - “she woke up”) and the factual future condition
used verbs in Indicative Future (“nosotros dormiremos” - “we
will sleep”). The potential past condition used verbs in
Subjunctive Pluperfect Past (“él hubiera trabajado”- roughly
corresponding to “he would have worked”) or Indicative
Conditional (“ella se dormiría” - “she would fall asleep”).
Participants were asked to categorize all sentences as referring
to past or future by means of lateralized left and right
keypresses. In one block they used a congruent mapping (left-

48

past right-future) and in another block the mapping was
reversed.

Experiment 1
We expected that potential events would activate the lateral
mental timeline as well as factual events do. Therefore, we
predicted an interaction between temporal reference and
response side both for factual and potential events. It is
important to point out that only the interaction with response
side is informative in this design, because the conditions
defined by the factors potentiality and time were not matched
in length, word frequency, verb form complexity, verb form
frequency, and so on. In other words, time and potentiality are
between-item factors, and therefore, their main effects or twoway interaction might arise because of uncontrolled item
variables. In contrast, response side is a within-item factor, and
therefore, its interaction with either time and/or potentiality
cannot be accounted for by differences among items.

Methods
Participants Twenty eight students (32.5 mean age, one lefthanded) of the Autonomous University of Barcelona
volunteered to participate. All of them were native Spanish
speakers.
Materials Verbal stimuli were 80 Spanish expressions with
conjugated verb forms. The verb forms were generated by
using 20 intransitive regular Spanish verbs. They were
conjugated in factual past (Indicative Past); potential past
(Subjunctive Pluperfect Past); factual future (Indicative
Future) and potential future (Indicative Conditional). Sentence
length was between 13 and 20 characters.
Procedure The experiment was programmed in E-Prime
(Schneider, Eschman, & Zucolotto, 2002) and run in a sound
attenuated room. Stimuli were presented at the centre of a
computer screen (1024 x 768 pixels, 24.5 x 41 cm), spanning
6.23º of visual angle, in white letters over a black background.
The distance between screen and participant was 0.59 m. One
session lasted approximately 20 minutes. Participants pressed a
left and right response keys on a keyboard. The “a” and “6”
keys were used, covered by stickers of the same colour. At the
beginning of each trial a fixation cross was presented for 500
ms before a randomly chosen sentence appeared on the centre
of the screen. It remained on screen until the participant’s
response or a maximum time of 4,000 ms. Then there was an
interval of 3,000 ms. Wrong responses were followed by a 440
Hz beep that lasted 500 ms. The next trial started 3,000 ms
after a correct response or the offset of the auditory feedback.
There were two experimental blocks, one for the congruent
time-response mapping and the other for the incongruent
mapping. In the congruent condition, participants pressed the
left key in response to both past factual and potential verb
forms, and the right key in response to both future factual and
potential verb forms. In the incongruent condition, this
mapping was reversed. The order of blocks was
counterbalanced over participants. The same set of verbal

stimuli was used in each block (thereby each block comprising
80 trials). Before each block there was a practice block of eight
trials per condition. Instructions appeared on screen at the
beginning of each block.
Design Latency and accuracy were analyzed by means of an
ANOVA including the factors Potentiality (factual vs.
potential) X Time (past vs. future) X Response side (left vs.
right) X Order of conditions (congruent-incongruent vs.
incongruent-congruent). The design was a mixed factorial
design, with Potentiality, Time, and Response side
manipulated within participants and Order of conditions
manipulated between participants. The Order of conditions
factor was introduced to decrease error variance, and its effects
and interactions will not be reported.

Results
Due to experimenter error, three verbal stimuli in the factual
condition (‘Nosotros silbamos’, ‘Nosotros dormimos’ and
‘Nosotros soñamos’) were ambiguous as to their conjugation,
as they take identical forms in Indicative Past and Present.
These represented 3.5% (168 trials). Errors occurred on 6.2%
of the remaining trials and were excluded from the latency
analysis. In order to avoid the influence of outliers, after
inspection of the RT distribution we excluded latencies below
400 ms and above 3,500 ms, what amounted to discarding an
additional 1.5% (62) of correct trials.
Reaction Time Analysis Centrally for our hypotheses, Time
interacted with Response side (F(1,27)=8.71, p=.006, η2=.24).
Moreover, there was no three-way interaction between
Potentiality, Time, and Response side (F<1), indicating that
the size of the interaction between Time and Response side
was the same for both factual and potential events. This was
supported by independent analyses of the interaction between
Time and Response side for factual events (F(1,27)=8.33,
p=.008, η2=.24) and potential events (F(1,27)=7.56, p=.01,
η2=.22). Figure 1 illustrates these results.
Additionally, both Potentiality (F(1,27)=6.94, p=.01, η2=.21)
and Response side (F(1,27)=5.05, p=.03, η2=.16) yielded main
significant effects. There was no main effect of Time (F<1).
There was an interaction between Potentiality and Time
(F(1,27)=7.86, p=.009, η2=.23), and no interaction between
Potentiality and Response side (F(1,27)=1.34, p=.26, η2=.05).
Accuracy Analysis Time and Response side did not interact
(F<1). Potentiality had a marginally significant effect
(F(1,27)=3.69, p=.07, η2=.12), but neither Time (F<1) nor
Response side (F(1,27)=2.20, p=.15, η2=.08) did. The
interaction between Potentiality and Time (F(1,27)=13.21,
p=.001, η2=.33) was significant. There was also an interesting,
and unexpected, interaction between Potentiality and Response
side (F(1,27)=8.18, p=.008, η2=.23) on the form: better
accuracy to potential events with the left hand and to factual
events with the right hand than when using the opposite
mappings.

49

we will assess whether the potential events can activate the
lateral timeline all by themselves.

Experiment 2
The aim of this experiment was to examine whether the
potential past and future verb forms are able to activate left
and right space when presented in a context that does not
include factual events. As in Experiment 1, the interaction
between Time and Response side was crucial for our
hypothesis: we expected that performance would be better in
the congruent conditions.

Methods
Participants Thirty four students of the Universidad de la
República (mean age 26.8 years, 3 left-handed) volunteered to
participate. They were all native Spanish speakers.
Materials Verbal stimuli were the 40 potential expressions of
Experiment 1.
Procedure Regarding sound attenuation, screen size and
resolution, and visual angle, conditions were similar to
Experiment 1. The procedure was identical to Experiment 1 in
all other details.

Figure 1: Mean latencies (ms) for factual (Panel A) and
potential (Panel B) events in Experiment 1 (error bars show
Standard Error of the Mean).

Discussion
Experiment 1 revealed a space-time congruency effect both for
factual and potential events. Participants responded faster to
both kinds of events when past was mapped to the left hand
and future to the right hand than with the opposite mapping.
The size of the effect was the same for either kind of event.
This suggests the activation of the lateral mental timeline in
both cases.
However, there is an alternative explanation of the
interaction between Time and Response side in the processing
of potential events. On this account, by intermixing factual and
potential trials and assigning response keys to past and future
reference all along the block we may have induced a carryover of the space-time congruency effect from factual to
potential trials. In other words, it is possible that potential trials
only showed the left-right past-future congruency effect
because they were intermixed with factual trials, which do
show the effect.
One possible way to sort out the carry-over account is to
remove the factual trials altogether, keeping only the potential
trials. The carry-over account is based on the possibility that
factuality would play a role on activating the left-right pastfuture mental timeline. Then, by eliminating the factual trials,

Design Latency and accuracy were analyzed by means of an
ANOVA including the factors Time (past vs. future) X
Response side (left vs. right) X Order of conditions
(congruent-incongruent vs. incongruent-congruent). Time and
Response side were manipulated within participants and Order
of conditions was manipulated between participants.

Results
Errors occurred on 5.23% (142) of the trials, and were
excluded from the latency analysis. After inspection of the RT
distribution we also excluded correct trials with latencies
below 335 ms and above 4,000 ms, what amounted to
discarding an additional 1.7% (43 trials).
Reaction Time Analysis There was a main effect of Response
side (F(1,33)=5.06, p=.03, η2=.13), but not of Time (F<1).
Centrally for our research, a significant interaction between
Time and Response side emerged (F(1,33)=6.53, p=.02,
η2=.17). Figure 2 illustrates these results.
We also analyzed the potential trial data from the two
experiments including Experiment as a factor. In the overall
analysis, the interaction between Time and Response side was
also significant (F(1,60)=13.45, p=.001, η2=.18). Moreover,
the three-way interaction between Time, Response side and
Experiment was not significant (F<1). Thus, the space-time
congruency effect had the same size in Experiments 1 and 2.
Accuracy Analysis The interaction between Time and
Response side approached significance (F(1,33)=3.15, p=.09,
η2=.09). Neither Time (F<1) nor Response side (F(1,33)=1.31,
p=.26, η2=.04) produced significant main effects.

50

Materials Verbal stimuli were the same 80 Spanish
expressions of Experiment 1, with four exceptions: Firstly, the
ambiguous items in Experiment 1 (“Nosotros silbamos”,
“Nosotros dormimos” and “Nosotros soñamos”) were fixed
by changing their conjugation from first person plural to third
person singular. Additionally, the verb “permanecer”
(“remain”) was replaced by the verb “sonreír” (“smile”)
because by itself “permanecer” does not express a specific
event.

Figure 2: Mean latencies (ms) for potential events in
Experiment 2 (error bars show Standard Error of the Mean).

Discussion
A clear space-time congruency effect was observed when
potential past and future events were presented without factual
events in the experimental context: participants responded
faster when past was mapped to the left hand and future to the
right hand, than with the opposite mapping. The size of the
effect was not different from that observed in Experiment 1.
Therefore, present data rule out the possibility that the
congruency effect observed for potential events in Experiment
1 was induced by the presence of factual events in the
experimental materials.
The results of these experiments provide evidence of
genuine space-to-time mappings for potential events
. Available studies suggest that the activation of these spacetime associations appears to be non-automatic (Ulrich &
Maienborn, 2010). In order to assess whether there is an
automatic activation of the left-right timeline for potential
events, in Experiment 3 we asked participants to judge the
potentiality of the event, instead of its reference to past or
future.

Experiment 3
The aim of this experiment was to examine whether there is an
automatic activation of the left-right mental timeline for
potential (and factual) events. With this goal, we asked
participants to judge whether each expression referred to a
factual or potential event. Thus, the potentiality dimension
became task-relevant and the temporal dimension taskirrelevant. We did not expect a space-time congruency effect
under these conditions, neither for factual nor potential events.

Methods
Participants Thirty new undergraduate students of the
Universidad de la República participated as volunteers (mean
age 26 years, no left-handers). They were all native Spanish
speakers.

Procedure The procedure followed closely Experiment 1, with
the following exceptions. At the beginning of the session, we
ensured that participants clearly discriminated factual from
potential expressions using an example. Additionally, the
practice block was extended to sixteen trials per condition.
This was because, on pilot testing, the potentiality task was
shown to be more difficult than the temporality task. In one
mapping condition, participants pressed the left key in
response to a factual event and the right key in response to a
potential event. In the other mapping condition, the assignment
was reversed.
Design Latency and accuracy were analyzed by means of an
ANOVA including the same factors as in Experiment 1:
Potentiality (factual vs. potential) X Time (past vs. future) X
Response side (left vs. right) X Order of mapping conditions.

Results
Errors occurred on 5.4% (257) of the trials, and were excluded
from the latency analysis. After inspection of the RT
distribution we excluded correct trials with latencies below
450 ms and above 3,200 ms, what amounted to discarding an
additional 1.6% (74 trials).
Reaction Time Analysis Centrally for our concerns, the
interaction between Time and Response side and the three-way
interaction between Potentiality, Time, and Response side
were not significant (all F<1). Figure 3 illustrates these results.
We also observed an unexpected interaction between
Potentiality and Response side (F(1,29)=6.99, p=.01, η2=.19):
responses were faster when potential events were mapped onto
the left hand and factual events onto the right hand than when
using the opposite mapping. Additionally, Potentiality
(F(1,29)=4.51, p=.04, η2=.14) produced a main effect, as in
Experiment 1. In contrast to that experiment, the main effect of
Time was significant (F(1,29)=18.87, p<.001, η2=.39) whereas
Response side was not (F<1). The interaction between
Potentiality and Time was replicated (F(1,29)=12.21, p=.002,
η2=.29).
With the aim of comparing the effects of the type of task
(time vs. potentiality judgment) on the interactions between
Time and Response side, as well as on the newly found
interaction between Potentiality and Response side, we
analyzed together the data from Experiments 1 and 3. The
overall two-way interaction between Time and Response side
was significant (F(1,56)=8.55, p=.005, η2=.13), and it was
modulated by Experiment (F(1,56)=8.21, p=.006, η2=.13),
supporting a change in the space-time congruency effect, from

51

being present in Experiment 1 to being absent in Experiment 3.
Additionally, the overall two-way interaction between
Potentiality and Response side reached significance
(F(1,56)=7.94, p=.007, η2=.12), and it was also qualified by
Experiment (F(1,56)=3.52, p=.07, η2=.06): it was absent in
Experiment 1 and present in Experiment 3. Therefore, the taskrelevant conceptual dimension in each experiment interacted
with the side of response.
Accuracy Analysis Neither the interaction between Time and
Response (F<1) nor the interaction between Time, Potentiality,
and Response (F(1,29)=2.52, p=.12, η2=.08) were significant.
The interaction between Potentiality and Response side fell
short of significance (F(1,29)=2.65, p=.11, η2=.08). There was
also an interaction between Time and Potentiality
(F(1,29)=4.91, p=.04, η2=.15), a main effect of Time
(F(1,29)=40.09, p<.001, η2=.58), and the main effect of
Response side approached significance (F(1,29)=3.06, p=.09,
η2=.10).

Figure 3: Mean latencies (ms) for factual (Panel A) and
potential (Panel B) events in Experiment 1 (error bars show
Standard Error of the Mean).

Discussion
In a task using a potentiality judgment, the latency measure did
not detect any space-time congruency effect, neither for factual
nor potential events. This result supports the non-automaticity
of the activation of the lateral mental timeline, as suggested by
Ulrich and Maienborn (2010).
Instead, there was an unexpected space-potentiality
interaction: participants responded faster when potential events
were mapped to the left hand, and factual events to the right
hand, than when using the opposite mapping. This interaction
was suggested by the accuracy analysis of Experiment 1 and it
was confirmed by the omnibus ANOVA of latency data in
Experiments 1 and 3. We discuss this finding in the following
section.

General Discussion
Do potential events activate the mental time line? The present
study provided a clear answer to this question: Yes, speakers
map time onto space when processing potential events.
Experiment 1 showed that the space-time congruency effect
for potential events was indistinguishable from the effect
observed for factual events. Experiment 2 showed that the
effect is genuine and arises even when the experimental
materials comprise only potential events. Finally, Experiment
3 showed that the activation of the lateral mental timeline is
non-automatic for both kinds of events. Events occurring at
different moments in both factual and fictive worlds are
mentally represented along a continuum that runs along the
lateral axis.
The present study also revealed an unexpected congruency
effect between lateral space and potentiality, such that the
processing of expressions was facilitated when potential events
were mapped onto the left hand and factual events onto the
right hand (as compared to the opposite mapping). This spacepotentiality mapping is also non-automatic, as it only arised
when participants judged potentiality and not time.
What can be the causes of this effect? One possibility relies
on the inherently potential character of future events. Speakers
of Aymara refer to the future using the word for “back”, and to
the past using the word for “front” (Núñez & Sweetser, 2006).
These authors suggested that the motivation for this conceptual
mapping is the fact that the past can be “seen” clearly, as it has
already happened, but the future cannot. Under this account,
the potentiality of the future would support mapping both
future and potential onto right space in Spanish speakers.
However, present data actually show the opposite mapping
(potential-left, factual- right), and therefore rule out this
account.
Another possibility is based on the polarity correspondence
hypothesis proposed by Proctor and Cho (2006). If both
potentiality and lateral space are polar dimensions, with a
marked and an unmarked (default) pole, the polarity
correspondence hypothesis would predict that processing
should be facilitated when the poles of the same sign are
mapped onto each other. It seems intuitively correct to assume
that the unmarked pole of the dimension of potentiality is the
factual pole, and that the unmarked pole of the dimension of

52

lateral space is the right side (at least for right-handers).
Therefore, mapping factual on the right response and potential
on the left response would facilitate processing as compared to
the reversed mapping.
This view can account for the observed space-potentiality
congruency effect, and at present we believe it is the best
available explanation of it. However, it opens other
challenging questions. Recently, Santiago and Lakens (2014)
have shown that polarity correspondence cannot explain the
mapping of time (nor numbers) onto lateral space. What are,
then, the factors that make some conceptual dimensions, such
as the potentiality dimension, able to generate a polarity
correspondence effect, and that distinguish it from the
dimension of time, which is not?
To conclude, the present study has shown that potential past
and future events activate the lateral mental timeline to the
same extent as factual events do. In doing so, it has also
revealed an interesting new phenomenon: the mental
representation of the dimension of potentiality can also
establish links to the lateral spatial dimension, at least under
conditions in which potentiality is task relevant. More research
is needed to clarify the exact nature of this relation.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Uruguayan National
Research and Innovation Agency to Roberto Aguirre, and by
grants P09-SEJ-4772 from Junta de Andalucía and European
Regional Development Fund, and PSI2012-32464 from the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitivity to Julio
Santiago. We would like to thank Claudia Maienborn, Rolf
Ulrich, Marc Ouellet, and Juan Carlos Valle-Lisboa for their
help throughout this project.

References
Baumeister, R. F., & Masicampo, E. J. (2010). Conscious
thought is for facilitating social and cultural interactions:
How mental simulations serve the animal-culture interface.
Psychological Review, 117(3), 945–71.
Casasanto, D., & Bottini, R. (2014). Mirror reading can
reverse the flow of time. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 143, 473–479.
De Vega, M., León, I., Hernández, J. A., Valdés, M., Padrón,
I., & Ferstl, E. C. (2014). Action sentences activate sensory
motor regions in the brain independently of their status of
reality. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 26(7), 1363–
1376.
Ferguson, H. J., Tresh, M., & Leblond, J. (2013). Examining
mental simulations of uncertain events. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 20(2), 391–9.
Flumini, A., & Santiago, J. (2013). Time (also) flies from left
to right... if it is needed! In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz,
& I. Wachmuz (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2315–
2320). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross-cultural
differences in mental representations of time: Evidence from

an implicit nonlinguistic task. Cognitive Science, 34(8),
1430–1451.
Gilead, M., Liberman, N., & Maril, A. (2012). Construing
counterfactual worlds: The role of abstraction. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 42(3), 391–397.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning by mental
simulation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(6), 280–5.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental Models. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Kaup, B., Yaxley, R. H., Madden, C. J., Zwaan, R. a, &
Lüdtke, J. (2007). Experiential simulations of negated text
information. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
60(7), 976–90.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). The metaphorical structure
of the human conceptual system. Cognitive Science, 4, 195208.
Núñez, R. E., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind
them: Convergent evidence from Aymara language and
gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison of spatial
construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30(3), 401–450.
Orenes, I., Beltrán, D., & Santamaría, C. (2014). How negation
is understood: Evidence from the visual world paradigm.
Journal of Memory and Language, 74, 36–45.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2010). Is the
future the right time? Experimental Psychology, 57, 308314.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Funes, M. J., & Lupiáñez, J. (2010).
Thinking about the future moves attention to the right.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 36, 17–24.
Proctor, R. W., & Cho, Y. S. (2006). Polarity correspondence:
A general principle for performance of speeded binary
classification tasks. Psychological Bulletin, 132(3), 416–42.
Santiago, J., & Lakens, D. (2014). Can conceptual congruency
effects between number, time, and space be accounted for by
polarity
correspondence?
Acta
Psychologica.
doi:10.1016/j.actpsy.2014.09.016
Santiago, J., Lupiáñez, J., Pérez, E., & Funes, M. J. (2007).
Time (also) flies from left to right. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 14, 512–516.
Santiago, J., Román, A., Ouellet, M., Rodríguez, N., & PérezAzor, P. (2010). In hindsight, life flows from left to right.
Psychological Research, 74(1), 59–70.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zucolotto, A. (2002). E- Prime
User’s Guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software Tools Inc.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupiáñez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of
reference. Cognitive Science, 30, 745–757.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S. & Winter, A. (1991). Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology 23, 515–557.
Ulrich, R. & Maienborn, C. (2010). Left–right coding of past
and future in language: The mental timeline during sentence
processing. Cognition, 117, 126–138.
Weger, U., & Pratt, J. (2008). Time flies like an arrow: Spacetime compatibility effects suggest the use of a mental timeline. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 15, 426–430.

53

