Does Training of Cognitive and Metacognitive Regulatory Processes
Enhance Learning and Deployment of Processes with Hypermedia?
Roger Azevedo (razeved@ncsu.edu)
North Carolina State University, Department of Psychology, 2310 Stinson Drive, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA

Amy Johnson (amjohn43@asu.edu)
Arizona State University, Learning Sciences Institute, 1000 S. Forest Mall Payne Hall, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA

Candice Burkett (cburke20@uic.edu)
University of Chicago at Illinois, Department of Psychology, 1240 W. Harrison Street, Chicago, IL 60607, USA

Abstract
In this study we examined the effectiveness of self-regulated
learning (SRL) training in facilitating college students’
science learning with hypermedia. Sixty (N = 60)
undergraduate students were randomly assigned to either a
training condition or a control condition and used a
hypermedia environment to learn about the circulatory
system. On Day 1, all participants were administered a pretest
and a self-report measure of SRL. On Days 2–4, participants
in the experimental group underwent 3-day training on the use
of specific, empirically based cognitive and metacognitive
SRL processes (e.g., judgment of learning, making
inferences) designed to foster their conceptual understanding;
control students received no training. Three weeks later (on
Day 5), all participants were administered a pretest on the
science topic and a self-report measure of SRL, and then used
a different version of the system to learn about another
science topic (i.e., the central nervous system). Verbal
protocol data were collected from both groups on Days 2–5.
Overall, there were no significant differences on several
learning outcome measures between conditions. However,
those in the training condition remembered significantly more
declarative knowledge of cognitive and metacognitive
strategies. Lastly, think-aloud protocol data showed
significant differences in the use of the SRL processes
immediately following training, but not following a 3-week
interval on a hypermedia transfer task.

cognitive strategies and metacognitive processes based on
coded concurrent think-aloud protocols). One explanation is
that the acquisition, retention, use, and transfer of these
processes develops over time and should be guided by welldesigned, theoretically guided, and empirically driven
training regiments (e.g., Azevedo & Cromley, 2004).
As such, interdisciplinary researchers are using advanced
learning technologies (ALTs) to train students to acquire,
retain, and transfer self-regulatory processes with several
ALTs across multiple educational and professional domains
(see Azevedo & Aleven, 2013). We argue that more
research on training students, using different theoretically
driven regimens, is necessary to enhance complex learning
and transfer of SRL knowledge and skills. As such, this
paper reports an empirical study where participants were
randomly assigned to one of two conditions (i.e., control or
SRL training condition) with a nonadaptive version of
MetaTutor (a hypermedia system) during a 5-day laboratory
study, to examine the effectiveness of SRL training on their
use of SRL processes and its impact on learning gains.

Keywords:
metacognition;
self-regulated
learning;
hypermedia; learning; training; process data; think-alouds

Participants were 60 undergraduate students (70% female)
from a large public university in the southeastern United
States. The mean age of the sample was 23 years old (SD =
3.25), and the mean GPA was 3.12 (SD = 0.65). They were
paid for participation in the research. Participants had little
prior knowledge of the human circulatory and nervous
systems, as indicated by pretest scores (circulatory system,
M = 40.3%, and nervous system, M = 23.6%).

Methods
Participants

Introduction
Learners can benefit from multimedia and hypermedia
systems when they use key cognitive and metacognitive
self-regulatory processes (Azevedo, 2015; Mayer, 2014).
Yet the research shows that they rarely use these strategies,
and as a consequence fail to develop a deep understanding
of complex topics (Azevedo & Aleven, 2013). Being able to
accurately monitor and regulate one’s own cognitive and
metacognitive processes and strategies requires a
tremendous amount of knowledge and effort, but is required
to be a successful learner (Winne & Azevedo, 2014).
Several approaches have been used to model and scaffold
learners’ use of metacognitive strategies (see Veenman,
2014). Unfortunately, most of the approaches have led to
diminutive effects and are difficult to interpret in the
absence of process data (e.g., evidence of deployment of

Research Design
We used a mixed-methodology approach that combined
product and process data to examine the effects of
computerized SRL training on learning outcomes and
participants’ deployment of SRL processes during learning.
A 2 (condition: SRL training vs. control) × 2 (time: pretest
vs. posttest) mixed factorial design was used to measure
learning gains from pretest to posttest on several human
body systems. Participants were randomly assigned to one
of two conditions, and were asked to learn about two

136

biological systems (human circulatory and nervous systems)
using MetaTutor over the course of the 5-day experiment.

to learn about complex topics. Gavin the Guide provided
procedural messages, while three other pedagogical agents
(PAs: Pam the Planner, Mary the Monitor, and Sam the
Strategizer) provided instructions intended to build
participants’ emerging understanding of SRL processes.
Pam the Planner instructed participants about three SRL
processes related to planning, including setting subgoals,
making plans for completing these subgoals, and activating
prior knowledge. Mary the Monitor instructed learners
about metacognitive monitoring processes, such as content
evaluation, feelings of knowing, and judgments of learning.
Sam the Strategizer taught learning strategies, such as
summarizing and taking notes.
The MTT interface included the following elements: (1)
one of the four PAs in the top-left corner of the screen, (2) a
running textual dialogue history, (3) audio streaming of
PAs’ voices presented through headphones, (4) a video
display that presented digitized video clips of other students
deploying SRL processes while learning with a computer,
and (5) radio buttons and textboxes for participants’
responses.
The MTT module provided participants with definitions
of 13 SRL processes and procedural knowledge of the most
effective means of and conditions for deploying these
processes. The training for each SRL process followed a
three-step procedure: (1) definition of the processes and
explanation of procedures for deployment, (2)
discrimination task, and (3) recognition task. After the
module presented the definition and procedures for each
SRL process, a discrimination task required participants to
view a good example video and a poor example video of the
SRL process being deployed by a learner, and then
accurately discriminate the good example from the bad
example. For this task, a good example video showed a
student appropriately using an SRL strategy, and a bad
example video showed a student inappropriately using an
SRL strategy. During the discrimination task, the PAs in
MTT assessed participants’ understanding of SRL by
presenting simple, closed-response questions (e.g., Do you
understand why this is a good example of the SRL activity
you just learned about?), and more-complex, open-ended
questions (e.g., In the textbox below, explain why you think
this is a poor example of the SRL activity you just learned
about). A recognition task required participants to watch
two 4-minute videos of a student learning to deploy various
SRL processes during hypermedia learning. For this task,
participants were asked to pause the video when they
recognized the deployment of an SRL process and identify
the process by selecting it from a list of 13 items. If
participants correctly identified the SRL process, they were
given positive feedback and prompted to proceed to the next
process. If they incorrectly identified an SRL process (e.g.,
they indicated that the student in the video used content
evaluation, when the student actually used a judgment of
learning), they were prompted to review that segment of the
video and try again. Participants who did not accurately
identify the SRL process after three attempts were given the

Paper and Pencil Materials and Measures
Pretests and Posttests Separate pretests were administered
to assess students’ existing knowledge of the human
circulatory and nervous systems. The nervous system pretest
included: (a) a labeling task, which required participants to
label the brain and brainstem on a color diagram; (b) a
matching task, which required participants to match seven
components of the nervous system with their corresponding
definitions; and (c) a 12-item multiple choice test, which
required participants to answer questions pertaining to the
nervous system by selecting one of four multiple choice
foils. For both the circulatory and nervous systems, two
equivalent forms were used for the pretest and posttest, and
were counterbalanced across participants.

Computerized Materials and Measures
Demographic Questionnaire Participants used a computer
to complete the participant questionnaire, which solicited
information concerning age, sex, current undergraduate
GPA, number and title of undergraduate biology courses
completed, and prior experience with biology and the
circulatory system.
Self-Regulated Learning Quiz The SRL quiz was a
matching task in which participants were required to match
13 student-generated quotes with the corresponding SRL
processes. The 13 SRL processes were: content evaluation,
feeling of knowing, judgment of learning, goal-directed
search, drawing/taking notes, planning, setting subgoals,
prior knowledge activation, monitoring progress toward
goals, coordination of informational sources, rereading,
making inferences, and summarizing (based on Azevedo &
Cromley, 2004). For example, when participants read: “I’ve
learned all about the different parts, and now I have 10
minutes left, so I should try and learn about how these parts
work together to aid in digestion,” they would select
monitoring progress toward goals as the correct answer
from the word bank at the top of the screen.
MetaTutor MetaTutor is a computer-based learning
environment composed of two modules (Azevedo et al.,
2013). The MetaTutor training (MTT) module trains
participants about the effective use of SRL during the
learning of complex science topics. The MetaTutor learning
(MTL) module is a hypermedia learning environment that is
designed to teach students about the circulatory, digestive,
and nervous systems.
MetaTutor Training MTT presented participants in the
SRL training condition with declarative and procedural
knowledge concerning the effective deployment of SRL (the
control condition did not interact with MTT). The
underlying assumption of MTT is that students should
regulate key cognitive and metacognitive processes in order

137

correct answer and instructed to continue to the next
process. The overall purpose of the MTT training module
was to develop participants’ understanding of the use of
effective SRL processes that can lead to increased learning
of complex science topics, such as human body systems.

Apparatus
All participants used MetaTutor on a desktop PC with a 17in. color monitor. Participants’ concurrent think-aloud
protocols (Azevedo & Cromley, 2004) and nonverbal
behaviors, such as body posture, gestures, and note taking,
were captured using a digital video camera and digital
microphone. All procedural instructions and instructional
messages from the PAs were delivered through headphones
worn by participants, and were also displayed visually in the
dialogue history box on the interface. A digital stopwatch
was used to monitor participants’ time spent on various
paper-and-pencil materials.

MetaTutor Learning MTL is a nonlinear, self-paced
hypermedia learning environment that was designed to teach
students about human body systems, such as the circulatory,
digestive, and nervous systems. For the circulatory system,
the MTL environment consisted of 41 pages of text with a
total of 7,288 words (M = 177.76 words per page). The
digestive system consisted of 34 pages of text with a total of
7,661 words (M = 225.32 words per page), and the nervous
system consisted of 37 pages of text with a total of 6,949
words (M = 187.81 words per page). Each page of text
within the circulatory, digestive, and nervous systems
contained one corresponding static diagram, and the Flesch–
Kincaid readability scores for each body system were 9.9,
11.4, and 12.2, respectively. The MTL environment
included a pane for each of the following key elements
designed to assist all participants in regulating their
learning: (1) An overall learning goal remained at the top of
the screen for the entire learning session with the intention
of aiding all participants in creating subgoals and
monitoring progress toward goals. (2) A timer in the topleft corner counted down from 60 minutes to allow
participants to monitor time. (3) A table of contents with
headings and subheadings of each key topic was located on
the left side of the screen to allow participants to preview
and evaluate content. (4) Instructional materials of each
body system with text and static diagrams were shown sideby-side in the middle of the screen to promote coordination
of informational sources. (5) Navigational buttons were
located on the left of the screen, which participants could
use to navigate linearly by clicking the previous and next
buttons, or nonlinearly by clicking on headings and
subheadings from the table of contents.
Images were not automatically displayed in the pictorial
representation pane; participants had to opt to open the
image by clicking on a thumbnail below the pane. Because
MTL could be used linearly or nonlinearly and was selfpaced, participants had the freedom to make decisions
regarding the order in which they read the pages, which
images they inspected, and how much time they spent on
any given page. MTL tracked the following four learner
interactions: (1) navigational path (linear vs. nonlinear,
revisits to previously opened pages, skipping pages); (2)
time spent on each page; (3) whether the image on a page
was opened (by clicking the thumbnail below the content);
and (4) time spent inspecting the image (if the image was
opened). The system logged every action taken by the
participant in a log-file. These log-files were uploaded to a
database for later data mining on participant interactions
within MetaTutor.

Experimental Procedure
This study involved a 5-day experiment in which
participants learned about several complex human body
systems. Days 1–4 were completed within a 1-week span.
Day 5 occurred 3 weeks after Day 4 was finished to
determine if participants in the training condition retained
the SRL training they had received and could transfer their
knowledge to a new learning task. Because we used a
concurrent think-aloud protocol during this experiment, all
participants were tested individually.
Day 1 On Day 1 of the experiment, participants were
randomly assigned to one of two MetaTutor conditions
(SRL training vs. control). All participants completed
several self-report measures and a pretest of the nervous and
digestive systems.
Day 2: SRL Training Condition On Day 2, participants in
the SRL training condition spent approximately 1 hour
learning declarative and procedural knowledge about SRL
processes using MTT. When the session began, Gavin the
Guide instructed participants that they would be using MTT
to learn about 13 SRL processes.
Day 2: Control Condition Participants in the control
condition, rather than receiving the SRL training, spent 1
hour using MTL to learn about the human digestive system.
First, participants watched a 2-minute video that described
how to engage in a think-aloud protocol. After watching this
video, participants viewed a 2-minute MTL tutorial video
that modeled the use of MTL, including navigating through
the learning environment, using the table of contents,
clicking thumbnails to enlarge images, and using the
embedded timer to monitor how much time was left in the
session. Learners were then provided instructions for the
learning task and began the 60-minute learning session. All
verbalizations and behaviors were video- and audiorecorded for later coding.
Day 3: SRL Training Condition On Day 3, participants in
the SRL training condition spent approximately 30 minutes
completing their SRL training with MTT. This portion of
training included the recognition task described in the
MetaTutor Training section.

138

verbalizations while learning about human body systems
(process data).

Day 3: Control Condition On Day 3, participants in the
control condition spent 30 minutes using MTL to continue
learning about the digestive system. They were instructed to
engage in the think-aloud protocol as they did on Day 2, and
the learning goal for this session was identical to the goal on
Day 2. Video and audio recording devices logged all
verbalizations, and MTL recorded all interactions between
the participant and the system.

Product Data The product data for this experiment
included a 3-component pretest and posttest for the
circulatory and nervous systems, as well as a 13-item SRL
quiz. Items on the pretest and posttest for the circulatory
system were scored on a 0 to 1 scale, where participants
were awarded 0 points for each incorrect or blank answer
and 1 point for each correct answer. The three components
of the pretest and posttest were the labeling task (range 0 to
7), the matching task (range 0 to 7), and the multiple choice
task (range 0 to 12). Participants received four total scores,
including an overall score for all items across all three
components (range 0 to 26), and one score for each
individual component. The nervous system pretest and
posttest were scored on an identical scale. The SRL quiz
was scored by awarding 0 points for each incorrect match
and 1 point for each correct match (range 0 to 13).

Day 4: SRL Training and Control Conditions On Day 4,
all participants used MTL to learn about the circulatory
system. Before the learning session began, all participants
received instructions for the session. Participants in the SRL
training condition watched the think-aloud and MTL tutorial
videos that the control condition had already viewed on Day
2. Because the control condition already viewed these
instructional videos and had two sessions of practice using
the think-aloud protocol and the MTT environment, they did
not view the videos again on Day 4. All participants
received instructions for the learning task, after which they
began the 60-minute learning task.
During the learning session, concurrent think-aloud
protocols were collected for each participant for subsequent
transcribing and coding of SRL processes used during
learning. All interactions within the environment (i.e.,
navigational patterns through the content, time spent reading
a page of content, opening images, and time spent
examining images) were collected and recorded with MTL.
Following the learning session, participants were given 20
minutes to complete a posttest about the circulatory system.
Upon completion of the posttest, all participants used the
computer to complete an identical version of the 13-item
SRL quiz that they took on Day 1 of the experiment. The
rationale for including this measure at the end of the
experiment was to determine whether participants in the
SRL condition demonstrated increased understanding of
SRL processes from Day 1 to Day 4 (i.e., following
exposure to the computerized SRL training).

Process Data The raw data collected from this study
consisted of 7,080 minutes (118 hours) of audio- and videorecordings from 60 participants who gave extensive
verbalizations while they learned about the circulatory and
nervous systems. During the first phase of data analysis,
several trained graduate and undergraduate students
transcribed the think-aloud protocols from the videotapes
and created a text file for each participant. This phase of the
data analysis for Day 4 (circulatory system) yielded a corpus
of 1,640 double-spaced pages (M = 27.3 pages per
participant) with a total of 402,435 words (M = 6,707.3
words per participant). Data analysis for Day 5 (nervous
system) yielded a corpus of 1,660 double-spaced pages (M =
27.7 pages per participant) with a total of 386,903 words
(M = 6,448.4 words per participant). These data were used
to assess participants’ use of SRL processes.
SRL Process Data We used Azevedo and colleagues’
(2004, 2009, 2013) coding scheme to analyze participants’
SRL behavior during learning with hypermedia. The coding
scheme is based on several recent models of SRL (e.g.,
Winne & Azevedo, 2014). It includes key elements of selfregulation as a 4-phase process, and extends these key
elements to capture a total of 28 different self-regulatory
variables used to regulate students’ learning of complex
science topics with hypermedia. Briefly, the coding scheme
includes the following variables: (a) planning processes,
including planning, setting subgoals, activating prior
knowledge, recycling goals in working memory, and
planning time and effort; (b) monitoring processes,
including feeling of knowing, judgment of learning,
monitoring progress toward goals, content evaluation,
identifying the adequacy of information, self-testing,
monitoring the use of strategies, and time monitoring; and
(c) learning strategies, including coordinating informational
sources, drawing and taking notes, making inferences,
elaborating knowledge, memorizing, using mnemonics,

Day 5 The final day of this 5-day experiment took place 3
weeks after Day 4. All participants used MTL to learn about
the human nervous system. Instructions and procedures
were identical to those on Day 4. After completing the 1hour learning session, participants were given 20 minutes to
complete a posttest about the nervous system. When the
posttest was complete, all participants used the computer to
complete the same 13-item SRL quiz that they took on Days
1 and 4.

Coding and Scoring of Data
In this section, we describe the scoring of participants’
responses for the matching, labeling, and multiple choice
tasks for the circulatory and nervous systems pretest and
posttest, and for the SRL quiz pretest and posttest (product
data). We also describe the coding of participants’

139

previewing headings and subheadings, reading notes,
rereading the content, and summarizing.

Question 2: Does SRL Training with MetaTutor
Significantly Improve Participants’ Understanding
of SRL Processes?

Interrater Agreement To establish interrater agreement, a
second trained researcher independently coded each
transcript. For Day 4, there was agreement on 3,696 out of
3,810 coded verbalizations, yielding an interrater agreement
of 97.0%. For Day 5, there was agreement on 3,305 out of
3,470 verbalizations, yielding an interrater agreement of
95.2%. Inconsistencies were resolved through discussion
between the two raters.

To answer this question, we conducted a separate ANCOVA
for Days 4 and 5 to determine if there were significant
differences in posttest scores on the SRL quiz on both days
between conditions (SRL training vs. control). For these
analyses, we used posttest SRL quiz scores from Days 4 and
5 as dependent variables, pretest scores from the SRL quiz
(completed on Day 1) as a covariate, and condition as a
fixed factor. The purpose of conducting this analysis was to
determine: (1) if participants in the training condition scored
significantly higher than the control condition immediately
after receiving SRL training, and (2) if participants in the
SRL training condition retained this knowledge and
outperformed the control condition 3 weeks after they
received training. These analyses indicated that participants
in the SRL training condition scored significantly higher on
the SRL posttest on both Day 4, F(1, 57) = 18.17, MSE =
.03, p < .001, η2(∂) = .24, and Day 5, F(1, 57) = 15.37,
MSE = .03, p < .001, η2(∂) = .21 (see Table 1).

Results
Question 1: Does SRL Training Delivered by
MetaTutor Lead to Increased Learning?
To answer this question, we conducted two separate
analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs) to determine if the
SRL and control conditions achieved significantly different
scores on the posttest on Days 4 and 5. For these analyses,
we used posttest scores from Days 4 and 5 as dependent
variables, pretest scores from Day 1 as a covariate, and
condition as a fixed factor. See Table 1 for means, standard
errors, and effect sizes for all learning outcome measures.

Question 3: Do Participants Use SRL Processes
Differentially on Days 4 and 5 between Conditions?
To more fully examine participants’ deployment of SRL at
the class level, a separate 2 × 3 repeated measures analysis
of variance (RM-ANOVA) was conducted for each of the
three SRL classes (planning, monitoring, and learning
strategies) to determine whether there were significant
differences in participants’ deployment of these classes on
Days 4 and 5 between conditions (SRL training vs. control).
For this analysis, condition was a between-subjects factor,
and day was a within-subjects factor.
For planning, the results showed a significant main effect
for day, F(1, 58) = 6.20, p < .05, η2(∂) = .10; a significant
main effect for condition, F(1, 58) = 10.11, p < .01, ∂η2 =
.15; and a significant interaction between day and condition,
F(1, 58) = 6.20, p < .05, η2(∂) = .10. Post hoc analyses
revealed that participants, overall, deployed more planning
processes on Day 4 than Day 5. Additionally, participants in
the training condition, overall, deployed more planning
processes than those in the control condition.
For monitoring, the results showed a significant main
effect for day, F(1, 58) = 15.35, p < .001, η2(∂) = .21, and a
significant main effect for condition, F(1, 58) = 7.35, p <
.01, η2(∂) = .11. There was no significant interaction between
day and condition. Similar to planning, post hoc analyses
revealed that participants in the SRL training condition,
overall, deployed significantly more monitoring processes
on Day 4 than Day 5. The SRL training condition, overall,
deployed more monitoring processes than the control
condition.
For learning strategies, we found a significant main effect
for day, F(1, 58) = 30.06, p < .001, η2(∂) = .34; a significant
main effect for condition, F(1, 58) = 3.99, p = .05, η2(∂) =
.06; and a significant interaction between day and condition,

Day 4: Circulatory System An ANCOVA on the posttest
scores for Day 4, using pretest scores as a covariate, failed
to find a significant difference between the SRL training and
control conditions for the labeling task, F(1, 57) = 3.66,
MSE = .04, p = .06, and the multiple choice task, F(1, 57) =
2.58, MSE = .02, p = .11. However, there was a significant
difference between conditions on the matching task, F(1,
57) = 4.12, MSE = .03, p = .05, η2(∂) = .07. Specifically, the
mean adjusted posttest scores for the control condition were
significantly greater than posttest scores for the SRL
training condition (see Table 1).
Day 5: Nervous System An ANCOVA conducted on
posttest scores for Day 5, using pretest as a covariate, failed
to find significant differences between the SRL training and
control conditions for the labeling, F(1, 57) = 3.10, MSE =
.03, p = .08; matching, F(1, 57) = 0.12, MSE = .03, p = .73;
or multiple choice tasks, F(1, 57) = .79, MSE = .03, p = .38.

140

F(1, 58) = 7.58, p < .01, η2(∂) = .12. Post hoc analyses
revealed that participants in the SRL training condition
deployed significantly more learning strategies on Day 4
than Day 5. The SRL training condition deployed
significantly more learning strategies than the control
condition on Day 4. However, the two conditions did not
differ significantly in their deployment of learning strategies
on Day 5 (p > .05).

increased frequency of use of SRL processes is directly
related to increases in learning gains.
Understanding the acquisition, retention, use, and transfer
of SRL skills is key to enhancing comprehension in science
learning. The use of ALTs remains a key tool in training
students to effectively enhance these skills (Azevedo &
Aleven, 2013). However, the results raise issues regarding
the sequencing, type, and duration of training for specific
aspects of metacognition (e.g., declarative and conditional
knowledge, procedural skills). Therefore, we argue that
future SRL training with ALTs may require individualized,
adaptive training regiments that are catered to each learner’s
individual needs—for example, more time on conditional
knowledge than declarative knowledge, modeling subtle
differences between sophisticated strategies, such as making
inferences versus hypothesizing, using pedagogical agents
to model optimal gaze behavior patterns related to
monitoring one’s comprehension of a diagram.

Discussion
With regard to the first research question, the results of this
study show that learners in both conditions failed to
significantly outperform each other on several learning
outcome measures. This finding is not consistent with
previous research, indicating that learners trained to regulate
aspects of their learning have demonstrated significant
learning gains in a variety of domains and tasks (e.g.,
Azevedo & Cromley, 2004). Our results run counter to the
fundamental assumption that training, aimed at acquiring,
using, and transferring SRL knowledge and skills students
need to regulate the complex SRL processes and
mechanisms, leads to superior learning gains during
learning with hypermedia.
With regard to the second research question, our results
show that those in the training condition were able to
significantly retain the declarative knowledge related to
cognitive and metacognitive SRL processes. The results also
illustrate that students are capable of enacting key cognitive
and metacognitive SRL strategies immediately following
training, but not after a prolonged period. The findings
highlight a key feature of SRL training—that is, acquiring
and transferring procedural and conditional knowledge and
skills requires extensive training (Veenman, 2014). These
results raise several key questions—that is, what is the
optimal amount of time needed for training on each phase
(e.g., declarative vs. conditional knowledge), what are
differences between availability versus production
deficiencies associated with the enactment of SRL skills,
and what is a more effective approach to training than the
typical “one-size-fits-all.”
With regard to the third research question, our extensive
think-aloud protocols indicated that learners in the SRL
training condition more frequently deployed planning,
monitoring, and learning SRL processes that taught them to
effectively regulate their learning with hypermedia.
However, the increased use of SRL processes was only
observed during Day 4, and not on Day 5. In fact, evidence
shows that those in the training condition deployed equal
numbers of SRL processes on Day 5 (i.e., following a 3week interval) as those in the control condition. This finding
challenges published findings in several ways: (1) it is the
only study thus far to provide think-aloud data on task
performance immediately following training and following
a 3-week interval; (2) it provides evidence that lack of
practice (during the 3-week interval) using SRL processes
leads to SRL deployment frequency rates similar to the
control condition; and (3) it challenges the assumption that

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by funding from the
National Science Foundation (DRL 1431552).

References
Azevedo, R. (2015). Defining and measuring engagement
and learning in science: Conceptual, theoretical,
methodological, and analytical issues. Educational
Psychologist, 50, 84–94.
Azevedo, R., & Aleven, V. (Eds.). (2013). International
handbook of metacognition and learning technologies.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.
Azevedo, R., & Cromley, J. G. (2004). Does training on
self-regulated learning facilitate students’ learning with
hypermedia? Journal of Educational Psychology, 96,
523–535.
Azevedo, R., Harley, J., Trevors, G., Duffy, M., FeyziBehnagh, R., Bouchet, F., & Landis, R. S. (2013). Using
trace data to examine the complex roles of cognitive,
metacognitive, and emotional self-regulatory processes
during learning with multi-agent systems. In R. Azevedo
& V. Aleven (Eds.), International handbook of
metacognition and learning technologies (pp. 427–445).
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.
Mayer, R. E. (Ed.). (2014). The Cambridge handbook of
multimedia learning (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Veenman, M. (2014). Training metacognitive skills in
students with availability and production deficiencies. In
H. Bembenutty, T. Cleary, & A. Kitsantas (Eds.),
Applications of self-regulated learning across diverse
disciplines. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Winne, P. H., & Azevedo, R. (2014). Metacognition. In
R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the
learning sciences (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

141

