Effect is sure, but explanation is unsure:
Closer investigation of the foreign language effect with Japanese participants
Kuninori Nakamura (knaka@seijo.ac.jp)
Faculty of Social Innovation, Seijo University
6-1-20, Seijo, Setagayaku, Tokyo 155-0081, Japan
Abstract
The foreign language effect (Costa et al., 2014) refers to a
phenomenon in which the response to a moral dilemma
depends on whether it is asked in a native or second language.
This study explored this effect with Japanese participants
using various types of moral dilemmas. Study 1 adopted
twelve variations of trolley dilemmas from Mikhail (2007).
Study 2 used seven types of moral dilemmas from Greene et
al. (2001). The dilemmas required permissibility and
understandability judgments. Results of the two studies
demonstrated the following two points. (1) Interactions
between types of dilemmas (switch/footbridge) and language
(native/foreign) were significant in both studies, indicating
that the foreign language effects were replicated consistent
with Costa et al. (2014). (2) Evidence that contradicts the
theoretical explanation of the foreign language effect was also
found.
Keywords: foreign language effect, moral dilemmas, mental
representation, dual process theory

Introduction
The idea that language changes people’s ways of thinking
has attracted attention from many researchers. This idea was
first proposed by nineteenth century thinkers. In the
twentieth century, the famous Sapir-Whorf hypothesis
(Carroll, Levinson, & Lee, 2012; Sapir, 1921) posited that
the structure of a language affects the ways in which its
speakers conceptualize their world. This hypothesis has
been tested by many empirical studies and its validity
remains under discussion (as a review, see Kay & Kempton,
1984; Takano, 1989).
Recent work on the foreign language effect (Costa,
Foucart, Arnon, Aparici, & Apesteguia, 2014; Costa,
Foucart, Hayakawa, Aparici, Apesteguia, Heafner, &
Keysar, 2014; Keysar, Hayakawa, & An, 2012) provide
interesting examples that support the idea that language
affects human thinking. In a series of their studies, Keysar
and his colleagues required participants to solve framing
effect tasks (e.g., Kahneman, & Tversky, 1984) known to
lead people to irrational decisions in either their native or a
foreign language. Results of the experiments consistently
demonstrated that irrational decisions in the framing effect
tasks are reduced when choices are presented in a foreign
language, indicating that language affects decision making
(see also Costa, Foucart, Arnon, et al., 2014).
Keysar, Hayakawa, and An (2012) explained the foreign
language effect in terms of dual process theory (e.g.,
Kahneman, 2003; Sloman, 1996; Stanovich & West, 2000).

Human cognition is composed of two systems; one that is
analytic, rule governed, and systematic, employing many
mental resources, and the other is intuitive, affective, and
heuristic. According to Keysar et al. (2014, p661), there are
reasons that foreign language use moves people from the
immediate affective system to a more deliberate, analytic
mode of thinking. A foreign language is less grounded in
the emotional system than a native language. It is typically
processed less automatically than a native language, which
could lead to more deliberate processing. Thus, such a
deliberate mode could affect processing in general and
result in more systematic decisions. Additionally, foreign
languages are difficult to process resulting in more analytic
decision-making processes.
On the basis of the foreign language effect in decision
making and the dual process theory explanation, Costa,
Foucart, Hayakawa, et al. (2014) also explored the foreign
language effect in moral thinking. Intuitively, moral
judgments about “right” and “wrong” are the result of deep
thought and should therefore be consistent and unaffected
by irrelevant aspects of moral reasoning, such as language.
However, recent studies (e.g., Greene, Sommerville,
Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001) indicate that moral
judgments are highly context dependent. Engagement of the
analytic and affective processes is the key to understanding
this contextual dependency. Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa, et al.
(2014) demonstrated the foreign language effect in moral
thinking, and their results appeared to be explained by dual
process theory. In what follows, I argue this point more
precisely.
The most prominent example of this contextual
dependency is the difference between the switch and
footbridge dilemmas. The switch dilemma assumes that a
runaway trolley is headed for five people who will be killed
if it proceeds on its present course. The only way to save
these people is to hit a switch that will turn the trolley onto
an alternate set of tracks where it will kill one person
instead of five. Should you turn the trolley in order to save
five people at the expense of one? Most people answer yes
to this dilemma (Greene et al., 2001). In the footbridge
dilemma, a trolley threatens to kill five people (as before).
You are standing next to a large stranger on a footbridge
that spans the tracks between the oncoming trolley and the
five people. Conversely, in this scenario, the only way to
save the five people is to push this stranger off the bridge
and onto the tracks below. He will die if you do this but his
body will stop the trolley from reaching the others. Should
you save them by pushing this stranger to his death? Most
people will answer no to this problem. The discrepancy

1697

between the responses to the two problems clearly
demonstrates the contextual dependency of moral reasoning.
Dual process theory explains this discrepancy in terms
of the relative weight of affective and analytic processes in
moral judgments. That is, affective processes generally
support judgments that favor the essential rights of a person
(deontological judgments). On the other hand, rational
controlled processes support judgments favoring the greater
good (utilitarian judgments), regardless of whether they
violate an individual’s rights. The switch dilemma requires
greater engagement of the analytic processes whereas the
footbridge dilemma involves more affective processes.
Brain imaging data support this explanation (Greene et al.,
2001).
Costa et al. (2014) found that this discrepancy would
vary depending on whether the moral dilemmas were
presented in a native or foreign language. They required
participants to solve moral dilemmas, including the switch
and footbridge dilemmas, using either their native or a
foreign language. Throughout the three studies, using a
foreign language induced more utilitarian judgment than the
native language. This supported the position that affective
processes played an important role in moral reasoning and
foreign language decreased engagement of affective
processes. Additionally, Costa et al. (2014) found an
interaction between type of dilemma and language. The
differences between languages in moral judgments were
significant for the footbridge dilemma but not for the switch
dilemma. Costa et al. (2014) speculated that this interaction
reflected that a foreign language increased utilitarianism by
increasing emotional distance.
Although Costa et al.’s (2014) findings that moral
reasoning might differ depending on the language were
impressive, their validity should be examined with a critical
eye. Therefore, this study focused on the following two
problems.
The first problem with Costa et al. (2014) was that the
variations of moral dilemmas were limited; they used only
two moral dilemmas: the switch and footbridge dilemmas.
However, as some researchers have called it, “trolleyology,”
there are many other variations of trolley-related moral
dilemmas to investigate moral thinking. Table 1 shows
various types of moral dilemmas used in previous studies
(Mikhail, 2007). Additionally, there are other types of moral
dilemmas that can also be used to explore engagement of
the affective and analytic systems in moral reasoning (e.g.,
see Greene et al., 2001). Thus, Costa et al. (2014) used
limited variations of both trolley-like and other moral
dilemmas.
Second, how participants understood the moral
dilemmas used in Costa et al. (2014) remains unclear. A
comparison between native and foreign language in moral
reasoning makes sense under an assumption that the
meanings of moral dilemmas are the same between native
and foreign languages. If participants understood the same
dilemma differently between the native and foreign
language, then the foreign language effect is not evidence

that language changed the way of thinking. Rather,
participants solved two different problems separately.
Although Costa et al. (2014) explored this issue in terms of
foreign language abilities, interpretations of the meanings of
moral dilemmas remain unclear. A key assumption of the
foreign language effect has not been tested.
Thus, this study explored the foreign language effect
from the following two aspects: (1) variations in moral
dilemmas and (2) understanding the meanings of moral
dilemmas. To address these points, this study employed
various types of moral dilemmas from the existing studies
(Greene et al., 2001; Mikhail, 2007) and explored
interpretations of the dilemmas by analyzing correlation
structures in moral judgments.

Study 1
Method
Participants
218 Japanese undergraduates participated in Study 1.111
participants were allocated to the foreign language condition
and the remaining participants to the native language
condition.
Materials and procedure
Twelve trolley dilemmas, including the switch and
footbridge dilemmas, were adapted from Mikhail (2007, pp.
32–35). Table 1 shows summary descriptions of the twelve
dilemmas.
Participants in the foreign language condition read the
twelve dilemmas, which were virtually identical to those in
Mikhail (2007). In the native condition, participants read the
twelve dilemmas translated into Japanese. All Japanese
scenarios were reviewed by a native Japanese speaker as to
whether they contained natural Japanese scenarios.
In both conditions, the dilemmas and measurement of the
independent variables were presented in booklets. I prepared
four types of booklets (differing only in the order of
presentation) with one dilemma on each page. Each of the
booklets comprised 12 pages.
Participants rated the permissibility of an act described in
the moral dilemmas on an eight-point scale, from 0 (morally
impermissible) to 7 (morally permissible). Participants were
randomly provided with one of the six types of booklets to
make choices in various situations without a single correct
answer.
Participants in both conditions read the permissibility
judgment sentences in Japanese to increase comparability of
results. That is, some doubts remained whether the meaning
of the phrase “permissibility” was the same in English and
Japanese. To address this concern, Study 1 required
participants to make all permissibility judgments in
Japanese.

1698

Table 1 Dilemmas used in this study
Content

Action

Kill one man to save five workmen

Throw switch to turn the train to the side track

Kill one heavy man to save five workmen

Throw the man from the bridge

Kill one man to save equipment

Throw switch to turn the train to the side track

Kill one weak man to save five workmen

Throw the man from the bridge

Kill hateful man to save five workmen

Throw switch to turn the train to the side track

Loop track (LT)

Kill one heavy man to save five workmen

Throw switch to turn the train to the side track

Man-in-front (MiF)

Kill one man in front of the heavy object to
save five workmen

Throw switch to turn the train to the side track

No sacrifice

Throw switch to turn the train to the side track

Kill one man to save five workmen instead of
taking another alternative that can save five
workmen without any sacrifice

Throw switch to turn the train to the side track

Kill five men to save one men

Throw switch to turn the train to the side track

Drop man (DM)

Kill one man to save five workmen

Throw switch to drop a man to the track

Collapse bridge (CB)

Kill one man to save five workmen

Throw switch to collapse the bridge on which a man is
standing

Kill one young man to save five patient

Transparent young man's organs to five patient

Kill one patient to save five

Hit a certain switch, which will cause the fumes to
bypass the room containing the three patients

Kill your baby to save tonwpeople

Smother your child to death

Destroy the sculpture to save one man

Push the sculptures into the valley so that it will roll onto
the tracks and block the trolley's passage

Lie to the guard to save the toursits

Lie to the guard to borrow a nearby speedboat

Study 1
Switch (S)
Footbdidge (F)
Expensive equipment (E)
Implied consent (IC)
Intentional homicide (H)

Costless rescue (CR)

Better alternative (BA)

Disproportinal death (DD)

Study 2
Donor
Hospital
Baby
Sculpture
Boat

Results and discussion
Figure 1 shows average permissibility judgment estimates
for all twelve dilemmas. Multivariate t-tests demonstrated
that the effects of language were significant in all twelve
dilemmas, indicating that foreign language effects were
found (Figure 1). Additionally, I examined the interaction
between type of dilemma (switch/footbridge) and difference
in language (Japanese/English) by two-way ANOVA.
Results showed a significant main effect of dilemma type, F
(1, 194) = 28.92, p < .01, language, F (1, 194) = 38.65, p
< .01, and interaction, F (1, 194) = 18.02, p < .01. Costa et
al.’s (2014) main result was replicated in the Japanese
participants.

However, Figure 1 demonstrates another interpretation
for the foreign language effect. As the dotted line in Figure
1 indicates, most of the mean estimates in the foreign
language condition were near 3.5 (median between 0 and 7).
Additionally, most of 95% confidence intervals of the
permissibility judgments contains 3.5. These suggest the
possibility that results in the foreign language condition
might reflect a central tendency of participants not
understanding the dilemma in the foreign language and
using values near the median as a “don’t know” response.
Additionally, permissibility judgments were higher in the
foreign language condition compared to the native language
condition for the disproportional death dilemma that
required killing five men to save one. Costa et al. (2014)
explained that utilitarian judgment was enhanced in the
foreign language condition because consideration in the

1699

7

Japanese

Permissibility ratings

6

English

5
4

**

**

**

**
**

**
**

**

IH

LT

**

**

**

**

3
2
1
0
S

F

E

IC

MiF

CR

BA

DD

DM

CB

Figure 1 Results of Study 1: Error bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals, and the dotted line indicates median of
the permissibility judgment.

Table 2 Results of factor analysis in Study 1
Native
Dilemmas
Switch (S)

Foreign

Factor 1

Factor 2

Factor 1

Factor 2

0.75

0.07

0.47

0.07

Footbdidge (F)

0.63

0.00

0.22

0.43

Expensive equipment (E)

0.37

-0.06

0.95

-0.28

Implied consent (IC)

0.45

0.01

-0.04

0.46

Intentional homicide (H)

0.43

0.01

0.01

0.42

Loop track (LT)

0.96

-0.22

0.31

0.29

Man-in-front (MiF)

0.82

0.02

0.46

0.13

Costless rescue (CR)

0.02

-0.05

-0.24

0.48

Better alternative (BA)

0.27

0.29

0.29

-0.06

Disproportinal death (DD)

-0.03

1.02

0.65

0.07

Drop man (DM)

0.76

0.15

0.21

0.22

Collapse bridge (CB)

0.37

0.45

0.30

0.47

Factor correlation

0.71

0.42

foreign language activated rational thinking. However, the
utilitarian judgment in the disproportional death dilemma is
“not switch.” Thus, use of the foreign language appeared to
prohibit rational thinking in the disproportional death
dilemma.
I also performed factor analyses by promax rotation with
maximum likelihood estimation on the results of both
language conditions. Eigenvalues for one-, two-, three-, and
four-factor solutions were 5.23, 1.20, 1.05, and 0.95 for the
native condition, respectively, and 3.30, 1.536, 1.26, and
0.95 for the foreign language condition, respectively. On the
basis of the eigenvalues, two-factor solutions were adopted
in both the native and foreign language conditions. Factor
loads shown in Table 2 indicate that the factor patterns of
the twelve moral dilemmas were different between the
native and foreign language conditions. While the six
dilemmas from switch to man-in-front were affected by

Factor 1 in the native language condition, these six
dilemmas were not affected in the foreign language
condition. Specifically, factor patterns for the switch and
footbridge dilemmas were different between the two
conditions.
To scrutinize the differences in the factor patterns
between the two conditions, I also performed
multidimensional scaling on both conditions (Figure 2) by
treating the correlation matrix as a distance matrix.
Alignments of the twelve dilemmas in the two dimensional
mapping were different between the two conditions. For
example, variations in the dilemmas that surround the
switch and footbridge dilemmas were different between the
native and foreign language conditions. Additionally,
alignment of the costless rescue dilemma was also different
between the two conditions. In the native language
condition, this dilemma was positioned separately from the
other eleven dilemmas. However, in the foreign language
condition, this dilemma was relatively near the implied
consent and intentional homicide dilemmas. Considering the
nature of the dilemma, isolation of the costless rescue
dilemma in the native language condition is natural because
this is the only dilemma that requires no sacrifice. Similarly,
multidimensional scaling alignments suggested that
participants’ understandings of the twelve moral dilemmas
were different between the two conditions.
To summarize, results of Study 1 revealed the following
three points. First, the interaction found in Costa et al.
(2014) was replicated; differences in permissibility
judgments between the native and foreign language
conditions were larger in the footbridge dilemma than the
switch dilemma. Second, there is a possibility that this
interaction was due to a central tendency in the foreign
language condition. Third, multidimensional mappings from
the correlation matrices were different between the native
and foreign language conditions. The dilemmas used in
Study 1 might change semantically with language.

Study 2
The purpose of Study 2 was threefold. First, Study 2
aimed to replicate the interaction between dilemma type
(switch/footbridge) and language (Japanese/English) in
Japanese participants. Second, it examined whether
dilemma comprehension would affect moral judgment in
either the native or foreign language condition. As Figure 1
demonstrates, Study 1 suggested a possibility that the
participants in the foreign language condition did not fully
comprehend the contents of the moral dilemmas, resulting
in participants answering points around the middle as an
implication of “don’t know.” Third, Study 2 tried to explore
more profoundly how participants interpreted moral
dilemmas both in the native and foreign language.
To address these concerns, Study 2 employed moral
dilemmas from Greene et al. (2001). They used 64 types of
moral dilemmas classified into three categories: moralpersonal dilemma, moral-impersonal dilemma, and nonmoral dilemma. Moral-personal dilemmas involve the

1700

CR

E
IC
IH

CB

IH
IC

F

F
BA

LT
DM
S
DD MiF

LT

CB

DM
MiF

DD

S

E

CR

BA

Figure 2 Results of multidimensional scaling in Study 1: left panel shows alignments of moral dilemmas in the
foreign language condition, and the right panel shows those in the native language condition.
affective system more than moral-impersonal or non-moral
dilemmas. This proposition is based on brain-imaging
studies and Nakamura (2013) also supported this
classification. Thus, using the moral-personal and moralimpersonal dilemmas enabled exploration of how the two
systems contributed to moral judgment. In addition,
analyzing the correlational structure between the moralpersonal and moral-impersonal dilemmas in both the foreign
and native language conditions also informed participants’
considerations when responding to the moral dilemmas.

Materials and procedure
Study 2 adopted seven moral dilemmas from Greene et
al. (2001), including the switch and footbridge dilemmas. In
addition to those dilemmas, Study 2 chose two moralpersonal dilemmas (transparent and crying baby) and three
moral-impersonal dilemmas (standard fume, sculpture, and
speedboat). Table 1 showed summary of the dilemmas .
The procedure of Study 2 was virtually identical to Study
1. Participants in the foreign language condition read the
seven dilemmas (Greene et al., 2001). In the native
condition, participants read the seven dilemmas translated
into Japanese. All Japanese scenarios were reviewed by a
Japanese native speaker as to whether they contained natural
Japanese scenarios.
After reading each dilemma, participants rated the
permissibility of the acts in the seven moral dilemmas, from
0 (morally impermissible) to 7 (morally permissible).

Results and discussion
Figure 3 shows the mean permissibility judgments for the
seven dilemmas. Consistent with Study 1, I examined the
interaction between type of dilemmas (switch/footbridge)
and differences in language (Japanese/English) by two-way
ANOVA in Study 2. Results showed a significant main
effect of type of dilemma, F (1, 163) = 92.10, p < .01,
language, F (1, 163) = 10.18, p < .01, and interaction, F (1,
163) = 5.99, p < .01. Study 2 also replicated the main
finding of Costa et al. (2014).
I also performed multivariate t-tests on the seven types of
moral dilemmas to examine the differences in permissibility

judgments between the native and foreign language
conditions. Results (Figure 3) indicated that six of the seven
types of dilemmas showed significant differences between
the two conditions. However, differences in the language
condition did not affect the permissibility judgment in the
baby dilemma. According to Greene et al. (2001), this
dilemma was considered a moral-personal dilemma
assumed to reflect the affective system. Costa et al. (2001)
suggested that use of a foreign language inhibits the
affective system, resulting in a reduction of utilitarian
judgments. Additionally, utilitarian judgments are stronger
in the two moral impersonal dilemma (sculpture and speed
boat) in the native language condition. Thus, the results for
the baby dilemma contradicted the explanation by Costa et
al. (2014).
The central tendency in the foreign language effect
appear to be replicated in Study 2. Mean permissibility
judgments of the seven dilemmas in the foreign language
conditions were nearer to the median of the scale than the
native language conditions.
I also performed factor analyses by promax rotation with
maximum likelihood estimation on the results of the native
and foreign language conditions. Eigenvalues for one-, two-,
three-, and four-factor solutions were 2.50, 1.70, 0.89, and
0.76 for the native condition, respectively, and 2.50, 1.40,
0.96, and 0.70 for the foreign language condition,
respectively. Based on the eigenvalues, two-factor solutions
were adopted in both the native and foreign language
conditions. Table 3 shows factor loads from the two factors.
Results of factor loads also indicated that factor
patterns were different between the native and foreign
language conditions. While the moral-personal and moralimpersonal dilemmas were classified into separate factors in
the native language condition, the factor pattern did not
clearly classify moral-personal and moral-impersonal
dilemmas in the foreign language condition. Additionally,
factor correlations were also different between the
conditions. Thus, the results of Study 2 supported
implications from Study 1: it found that the interaction
between types of dilemmas and language, but it also
provides a possibility that the explanation by Costa et al.
(2014) is not adequate.

1701

7

Permissibility judgment

**

**

6
Japanese

English

5

*

**

4

**
**

3

2

1

0
Switch

Footbridge

Donor

Hospital

Baby

Sculpture

Boat

Figure 3 Results of Study 2: Error bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals, and the dotted line indicates median of
the permissibility judgment
Table 3 Results of factor analysis in Study 2: blue fonts
show the moral impersonal dilemmas and red fonts show
the moral impersonal dilemmas.
Dilemmas

Native
Factor 1 Factor 2

Foreign
Factor 1 Factor 2

Switch

0.73

0.16

0.27

0.54

Footbdidge

0.85

0.08

0.94

-0.05

Donor

0.64

-0.06

0.63

-0.17

Hospital

0.57

-0.36

0.20

0.44

Baby

0.30

0.26

0.18

0.48

Sculpture

0.03

1.00

-0.16

0.54

Boat

0.02

0.47

-0.27

0.59

Factor correlation

-0.07

0.49

General discussion
This study investigated the foreign language effect that
moral reasoning differed depending on whether reasoning is
done in a native or foreign language. In these two studies, I
found that the foreign language effect itself is robustly
replicated in the same way as Costa et al. (2014). The
difference between the native and foreign language
conditions was larger in the foreign language condition than
it was in the native language condition, and this difference
is larger in case of the footbridge dilemma than the switch
dilemma. This finding is important because this is the first
case that demonstrated the foreign language effect in
Japanese participants, and thus provides another empirical
support for the foreign language effect.
However, this study also indicates that evidence for the
theoretical explanation of the foreign language effect was
not as clear as Costa et al. (2014) purported. Participants’
interpretations of the moral dilemmas themselves might
differ between the foreign and native language conditions.
The alignments of moral dilemmas in multidimensional
scaling were different between the two conditions.

Additionally, permissibility judgment of the baby dilemma
that is assumed to reflect engagement of the affective
system did not differ significantly between the two
conditions. These findings are inconsistent with the
explanation by Costa et al. (2014) that reduction of
emotionality elicited by foreign language promote utilitarian
judgments, and pose a question about an assumption that
meanings of the moral dilemmas are the same between the
native and foreign language conditions.
In sum, the take home message of this study is as
follows: the effect is sure, but the explanation is unsure.
The explanation by Costa et al. (2014) surely appears to fit
the foreign language effect within a scope the switch and
footbridge dilemmas. However, when the other types of
moral dilemmas are considered, the foreign language effect
takes on a new aspect: meanings of the dilemmas
themselves might change between the two conditions, and
the central tendency in permissibility judgment might work
in the foreign language condition. These possibilities are
important alternative explanations to the foreign language
effect. Thus, the future research should include various
types of moral dilemmas other than the switch and
footbridge dilemmas, and analyze natures of the dilemmas
in terms of the affective and analytic systems.

References
Carroll, J. B., Levinson, S. C., & Lee, P. (Eds.) (2012).
Language, thought, and reality: Selected writings of
Benjamin Lee Whorf (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Costa, A., Foucart, A., Arnon, I., Aparici, M., & Apesteguia,
J. (2014). ‘‘Piensa’’ twice: On the foreign language
effect in decision making. Cognition, 130, 236–254.
Costa, A., Foucart, A., Hayakawa, S., Aparici, M.,
Apesteguia, J., Heafner, J., & Keyser, B. (2014). Your
morals depend on language. PLOS ONE, 9, e94842.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J.
M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293,
2105–2108.
Kay, P., & Kempton, W. (1984). What is the Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis? American Anthropologist, 86, 65–79.
Keysar, B., Hayakawa, S. L., & An, S. G. (2012). The
foreign-language effect: thinking in a foreign tongue
reduces decision biases. Psychological Science, 23, 661–
668.
Nakamura, K. (2013). A closer look at moral dilemmas:
latent dimensions of morality and the difference between
the trolley and footbridge dilemmas. Thinking and
Reasoning, 19, 178–204.
Sapir, E. (1921). Language: An introduction to the study of
speech. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.
Takano, Y. (1989). Methodological problems in crosscultural studies of linguistic relativity. Cognition, 31,
141–162.
Kahneman, D., amd Tversky, A. (1984). Choice, values, and
frames. American Psychologist, 39, 341-350.

1702

