Effects of Complementary Control on the Coordination Dynamics of Joint-Action
Lillian Rigoli (lrigoli@ucmerced.edu)
Department of Cognitive & Information Sciences, University of California Merced, Merced, CA, USA

Veronica Romero (romerovc@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, University of Cincinnati, 4150 Edwards Cl., Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Kevin Shockley (kevin.shockley@uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, University of Cincinnati, 4150 Edwards Cl., Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Gregory J. Funke (gregory.funke.1@us.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory, 711th Human Performance Wing, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433, USA

Adam J. Strang (adam.strang.1@us.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory, 711th Human Performance Wing, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433, USA

Michael J. Richardson (michael.richardson@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, University of Cincinnati, 4150 Edwards Cl., Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA
Abstract
Previous research has revealed that the behavioral dynamics
of joint-action can naturally emerge from the physical and
informational constraints that define a shared task-goal. The
emergence of complementary actions or functional differences
in control also appear to be a natural part of such behavior, and
are often an inherent aspect of robust and highly flexible jointaction performance. The aim of the current study was to explore
these latter aspects of joint-action behavior. More specifically,
we examined the interpersonal coordination and control that
emerged between two individuals performing a virtual labyrinth
ball-control game. Key manipulations involved whether control
was symmetrical (i.e. both individuals had full control of the
board tilt), asymmetrical (i.e. one with control of the x-axis of
tilt and the other with control of the y-axis of tilt), or unbalanced
(i.e. one joystick had full control of the y-axis of tilt, but only ½
the gain control of the x-axis of tilt, and vice versa). Data on a
solo individual two-handed version of the task was also
collected for comparison purposes. Our results revealed that the
patterns of synergistic coordination that emerged were the same
for pairs and individuals, and that both pairs and individuals
maintain task success by mutually adapting the coordination and
control dynamics across the different task manipulations.
Key words: interpersonal coordination; joint-action; recurrence
analysis; motor-control.

Introduction
Social movement coordination is a fundamental part of
everyday interaction, from navigating a crowded sidewalk,
to playing a game of pat-a-cake, to clearing a dinner table
with friends and family. It should come as no surprise,
therefore, that a great deal of previous research has
demonstrated how individuals are able to expertly
coordinate their movements and actions with those of other
individuals (for reviews see Bekkering et al., 2009; Sebanz
& Knoblich, 2009; Marsh, Richardson & Schmidt, 2009;
Schmidt & Richardson, 2008; Shockley & Riley, 2015).

Previous research on joint-action and social movement
coordination has predominately focused on the incidental or
non-goal
directed
movement
coordination
that
spontaneously occurs between co-present or interacting
individuals (e.g., the spontaneous entrainment that occurs
between two people sitting side-by-side in rocking chairs or
the full body coordination that occurs during conversation;
e.g., Richardson, et al., 2007; Shockley, Santana & Fowler,
2003; Schmidt, Nie, Franco, & Richardson., 2014).
However, many everyday joint action tasks involve goal
directed activities that require that co-actors explicitly cocontrol external events or environmental objects (e.g.,
moving a table or passing a football). In many instances,
these tasks also involve complementary actions or
movement control and are characterized by a strong level of
mutual adaptation, anticipation and reciprocal compensation
(Knoblich & Jordan, 2003; Richardson, Harrison, Kallen,
Walton, Eiler, & Schmidt, in press; Vesper & Richardson,
2014). In these instances, the coordinated behavior of coactors can be considered synergistic (Turvey & Fonseca,
2009; Riley, Richardson, Shockley, & Ramenzoni, 2011).
The term synergy refers to a functional grouping of
structural elements that are temporarily constrained to act as
a single coordinated unit (Kelso, 2009; Turvey & Fonseca,
2009). Historically, the term synergy has been used to refer
to flexible and adaptive intrapersonal systems of
coordination and control (i.e., the interlimb coordination
that occurs between an individual’s two hands when
carrying an object). However, there is now a growing body
of evidence indicating that the behavioral coordination that
occurs during many joint-action tasks meets the technical
definition of a synergy (Riley, et al., 2011; Romero, Kallen,
Riley, & Richardson, in press), such that the coordinated
movements of co-acting individuals should be understood to
be a single unified behavioral system.

1997

The goal of the current study was to further explore the
synergistic nature of joint-action behavior and, in particular,
the degree to which the coordinated control of co-acting
individuals naturally and spontaneously adapts to changing
task constraints. To do this, individual participants and pairs
of cooperating participants were required to play a virtual
labyrinth ball-control game, in which the rotation of the
virtual table was controlled using two joysticks. The aim of
the game was to use the two joysticks to move a virtual
marble from a start location to a target location while
avoiding a set of obstacles. Unbeknownst to the participants,
the degree to which the two joysticks controlled the x- (leftright) and/or y- (forward-back) axes of table rotation was
manipulated. Of particular interest was the degree to which
individuals and pairs spontaneously and mutually adapted to
these changes in table control and, moreover, whether the
same synergistic reorganization was observed for
individuals and pairs.

Method
Participants
Twenty-seven students at the University of Cincinnati
participated in the experiment. All participants were over 18
years of age. Nine participants were randomly assigned to
the individual condition and eighteen participants were
randomly assigned to the joint (pair/two person) condition.

Task and Materials
Participants in both the individual and joint action
conditions were instructed to tilt a virtual game board using
two joysticks in order to move a virtual marble from a start
location to a green target location. The goal of the game was
to move the marble from the start location to the target
location as quickly and efficiently as possible without
hitting (i) the barrier positioned around the edge of the game
board or (ii) any of the 10 obstacles (small vertically
oriented cylindrical pegs) positioned at various locations
around the game board. Once the target was successfully
reached, a new target would appear at a new location on the
virtual board (see Figure 1. left), with each game (trial)
involving 20 target locations. During the course of a single
game the location of the 10 obstacle pegs (i.e., the obstacle
map) remained fixed, however, these locations changed
across games (see below for more details).

single participant individually controlling the game board with
both joysticks. (right) An example of two participants controlling
the game board together, with each member of the pair using only
one joystick.

Individuals and pairs completed the task under three
different control conditions: symmetrical control,
asymmetrical control, and unbalanced control. In the
symmetrical condition, both joysticks had control of both
the x and y rotation axes of the virtual game board with
equal gain. In the asymmetrical condition, one joystick
controlled the game board’s y-axis of table rotation (with no
influence/control over the game board’s x-axis), while the
second joystick controlled the game board’s x-axis of table
rotation (but had no control over the game board’s y-axis).
In the unbalanced condition, one joystick had full control of
the y-axis of table rotation, but only 50%-gain control of the
x-axis of table rotation, while the second joystick had full
control of the x-axis of table rotation, but only 50%-gain
control of the y-axis of table rotation. Note that 50%-gain
control refers to the fact that the mapping between the
movements of board rotation was ½ of that of the joystick
that had full (i.e., 100%-gain) control. Joystick movement
was recorded at 30Hz.
In the individual condition, participants controlled the two
joysticks using their right and left hands respectively (see
Figure 1. center). In the joint action condition each member
of a pair controlled only one joystick (see Figure 1. right).
To be consistent with the individual control condition one
participant in a pair controlled the ‘right’ joystick with their
right hand, while the other participant controlled the ‘left’
joystick with their left hand. For the remainder of this paper
we refer to the two joysticks as the right-hand (RH) and lefthand (LH) joysticks respectively. Each member of a joint
action pair was randomly assigned to the LH and RH
joystick, with joystick assignment kept constant across all
trials and sessions.

Procedure
Both individuals and pairs performed three separate game
sessions, one session for each control condition (order of
control condition was counterbalanced across individuals
and pairs. In each session, participants performed four
practice games before performing two test games (each
game consisting of 20 target locations). Different obstacle
maps were employed for each practice game. For the test
games, however, the same obstacle maps were used across
participants and sessions for comparison purposes.

Results & Discussion

Figure 1. (left) An example of the task stimulus. The marble is in
the top left corner and the current target is in the middle-right
region of the display. The obstacle pegs are represented by the
brown dots position throughout the map. (middle) An example of a

Only data from the two test games (trials) was analyzed to
determine the effects of the different control conditions and
the comparative task performance of individuals and pairs.
For each of the analyses presented below, data was averaged
across the two test games.
Inter-Target Movement Time. The mean and SD of the
inter-target movement time was relatively consistent across
all conditions for both individuals and pairs (Fig. 2). This

1998

was confirmed using 2 (group: individual, joint) × 3
(condition: symmetric, asymmetric, unbalanced) mixed
design analyses of variance (ANOVA), which only revealed
a significant and marginally significant main effect of
condition for the mean, F(2, 30) = 6.08, p < .01, 𝜂!! = .29,
and SD, F(2, 30) = 3.09, p < .06, 𝜂!! = .17, of inter-target
movement time, respectively (all other Fs < 1.0). With
regard to the significant main effect of condition for mean
inter-target movement time, a post hoc t-test revealed that
this was due to the modest difference between the
asymmetric and unbalanced conditions (p < .025). No other
differences were found to be significant (all p > .10). In
these and all subsequently reported post hoc analyses, a
Bonferroni correction was applied to control Type-I error
rates.

mixed design ANOVA did not result in a significant effect
of group, F(1, 15) = 3.06, p = .10, 𝜂!! = .17.
Joystick Movement. To determine whether the symmetry
manipulations of joystick axis control influenced the
manner by which participants moved and controlled the
joystick, the difference between x and y mean change in
position over the course of a trial was calculated (calculated
as the xmean - ymean of the joystick positional time-series). In
short, this measure indexes the difference in amount of
movement between the x and y dimensions of a joystick.
Thus, positive values correspond to a greater magnitude of
positional movement in the x dimension of joystick control;
zero corresponds to equal amounts of positional movement
in the x and y dimension of joystick control; and negative
values corresponded to greater positional movement in the y
dimension of joystick control.

Figure 3. Mean number of pegs and walls hit for individual and
joint (pair) joystick control as a function of condition.

Figure 2. Mean (upper graph) and SD (lower graph) of inter-target
movement time (in seconds) for individual and joint (pair) joystick
control as a function of condition.

Peg and Wall Collisions. Individuals collided with more
pegs and the game board boundary (wall) than pairs,
suggesting that individual action was slightly worse overall
compared to pairs (Fig. 3). However, a 2 (group: individual,
joint) × 3 (condition: symmetric, asymmetric, unbalanced)

A 2 (group: individual, joint) × 2 (Joystick: LH, RH) × 3
(condition: symmetric, asymmetric, unbalanced) mixed
ANOVA performed on this measure resulted in a significant
main effect of joystick, F(1, 15) = 26.55, p < .01, 𝜂!! = .64,
and a significant two way interaction between joystick and
condition, F(2, 30) = 14.53, p < .01, 𝜂!! = .49. There were no
other significant effects, including no effects for group,
indicating that the differences in movement change between
the x and y dimensions of joystick control were comparable
for individuals and pairs. As can be seen from an inspection
of Figure 4, results revealed that the amount of movement
change exhibited in the x and y joystick axes were consistent
with the control manipulations. This was most notable in the
asymmetric condition, in which participants tended to
exhibit more joystick movement with regard to the
dimension that actually influenced the rotation of the table.
Not surprisingly, this difference was present but much less
pronounced in the unbalanced condition and non-existent in
the symmetric condition.
To further verify this result, a simple effects analysis of
condition was performed for both RH and LH joysticks. For
the RH joystick, although this analysis revealed a significant

1999

effect of condition, F(2, 32) = 3.46, p < .05, 𝜂!! = .18, with
more y-axis control in the asymmetric and unbalanced
condition compared to the symmetric condition (as
expected), post hoc t-tests revealed that these differences
were not statistically significant (all p > .12). For the LH
joystick, the simple effects analysis also resulted in a
significant effect of condition, F(2, 32) = 15.10, p < .01, 𝜂!!
= .49. Furthermore, a post hoc t-test revealed that the x-y
movement change in the asymmetric condition was
significantly different from that observed in both the
symmetric and unbalanced conditions (both p < .01). There
was no difference between the symmetric and unbalanced
conditions (p > .5). Finally, for the LH joystick, the x-y
movement change for the symmetric, asymmetric and
unbalanced conditions were all found to be significantly
different from zero (all t(16) > 3.64, p < .01). In contrast, for
the RH joystick, the x-y movement change for all three
conditions were not significantly different from zero (all
t(16) < 3.32, p > .11).

with regard to the current task, the degree of movement
similarity. Maxline corresponds to the longest line or
sequence of recurrent states and in this context, can be
thought to index the overall strength of the coordination that
occurs between two behavioral time-series (see Richardson,
et al., 2007, 2008 for more details).
Here, we compared the x-axis movements of the RH
joystick to the x-axis movements of the LH joystick and yaxis movements of the RH joystick to the y-axis movements
of the LH joystick. The CRQA parameters employed were
as follows: time-lag = 20 samples; embedding dimension =
6; radius = 10 percent of the maximum distance between
points (see e.g., Marwan 2008; Webber & Zbilut 2004; for
more details about these parameters and how they are
chosen). All time-series data was z-score normalized prior to
performing CRQA.

Figure 4. Mean x-y change or amount of positional movement
control as a function of joystick and condition.

Cross-Recurrence Quantification Analysis (CRQA). The
coordination that occurred between the LH and RH joystick
movements was indexed using cross-recurrence analysis.
CRQA is a nonlinear time-series analysis that determines
the degree of recurrent structure between two time-series in
reconstructed phase space. The advantage of CRQA over
linear forms of bivariate time-series analysis (e.g., cross
correlation, relative phase analysis) is the fact that it does
not require any a priori assumptions about data structure or
stationarity. Accordingly, it has previously been employed
to index the occurrence and stability of interpersonal
movement coordination across a number of joint-action
settings (e.g., Shockley et al., 2003; Richardson & Dale,
2005; Richardson, et al., 2005).
CRQA provides a set of dependent metric, each
characterizing a different aspect of the dynamics that
underlie the recurrent structure of two time-series. Of most
relevance to the current study are the CRQA metrics %REC
and MaxLine. In short, %REC captures the amount of
recurrent activity that occurs between the two time-series or,

Figure 5. Mean %REC (upper graph) and mean MaxLine (lower
graph) for individual and joint (pair) joystick movement averaged
over the X and Y direction as a function of condition

A preliminary analysis of the resulting %REC and
Maxline values revealed a similar pattern of results for the
x-axis and y-axis comparisons. Accordingly, the %REC and
MaxLine data were averaged across the two movement
planes (i.e., x-to-x and y-to-y) prior to statistical analysis.
Both %REC and MaxLine were then analyzed using a 2
(control: individual, joint) × 3 (condition: symmetric,
asymmetric, unbalanced) mixed design ANOVA.
For %REC, this analysis revealed a significant main
effect of condition, F(2, 30) = 8.492, p < .01, 𝜂!! = .36, with
post hoc t-tests finding significantly less recurrence in the

2000

asymmetric condition (M = 2.22, SD = 1.42) compared to
both the symmetric (M = 4.70, SD = 3.31, p < .01) and the
unbalanced conditions (M = 3.31, SD = 1.58; p < .01; see
Figure 5). There were no other significant effects (all p >
.14).
For MaxLine, the ANOVA also revealed a main effect for
condition, F(2, 30) = 5.83, p = .01, 𝜂!! = .28. Post hoc t-tests
revealed that this was due to mean MaxLine being
significantly longer in the symmetric condition (M = 254.63,
SD = 102.97) compared to the asymmetric condition (M =
178.98, SD = 81.33, p < .01; see Figure 5). The unbalanced
condition (M = 222.82, SD = 95.55) was only marginally
different from the symmetric and asymmetric conditions
(both p < .1).

Conclusion
The current study examined the effects of control
symmetry on the movement coordination and performance
dynamics exhibited by individuals and pairs completing a
virtual labyrinth type ball moving game, with the task goal
of moving a virtual marble from a start location to a target
location while avoiding obstacles. For both individuals and
pairs, the rotation of the virtual table board was controlled
using two joysticks, so that three different control
manipulations were included: a symmetrical control
condition, where both joysticks had control of both the x
and y rotation axes of the virtual game board with equal
gain; an asymmetric control condition, where one joystick
controlled the game board’s y-axis of table rotation, while
the second joystick controlled the game board’s x-axis of
table rotation; and an unbalanced control condition, where
one joystick had full control of the y-axis of table rotation,
but only 50%-gain control of the x-axis of table rotation,
while the second joystick had full control of the x-axis of
table rotation, but only 50%-gain control of the y-axis of
table rotation.
Overall, the results revealed that the control dynamics of
individuals and pairs was more or less equivalent and that
pairs performed as well, if not slightly better, than
individuals with regard to task errors (i.e., obstacle
collisions). In other words, joint control did not seem to
reduce task performance compared to individual
performance, nor did it result in different patterns of interjoystick control. This suggests that individual and joint task
success was defined by the same behavioral dynamics and
that both individuals and pairs were able to converge upon
these dynamics during practice (also see Knoblich & Jordan,
2003; Schmidt & Richardson, 2008). Although the firm
constraints inherent to the task surely narrowed the possible
behavioral space that individuals and pairs could adopt to
achieve task success, this does not change the fact that the
apparent similitude of individual and joint-action
performance provides evidence that the interpersonal
coordination exhibited by pairs was as synergistic and
mutually responsive as the interlimb coordination exhibited
by individuals.

The synergistic and mutually adaptive organization of the
behavioral control exhibited by pairs and individuals was
apparent from the differences in the inter-joystick
movement dynamics that occurred for the different control
conditions. The most notable differences arose when
comparing the asymmetric condition to the symmetric and
unbalanced conditions. In general, participants tended to
move their joysticks more in the directional axis/axes that
the corresponding hand had control over, even though they
were not informed of the difference in control. This was
most pronounced in the asymmetric condition in which each
joystick had complete control of only one of the two
rotation axes. As expected, for this condition both
individuals and pairs spontaneously organized the
directional magnitude of joystick control in response to the
differential control. A similar, yet less pronounced
differential organization was observed for unbalanced
condition.
It is worth noting that a funnel debriefing was conducted
at the end of the experiment and only 1 pair suspected that
the symmetry of joystick control was being manipulated
across sessions. In contrast, most individuals indicated that
they either suspected or came to realize that the symmetry
of joystick control was being manipulated over the course of
the experiment. This implies that knowledge of differential
control is not necessarily required for individuals to
converge upon complementary task solutions during jointaction behavior. Indeed, the fact that in the current task pairs
and individuals performed in a similar manner and were
similarly affected by the control manipulations, indicates
that being aware (or not aware) of the task constraints
played little to no role in shaping the coordination and
control strategies adopted. Rather, individual and team
performance appeared to be determined by the physical and
informational properties of the task and task context. In
other words, task success for both individuals and pairs was
constrained by the same behavioral dynamics (Warren,
2006), with these dynamics defining the set of task control
laws that were independent of whether the effectors
employed were from a single nervous systems or two
visually coupled nervous systems.
Finally, CRQA was employed to examine the stability of
the inter-hand coordination exhibited by individuals and
pairs across the different control conditions, with the
asymmetric condition resulting in weaker coordination (i.e.,
lower Maxline) and less recurrent movement dynamics
(%REC) compared to the symmetric and unbalanced
conditions. This is consistent with the movement control
exerted on the LH and RH joysticks being more independent
(i.e. less coupled), and is yet further evidence that
individuals and pairs were sensitive (unintentionally in the
case of pairs) to the asymmetry of control and
spontaneously adapted their behavioral coordination
accordingly. Although not significant, the overall lower
%REC and Maxline scores for pairs compared to
individuals is also likely to be a result of the weaker interhand coupling for pairs compared to individuals. An

2001

interesting possibility for future research is whether this
reduced inter-hand coupling is the reason why pairs
exhibited fewer errors and obstacle collisions compared to
individuals (although not significantly fewer errors). Indeed,
it is possible that for some tasks a weaker and less tightly
coupled control system may actually result in more robust
and adaptive control dynamics than a stronger and more
tightly coupled control system, and hence lead to greater
task success (e.g., Strang, Funke, Dukes, & Middendorf,
2014). If true, joint-action control may in some instances be
preferable over individual control.
Acknowledgment: This research was supported by the
National Institutes of Health (R01GM105045) and the
National Science Foundation (REU#126314).

References
Bekkering, H., de Bruijn, E. R. A., Cuijpers, R. H.,
Newmand-Norlund, R., van Schie, H. T., & Meulenbroek,
R. (2009). Joint action: Neurocognitive mechanisms
supporting human interaction. Topics in Cognitive
Science 1, 340-352.
Kelso, J. A. S. (2009). Synergies: Atoms of brain and
behavior. In D. Sternad (Ed.), Progress in Motor Control
(pp. 83-91). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Knoblich, G. & Jordan, S. (2003). Action coordination in
groups and individuals: Learning anticipatory control.
Journal of experimental psychology. Learning, memory,
and cognition , 29 (5), p.1006. DOI: 10.1037/02787393.29.5.1006
Marsh, K. L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt, R. C. (2009).
Social connection through joint action and interpersonal
coordination. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 320-339.
Richardson, D. C & Dale, R. (2005). Looking To
Understand: The Coupling Between Speakers’ and
Listeners’ Eye Movements and its Relationship to
Discourse Comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29, 1045–
1060.
Richardson, M. J., Harrison, S. J., Kallen, R. W., Walton,
A., Eiler, B., & Schmidt, R. C. (in press). Self-Organized
Complementary Coordination: Dynamics of an
Interpersonal Collision-Avoidance Task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R. W.,
Goodman, J. R., & Schmidt, R. C. (2007). Rocking
together: Dynamics of intentional and unintentional
interpersonal
coordination. Human
movement
science, 26(6), 867-891.
Riley, M. A., Richardson, M. J., Shockley, K., &
Ramenzoni, V. C. (2011). Interpersonal synergies.
Frontiers
in
Psychology,
2,
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00038.
Romero, V., Kallen, R., Riley, M. A., & Richardson, M. J.
(under review). Is Joint Action Synergistic? Studying the
Stabilization of Interpersonal Hand Coordination. Journal

of Experimental Psychology Human Perception and
Performance.
Schmidt, R. C., Nie, L., Franco, A., & Richardson, M. J.,
(2014). Bodily synchronization underlying joke telling.
Frontiers
in
Human
Neuroscience,
doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00633.
Schmidt, R. C., & Richardson, M. J. (2008). Dynamics of
interpersonal coordination. In A. Fuchs & V. K. Jirsa
(Eds.), Coordination: Neural, behavioral and social
dynamics (pp. 281-307). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2009). Prediction in Joint
Action: What, when, and where. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1, 353-367.
Shockley, K., Santana, M. V., & Fowler, C. A. (2003).
Mutual interpersonal postural constraints are involved in
cooperative conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29(2),
326.
Shockley, K., & Riley, M. A. (2015). Interpersonal
couplings in human interactions. In C. L. Webber, Jr., &
N. Marwan (Eds.). Recurrence Quantification Analysis:
Theory and Best Practices. (pp. 399-421). Springer.
Strang, A.J., Funke, G.J., Dukes, A.W., & Middendorf,
M.S. (2014). Physio-behavioral coupling in a cooperative
team task: Contributors and relations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 40, 145-158. doi: 10.1037/a0033125
Turvey, M. T., & Fonseca, S. (2009). Nature of motor
control: Perspectives and Issues. In D. Sternad (Ed.)
Progress in Motor Control: A multidisciplinary
perspective (pp. 93-122). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Vesper, C., & Richardson, M. J. (2014). Strategic
communication and behavioral coupling in asymmetric
joint action. Experimental Brain Research, 232, 29452956.
Warren, W. H. (2006). The dynamics of perception and
action. Psychological Review, 113, 358-389.

2002

