Elemental Causal Learning from Transitions
Kevin W. Soo (kevin.soo@pitt.edu)
Benjamin M. Rottman (rottman@pitt.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh
3939 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
Abstract

but by some coincidence some unknown factors changed the
patient’s energy at the same times (and in the same
direction) that the patient happened to take the drug.
Contrast Figure 1a with Figure 1b. In Figure 1b, the three
days that the patient took the medicine are all grouped
together. Now it is much less convincing that the medicine
works. Because they are grouped together it is more likely
that the pattern is due to a coincidence; perhaps the patient
had more energy on Saturday and Sunday because it is the
weekend, or because she just got over a cold, or her kids are
behaving, etc. There are practically unlimited numbers of
possible alternative causes, and when the trials are grouped
together as in Figure 1b it is more likely that the pattern is
merely a coincidence. This example illustrates how the
transitions, i.e. the change in the cause and effect from one
observation to the next convey meaningful information for
learning causal strength (e.g., Rottman & Keil, 2012; Soo &
Rottman, 2014).

Much research on elemental causal learning has focused on
how causal strength is learned from the states of variables. In
longitudinal contexts, the way a cause and effect change over
time can be informative of the underlying causal relationship.
We propose a framework for inferring the causal strength
from different observed transitions, and compare the
predictions to existing models of causal induction. Subjects
observe a cause and effect over time, updating their
judgments of causal strength after observing different
transitions. The results show that some transitions have an
effect on causal strength judgments over and above states.
Keywords: causal learning; causal reasoning; time

Introduction
Elemental causal learning is the process of learning whether
a single potential cause has an influence on an effect. It is an
ubiquitous mental process that helps us navigate and
manipulate the world (e.g., Does premium gas get my car
better mileage? Does doing a colleague a favor make them
more friendly? Does watering my plant twice a week make
it healthier than watering it once a week?) Consider the
following extended example: a patient suffering from
chronic fatigue tries a new drug that claims to boost energy
levels. Over the next week, she takes the drug on three days
(drug = 1, no drug = 0), keeping track of whether she has
high (1) or low (0) energy. Figure 1 shows two possible
patterns of experience with the drug, which we contrast.
Day

Tue

Wed

Thu

Fri

Sat

Sun

Mon

(a) Drug
Energy

0
1

0
0

1
1

0
0

1
1

0
0

1
0

(b) Drug
Energy

0
1

0
0

0
0

0
0

1
1

1
1

1
0

Learning from States vs. Transitions
Instead of reasoning about transitions, an alternative
strategy to learn whether the medicine works is to keep
track of the distribution of states experienced. Table 1
summarizes the states in the data from Figure 1a or Figure
1b; both contain the same 7 states just in a different order.
By convention, the states are labeled [A], [B], [C] and [D].
Table 1: Frequencies of states in data from Figure 1. Labels
for states are shown beside counts in [square brackets].

Drug = 1
Drug = 0

Energy = 1
2 [A]
1 [C]

Energy = 0
1 [B]
3 [D]

Note. The drug is the cause and energy is the effect.

Figure 1: Example Longitudinal Data Sets
From the experience in Figure 1a, how might the patient
infer the drug’s causal strength? Consider Wed-Sun.
Between each of these days, stopping and starting the drug
is accompanied by corresponding changes in energy,
suggesting a strong positive causal relationship between the
drug and energy. There are other days (Tuesday and
Monday) that do not fit with this pattern, so the drug does
not always work and it is not always needed. However,
given the pattern from Wed-Sun, it is hard to explain the
consistent pattern without inferring that the drug worked. It
seems less likely that the drug has no influence on energy,

From Table 1, there are more [A]/[D] states relative to
[B]/[C] states, suggesting a positive contingency between
the cause and effect (a positive causal relationship). Many
models of elemental causal induction compute causal
strength from the state frequencies (Table 1). Hattori &
Oaksford (2007) documented 41 models of elementary
causal induction that use only the state frequencies. These
models are intended for “cross-sectional” situations where
each observation is independent of the prior one – e.g.
observing 7 patients, where three have taken the medicine
and four have not. In cross-sectional situations the
transitions do not convey meaningful information.
In the current study we are interested in causal learning in
longitudinal situations (e.g., tracking one person over time).
Because most of the focus within the causal learning

2254

literature has been on cross-sectional rather than
longitudinal situations, there is not an existing theory of
how people may interpret transitions. In the section below
we propose one framework for how learners might interpret
transitions and how different types of transitions could
influence beliefs about causal strength. We then compare
the predictions from this framework to existing models of
causal induction. Finally, we present behavioral data from
an experiment showing people are sensitive to transitions
over and above states, in patterns generally consistent with
the transition-based learning framework.

Transition-based learning
With a binary cause and effect there are four possible states
at any given time point. Thus, there are 4 × 4 = 16 possible
transitions that can occur between two adjacent time points
in a time series. Table 2 categorizes all transitions into
different types depending on how consistent they are with a
positive causal relationship, a negative one, or no
relationship. A transition is consistent with a causal
relationship if the transition is likely to be generated by that
relationship. In general, with positive causal relationships,
changes in the cause (X) are accompanied by changes in the
effect (Y) in the same direction (e.g. α transitions). With
negative causal relationships, changes in X lead to changes
in Y in the opposite direction (e.g. β transitions). If there is
no relationship, changes in X are not associated with
changes in Y. From this logic, one can reason backwards to
consider how observing a particular transition should
influence one’s belief concerning the causal relation.
Table 2: Predictions of Transition-Based Learning.
Transitions
States Type X0 Y0 X1
A to D α 1 1 0
D to A α 0 0 1
B to D δ 1 0 0
C to A δ 0 1 1
B to C β 1 0 0
C to B β 0 1 1
D to B γ 0 0 1
A to C γ 1 1 0
A to B ε 1 1 1
B to A ε 1 0 1
C to D ε 0 1 0
D to C ε 0 0 0
A to A ζ 1 1 1
B to B ζ 1 0 1
C to C ζ 0 1 0
D to D ζ 0 0 0

Consistent with
___ relation? ∆
Y1 P+ 0 N✗
✗ ++
0 ✓
✗
✗ ++
1 ✓
0 ✓ ✓ ✗ +
1 ✓ ✓ ✗ +
✗
✓ -1 ✗
✗
✓ -0 ✗
✓
✓
0 ✗
✓
✓
1 ✗
0 ✓ ✓ ✓ 0
1 ✓ ✓ ✓ 0
0 ✓ ✓ ✓ 0
1 ✓ ✓ ✓ 0
1 ✓ ✓ ✓ 0
0 ✓ ✓ ✓ 0
1 ✓ ✓ ✓ 0
0 ✓ ✓ ✓ 0

Consider α transitions – increases in X accompanied by
increases in Y ([D to A] transitions), or decreases in X
accompanied by decreases in Y ([A to D] transitions).
These are transitions that would be generated by a positive
causal relationship. Such transitions are unlikely if there
were no causal relationship or a negative one – one would
need to posit a coincidental hidden cause that influenced Y
at the same time that X changed (Figure 1a). Since such
transitions are most consistent with a positive relation (not
neutral or negative), this framework predicts large positive
increases in causal strength judgments after α transitions.
Next, consider δ transitions such as [C to A] – X increases
(0 to 1) but Y stays at 1. This transition is consistent with a
positive causal relationship with a ceiling effect for Y; it
cannot increase any further. A [B to D] transition could be
interpreted in the same way but with a floor effect.
However, these transitions are also consistent with there
being no causal relationship, because a change in X is not
accompanied by a change in Y. Because α transitions are
only consistent with a positive causal relationship while δ
transitions are also consistent with no relation, observing α
should lead to a larger increase in causal strength judgments
than observing δ (though both should lead to an increase).
ε transitions are when only the effect (Y) changes, while
X stays the same. When Y changes, there is no reason to
expect X to change regardless of the causal relation. Our
framework does not predict change to the causal strength
judgment for ε transitions. In ζ transitions, neither X nor Y
change. Repeated observations of the same state could be
due to the continued causal influence of X, or both X and Y
coincidentally remaining in the same state (Figure 1). We
predict no change in judgments for ζ transitions.
This logic can be extended to transitions consistent with
negative causal relationships. β transitions (only consistent
with a negative relation) should lead to larger decreases
than γ transitions (consistent with a negative relation with a
floor/ceiling effect, and also with no relation). Observing β
should also lead to a larger decrease than observing ε or ζ
transitions.
In sum, the most crucial prediction made by this theory is
that α and β transitions will lead to more change (in the
positive and negative direction respectively) than the other
types of transitions.

Models of causal induction

Note. Each transition is shown to be consistent (✓) or inconsistent (✗) with
a positive (P+), negative (N-) or no (0) causal relation. ∆ is the predicted
change in causal strength judgment due to the transition. ++ and -- are large
changes to causal strength in the positive vs. negative directions, whereas +
and – are smaller changes. 0 is no change to causal strength.

We compare the predictions of our framework in Table 2
(the rightmost column) with several existing models of
causal strength learning: We briefly present their predictions
for longitudinal causal learning in Table 3, with predictions
for our transition-based learning (TBL) framework. Many of
the models are entirely or largely influenced by the states, so
Table 3 groups together the four transitions that end in the
same state (gray vs. white). Within each of the four groups
in Table 3, the first row are α or β transitions (both variables
change), the second are δ or γ (ceiling and floor effects), the
third are ε transitions (effect changes by itself), and the
fourth are ζ transitions (neither variable changes).

2255

Table 3: Model predictions for 16 transitions.
Transition ∆P / PowerPC RW
D to A
++
++
C to A
++
++
B to A
++
++
A to A
++
++
A to D
++
0
B to D
++
0
C to D
++
0
D to D
++
0
C to B
--D to B
--A to B
--B to B
--B to C
-0
A to C
-0
D to C
-0
C to C
-0

TD
+
+
++
++
*
*
0
0
--*
*
0
0

α
δ
ε
ζ
α
δ
ε
ζ
β
γ
ε
ζ
β
γ
ε
ζ

TBL
++
+
0
0
++
+
0
0
-0
0
-0
0

Note. ++ and -- denote a predicted increase or decrease that is larger
relative to + and – within the same model. 0 denotes no predicted change.
*These cases depend upon too many factors so no generalized predictions
can be made.

∆P (Jenkins & Ward, 1965) and Power-PC (Cheng,
1997) These are two examples of models that are calculated
simply from the contingency table (e.g., Table 1). They both
produce a causal strength rating from -1 to 1, and can be
calculated with the following equations: ∆P = a/(a+b) –
c/(c+d), and powPC (for a positive causal strength) =
∆P/[d/(c+d)]. If these models are used to calculate causal
strength repeatedly after each new observation, then after an
A or D observation the causal strength judgment will go up,
and after a B or C observation the judgment will go down.
These models are not sensitive to transitions. For
example, consider four sequences of data all ending in A:
[A,B,C,D,A], [D,A,B,C,A], [C,D,A,B,A], and [B,C,D,A,A].
In all four of these sequences the causal strength ratings
from ∆P and Power PC would be exactly zero after the 4th
trial. Then, after the 5th trial, the causal strength rating
would increase. However, it would increase exactly the
same amount under all four sequences. The causal strength
would be 1/6 for ∆P and 1/3 for Power PC.
RW (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; Wagner & Rescorla,
1972) The Rescorla-Wagner model is a model of associative
learning that has also been proposed of human causal
learning (Shanks & Dickinson, 1987). RW is a trial-by-trial
model of learning that updates weights representing the
strength of the association between a cue (cause) and
outcome (effect) after each observation. RW was created to
model change in associative strength within a single animal
over time, so unlike the models mentioned above it is meant
to handle time series data.
RW was created to model many temporal phenomena in
how associative strengths get updated over time such as
acquisition curves and blocking, so unlike the models above
it is exquisitely sensitive to the order of the data. Still, RW

works by updating the associative strength after each
sequential state observation, [A], [B], [C], or [D]. At any
point in time, the change in the associative strength is
calculated based on the difference in the error prediction of
the outcome (effect) from summing the associative strengths
of the present cues (causes). Thus, it does not matter what
the immediately previous trial was, the only thing that
matters is the current associative strength rating.
One reason why the current associative strength rating
matters is that if the current associative strength is zero and
an [A] trial occurs, there will be a relatively large increase
to the associative strength, but if the current associative
strength is .75 and an [A] trial occurs there will be a smaller
increase in the associative weight (because the error is
smaller). For this reason, we use the prior causal strength
rating as an interaction term in all analyses.
Provided that the associative strength is not already at
asymptote (+1 or -1), the strength will always increase on an
[A] trial and decrease on a [B] trial. Changes to the strength
only occur when the cue is present, so no changes occur
after [C] and [D] trials; though Van Hamme & Wasserman
(1994) have proposed that the strengths be updated even
when the cue is absent.
In sum, even though RW is sensitive to many aspects of
the order of the observations, the specific prior observation
does not have any impact above and beyond the current
associative weight. This means that there should be the
same amount of change after an [A] trial regardless of the
prior state, accounting for the current associative weight.
TD Temporal difference (TD) learning is a form of
reinforcement learning. Here we discuss a particular
instantiation of TD learning that models classical
conditioning (Sutton & Barto, 1987). Even though TD is
heavily based on RW and it has been widely applied in other
areas of psychology (cf. Seymour et al., 2004), as far as we
know TD has never been proposed or analyzed as a model
of human causal learning. Here we discuss some of the most
important differences between RW and TD.
First, whereas RW seeks weights that minimize the
prediction of the unconditioned stimulus (effect) at a given
instant, TD predicts a sum of future values of the effect
signal discounted such that the near future is weighted more
than the distant future. Second, learning (or changes to the
associative strength) occurs repeatedly moment-to-moment
within a trial as opposed to just once at the end of the trial.
Third, whereas RW only updates weights for the cause
when the cause is present, TD updates weights for the cause
in proportion to the strength of an “eligibility” trace (similar
to a memory/salience trace) of the cause. If the cause has
been present for a while, learning is fast. But if it was
recently absent, learning is slow until it is more eligible.
Even after the cause disappears some learning can occur to
the extent that the trace persists. Fourth, the weights for the
cues are not bounded; we just focus on whether the weights
change in the positive or negative direction.
The dynamics of all of these features plus others means
that (unlike the other models discussed so far) TD actually

2256

makes predictions about transitions between specific states
(Table 3). First, TD predicts a greater increase for [A to A]
and [B to A] than [C to A] or [D to A] transitions. In the
latter two transitions the trace of the cause is initially zero,
and it takes time to become activated, slowing down
learning. In the former two transitions the cause is already
present from the previous trial so the eligibility trace is
initially higher, speeding up learning. The difference
between [B to B] and [A to B] vs. [C to B] and [D to B] is
also due to the eligibility trace, just in the negative direction.
In the transitions [C to C], [C to D], [D to C], and [D to
D], the cause is never present so its eligibility is always zero
and its weight is not updated. This is similar to how RW
does not update strength when the cue is absent.
The transitions [A to B], [D to B], [B to C], and [A to C]
are all extremely dynamic and depend on the prior weight
(above vs. below zero) and the prior weight of the
unobserved cue (above vs. below zero). Because of the
extreme level of the dynamics we cannot make a
generalized characterization of how the weights get updated
for these transitions.
Comparisons Between Models Predictions for the
transition-based learning (TBL) framework are included in
the right column in Table 3 (compare to Table 2). There are
several comparisons that shed light on the similarities and
differences between the models.
First, there is some consistency in the models.
Transitions ending in A and D are viewed as positive (or
neutral) evidence for all models, whereas those ending in B
and C are negative (or neutral) evidence for all models.
Second, ∆P, Power PC and RW make the same predictions
for all transitions ending in the same state. In contrast, TD
and TBL make different predictions for transitions that end
in the same state. Third, even though both TD and TBL are
sensitive to transitions, the predictions are nearly opposites.
Consider the transitions ending in A. TD predicts larger
increases for [B to A] and [A to A] than [D to A] and [C to
A]. TBL makes the exact opposite predictions. Most
importantly, TBL predicts the largest increase for [D to A].
This same basic pattern also plays out in the transitions
ending in B. Here we are ignoring the transitions ending in
C and D because TD does not make general predictions. The
goal of our experiment was to test which of these models
predicts the trial-by-trial changes in causal strength
judgments the best.

Experiment
Subjects observed sets of longitudinal data and made causal
strength judgments after each trial. We were focused on
whether the changes in causal strength judgments from trial
to trial were influenced by the immediately-prior trial.

Methods
Subjects 100 subjects were recruited through Amazon
Mechanical Turk (MTurk) and paid $1.75 for completing
the experiment. The experiment was conducted online and
took roughly 15-20 minutes to complete. Because some

subjects began the study but stopped midway, we actually
collected data from 177 subjects though some of their data
was partial (i.e. less than the full number of scenarios).
Design and stimuli Subjects were presented with sets of
data consisting of a binary cause and effect. Each subject
viewed 15 sets of data, and each set (one scenario) consisted
of 8 trials. For each participant five data sets had ∆P = 0 (2
observations of each state), another five had ∆P = -0.5 (1
observation each of [A] and [D], 3 observations each of [B]
and [C]), and another five had ∆P = 0.5 (3 observations each
of [A] and [D], 1 observation each of [B] and [C]). The
trials within a data set were randomly ordered. The reason
for having data sets with positive, negative, and neutral
contingencies was to have a sampling of all the transitions.
For example, β transitions are very rare in the ∆P = 0.5 data
sets. Each data set had 8 states, and thus 7 transitions.
Procedure Subjects were told to imagine they were
researchers studying the effects of drugs on chemicals in the
blood of monkeys. Each scenario involved testing one drug
on one chemical in one monkey, with a new drug, chemical,
and monkey for each of the 15 scenarios.
Each trial within a scenario involved the drug either being
administered or not (using an intravenous drip), and then
participants were told that one hour later a blood test is
conducted to reveal whether the chemical is high or low.
After seeing the blood test participants estimated the causal
strength of the drug on the target chemical using a slider
with the following anchors: -99 = ‘When the drug is on, the
chemical is usually low. When the drug is off, the chemical
is usually high’, 0 = ‘There is no relationship between
whether the drug is on or off and the level of the chemical’,
and 99 = ‘When the drug is on, the chemical is usually high.
When the drug is off, the chemical is usually low’. The
slider stayed at the same value from the participant’s
judgment after the prior trial; after each trial participants
could either move the slider to update their judgment or a
check-box to keep the same judgment from before. After
making the judgment participant saw the next trial (whether
the drug was administered or not, and the blood test) until
they were finished with the 8 trials. Subjects completed a
practice scenario and 15 actual scenarios (5 from each
contingency); the order of the 15 scenarios was random.

Results
36 subjects were excluded from the analysis because their
responses indicated a misinterpretation of the scale – on [D]
states; they always reduced their causal strength judgments.
Further investigation revealed that these subjects’ judgments
tracked the occurrence of the effect; they increased
judgments when the effect was present (even on [C] trials),
and decreased them when it was absent. This interpretation
occurred despite our best efforts at defining a positive vs.
negative relation (see methods section). We did not want to
further train subjects on the use of the scale by providing
feedback because we did not want to imply that there was
one right answer and wanted to preserve their natural use of
the scale as much as possible. However, this interpretation

2257

of the scale is not explainable by any of the models of
causal induction. Thus, we eliminated from the analysis
subjects who increased at least half their judgments on [A to
C] and [B to C] transitions and decreased at least half of
them on [A to D] and [B to D] transitions.
We analyzed the change in causal strength judgments (the
difference between the judgment at the present and prior
trials) for each of the 16 types of transitions. We ran four
regressions, one for each group of transitions ending in the
same state (shaded rows in Table 4). The α and β transitions
(top row within each of the 4 sets in Table 4) were treated as
the reference transition, because the most important
hypothesis was whether the α and β transitions produced
larger changes than the other transition types. A by-subject
random intercept and a random slope on transition type were
included to account for the fact that each individual made
multiple judgments for each transition type.
One challenge in analyzing change scores is that the
causal strength judgment at the prior trial can constrain the
amount of change. For example, for transitions expected to
lead to an increase, a very high starting point would
constrain the amount of possible increase. It is also possible
that different transition types would produce different
amounts of change at different prior strength levels, so an
interaction between prior strength and transition type was
included in the regression. (These interactions are not
discussed further in the current manuscript.)
Table 4 displays the results of the four regressions. Within
the four transitions ending in a given state, the other three
transitions were all compared against the top transition. In
typical regression tables the difference between levels is
reported. But for ease of interpretation we translate the
differences to their own group means (e.g. [C to A]
transitions produced an average increase of 14 points). The
rightmost column in Table 4 summarizes which of the three
transitions are significantly different in size compared to the
top transition (+ is a significant smaller increase than ++).
The first impression of this table is that all the transitions
ending in A and D produced increases in causal strength,
whereas those ending in B and C produced decreases. This
finding is most consistent with Power PC and ∆P.
The second striking finding is that the α and β transitions
always produced more extreme changes compared to ζ
transitions (forth row of each set). This finding is uniquely
predicted by TBL; it is not predicted by the other models
and is even the opposite prediction made by TD.
Third, the other predictions made by TBL, that α and β
would be stronger than δ and γ (ceiling and floor effects),
and ε (when the effect changes by itself) were not supported
(except one instance of δ). The following paragraphs go
through the results in more detail.
Amongst transitions ending in [A], all four transitions
lead to increases. [D to A] transitions led to the largest
increase, an average increase of 21. Compared to [D to A],
[C to A] transitions and [A to A] transitions led to
significantly smaller increases. The significance can be seen
by examining whether the 95% CI includes the mean change

for [D to A]. For example, 95% CI for [C to A], [8, 19] is
entirely lower than the mean for [D to A], 21. [A to A] also
produced a significantly smaller increase than [D to A], but
[B to A] was not significantly different.
Among the transitions ending in [D], the α transition was
significantly stronger than ζ. It was not significantly
different than δ, and it actually was weaker than ε (which is
not predicted by any model).
Among the transitions ending in [B] and [C], the β
transitions were more extreme than the ζ transitions, but the
β transitions were the same size as the γ and ε transitions.
In summary, the results show some patterns consistent
with Power PC and ∆P, as well as one consistent pattern
uniquely predicted by TBL, that α and β transitions resulted
in larger changes to causal strength than ζ transitions.
Table 4: Regression results for effect of transitions. Separate
models for each group of transitions by end-state.
Transition Type
D to A
C to A
B to A
A to A
A to D
B to D
C to D
D to D
C to B
D to B
A to B
B to B
B to C
A to C
D to C
C to C

α
δ
ε
ζ
α
δ
ε
ζ
β
γ
ε
ζ
β
γ
ε
ζ

Mean
Change
21
14
19
10
11
10
17
7
-16
-15
-19
-12
-15
-13
-14
-11

95% CI of
Change
Summary
Lower Upper
18
24
++
8
19
+
13
25
++
7
14
+
8
14
++
4
15
++
11
24
+++
3
9
+
-19
-14
--21
-9
--25
-12
--15
-8
-18
-13
--18
-7
--21
-10
--14
-7
-

Note. The Change column indicates the relative increase or decrease of a
particular transition relative to the top row in the same group of transitions.

General Discussion
Previous work studying elemental causal learning has
focused on how causal strength is learned from states – [A],
[B], [C] and [D]. In the current article we proposed an
extreme version of an elemental causal learning theory that
focuses exclusively on transitions. The proposal we put
forth was intended to be provocative – to theorize how
different transitions could be interpreted completely
independently of states. In reality, we are not proposing that
people exclusively rely upon transitions and indeed the
results suggest a combination of strategies.
The main finding in support of the transition-based
learning theory was that when both the cause and effect
changed (α and β) people changed their causal strength
judgments more than when the same state was repeated (ζ),
controlling for the prior causal strength judgment. Another

2258

way to think about these findings is that when the same state
is repeated (ζ) there actually is no “transition”; the repeat of
the state could be viewed as redundant (i.e. repeated
observations of a state can be collapsed into a single
extended data point). This finding was the basic
phenomenon from the example involving Figure 1.
The TBL framework made two predictions that were not
supported. We review these predictions because they reveal
some interesting reasoning habits. The first prediction
involved δ and γ transitions. One example is when the cause
changes from 0 to 1 but the effect stays at 1. We predicted
that this transition could be viewed as consistent with a
positive causal relation (a ceiling effect), however it could
also be consistent with no relation – the cause turns on but
since the effect is already on the cause was not responsible
for the effect. Out of the four δ and γ transitions one was
weaker than the α and β transitions, but the other three were
not significantly different. This suggests that the participants
were attributing the state of the effect to the cause even
though the state of the effect was present before the cause.
The second disconfirmed prediction made by TBL was
that transitions when the effect changes on its own would
not result in changes to the causal strength (e.g., if the cause
stays at 1, and the effect changes from 0 to 1). The
reasoning was that it is always possible that the effect could
change on its own due to some unobserved factor, but this
change should be attributed to the unobserved factor, not the
target cause. Another interpretation is that there really is a
positive causal relation, but at the initial state there was a
temporary unobserved inhibitory factor.
From the discussion above, it is evident that transitions
can be interpreted in multiple ways. There is some
interesting research on how observed states can be
interpreted differently given different prior knowledge – in
some instances even [A] can be interpreted as negative
evidence (Luhmann & Ahn, 2011). When reasoning about
states, beliefs about unobserved factors drive the different
interpretations. And as seen in the paragraphs above, we
also hypothesize that beliefs about unobserved factors could
be responsible for different interpretations. More fully
developing a transition-based theory of causal induction will
require clarifying the interpretations of the transitions,
which could be facilitated by eliciting verbal explanations of
the interpretation of a given transition.
The current results suggest that elemental causal learning
in longitudinal contexts involves a combination of transition
and state-based reasoning. One important goal for future
research is to better capture how these two types of
reasoning get used – do they get used simultaneously, are
there individual differences, or does a single learner
sometimes focus on one interpretation and other times focus
on another? Future research will investigate the factors that
promote the use of one reasoning pattern over another. This
will ultimately result in a more complete theory of realworld elemental causal learning that (unlike most existing
theories) makes the distinction between data in crosssectional and longitudinal contexts.

References
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104(2),
367–405. doi:10.1037//0033-295X.104.2.367
Hattori, M., & Oaksford, M. (2007). Adaptive noninterventional heuristics for covariation detection in
causal induction: model comparison and rational
analysis. Cognitive Science, 31(5), 765–814.
doi:10.1080/03640210701530755
Jenkins, H. M., & Ward, W. C. (1965). Judgment of
Contingency Between Responses and Outcomes.
Psychological Monographs: General and Applied,
79(1), 1–17.
Luhmann, C. C., & Ahn, W.-K. (2011). Expectations and
interpretations during causal learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37(3), 568–87. doi:10.1037/a0022970
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A Theory of
Pavlovian Conditioning: Variations in the
Effectiveness of Reinforcement and
Nonreinforcement. In Classical Conditioning II:
Current Theory and Research (pp. 64–99).
Rottman, B. M., & Keil, F. C. (2012). Causal structure
learning over time: observations and interventions.
Cognitive Psychology, 64(1-2), 93–125.
doi:10.1016/j.cogpsych.2011.10.003
Seymour, B., Doherty, J. P. O., Dayan, P., Koltzenburg, M.,
Jones, A. K., Dolan, R. J., … Frackowiak, R. S.
(2004). Temporal difference models describe higherorder learning in humans. Nature, 429(June), 664–
667. doi:10.1038/nature02636.1.
Shanks, D. R., & Dickinson, A. 1987. Associative accounts
of causality judgment. In G. H. Bower (Ed.),
Psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in
research and theory (pp.229-261). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Soo. K. W., & Rottman, B. M. (2014). Learning Causal
Direction From Transitions With Continuous And
Noisy Variables. In P. Bello, M. Guarin, M. McShane,
& B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1485-1490).
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1987). A TemporalDifference Model of Classical Conditioning. In
Proceedings of the 9th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Van Hamme, L. J., & Wasserman, E. A. (1994). Cue
Competition in Causality Judgments: The Role of
Nonpresentation of Compound Stimulus Elements.
Learning and Motivation, 25, 127–151.
doi:10.1006/lmot.1994.1008
Wagner, A. R., & Rescorla, R. A. (1972). Inhibition in
Pavlovian Conditioning: Application of a Theory. In
Inhibition and Learning (pp. 301–336).

2259

