Emergence of systematic iconicity: transmission, interaction and analogy
Tessa Verhoef (tverhoef@ucsd.edu)
UCSD, Center for Research in Language
La Jolla CA 92093, USA

Seán G. Roberts (sean.roberts@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Mark Dingemanse (mark.dingemanse@mpi. nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Abstract
Languages combine arbitrary and iconic signals. How do
iconic signals emerge and when do they persist? We present
an experimental study of the role of iconicity in the
emergence of structure in an artificial language. Using an
iterated communication game in which we control the
signalling medium as well as the meaning space, we study the
evolution of communicative signals in transmission chains.
This sheds light on how affordances of the communication
medium shape and constrain the mappability and
transmissibility of form-meaning pairs. We find that iconic
signals can form the building blocks for wider compositional
patterns.
Keywords: iconicity, language evolution, iterated learning,
social coordination, cultural transmission, analogy.

Introduction
In the emergence of communicative signals, links are
established between linguistic form and meaning. These
links are usually thought to be arbitrary for the majority of
meanings (De Saussure, 1916; Hockett, 1960). However,
more recently the importance of non-arbitrary links in
linguistic forms (Perniss, Thompson & Vigliocco, 2010)
and language evolution (Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001)
has been getting more attention. Iconicity, in which there is
a perceived resemblance between form and meaning, seems
to play a larger role than was originally assumed (Perniss,
Thompson & Vigliocco, 2010), especially when looking not
only at spoken Indo-European languages. Sign languages,
perhaps more obviously than spoken languages, are rich in
iconic forms (Mandel, 1977; Taub, 2001; Meir, Padden,
Aronoff & Sandler, 2013) and there are also many spoken
languages that have large inventories of sound-symbolic
words, known as mimetics (Kita, 1997), expressives
(Diffloth, 1972) or, cross-linguistically, ideophones
(Dingemanse, 2012).

When does iconicity emerge and persist?
We investigate experimentally what factors influence the
emergence of iconic forms in language and when these
forms are expected to persist. We focus on the mappability
of aspects of meaning to aspects of the signalling medium,

and on the transmissibility of iconic forms on the basis of
transparency, structure and learnability.
Mappability One factor that is relevant for the emergence
of iconicity is how easy it is to map certain forms with
certain meanings (Dingemanse, 2013). Not all meanings
lend themselves well to forming iconic mappings in each
communication medium. Spatial relations for instance are
generally easier to map onto manual signals, while
meanings related to sounds are easier to represent iconically
with spoken signals. The affordances of the signalling
medium influence the mappability of form-meaning pairs
and this influences the iconic strategies that may be
recruited in the emergence of languages.
Transparency Iconic signals can be seen as more
transparent than arbitrary signals because their form reveals
something about their meaning. They may therefore be easy
to interpret and remember, and it has been proposed that
such forms may have played an important role in the
bootstrapping and grounding of early linguistic forms in
both development (Maurer et al. 2006, Imai et al. 2008) and
language evolution (Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001).
However, there is also evidence suggesting that forms with
some degree of iconicity are not always easier to learn than
non-iconic signals (Ortega & Morgan, 2010) and that
arbitrariness may provide a learning advantage too (Gasser,
2004; Monaghan & Christiansen, 2006).
Many different strategies can be used to represent a
meaning iconically (Meir et al., 2013), and it is not in all
cases trivial to predict which strategy or type would be the
most preferred. Moreover, interpretation of iconicity highly
relies on shared expectations and experiences outside of
linguistic regularities, which may not be shared by all
languages users and be less accessible to very young
children acquiring their language (Tolar, Lederberg, Sonali
& Tomasello, 2008). Thus, iconicity is not by itself a
guarantee for learnability and transmissibility.
Systematic iconicity Iconicity is rarely monolithic (Meir et
al. 2013), and there are many different types. Simple one to
one resemblances of words to meanings (familiar from

2481

onomatopoeia like boom and moo) are relatively limited in
natural languages. More prevalent uses of iconicity involve
predictable and more or less productive patterns, where
iconicity is a shared property among groups of signals,
systematically related or productively applicable to word
classes (Mandel, 1977; Meir et al., 2013; Padden, Meir,
Hwang, Lepic & Seegers & Sampson, 2013; Padden,
Hwang, Lepic & Seegers, 2014). An example of this in sign
languages is lexical patterning (Padden et al., 2013; 2014),
where word categories can be identified by a sign reflecting
for instance what a tool looks like (noun) versus showing
how it is used (verb), which are both iconic forms. In
spoken language ideophones, related word forms often
depict related meanings, as in Japanese goro 'a heavy object
rolling', koro 'light object rolling' and korokoro 'many light
objects rolling' (Vigliocco & Kita, 2006). We might expect
patterns of this kind to be more transmissible, given their
predictable and productive properties, which may in turn
influence their persistence.

evolution of communicative signals in artificial languages.
We investigate both the initial emergence of iconic forms
for mappable and less mappable meanings, and the
systematic reuse of iconic strategies. Different from prior
work (e.g. Garrod et al. 2010), we control both the set of
meanings and the signalling medium, making it possible to
study how signals differ in communicative success,
learnability, and stability over time.

Methods
The experiment consists of dyadic interactions in which
pairs of participants played guessing games together. They
could only communicate using sound signals, resulting in
artificial whistle-like languages, as in Verhoef (2012). At
the end of a trial, a pair’s set of signals formed a new
language, following the experimental design of Tamariz,
Cornish, Roberts & Kirby (2012). The next pair was trained
on that language before a new trial started. This created
several parallel chains of transmission in which the artificial
languages developed over time.

Signals
Participants communicated using a vertical bar on a touch
screen, which could be used to create signals that vary in
pitch over time. The pitch could be manipulated by sliding
the finger up and down, where the top of the bar produced
higher pitch and the bottom lower. Signals could be
discontinuous (e.g. a series of short beeps), but were limited
in overall length to 4 seconds. Figure 1 shows a screenshot
of the interface with the signal bar on the right.

Figure 1: The interface of the experiment, showing a
meaning to be communicated and the signal bar.

Meanings

Pattern emergence Cultural transmission of linguistic
structures can be studied experimentally. For instance,
languages tend to become more regular and systematic over
time when they are transmitted from generation to
generation (Hare & Elman, 1995; Kirby, 2001; Kirby,
Cornish & Smith, 2008; Kirby, Griffiths & Smith, 2014;
Reali & Griffiths, 2009). Cultural transmission experiments
that focused specifically on the role of iconicity and
arbitrariness reveal that iconic forms sometimes become
more abstract and arbitrary when they are transmitted and
become part of emerging sub-lexical patterns. Santiago,
Tamariz, Vigliocco & Vinson (2014) observed effects of
biases for using iconic forms, but only when participants
interacted communicatively. A transition from more
iconicity to more arbitrariness was also demonstrated in
social
coordination
experiments
where
novel
communication systems emerge through interaction
(Garrod, Fay, Lee, Oberlander, & MacLeod, 2007; Theisen,
Oberlander & Kirby, 2010). Earlier studies did not focus on
systematic iconicity, and did not systematically control both
the signalling medium and the meaning space in the same
experiment.
Here we combine a social coordination task with a
vertical transmission paradigm to study the emergence and

The meaning space consisted of animal silhouettes facing in
two directions. Some meanings were easy to encode
iconically while others were more difficult given the
medium of communication. For some meanings, both
animal type and orientation are easy to express with one
holistic, unanalysable signal. As shown in figure 2, an
obvious signal for ‘eel’ just follows its diagonal shape and
this immediately makes it clear1 which one of the two is
referred to: high-to-low pitch for the one oriented top-left to
bottom-right and low-to-high pitch for the one oriented
bottom-left to top-right. Another strategy would be to
follow the direction the animal is swimming in. For the eel
swimming to the right, this would result in the exact same
signal, moving down, but for the eel swimming to the left an
iconic signal based on this property would be moving down
instead of up, giving this meaning two obvious possible
forms that fit well. For the less mappable meanings (the
seahorses) there are no such obvious iconic solutions to
encode animal type or orientation: a very large number of
possible signals could be evaluated as equally fitting.
1

Assuming a bias for interpreting time as going from left to
right, which is most probably the case for people who grew up
reading from left to right and looking at left-to-right timelines.

2482

Results
To explore the influence of mappability, learning and
transmission on the emerging artificial languages, we
analysed communicative success and the use of iconicity.

Communicative success
Communicative success (as measured by correct guesses)
was higher for easy to map than for hard to map meanings.
This is as hypothesized: the signalling medium affords the
iconic expression of those meanings, leading to better
communicative performance. The mean correct score was
3.7 out of 8.
As shown in figure 3, meanings in which the animal was
facing left were consistently harder to get correct than the
ones facing right. This is consistent with the way in which
the meaning space was constructed. As noted above, there
are two possible iconic solutions for encoding the left-facing
eel, whereas these two are conflated in the right-facing eel.
The fact that this effect of facing direction occurs for the
seahorses as well indicates an interesting connection
between signals used for the two types of meanings. We
will address this later.

Figure 2: The meanings: ‘hard to map’ seahorses and ‘easy
to map’ eels, facing in different directions, with possible
iconic signal productions for the eels.

Interaction
Participants played guessing games in which each person
held a touch sensitive tablet, both were wearing headphones,
and neither could see the other’s screen. The tablets were
connected over a network and participants could send each
other signals. In each round, one participant was the
‘speaker’ while the other was the ‘listener’. The speaker was
presented with a target meaning and produced a signal for it.
The listener listened to the speaker’s signal and was
presented with a panel showing all the possible meanings.
The listener chose one of these meanings as their guess for
what the speaker intended. Both players were given
feedback after each guess, showing the target meaning and
what the listener guessed. Each meaning was presented as
the target twice, in a random order, with participants
alternating roles as speaker and listener after each
presentation, so that each participant took the role of
speaker for each meaning once.

Training
Except for each first pair of participants in a transmission
chain, both participants were first trained on a language
before interacting. In this training they were exposed to each
meaning and the last signal used for that meaning by the
previous pair. Participants only saw a random half of the
previous meanings, and there were two training rounds in
total, showing each training item twice. The first pair of
each transmission chain started immediately with the
interaction phase, thus negotiating their own signals for the
meanings.

Procedure
Data for this experiment was collected as part of a science
festival2. A total number of 202 visitors gave informed
consent and participated, resulting in 10 transmission
chains. The complete data set has 6 chains with 10
generations and 4 chains with between 3 and 5 generations
(we control for these imbalances with the statistical methods
below).

Figure 3: Proportion of correct guesses for each meaning
(means and 95% confidence intervals). Expected
performance at chance would be 25%.
We analysed the results with a binomial mixed effects
model predicting correct guesses by animal, facing direction
and generation, while controlling for chain and participant
pair. Including animal significantly improved the fit of the
model (model comparison χ2 = 5.31, df = 1, p = 0.02), as
did facing direction (model comparison χ2 = 7.0, df = 1, p =
0.01), but generation did not (χ2 = 0.14, df = 1, p =
0.70). There were no significant interactions, and no
inclusion of random slopes significantly improved the
model. That is, facing direction and animal had independent
effects.

2

‘De nacht van kunst en kennis’, Museum Boerhaave, Leiden,
The Netherlands

2483

0.2

We have shown there were differences in communicative
success between the different meanings. The pattern of
differences fits the hypothesis that participants exploited the
fact that some meanings were easier to map iconically given
the signalling medium. Can we find evidence for iconicity
in the signals? If we look at the mean signal, computed on
the basis of all successful signals, we can clearly see the
expected pattern for the mappable meanings (Figure 4). The
eel swimming to the right has a diagonal shape from upper
left to lower right corner and the signal is also
predominantly going down in frequency. The opposite
pattern is observed for the eel facing left. Again, in line with
the fact that there are two competing iconic solutions for the
left-facing eel, the effect is strongest for the right-facing eel.

-0.6 -0.2

Iconic signals

0.6

significant effect of mappability (since this test assessed the
direction of the signal, est = 0.1, t= 1.4, p = 0.07). Figure 5
shows the correlation coefficient of the signals, for correct
answers, for iconic and non-iconic stimuli.
When the stimuli faces right, regardless of mappability, a
correct guess is more likely when the signal has a more
negative slope (adding signal direction x facing direction
improves fit of the first model χ2 = 4.81, t = 0.03, p =0.03).
Signal correlation with time

The model estimates for the probability of correct guesses
are: left facing seahorse (35%), right facing seahorse (46%),
left facing eel (44%) and right facing eel (56%).
There was no overall effect of generation, although in
many cases we can see the system break down after about 4
generations. This could be due to a ceiling effect or other
reasons we address in the discussion. Generation does
marginally improve the model when looking at only the first
4 generations of each chain (χ2 = 3.54, df = 1, p = 0.06).

Easy to map
Hard to map
Left

Right

Stimuli Direction

Figure 5: The mean correlation of the signal over time with
95% confidence intervals for different meanings.

Systematic reuse of iconic strategy

Figure 4: The black lines represent the moving average of
signal values over normalised time (x axis) for mappable
meanings (shown beneath the graph). 95% of signal
segments fall within the vertical blue bars.
We calculated the correlation between the signal
trajectory and time. For monotonic, steadily changing tones,
an increasing tone would receive a correlation of 1, while a
decreasing tone would receive a correlation of -1. We ran a
mixed effects model, predicting the correlation of the signal
over time by mappability, facing direction and generation,
controlling for participant pair and communication
chain. Stimuli facing right were more likely to have a
negative correlation (est.= -0.20, t = 1.8, χ2 = 19.8, p <
0.0001). The effect for right-facing, mappable stimuli (the
eel) was especially strong (est. = -0.43, t = 3.75, χ2 = 14.1, p
= 0.0002), which can be attributed to the mapping for the
right-facing eel being unambiguous. There was a weak
effect for the interaction between direction and generation
(right-facing signals became less correlated over time, est =
0.04, t = 2.11, χ2= 4.47, p = 0.03). As expected there was no

Looking at individual languages that emerged across the
chains, we observe the reuse and spread of iconic strategies,
resulting in systematic patterns in which both animal and
facing direction are encoded in a compositional and
predictable manner. Often, it seems to be the case that the
feature of the signal that encodes the facing direction has its
origins in the iconic strategy for representing the eels only,
and then got recruited for the seahorses using analogical
reasoning. The eel that is positioned from top left to bottom
right happens to be right-facing. The most obvious signal
for that meaning follows the shape iconically with a
decreasing pitch trajectory. This solution can be re-used for
encoding the right-facing seahorse, resulting in a signal that
is not directly iconic, but understood by analogy. Further
extending the analogy, the opposite pattern can be used for
the other seahorse. The (often) wobbly signals associated
with the seahorses can also be seen as iconic, especially in a
system where there is a clear contrast with the smooth
signals for the eels. Figure 6 shows four examples of such
systems, all from different transmission chains, in which the
holistic iconic strategy that works for eel orientation is
recruited for representing seahorse orientation.
Figure 7 shows how such a system gradually develops
over time as the language is transmitted from dyad to dyad.
First, the signals seem to only distinguish the two animals,
while making a contrast between the two facing directions,
then the distinction in direction appears for eels, which is
adopted to encode facing distinction in the seahorses as well
one generation later.

2484

generation was trained on an arbitrary, non-compositional
language that we constructed. Qualitatively, the signals
evolve away from the starting languages towards the kinds
of languages seen in the main experiment (smooth changes
for eels, wobbles for the seahorses). We also observed all
the statistical effects presented above with these new chains.
Analysing all the data together, neither the proportion of
correct guesses nor the signal correlation is significantly
predicted by type of starting condition. This suggests that
the original arbitrary language is ‘washed out’ by use and
transmission.

Discussion

Figure 6: Successful signal sets. Each rounded box
represents a separate generation. Signals are plotted as pitch
(vertical axis) over time (horizontal axis).
Quantitative support for this mechanism is revealed by
the data presented earlier. As shown in Figure 3, there is not
only a difference in communicative success for the two eels
(which we expect on the basis of their slight difference in
mappability), but the right facing seahorse is also easier to
guess than the left facing seahorse. This can't be explained
by iconic strategies for the seahorses in isolation – there is
no theory that would predict that facing left would be harder
to map than facing right for these meanings. The difference
must come from the signal transferring from the eel to the
seahorse. In other words, participants re-use the iconic
signals in a compositional way.

Figure 7: The evolution of signals over generations for
different pairs of participants (rows) in the same chain and
different meanings (columns) Colour represents successful
(green) and unsuccessful guesses (red).
In the experiment above, the first generation did not
receive training on a prior language. In this case, iconic
signals emerged. However, if conventional signals were to
emerge first, it is possible that iconic signals would not
appear. To test this, we ran two chains where the first

We studied when iconicity emerges in communicative
signals and what conditions allow iconic forms to persist.
We carefully controlled the medium of communication and
the mappability of meanings to this medium. The results
show that iconic strategies were used to a great extent and
were also reused and combined in a compositional way,
resulting in the emergence of systematic iconic patterns.
Where previous work focused on the possible competition
between iconicity and (combinatorial) structure (e.g.
Verhoef et al., 2013), here we show how iconicity actually
shapes emerging structures. Iconicity is used often and
iconic primitives become building blocks in compositional
patterns. Affordances of the medium of communication
direct this process. Our findings fit with the observation that
there may be “competition between different types of
iconicity that languages exploit in order to organize their
grammars” (Meir et al., 2013).
While communicative success improved over the first few
chains, we found no overall effect of generation. Some
generations solve the problem in the way we expected, but
the system was not always transmitted faithfully. This could
be caused by the setting of the experiment, the small size of
the meaning space, or too little training. Also, the training
language came from a random selection of both previous
participants' signals, which may disrupt the transmission of
the potential structure one of the two participants had
internalized and expressed in their signals. In one case, the
participants reported not noticing that there was a distinction
in facing direction because there was no distinction in the
signals from the previous generation. In general, although
we designed the stimuli to have an obvious solution, we
were surprised at the range of approaches adopted (e.g.
iconically representing the animal's speed or size). Some of
these systems may be iconic and 'obvious' to their creators,
but less easy to interpret by a communicative partner or next
learner in the experiment. Our data collection setting limited
the experiment to a short length, and therefore a small
meaning space. Currently we are working on a laboratory
follow-up with a larger variety of meanings and more time
for interaction and learning.
Both mappability and learnability influence the
emergence and persistence of iconic signals, in our
experiment as well as in natural languages. We have shown
how iconic signals emerge, become systematised, and how

2485

they may be reused as building blocks in compositional
signals, in the process of interaction and transmission.
Iterated communication games provide a promising
approach towards unravelling the role of iconicity in
representation, linguistic structure and language evolution.

Acknowledgments
We thank Shawn Bird, Marissa Casillas, NTR, and the staff
of Nacht van kunst en kennis. This work is supported by the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO
Rubicon grant to T.V. & NWO Veni grant to M.D.) and by
the Max Planck Society for the Advancement of Science
(S.R. and M.D.).

References
De Saussure, F. (1916). Cours de linguistique générale.
Paris: Payot.
Diffloth, G. (1972). Notes on expressive meaning. Chicago
Linguistic Society 8: 440–447.
Dingemanse, M. (2012). Advances in the cross-linguistic
study of ideophones. Language and Linguistics Compass,
6(10): 654–672.
Dingemanse, M. (2013). Ideophones and gesture in
everyday speech. Gesture, 13: 143-165.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod, T.
(2007). Foundations of Representation: Where Might
Graphical Symbol Systems Come From? Cognitive
Science, 31(6): 961-987.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Rogers, S., Walker, B. & Swoboda, N.
(2010) Can Iterated Learning Explain the Emergence of
Graphical Symbols? Interaction Studies 11 (1): 33–50.
Gasser, M. (2004). The origins of arbitrariness in language.
In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, (pp. 434-439).
Hare, M., & Elman, J. L. (1995). Learning and
morphological change. Cognition, 56(1), 61-98.
Hockett, C. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific
American, 203: 88–111.
Imai M., Kita S., Nagumo M., Okada H. (2008). Sound
symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition
109(1): 54–65.
Kirby, S. (2001). Spontaneous evolution of linguistic
structure-an iterated learning model of the emergence of
regularity and irregularity. IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, 5(2):102–110.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H. & Smith, K. (2008) Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
PNAS. 105(31):10681-10686
Kirby, S., Griffiths, T. & Smith, K. (2014) Iterated learning
and the evolution of language. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology. 28C: 108-114
Kita, S. (1997). Two-dimensional semantic analysis of
Japanese mimetics. Linguistics 35: 379-415.
Mandel, M. A. (1977). Iconic devices in American sign
language. In L. A. Friedman (Ed.) On the Other Hand:
New Perspectives on ASL. NY: Academic Press, 57–107.

Maurer, D., Pathman, T. & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: sound-shape correspondences in toddlers
and adults. Developmental Science, 9(3): 316–322
Meir, I., Padden, C., Aronoff, M. & Sandler, W. (2013)
Competing iconicities in the structure of languages.
Cognitive Linguistics, 24(2): 309 – 343
Monaghan P. & Christiansen M. H. (2006). Why formmeaning mappings are not entirely arbitrary in language,
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver, (pp. 1838-1843)
Ortega, G., & Morgan, G. (2010). Comparing child and
adult development of a visual phonological system.
Language interaction and acquisition, 1(1): 67-81.
Padden, C., Meir, I., Hwang, S.-O., Lepic, R., & Seegers, S.,
& Sampson, T. (2013). Patterned iconicity in sign
language lexicons. Gesture 13(3): 287-308.
Padden, C., Hwang, S.-O., Lepic, R., & Seegers, S. (2014).
Tools for language: Patterned iconicity in sign language
nouns and verbs. Topics in Cognitive Science, 7(1):81-94
Perniss, P., Thompson, R., & Vigliocco, G. (2010).
Iconicity as a general property of language: evidence from
spoken and signed languages. Front. Psychol., 1:227.
Ramachandran, V., & Hubbard, E. (2001). Synaesthesia–a
window into perception, thought and language. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 8(12): 3–34.
Reali, F. & Griffiths, T. (2009). The evolution of frequency
distributions: Relating regularization to inductive biases
through iterated learning. Cognition, 111(3):317–328.
Santiago, J., Tamariz, M., Vigliocco, G. & Vinson, D.
(2014) The role of iconicity in the evolution of linguistic
structure. In Proceedings of EVOLANG10. World
Scientific, (pp. 294-295).
Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., Roberts, S. & Kirby, S. (2012)
The effect of generation turnover and interlocutor
negotiation on linguistic structure. In Proceedings of
EVOLANG9. World Scientific, (pp. 555-556).
Taub, S. F. (2001). Language from the body: iconicity and
metaphor in American Sign Language. Cambridge/NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Theisen, C., Oberlander, J. & Kirby, S. (2010) Systematicity
and arbitrariness in novel communication systems.
Interaction Studies, 11(1): 14-32
Tolar, T. D., Lederberg, A. R., Sonali G. & Tomasello, M.
(2008). The Development of the Ability to Recognize the
Meaning of Iconic Signs. J Deaf Stud Deaf Educ 13(2):
226–240.
Verhoef, T. (2012). The origins of duality of patterning in
artificial whistled languages. Language and Cognition,
4(4): 357–380.
Verhoef, T., Kirby, S. & de Boer, B. (2013) Combinatorial
structure and iconicity in artificial whistled languages. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Austin,TX, (pp. 3669-3674).
Vigliocco G. & Kita S. (2006) Language-specific effects of
meaning, sound and syntax: implications for models of
lexical retrieval in production. Lang. Cogn. Process, 21:
790-816

2486

