ERP indices of situated reference in visual contexts
Elli N. Tourtouri, Francesca Delogu, and Matthew W. Crocker
{elli, delogu, crocker}@coli.uni-saarland.de
Department of Computational Linguistics,
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
Abstract
Violations of the maxims of Quantity occur when utterances
provide more (over-specified) or less (under-specified)
information than strictly required for referent identification.
While behavioural data suggest that under-specified
expressions lead to comprehension difficulty and
communicative failure, there is no consensus as to whether
over-specified expressions are also detrimental to
comprehension. In this study we shed light on this debate,
providing neurophysiological evidence supporting the view
that extra information facilitates comprehension. We further
present novel evidence that referential failure due to underspecification is qualitatively different from explicit cases of
referential failure, when no matching referential candidate is
available in the context.
Keywords:
informativity;
over-specification;
specification; referential processing; ERPs

under-

Introduction
The gricean maxims of Quantity stipulate that speakers
should provide no less (first maxim) and no more (second
maxim) information than required for the purposes of the
exchange. In visually situated communication, violations of
these maxims occur through the use of referring expressions
that provide less (under-specified) or more (over-specified)
information than strictly required (minimally-specified) for
the identification of the target referent. For example, the use
of the expression “the yellow bowl” is over-specified in a
context with only one bowl present (the colour modifier is
superfluous), under-specified in a context with two yellow
bowls (the modifier does not disambiguate between the two
objects), while it is minimally-specified when a second bowl
that differs in colour is co-present (the colour adjective is
necessary and sufficient for identification).
Although it has not yet become clear why speakers may
choose to include excessive information in their referring
descriptions, empirical data demonstrate that they do so
quite frequently, while they very rarely provide less
information than necessary (Deutsch & Pechmann, 1982;
Engelhardt, Bailey, & Ferreira 2006; Ferreira, Slevc, &
Rogers, 2005; Nadig & Sedivy, 2002; Pechmann, 1989,
inter alia), suggesting that speakers are not (fully) gricean.
On the other hand, there is no clear evidence regarding the
online sensitivity of listeners to the gricean maxims, that is,
whether or not violations of the maxims of Quantity on
behalf of the speaker result in processing difficulty for the
listener. While some offline studies provide support to the
intuition that under-specification impairs comprehension
(Davies & Katsos, 2013, experiments 1 & 2; Engelhardt et
al., 2006, experiment 2), there is no conclusive evidence as

to how, if at all, over-specification affects processing. A
number of studies suggest that, if not beneficial to
comprehension, the inclusion of extra information is at least
as good as minimal specification (Arts, Maes, Noordman, &
Jansen, 2011; Arts, Maes, & Noordman, 2004), while others
advocate that over-specification leads to impairments in
comprehension (Engelhardt et al., 2006, experiment 3;
Engelhardt, Demiral, & Ferreira, 2011; Davies & Katsos,
2013).
In an ERP experiment, Engelhardt, Demiral and Ferreira
(2011) used the referential processing task to present
participants with two-object visual displays concurrent with
audio instructions to look at the target. In one display,
objects were either of the same type, e.g. two stars –
rendering modification of the noun necessary for target
identification – or of different types, e.g. a star and a circle –
when the mention of only the head noun would be
sufficient. The experiment used a 2x2 design crossing
display (same/different) and modifier (colour/size). An
N400-like effect was found for the adjective in response to
over-specified relative to minimally-specified expressions,
while behavioural data suggested that it took longer for
participants to identify the target object upon hearing an
over-specified description (different-object display). The
findings were interpreted as an indication that the inclusion
of additional information in referring expressions is harmful
for comprehension. However, we believe that this might be
a too strong conclusion, especially since over-specified
instructions always accompanied different-object displays,
possibly raising a confound, namely that any effect might
simply be due to the (slightly more complex) display type,
and not to the inclusion of extra information in the
instruction. What is more, these results might merely reflect
that extra information is strikingly redundant when visual
context is highly simplified (as the two-object scenes used
here), while different processes may be at play in the
presence of more demanding visual settings. Furthermore,
one might expect any effects of over-specification –
beneficial or detrimental – to occur (also) at the noun, and it
is not clear why Engelhardt and colleagues only focused on
the adjective region.
In this paper we present an ERP study that tested the
effects of over- and under-specification on language
comprehension in visually-situated settings. We employed a
referential processing task similar to the one in Engelhardt
et al. (2011), but, crucially, with visual scenes that were
more complex and accommodated all conditions.
Furthermore, we tested the intuition that under-specification
is detrimental to language understanding – as it leads to

2422

referential failure – by comparing it to explicit cases of
referential failure when no matching referential candidate is
available in the visual context.

Experiment
In an ERP experiment participants listened to instructions
like “Find the yellow bowl” in German, paired with four
visual contexts such as the ones in Figure 1. We contrasted
“the yellow bowl” in B, where the noun alone is sufficient
for target identification (OS), and C, where the adjective
does not help disambiguate (US), to A, where the adjective
is necessary and sufficient (minimally-specified, MS). A
mismatch (MM) condition served as a case of explicit
referential failure, where the adjective and noun were both
represented in the display but by different objects (D).
Given that over-specification is ubiquitous in language
use, we hypothesised that OS would be facilitatory, or at
least as good as MS, as speakers would unlikely use
redundant information if this hindered comprehension for
their listeners. As for US, our hypothesis was that it would
be detrimental to comprehension, but possibly yielding a
qualitatively different effect than MM, since US leads to an
unresolved ambiguity, while MM raises a question as to the
validity of the information provided by the adjective and
noun.

Method
Participants Thirty-three Saarland University students
(mean age 25, 11 male) participated in the experiment and
were monetarily compensated for their participation. They
were all right-handed native speakers of German with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no problems with
colour perception.
Materials For creating the visual stimuli we used pictures
of 30 everyday objects that differed along the dimensions of
type (e.g., bowls, mugs, etc.), colour (red, blue, green,
yellow) and pattern (dotted, striped, checkered). We opted
for colour and pattern as distinguishing features, since they
are both intrinsic to the objects (therefore, not requiring
comparison, as in the case of relative features, such as size).
Colour hue and brightness were adjusted using GIMP
(Version 2.8.10). In order to make sure that not only objects
were identifiable in all colours and patterns, but also that the
descriptions to be used in the experiment would not diverge
from participants’ naming preferences, we conducted an
offline picture naming study. We presented 24 independent
participants with the object images in all colours and
patterns (distributed over 8 lists), and asked them to name
the objects including a colour and pattern term. Only objects
with naming agreement above 80% were used to create the
visual stimuli.
A set of 128 items was created. Each item comprised one
spoken instruction (containing either a colour or a pattern
description) and four displays (essentially four versions of
the same display counterbalancing the target position within
the item, and the colours and patterns per object type

throughout the experiment). Crucially, experimental
displays were constructed so as to accommodate all four
types of descriptions, so that the display would not reveal
the condition. To this end, six objects were necessary per
display: Two same-object pairs for the MS and US
conditions, and two unique objects for OS and MM. The
objects were arranged in an oval-shaped array, as shown in
Figure 1. Because the determiner in German is marked for
gender, visual displays employed only same-gender objects,
in order to assure that the target referent would not be
revealed before the adjective. It was also taken care that
none of the nouns represented in a display would begin with
the same phoneme, so as to make sure that disambiguation
would always occur at noun onset.
In total, 640 visual displays were created, of which 512
were experimental (128 x 4 versions), 128 were fillers and
another 12 were for practice. Half of the displays were
designed to combine with colour descriptions and the other
half with pattern descriptions. In the colour displays (cf.
Fig.1) the MS pair (the two bowls in A) shared pattern, but
differed in colour. The OS referent (the bowl in B) was of
unique colour, but not unique pattern. The US objects (the
two bowls in C) shared colour, but differed in pattern, and
the MM target (the bowl in D) was of unique pattern, but
not colour. Pattern displays were created following the same
set-up, only objects that shared colour in the colour displays
would now share pattern, and so on.
This resulted in an apparent inconsistency between colour
and pattern displays; i.e., there were 4 colours in the first,
while only 3 in the latter. We counterbalanced that in the
fillers, by coupling the 3-colour displays with colour
instructions and the 4-colour displays with pattern
instructions. The target position was also counterbalanced in
the fillers, where the target could occupy any of the 6
positions. What is more, it was taken care that across all
displays – experimental and filler – the target objects
occupied each of the 6 positions an equal number of times.
The visual displays were paired with German instructions
like “Finde die gelbe Schüssel” (Find the yellow bowl) for
the displays in Figure 1. All instructions started with the
same two words “Finde den/die/das…”, continued with a
colour or pattern pre-nominal adjective and finished with
the head noun. Filler instructions differed in that they
contained one, two or zero modifiers, thus rendering all
filler descriptions minimally-specified. Audio stimuli were
recorded with neutral intonation by a young, female speaker
of German, in a sound-proof recording booth using Cubase
AI 5. As speech was continuous (there was no attempt to
insert pauses in between words), recordings were then
annotated for adjective and noun onsets using Praat
(Version 5.3). The mean duration of the adjective was
481.3ms (SD = 32ms), and that of the noun was 557.2ms
(SD = 75.7ms).
Four lists were created using the Latin square design.
Lists were pseudo-randomized so that no more than two
experimental items were consecutive at any point in the list,
and that, even when a filler intervened, there would not be

2423

A

B

C

D

Figure 1. Sample displays for a colour item. All four displays are paired with the instruction “Find the yellow bowl”,
resulting in the four conditions: Minimally-specified (MS) in A, over-specified (OS) in B, under-specified (US) in C, and
mismatch (MM) in D.
two items of the same condition in a row. Stimuli were
presented in 8 blocks of 32 trials each, and block
presentation order was also counterbalanced. An additional
block of 12 filler trials was used for practice.
Based on the findings by Engelhardt et al. (2011), we
predicted that over-specification would modulate an N400like component, with OS being less negative than MS, since
the adjective renders the noun predictable. For US compared
to MS we expected a component related to processing
difficulty that might differ qualitatively from that yielded in
MM, due to the differing nature of referential failure in the
two conditions.
Procedure The experiment was implemented and run using
the E-prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc.).
Participants were seated alone in a sound-isolated and
electromagnetically shielded cabin. Displays were presented
on a 1680 x 1050 resolution monitor.
Following a 3s preview, a cross appeared in the middle of
the screen that participants had to fixate, and 500ms later the
audio instructions were played. The display remained on the
screen without the fixation cross for another 500ms after the
instructions. Next, participants were prompted to carry out
the task, which was to indicate which side of the display the
target object appeared on (MS and OS conditions), or

whether such a decision was not possible (US and MM
conditions) by pressing the corresponding button on a
button box in front of them as quickly and accurately as
possible.
The EEG was recorded from 26 Ag/AgCl electrodes
placed on the scalp according to the standard 10-20 system
and the signal was amplified by a BrainAmps DC amplifier
(Brain Products). Eye movements and blinks were
monitored by electrodes placed on the outer canthus of each
eye, and above and below the right eye. Impedances were
kept below 5kΩ. The EEG signal was digitized at a
sampling rate of 500Hz and re-referenced offline to the
average of both mastoid electrodes.
Analysis The EEG signal was filtered offline (30Hz high
cut-off). Single-participant averages were then computed in
a 1000ms window per condition relative to the onset of the
adjective (“yellow”) and head noun (“bowl”), and aligned to
a 200ms pre-stimulus baseline. Trials were semiautomatically screened offline for eye movements, blinks,
electrode drifts, and amplifier blocking. After artefact
rejection 8 participants with less than 18 trials left were
excluded from analyses. Only artefact-free ERP averages
time-locked to the onset of the critical regions entered the
analyses. We performed omnibus repeated measures

2424

−3

Pz

2

1

0

−1

−2

MS
OS
US
MM

−200

0

200

400

600

Figure 4. Averaged ERPs for the four conditions timelocked to the noun onset (vertical line) at electrode Pz.

Figure 2. Averaged ERPs for the four conditions timelocked to the adjective onset (vertical line) at electrode Pz.
ANOVAs on mean amplitudes crossing Informativity (4
levels) with an Electrode factor (17 levels). Any effects and
interactions were followed up with separate pairwise
comparisons (OS, US, MM vs. MS, and US vs. MM).

Results
Reaction time analyses revealed that participants were faster
(p < .01) to identify the target in the OS (439ms, SD =
250.45), and slower (p < .01) in the MM (540ms, SD =
348.84) compared to the MS (480ms, SD = 306.37)
condition. Interestingly, the comparison between the US
(482ms, SD = 357ms) and MS conditions did not result in a
significant difference (p > .05). Response accuracy was high
overall; participants pressed the correct button over 90% of
the time in the OS, MS and MM conditions and 86.80% of
the time in the US condition.
Visual inspection of the ERP waveforms time-locked to
the adjective (Fig.2) shows a larger positivity for US
compared to MS starting after 200ms and reaching
maximum after 400ms. The omnibus ANOVA between
400-600ms yielded a significant interaction of Informativity
x Electrode (F(48,1200) = 1.57, p = .008). This effect was
further explored with pairwise comparisons. The
comparison between US and MS revealed a marginal effect
of Informativity (F(1,25) = 3.14, p = .088). As shown in
Figure 3A the effect was broadly distributed and slightly
more pronounced on the right electrode sites. The
A

comparison between US and MM yielded a significant
Informativity x Electrode interaction (F(16,400) = 2.88, p <
.001) and Figure 3B displays the distribution of this effect.
None of the other comparisons reached significance. These
results indicate that something fundamentally different is
going on in US compared to any of the other conditions,
crucially also compared to the explicit case of referential
failure (MM). This is possibly the fact that it is only in the
US condition that participants are able to identify the target
category (e.g., the bowl) already by hearing the adjective
(“yellow”) as the instruction unfolds, but, crucially, also fail
to pin down the target object. We will return to this point in
the discussion.
The ERPs time-locked to the noun (Fig. 4) show a graded
negativity peaking around 400ms, with MM being the most
negative and OS the least negative. The omnibus ANOVA
in the 300-500ms time-window revealed a main effect of
Informativity (F(3,75) = 6.23, p < .001) and an
Informativity x Electrode interaction (F(48,1200) = 2.66, p
< .001). Pairwise comparisons for MM vs. MS yielded an
interaction of Informativity x Electrode (F(16,400) = 5.08, p
< .001). As shown in Figure 3C the distribution of the effect
is centro-parietal, which is the typical distribution of the
N400 effect. The comparison between OS and MS in the
same time-window revealed a main effect of Informativity
(F(1,25) = 8.26, p = .008), and again a centro-parietal
distribution (Fig. 3D). The timing and topographic

B

C

D

Figure 3. Topographic maps showing the effects of US minus MS (A) and US minus MM (B) in the 400-600ms time-window
post-adjective onset. C is showing the effect of MM minus MS in the 300-500ms time-window post-noun onset, and D the
effect of MS minus OS in the 300-500ms time-window post-noun onset.
.

2425

distribution of the two effects indicates that Informativity at
the noun modulates the N400 component. While the
comparison between US and MS in the 300-500ms timewindow did not reach significance,1 the US vs. MM
comparison revealed a main effect of Informativity (F(1,25)
= 10.53, p = .003) and an Informativity x Electrode
interaction (F(16,400) = 3.19, p < .001). While this finding
seems to corroborate the view that referential failure due to
under-specification is different from referential failure due
to mismatch, we refrain from drawing strong conclusions
from the effects (or lack thereof) elicited by the US
condition in the noun region (see Footnote 1).

General Discussion
In this study we investigated the influence of over- and
under-specified expressions on visually-situated referential
processing. The results that we report offer two important
insights: Firstly, we provide evidence that over-specification
is beneficial rather than detrimental to language
comprehension, as indexed by the decreased negativity
elicited for the OS relative to the MS condition. Secondly,
we tested the intuition that under-specification impairs
comprehension as it leads to referential failure, by
contrasting it, not only to minimal-specification, but,
importantly, to cases of explicit referential failure
(mismatch), and showed that the two processes result in
qualitatively different effects.
Specifically, while at the adjective region there were no
differences between the MM, OS and MS conditions, we
found a graded centro-parietal negativity peaking around
400ms after the onset of the noun for MM, MS, and OS,
where MM was the most and OS the least negative. We
interpret this N400-like effect as reflecting the predictability
of the noun,2 as determined by the visual context in
combination with the information provided by the adjective.
That is, while in the MS condition the adjective provides
enough information to help narrow down the referential
space to two objects (cf. the yellow bowl and the wateringcan in Fig.1A), with the noun disambiguating, then, between
the two, in both the OS and MM conditions the adjective
(“yellow”) can already single out the target referent (the
bowl and mug, in Fig.1B and 1D, respectively), thereby
raising specific expectations for the noun. When these
expectations are disconfirmed (MM condition), the N400
elicited by the noun is higher than it is in the MS condition,
while when they are confirmed (OS condition), the N400
amplitude is lowest. This last finding is at odds with the
results of Engelhardt et al. (2011), as it suggests that not
only is over-specification not detrimental to comprehension,
1

Note, however, that the pre-stimulus baseline correction was
performed on an interval displaying a significant difference
between US and MS (the last 200ms of the adjective). This may
have artificially pulled the two waveforms together, thereby
masking any potential effect of US vs. MS in the noun region.
2
Cf. Kutas and Federmeier (2011) for a review on the N400 as
indicator of predictability (even though the literature so far does
not extend to situated language processing).

but that it is in fact beneficial, at least when in presence of a
complex visual context. Such an interpretation is
corroborated by the reaction time data, which were faster in
the OS, while slower in the MM, in comparison with the MS
condition.
As for the cases when the information given is less than
minimally required for target identification, the pattern of
results first and foremost reveals that referential failure due
to US is qualitatively different than that in MM. While the
ERPs for the OS, MS and MM conditions overlap
throughout the adjective region and start diverging only at
300ms after the noun onset, there was a significant positive
deflection for US compared to MS already at the adjective
region (cf. Fig. 2). What is so unique about the US condition
that is reflected in these findings? Crucially, while in both
the US and MS conditions the adjective picks out two out of
the six objects, in the MS condition these are of a different
type (cf. yellow bowl and watering-can in Fig.1A), and the
noun is still required for disambiguation. In other words, in
the MS condition, both the adjective and the noun are
necessary to fully disambiguate the target, and each of them
provides information that incrementally restricts referential
space. By contrast, in the US condition the adjective
identifies exactly two objects that are of the same type (cf.
the two yellow bowls in Fig.1C), rendering the adjective
redundant. What is more, processing of the adjective in the
US condition is different than in the OS and MM conditions,
as well: Even though the adjective in OS and MM is also
redundant, it does however help single out the target
referent already before any information about its type comes
in, giving rise to predictions about the head noun,3 and
potentially making processing easier and faster (OS
condition). In the US condition, on the other hand, the
adjective is not only redundant, but it is also unhelpful,
since the two objects it pins down are of the same type,
giving away the head noun, but at the same time having
listeners await for more information, as they discover that
the upcoming noun is not going to help disambiguate. We
believe that it is exactly this realisation that is reflected in
this positivity.
The influence of providing less information than
communicatively necessary on listeners’ brain responses
during comprehension is, to our knowledge, underinvestigated. One study that touches on this issue, however,
provides results consistent with our current findings. Hoeks,
Stowe, Hendriks, and Brouwer (2013) investigated the
processing of partial answers to questions. They had
participants read short dialogues that comprised questions
like “What did the mayor and the alderman do”, and
responses that only answered half the question and left
information about the other half pending (“The mayor
praised the councilor”), as their brain responses were
measured. Relative to a neutral condition where the question
was general (“What happened”) – and the answer was,
3

Although these predictions turn out to be inaccurate in the MM
condition, they are incrementally received as helpful (cf. the
discussion about the graded negativity, above).

2426

therefore, complete – partial answers resulted in a broadlydistributed positivity, which started around 350ms after the
onset of the critical word (“councilor”) and lasted through
the 600-900ms time-window. The authors interpret this
positivity as reflecting increased effort in updating or
reorganising a representation of what is being
communicated. Analogously, the positivity elicited by US
compared to MS at the adjective possibly reflects, on the
one hand, the realisation that this information is not helpful
– since it picks out two objects of the same type – and, on
the other, some process of updating the mental model of
what is being said. This update can amount to the general
expectancy for disambiguating information to come in
before the noun (which is already predicted), or even the
formulation of specific predictions as to what the next
adjective should be, given information so far (cf. “dotted” or
“checkered” in Fig.1C).
Future work is necessary to interpret the effect of underspecification and determine whether this positivity indeed
reflects processes of updating the listener’s mental
representation. For example, under this account, if a third
object of the same type but different colour was introduced
in the visual context (e.g., a red bowl in Fig.1C), one should
not expect a positive deflection after “yellow”, since the
adjective now rules out one object and helps narrow down
the referential space.

Conclusions
Our findings demonstrate that ERPs index the full spectrum
of situated referential processes, offering two important
insights. Firstly, we observed N400 sensitivity to the
(visually-determined) predictability of the noun in the MM,
MS and OS conditions, suggesting that over-specification is
not detrimental, but rather beneficial to language
comprehension. Secondly, we show that listeners rapidly
identify unhelpful information: The adjective in the US
condition fails to distinguish between the two objects of the
same type, resulting in a positive deflection relative to both
the MS and MM conditions. This effect indicates that
referential failure due to under-specification is qualitatively
different from explicit cases of referential failure
(mismatch).

References
Arts A., A. Maes, L. Noordman, & C. Jansen (2011).
Overspecification facilitates object identification. Journal
of Pragmatics, 43, 361-374.
Davies, C., & N. Katsos (2013). Are speakers and listeners
‘only moderately Gricean’? An empirical response to
Engelhardt et al. (2006). Journal of Pragmatics, 49(1),
78-106.
Deutsch W., & T. Pechmann (1982). Social interaction and
the development of definite descriptions. Cognition, 11,
159-184.
Engelhardt, P. E., K. Bailey, & F. Ferreira (2006). Do
speakers and listeners observe the Gricean Maxim of
Quantity. Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 554-573.
Engelhardt P. E., Ş. B. Demiral, & F. Ferreira (2011). Overspecified referring expression impair comprehension: An
ERP study. Brain and Cognition, 77, 304-314.
Ferreira, V. S., L. R. Slevc, & E. S. Rogers (2005). How do
speakers avoid ambiguous linguistic expressions?
Cognition, 96, 263-284.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In: P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.) Syntax and Semantics: Speech Acts
(Vol.III), pp. 510-516. New York: Academic Press.
Hoeks, J. C. J., L. A. Stowe, P. Hendriks, & H. Brouwer
(2013). Questions Left Unanswered: How the Brain
Responds to Missing Information. PLoS ONE, 8(10):
e73594. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0073594.
Kutas M., & K. D. Federmeier (2011). Thirty Years and
Counting: Finding Meaning in the N400 Component of
the Event-Related Brain Potential (ERP), Annual Review
of Psychology, 62, 621-647.
Maes A., A. Arts, & L. Noordman (2004). Reference
management in instructive discourse. Discourse
Processes, 37, 117-144.
Nadig A. S., & J. C. Sedivy (2002). Evidence of
perspective-taking constraints in children’s online
reference resolution. Psychological Science, 13(4), 329336.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental Speech Production and
Referential Overspecification. Linguistics, 27(1), 89-110.

Acknowledgments
We thank Zijian (Fabio) Lu, Torsten Jachmann and Yoav
Binoun for helping with experiment implementation and
data collection, and Vera Demberg and Harm Brouwer for
useful discussions. This research was supported by the
“Multimodal Computing and Interaction” Cluster of
Excellence and by SFB1102 “Information Density and
Linguistic Encoding” awarded by the German research
foundation (DFG).

2427

