Evidence for widespread thematic structure in the mental lexicon
Simon De Deyne (simon.dedeyne@adelaide.edu.au)a
Steven Verheyen (steven.verheyen@ppw.kuleuven.be)b
Amy Perfors (amy.perfors@adelaide.edu.au)a
Daniel J. Navarro (daniel.navarro@adelaide.edu.au)a
a

b

University of Adelaide, School of Psychology, 5005 Adelaide, Australia
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract

2013).
The goal of this paper is to explore how the mental lexicon is
semantically structured, using a large-scale semantic network
that covers the majority of words in the lexicon. In the first
part of the paper we use a flexible clustering technique to
investigate how the lexicon as a whole is organized, and find
evidence for widespread thematic structure. In the second part,
we present a more focused empirical test, that investigates
whether categories are organized taxonomically. We find that
even within concrete noun categories like BIRDS and TOOLS,
most of the organizational structure appears to be thematic.

Semantic structure in the mental lexicon is often assumed to
follow a taxonomic structure grouping similar items. This
study uses a network clustering analysis of a massive word
association dataset that does not primarily focus on concrete
noun categories, but includes the majority of the words used
in daily life. At this scale, we found widespread overlap
between thematically organized clusters, arguing against a
discrete categoric view of the lexicon. An empirical analysis
focusing on taxonomic categories confirmed the widespread
thematic structure even for concrete noun categories in the
animal domain. Overall, this suggests that applying network
clustering to word association data provides valuable insight
into how large-scale semantic information is represented. This
analysis leads to a different, more thematic topology than the
one inferred from idealized small-scale approaches that sample
only specific parts of the lexicon.

Study 1: Network Clustering
Constructing the semantic network. The network we used
was derived from a large scale word association study described in detail in De Deyne, Navarro, and Storms (2013).1
The study involved a total of 71,380 native Dutch speakers and
over 12,400 cue words, and employed a multiple response design in order to better approximate weak associations between
words. For the purposes of this investigation, non-dominant
word forms (e.g., apples) were removed if a dominant form
(e.g., apple) was also present in the corpus. This resulted
in a corpus that contained 2.41 million responses to 11,252
cue words. From this corpus we constructed a network in
which each word is a node, and two words are connected by
an edge if one word is an associate of the other. In order to
avoid over-weighting high-frequency edges between words,
response frequencies were transformed to reflect the mutual
information between two words (see De Deyne, Verheyen, &
Storms, in press; Bullinaria & Levy, 2007, for details). The resulting network captures the semantic relations in the lexicon
(De Deyne et al., 2013, in press).

Keywords: semantic networks; thematic roles; taxonomies;
clustering.

One of the most influential ideas in psychological theories
about the representation of semantic knowledge holds that
concepts are grouped together on taxonomic grounds. In this
taxonomic view, the entities that constitute a category are comparable because they have the same function in categories like
TOOLS or VEHICLES , or look the same and/or share certain
biological properties in categories like FRUIT or INSECTS (Lin
& Murphy, 2001). The view that concepts are organized as
a taxonomy of categories (e.g., BIRDS or ANIMALS) on the
basis of entity feature overlap has been challenged as some
studies have attributed a larger role to thematic relations between words that perform complementary roles in the same
scenario or event (Gentner & Kurtz, 2005; Lin & Murphy,
2001). Others stress the role of affect in structuring word
meaning (Niedenthal, Halberstadt, & Innes-Ker, 1999). These
findings are suggestive, but we still lack a comprehensive account of the extent to which these different principles structure
lexical meaning and whether the same principles hold at different hierarchical levels that group together entities. Moreover,
not all aspects of these different proposals are compatible, nor
is it clear at what level of abstraction the proposed principles
operate. In addition, many studies of semantic structure are
biased towards concrete noun categories (Medin, Lynch, &
Solomon, 2000; Medin & Rips, 2005) and most only focus on
a small part of the lexicon. This focus on small data sets is of
particular concern because many characteristics of networks,
including information retrieval, are qualitatively different at
different sizes (the more is different principle, discussed in
Baronchelli, i Cancho, Pastor-Satorras, Chater, & Christiansen,

Extracting clusters from networks. Given a semantic network, the goal is to use statistical methods to work out how it
is organized. A standard way to do this is to extract clusters
of words that are more highly interconnected within a cluster
than between clusters. By examining which words tend to
form dense clusters, we are able to get a sense of how the
lexicon as a whole is structured.
In recent years, network clustering methods have been developed that can handle large networks. One such method
is the Order Statistics Local Optimization Method (OSLOM)
developed by Lancichinetti, Radicchi, Ramasco, and Fortunato (2011). Using OSLOM, clusters can be identified by
1 The word association project is ongoing and can be accessed at
http://www.smallworldofwords.com.

518

Table 1: Overview of the hierarchical cluster structure showing five

Table 2: First ten (alphabetical) words from four example clusters

levels (Level 1 is broadest, Level 5 is most precise). The statistics
include total number of clusters N, average cluster size hNc i and its
standard deviation, number of homeless nodes Nhomeless , number of
nodes member of multiple clusters Noverlapping , maximum overlap
for any node and the average p-value hpi.

consisting of Nc members found for different values of p at Level 5
of the hierarchy. Each column shows elements of thematic structure.

N
hNc i
sd(Nc )
Nhomeless
Noverlapping
max(overlap)
hpi

1

2

3

4

5

2
8588
2112
18
5943
2
0

7
3049
973
18
6956
7
0.062

37
515
364
39
5263
8
0.04

161
112
66
86
4717
10
0.035

506
25
12
380
1676
6
0.051

evaluating the likelihood that such a cluster would arise in a
comparable random network. A full discussion of OSLOM is
beyond the scope of this paper, but for the current purposes, it
suffices to note that OSLOM allows clusters to overlap and it
automatically determines a hierarchical solution if the structure of the network supports this. It is also flexible enough
to exclude words from any cluster (“homeless nodes”) if they
are not sufficiently well connected to others. Finally, each
cluster is associated with a p-value, allowing the statistical
significance of individual clusters to be assessed. Following
Lancichinetti et al. (2011) the choice for p at 0.25 was determined on a case-by-case basis where in this study the worst
clusters were still interpretable (see further). For more details on OSLOM and how we applied it to our data, see the
supplementary materials.2

Results
Applying OSLOM to the semantic network resulted in a solution with five hierarchical levels. An overview of this solution
is shown in Table 1. There was a large degree of variability
in the number of clusters across the five different levels. On
average, the p-value of the extracted clusters was low (.051),
indicating that the obtained clusters were unlikely to arise in a
comparable random network.
There were few homeless nodes at any level, indicating that
most words were reliably attributed to a specific cluster. There
was also a considerable degree of overlap at all levels relative
to the size of the clusters; clusters were more distinct at the
more precise levels, where more clusters were obtained. For
instance, at the lowest level 1,676 words appeared in multiple
clusters, compared to 5,943 at the highest level.
The fact that many words appear in multiple clusters argues
against the idea of a discrete representation in categories. Inspection of these overlapping nodes allows us to grasp how
different clusters are related at the same hierarchical level,
which might also explain why certain clusters are grouped
together at higher hierarchical levels. Membership of multiple clusters often reflects various related senses a word might
have. For example, the word language (see Figure 1) was attributed to four different clusters related to nationality, speech,

p < 0.0001
Nc = 14

p < 0.0001
Nc = 21

p = 0.247
Nc = 35

p = 0.243
Nc = 29

aikido
combat
martial art
belt
Japan
combat
kimono
to wrestle
judo
judoka

envy
envious
dislike
disapproval
aversion
hate
to hate
grudge
bitter
resentment

anthropology
dino
dinosaur
dodo
evolution
fossil
history
cave
bludgeon
mammoth

earthly
real
existence
to exist
fact
factual
present
now
is
sober

language education, and communication, thus explaining important relations between these different clusters. In other
cases, overlap might point to separate senses. For instance,
the Dutch homonym bank (meaning either financial institution
or couch) belonged to both a cluster indicating finance and a
cluster for furniture and sitting. Both cases confirm that the
obtained solution derives overlapping clusters in a sensible
way by accounting for polysemy and homonymy.
Figure 1 shows the hierarchical clusters obtained by our
analysis. At each level the most prototypical examples of clusters are shown, where the typicality of any word is measured
by the weighted sum of all links it receives from other words
in that cluster. At the most general level (Level 1), there are
only two distinct clusters, one of which appears to contain
words with negative connotations and one with positive ones.3
In order to verify whether this interpretation is supported statistically, we used the valence judgments reported by Moors
et al. (2012), which are applicable to 3,642 non-overlapping
words in our clusters. The valence judgments differed significantly between our two clusters according to an independent
t-test (t(3640) = 7.367, CI = [0.190,0.327]). This supports
the interpretation, and agrees with other research that suggests
valence is the most important dimension in semantic space
(De Deyne, Voorspoels, Verheyen, Navarro, & Storms, 2014;
Samsonovic & Ascoli, 2010) and that category structures are
affect-based (Niedenthal et al., 1999).
At lower levels in the hierarchy, the meaning associated
with each cluster becomes more concrete. For instance, Level
2 differentiates among the “negative” cluster words at Level 1
– making a distinction between a purely negative cluster (with
words like negative and sadness) and clusters with central
nodes like school, religion, and money. The subdivisions of
the “positive” cluster involve the central nodes nature, music, sports, and food which might be interpreted as covering
sensory information and natural kinds.
Inspecting over 500 derived clusters revealed a widespread
thematic structure, grouping together entities like poet and
3 Unlike

other results reported in the paper, this seems to be
slightly dependent on parameter choices: we found that some choices
of parameter values produced more than two clusters. However, the
positive vs negative distinction was always present.

2 The

supplementary materials together with the clustering solution at the different hierarchical levels can be downloaded from
http://www.smallworldofwords.com/data/cogsci2015/

519

Figure 1: Hierarchical tree visualization of clusters in the lexicon with five most central members.

Method and Procedure

poem), which could cooccur in the same scenario or event
more often than what would be expected under a strict taxonomic organization. This was the case regardless of the size
of the clusters and how significant they were. For example,
in the case of low values for p this resulted in clusters like
the left column in Table 2, which has taxonomic elements
(e.g., judo, karate, and aikido) but also thematic ones (Japan,
belt, kimono, to wrestle). The inclusion of thematic elements
occurred even in clusters focused around non-concrete words,
as in the second and last column of Table 2. For example, in
the second column we observe mostly abstract negative sentiments and the inclusion of a mixture of adjectives, nouns, and
verbs (which do not reflect a pure taxonomy, but also allow
for properties and actions). It is also evident that even clusters
with fairly high p values were meaningful, as is shown in
columns 3 and 4 of Table 2. These clusters have a sensible
interpretation, although many words would be appropriate in
different clusters as well.

Data from an exemplar generation task by Ruts et al. (2004)
were used to identify members of the most commonly used
taxonomic categories in the literature (see for example Rosch,
Mervis, Grey, Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976; Hampton,
1979). In this task, 100 participants generated as many exemplars they could think of for six artifact categories (CLOTH ING, KITCHEN UTENSILS , MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS , TOOLS,
VEHICLES , and WEAPONS ) and seven natural kinds ( FRUIT ,
VEGETABLES , BIRDS , INSECTS , FISH , MAMMALS , and REP TILES ). This resulted in a total of 789 words, of which 588
were included in the word association data (the missing words
tended to be low frequency words like komodo or shiruken).
The names of the categories and the number of exemplars
obtained through this procedure are shown in the first two
columns of Table 3.
The critical question is whether the clusters extracted in
Study 1 include anything that might correspond to concrete
noun categories like BIRDS and VEGETABLES. For each of
our categories, we found the best matching cluster and calculated the precision and recall in terms of the F-measure for
clustering performance (see Ball, Karrer, & Newman, 2011,
for more details regarding the use of F in clustering). A
taxonomic-like organization would be evident in clusters with
high precision and recall, resulting from many true positives
and few false positives and false negatives. For instance, if the
cluster corresponding to the category BIRDS contained robin
(a true positive) and did not contain spoon (a true negative),
that would increase the F-score. Conversely, if it contained

Study 2: Searching for taxonomic categories
Our results so far suggest that clustering of the mental lexicon
reveals widespread thematic organization and considerable
overlap between clusters. There would seem to be little evidence that taxonomic categories play an important role in
organizing the lexicon. However, the findings in the previous
section were based on a subjective interpretation of over 500
clusters in an exploratory clustering analysis rather than on an
explicit search for taxonomic structure. To redress this, this
section presents analyses that conduct exactly such a search.

520

Table 3: F-values and cluster sizes for items generated for
13 concrete noun categories. Nhuman is the category size
based on the exemplar generation task; Nc is the size of
the best-matching cluster; F captures precision and recall
according to the human categories for the full network. F 0 is
calculated from a network that excluded potential thematic
information. F-values are fairly low, indicating a rather low
correspondence between the clusters and the taxonomic
categories. Excluding thematic information results in F 0
values that do capture taxonomic information.
Nhuman

Nc

F

F0

F RUIT
V EGETABLES
B IRDS
I NSECTS
F ISH
M AMMALS
R EPTILES

40
35
53
40
37
61
21

50
58
63
34
48
21
22

0.47
0.50
0.53
0.46
0.57
0.20
0.65

0.84
0.90
0.90
0.68
0.91
0.76
0.51

Mean

41

42

0.48

0.79

C LOTHING
K ITCHEN U TENS .
M USICAL I NSTR .
T OOLS
V EHICLES
W EAPONS

46
71
46
73
46
46

70
18
24
56
28
25

0.35
0.20
0.37
0.25
0.16
0.37

0.80
0.66
0.89
0.76
0.73
0.88

Mean

55

37

0.28

0.79

Category

ture: beak, egg, nest, and whistle appear in the BIRDS cluster;
in the case of FRUIT, intrusions included juicy, pick, and summer. In other words, the thematic interpretation of entities at
the lowest level in Figure 1 (e.g., score, music theory, piano,
stave, violin) is now confirmed empirically for a total of 13
frequently used categories.
Overall, our inability to find a taxonomic organization even
for biological categories, combined with the widespread thematic structure across nearly all clusters, strongly suggests that
multiple factors contribute to structure in the mental lexicon,
and thematic relations are a major one of them.
Finding taxonomies by restricting the network. One potential response to the previous analyses relates to the nature
of the data upon which they are based. Perhaps the word association task simply fails to capture taxonomic information,
and if so, the results of these analyses are simply an artifact of
the choice of task. Alternatively, perhaps the “failure” arises
because the word association task is more general than the
tasks typically used to study taxonomic categories.
There is some evidence that a different choice of task would
produce different choices. For instance, much of the work on
taxonomic organization relies on tasks in which participants
are asked to list features of entities (e.g., Ruts et al., 2004).
One could argue that feature generation is a constrained version of the word association task, and the key difference is
the number of thematic responses one gets in both procedures.
Similarly, feature generation stimuli are usually restricted to
concrete nouns, which places restrictions on what words can
be grouped together. In other words, the tendency to find
taxonomic categories may be a result of restricting the task.
To test this idea, we used the word association data to construct a network that included only those 588 words that belonged to one of the taxonomic categories. Moreover, in order
to approximate the “shared features” measure that is more
typical of feature generation tasks, we computed the cosine
similarity between pairs of words. That is, words that have the
same associates are judged to be more similar, and this similarity was used to weight the edges in the restricted network.4
We then applied the clustering procedure to this restricted network and repeated the analysis from the previous section. The
F-statistics from this analysis are reported as the F 0 -values
in Table 3. This time, the results of the clustering show a
high degree of agreement with the taxonomic organization,
with an average F-value of 0.79. The only exception was
REPTILES , which upon inspection appears to reflect a failure
to distinguish REPTILES from INSECTS.
The success of this analysis suggests two things. First, the
word association task does encode taxonomic information, as
evidenced by the fact that we are able to reconstruct taxonomic
categories. However, the fact that the only way to do so is to
mimic all the restrictive characteristics of a feature generation
task (e.g., limited word set) is revealing. Taxonomic information is not the primary means by which the mental lexicon
is organized: if it were, we should not have to resort to such
drastic restrictions in order to uncover taxonomic categories.

guitar (a false positive) or did not contain ostrich (a false
negative), that would decrease the F-score. This way, high
F-scores should reflect categories that are not overly specific
(many false negatives) or general (many false positives).

Results
The best matching clusters were found at the lowest level in
the hierarchy (Level 5). As Table 3 shows, for natural kinds
the average number of generated exemplars (41) was similar
to the average number of cluster members (42). However, for
artifacts the clusters contained fewer members (55 vs 37). The
F-values were on average 0.48 for the natural categories and
0.28 for the artifacts. Exceptions like FISH notwithstanding,
the results indicate only limited support for the presence of
a taxonomic organization. Moreover, the difference between
both domains is consistent with previous work finding that
artifact categories do not have as clear of a delineation as
natural kinds do (Ceulemans & Storms, 2010). Overall the
F-values are low, suggesting that the network structure of the
mental lexicon does not support a general and strict taxonomic
organization.
To explain why even the best-matching clusters provide
poor approximations to taxonomic categories, Table 4 lists the
five most central false positives. In some cases these words
could in fact be interpreted taxonomically. For instance, in
several cases the category label was included in the cluster.
However, for the most part the intrusions are thematic in na-

4 Note

that one could also derive such a similarity-based network
for the complete lexicon, which would reflect the similarity between
cues rather than their weighted associative strength. We did in fact
do this. It produced results similar to the original analysis.

521

Table 4: Top 5 false positives ordered by cluster in-strength per category. Most of the false positives are thematic in nature. For
instance, false positives for the BIRDS category include beak, egg, nest, and whistle.
Category
F RUIT
V EGETABLES
B IRDS
I NSECTS
F ISH
M AMMALS
R EPTILES
C LOTHING
K ITCHEN U TENSILS
M USICAL I NSTR .
T OOLS
V EHICLES
W EAPONS

1

2

3

4

5

fruit
vegetable
bird
insect
fish
rodent
reptile
clothing
cooking
wind instrument
tools
speed
sharp

juicy
healthy
beak
vermin
fishing
gnaw
scales
fashion
kitchen
to blow
carpenter
drive
stab

pit
puree
nest
beast
rod
tail
animal
blouse
stove
fanfare
carpentry
vehicle
blade

pick
sausage
whistle
crawl
slippery
pen
tail
collar
cooker hood
orchestra
wood
motor
point

summer
hotchpotch
egg
animal
water
marten
amphibian
zipper
burning
harmony
drill
circuit
stake

General Discussion

the idea that our results are robust against differences in the
amount, type, and quality of the data from which the lexicon
is derived.

The prominent view that the mental lexicon is organized in
taxonomic categories remains highly influential. It dates back
to knowledge ontologies proposed by Aristotle and Linnaeus
and lives on in current encyclopedias like Wikipedia or search
engines like Yahoo! (Inc). While it might be useful or at least
economical to retrieve information from an encyclopedia by
agreeing on a single taxonomic index, information stored in
the mental lexicon seems accessible in other ways as well.
Despite the ubiquity of the taxonomic view, we found only
limited evidence (at best) for a dominant taxonomic organization in a large-scale semantic network derived from human
word-association judgments; instead, thematic organization
was widespread. The pervasiveness of thematic organization
occurred even in a typical taxonomic domain like animals.
In previous work the pervasive contribution of thematic or
relational knowledge may have been overlooked due to a selection bias stemming from a focus on certain concepts (nouns,
mostly concrete) and semantic relations (mainly taxonomically
defined).
In other work we have performed similar analyses that
suggest that the thematic organization observed here does
not depend strongly on the type of data (word associations)
from which the network is constructed. Our results showed
widespread thematic organization when using networks based
on primary responses only (unlike this work, which used three
responses) as well as models derived from syntactic dependency relations in written and spoken corpora (De Deyne, Verheyen, & Storms, 2015). The main difference observed in
the latter situation is that models derived from text resulted in
fewer clusters as a consequence of the smaller signal-to-noise
ratio in the text-based models compared to word association
based ones. For the word association network based on primary responses only, the evidence for a taxonomic organization was slightly stronger because the category labels itself
were more often given as a primary than as a secondary or
tertiary response (e.g, alligator – reptile; De Deyne & Storms,
2008). Even these networks were predominantly thematically
organized, though. Altogether, these findings add support to

Broader Implications. While our results do not exclude the
role of taxonomic grounds for grouping entities in special
cases like F ISH, thematic structure was widespread, showing
up in nearly all investigated clusters at all depths of the derived hierarchy. The finding that many words from domains
like animals (which are traditionally considered taxonomic)
are thematically clustered, even at the lowest level of the hierarchy, supports the idea that the networks are organized
primarily along thematic rather than taxonomic or categorical
lines. Other studies that evaluate semantic structure in the
mental lexicon also suggest that the network is thematic. It
can account better for thematic relatedness judgments than taxonomic relatedness judgments (De Deyne et al., in press) and
has been shown to facilitate word processing when thematic
but not coordinate prime-target pairs are used (Hutchison,
2003). This converges with recent evidence that highlights
the role of thematic representations even in domains such
as animals (Gentner & Kurtz, 2006; Lin & Murphy, 2001;
Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999) and the fact that a taxonomic
organization of knowledge might be heavily culturally defined
(Lopez, Atran, Coley, Medin, & Smith, 1997), a consequence
of formal education (Sharp et al., 1979), or reflect different
levels of expertise (Medin, Lynch, Coley, & Atran, 1997).
While other reserachers have argued for a role for thematic
relations, these relations haven’t received nearly as much attention as taxonomic structure. One explanation is that in
contrast to previous studies, our network has a wide coverage
of all kinds of words – words that vary widely in terms of
their abstractness, emotional connotation, and part of speech
(verbs, adjectives, and nouns). By not restricting the type
of words in the network, the risk of a selection bias towards
concrete nouns is reduced and the likelihood of identifying
thematic representations increases (Medin et al., 2000; Medin
& Rips, 2005). In addition, it is quite likely that the thematic
organization reflects an inherent property of language: most
words are taxonomically related to only a small number of

522

other words, but can occur in a variety of thematic settings.
This is in line with previous findings showing that Zipf’s law
reflects the tendency to avoid excessive synonymy in semantic
networks (Manin, 2008).
Our findings have implications that affect other domains
of language processing as well. They might explain what
kind of semantic information is likely to become activated
in tasks like priming or word recognition. In the case of
priming, for example, it could explain the distinct effects found
for thematically and taxonomically related pairs (Hutchison,
2003). Similarly, in word recognition it may provide a way to
understand the processing advantages associated with words
that have “rich” semantics (Pexman, Hargreaves, Siakaluk,
Bodner, & Pope, 2008), which were previously explained
in terms of the number of entity features a word has or the
number of contexts in which it occurs.
A final point worth noting is that the present work focuses on semantic representations; this could highlight other
properties than modal-specific representations. For instance,
language-based representations might underestimate the richness of certain perceptual properties (Pecher & Zwaan, 2005).
It is possible that a similar selection bias pertains to nonlinguistic concept representations as well. For instance, an
encounter with a certain bird or interaction with a specific
musical instrument involves more than just encoding of the
perceptual features of each – at the least there is other contextual information, like habitat or venue, that ought to be part
of modal-specific proposals. Overall, our work suggests that
the classic taxonomic view is unnecessarily restrictive if the
goal is to understand how semantic or concept information is
stored or retrieved in a wide range of tasks.

tations for a wide range of concepts. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology.
De Deyne, S., Voorspoels, W., Verheyen, S., Navarro, D. J., & Storms,
G. (2014). Accounting for graded structure in adjective categories with valence-based opposition relationships. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 29(5), 568–583.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman, &
P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization inside and outside the lab.
(pp. 151–175). American Psychology Association.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2006). Relations, objects, and the
composition of analogies. Cognitive Science, 30, 609–642.
Hampton, J. A. (1979). Polymorphous concepts in semantic memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 441–
461.
Hutchison, K. A. (2003). Is semantic priming due to association
strength or feature overlap? Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
10, 785–813.
Lancichinetti, A., Radicchi, F., Ramasco, J. J., & Fortunato, S. (2011).
Finding statistically significant communities in networks. PloS
one, 6(4), e18961.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (2001). Thematic relations in adults’
concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 1,
3–28.
Lopez, A., Atran, S., Coley, J. D., Medin, D. L., & Smith, E. E.
(1997). The tree of life: Universal and cultural features of
folkbiological taxonomies and inductions. Cognitive psychology, 32(3), 251–295.
Manin, D. Y. (2008). Zipf’s law and avoidance of excessive synonymy. Cognitive Science, 32(7), 1075–1098.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Atran, S. (1997). Categorization and reasoning among tree experts: Do all roads lead
to rome? Cognitive psychology, 32(1), 49–96.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., & Solomon, K. O. (2000). Are there kinds
of concepts? Annual review of psychology, 51(1), 121–147.
Medin, D. L., & Rips, L. J. (2005). Concepts and categories: memory,
meaning, and metaphysics. In K. Holyoak & R. Morrison
(Eds.), The cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning
(pp. 37–72). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Moors, A., Houwer, J. D., Hermans, D., Wanmaker, S., van Schie,
K., Harmelen, A.-L. V., . . . Brysbaert, M. (2012). Norms of
valence, arousal, dominance, and age of acquisition for 4,300
dutch words. Behavior research methods, 1–9.
Niedenthal, P. M., Halberstadt, J. B., & Innes-Ker, Å. H. (1999).
Emotional response categorization. Psychological Review,
106(2), 337.
Pecher, D., & Zwaan, R. A. (Eds.). (2005). Grounding cognition:
The role of perception and action in memory, language, and
thinking. Cambridge University Press.
Pexman, P. M., Hargreaves, I. S., Siakaluk, P. D., Bodner, G. E., &
Pope, J. (2008). There are many ways to be rich: Effects of
three measures of semantic richness on visual word recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(1), 161–167.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C., Grey, W., Johnson, D., & Boyes-Braem, P.
(1976). Basic objects in natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382–439.
Ruts, W., De Deyne, S., Ameel, E., Vanpaemel, W., Verbeemen,
T., & Storms, G. (2004). Dutch norm data for 13 semantic
categories and 338 exemplars. Behaviour Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 36, 506–515.
Samsonovic, A. V., & Ascoli, G. A. (2010). Principal semantic
components of language and the measurement of meaning.
PloS one, 5(6), e10921.
Sharp, D., Cole, M., Lave, C., Ginsburg, H. P., Brown, A. L., &
French, L. A. (1979). Education and cognitive development:
The evidence from experimental research. Monographs of the
society for research in child development, 1–112.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Bassok, M. (1999). What makes a man similar
to a tie? Cognitive Psychology, 39, 208–238.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by an ARC grant DE140101749
awarded to the first author. SV is a postdoctoral fellow at the Research
Foundation - Flanders. Salary support for AP and DJN was provided
by ARC grants DE120102378 and FT110100431, respectively.

References
Ball, B., Karrer, B., & Newman, M. (2011). Efficient and principled
method for detecting communities in networks. Physical
Review E, 84(3), 036103.
Baronchelli, A., i Cancho, R. F., Pastor-Satorras, R., Chater, N., &
Christiansen, M. H. (2013). Networks in cognitive science.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(7), 348–360.
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (2007). Extracting semantic representations from word co-occurrence statistics: A computational
study. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 510–526.
Ceulemans, E., & Storms, G. (2010). Detecting intra-and intercategorical structure in semantic concepts using HICLAS.
Acta Psychologica, 133(3), 296–304.
De Deyne, S., Navarro, D. J., & Storms, G. (2013). Better explanations of lexical and semantic cognition using networks derived
from continued rather than single word associations. Behavior
Research Methods, 45, 480–498.
De Deyne, S., & Storms, G. (2008). Word Associations: Network
and Semantic properties. Behavior Research Methods, 40,
213–231.
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., & Storms, G. (2015). Structure and organization of the mental lexicon: a network approach derived
from syntactic dependency relations and word associations.
In A. Mehler, A. Lücking, S. Banisch, P. Blanchard, & B. Job
(Eds.), Towards a theoretical framework for analyzing complex linguistic networks. Berlin/New York: Springer.
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., & Storms, G. (in press). The role of
corpus-size and syntax in deriving lexico-semantic represen-

523

