Examining the role of inhibitory control in bilingual language switching
Alison R. Shell (ashell@umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, Biology/Psychology Building
College Park, MD, 20742 USA

Jared A. Linck (jlinck@umd.edu)
University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of Language, 7005 52nd Avenue
College Park, MD 20742 USA

L. Robert Slevc (slevc@umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, Biology/Psychology Building
College Park, MD 20742 USA
Abstract
Bilingual language production is widely believed to be a
competitive process. Bilinguals may manage this competition
by relying on inhibiting one language while speaking in the
other. However, it remains unclear if this process relies on
domain general inhibitory mechanisms, and, if so, when and
where during language production inhibitory control is
applied. The current study investigates these issues by
experimentally manipulating demand on inhibitory control
using a picture word interference task during a language
switching paradigm. Switching costs were not exacerbated
when inhibitory control was taxed; in fact language switching
was less costly during inhibition-demanding trials. These
findings do not support the idea that inhibitory control
mechanisms underlie language switching and suggest that
language switching and the resolution of within-language
lexical competition do not share inhibitory resources.
Keywords: bilingualism; inhibitory control; word production;
language switching

Introduction
By most models of word production (e.g., Levelt, Roelofs,
& Meyer, 1999), word production starts with a concept,
from which activation spreads to an array of lexical items
(lemmas), which carry semantic and syntactic information
without word-form information. As activation spreads to the
target lemma and those sharing semantic properties with the
target, lexical selection must overcome the influence of
competing lemmas; accordingly, selection is generally
agreed to be a competitive process (Ferreira, 2010).
For bilinguals, lexical selection not only requires
overcoming lexical competition from semantically similar
items, but also from semantically identical items in another
language. Cross language facilitation and interference
effects show that bilinguals’ multiple languages are active at
the point of selection (e.g., Kroll, Bobb & Wodniecka,
2006), and thus bilinguals must overcome both within- and
between-language competition (e.g., Gollan & Silverberg,
2001).
This additional competition from the non-target language
presumably needs to be resolved in order to successfully
produce a target lexical item. How speakers do this is still
unsettled, however, an influential model proposes that
bilinguals
use
domain-general
inhibitory
control

mechanisms to suppress the non-target language (Green,
1998).
Much of the experimental evidence that inhibitory control
is involved in bilingual language control comes from
language-switching tasks that require a speaker to switch
between languages while naming items as indicated by a
cue. Thus trials involve both staying within a language (stay
trials), and switching from one language to the other (switch
trials). The costs associated with switching (increased
reaction time on switch vs. stay trials; cf. switching costs
outside of the linguistic domain; Monsell, 2003) are,
counter-intuitively, often larger when switching from L2 to
L1 than from L1 to L2 (e.g., Meuter & Allport, 1999),
which may reflect having to overcome residual inhibition of
the more dominant L1. Note, however, these asymmetries
are not always found and it is unclear how much about the
underlying switching processes can be gleaned from such
asymmetries alone (e.g., Bobb & Wodnieka, 2013)
Furthermore, not all bilinguals show such asymmetric
switch costs, leading to claims that inhibition is not
necessarily required for language control. For instance,
Costa and Santesteban (2004) demonstrate that while
bilinguals with a dominant L1 show asymmetrical switch
costs, balanced bilinguals (who are equally proficient in L1
and L2) fail to show switch cost asymmetries, even when
switching between their dominant L1 and a third language
(L3) in which they are relatively unskilled. This fits with
other evidence suggesting that bilingual lexical selection is
not a competitive process. For example, Costa, Miozzo, and
Caramazza (1999) found that in a picture word interference
task, the expected effects of the distractor word on target
picture naming (i.e., semantic interference and phonological
facilitation) occurred when the word was presented in the
target language, but also in the non-target language. These
findings suggest that while both languages are in fact
activated, they do not necessarily compete for selection.
Bloem and La Heij (2003) take this even further,
suggesting a language specific account of lexical access
without competition at the lexical level. Based on findings
that related words hindered naming in a translation task, but
related pictures facilitated translation, they propose that
competition is resolved at the earliest stage of production
(the conceptual level), that only the target concept is
lexicalized, and therefore lexical competition, as has been

2146

discussed, does not occur. (Note that their theory does
account for the effect of semantic interference in PWI tasks,
proposing that interference occurs due to spreading
activation from target to related items as a by-product of the
lexicalization process.)
On the other hand, other findings do support an important
role of inhibitory control in bilingual switching. Much of
this comes from correlation between language switching
costs and performance on other inhibitory control tasks.
That is, bilinguals with higher scores on domain-general
inhibitory control tasks tend to perform better on language
switching tasks (e.g. Linck, Schwieter, & Sunderman,
2012). Another type of, albeit controversial, support for the
role of domain-general inhibitory control in bilingual
language production comes from findings that bilinguals’
lifetime of practicing inhibitory control in guiding language
use may transfer to improved performance in domaingeneral attention and inhibitory control tasks (“the bilingual
advantage,” e.g., Abutalebi et al., 2012; Bialystok, 1999; but
see Papp & Greenberg, 2013).
As such, the support for both cross-language lexical
competition and for the role of inhibitory control in
resolving this competition is mixed, and often based on
correlational evidence, which is subject to alternative
explanations (e.g. differences in education, motivation, etc.).
The goal of the current study is thus to clarify the role of
inhibitory control in bilingual language production by
experimentally manipulating the availability of inhibitory
control (via lexical competition) during a bilingual
production task. If bilingual production does in fact require
the same inhibitory control mechanisms involved in
resolving lexical competition, it should be subject to the
limited capacity of these resources. That is, a concurrent
task that shares resources with language selection should
interact with a bilingual production task by reducing the
ability to deal with the language conflict. Though this effect
should occur on all production trials, it should be
particularly pronounced on a language switch (i.e. overadditive) if additional control is, in fact, needed in order to
switch into the new language. If, however, these tasks do
not rely on shared resources, there should be no interaction.

Current Experiment
The current study manipulated inhibitory control during a
language switch task using the well-studied picture word
interference (PWI) paradigm, which manipulates the level
of competition in picture naming by adjusting the
relationship between target pictures and concurrently
presented distractors. Specifically, picture naming is slowed
when distractor words (presented either aurally or
superimposed in print) are semantically related to the
pictured item (Aristei & Rahman, 2013; Schriefers, Meyer
& Levelt, 1990). Because a lexical concept activates not
only its own lemma but also semantically similar lemmas, a
semantically similar distractor that adds additional
activation to a competing lemma can increase lexical
competition and the need for inhibitory control. This

semantic interference only occurs when the distractor is
timed to appear at or just before the picture onset,
suggesting that semantic interference occurs early in the
process of production, that is, during lemma selection. In the
current study, the relation of the distractor word to the target
picture (related, unrelated, or neutral) was manipulated
during a language-switching paradigm to vary demand on
inhibitory control during language switching.
The aim of the current study is to examine the role of
domain-general control mechanisms on language switching.
The PWI paradigm involves control of linguistic
representations, and therefore might be taken to reflect
language-specific, rather than domain-general mechanisms.
However, while both tasks do rely on lexical selection and
likely involve some shared processes, note that the PWI task
appears to involve general inhibitory control mechanisms;
for example, semantic interference in PWI involves brain
regions classically associated with conflict/cognitive control
across domains (see de Zubricaray Wilson, McMahon &
Muthiah, 2001). Thus, interactions of language switching
with PWI interference would likely reflect shared reliance
on domain general cognitive control mechanisms.

Method
Participants Thirty-two native English-speaking adults
with intermediate proficiency in Spanish (currently or
recently having taken intermediate to upper level college
Spanish courses) were recruited from the University of
Maryland and paid $10 for their participation. These
qualifications were assessed with a shortened version of
Language Experience and Proficiency Questionnaire
(LEAP-Q; Marian, Blumenfeld, & Kaushanskaya, 2007).
One participant was excluded from analysis for not meeting
the requirement of being a native English speaker.
Materials The target pictures, sixteen black and white
drawn images from the International Picture Naming Project
(IPNP) database (Szekely et al., 2004), were chosen to be
commonly known to intermediate Spanish learners, to avoid
cognate names in Spanish and English, and to meet the
requirements of the distractor words, as described below.
Trials were set up in triads by language (L1 and L2), with
a switch into the language (switch), a stay trial following the
switch (stay1) and a second stay (stay2). Lists were created
so that each picture showed up equally in each language,
and equally in the related and unrelated distractor conditions
(described below). Additionally, each picture showed up
equally in each of the switch, stay1, and stay2 positions in
each language, and each switch trial was followed equally
often by a related or unrelated stay trial. Finally, to reduce
repetition-priming effects, a picture in a switch trial was
never repeated in the following stay1 trial. Note that all
trials were pseudo-randomized, with the above constraints,
per participant, as to reduce order effects.
All distractor strings were presented in capital letters, in
red size 24 Helvetica font, in the center of the picture
stimuli to make the string highly visible. Related distractor

2147

words were selected from the online WordNet database
(Miller, 1995), to be a non-cognate sister term of the target
picture item- that is, sharing a hypernym (e.g., “pet” for
“cat” and “dog”) with the target item (Schriefers et al.,
1990) and to have high frequency, as to ensure familiarity
for participants. Unrelated distractor words were chosen to
be non-cognates, matched in frequency and number of
syllables in both Spanish and English, and to be minimally
related to the target (e.g., Target: “COW” / “VACA”,
Related: “HORSE” / “CABALLO”, Unrelated: “RING” /
“ANILLO”). Neutral “distractors” appeared during the
second stay trials (stay2 trials) and acted as a resetting trial
before the switch. These neutral “distractors” were a string
of “#”’s, which matched the number of characters of the
unrelated distractor in the target language to match in terms
of visual distraction, but remove potential for any lexical
competition with the target word. For example, the neutral
distractor for “VACA” (“ANILLO”) was “######”.
Procedure The experiment was administered using
PsyScope X (Build 57; Bonatti, n.d.), and vocal responses
and voice onset times were digitally recorded with a headmounted microphone connected to an IOlab response box.
The microphone sensitivity was calibrated for each
participant at the start of the session.
A set of practice trials preceded the full experiment to
ensure comfort with each component before completing the
combined task. To begin, participants were presented with
the 32 distractor items in a pre-determined randomized
order for translation from Spanish to English. Each item was
presented in capital letters, in size 24 black Helvetica font
for translation into English. Upon response the correct
response appeared below the picture as feedback before the
participant could move on to the next trial. The list appeared
two times in the same order, to ensure the participant was
comfortable with the distractor words and their meanings.
Participants were informed that they would be tested on
these words at the end of the experiment and encouraged to
learn any words they did not yet know. If they received
below 75% accuracy, they went through the translation
process in the same order a second time. At this point all
participants successfully were able to translate with at least
75% accuracy; as such each participant translated each item
a maximum of four times.
Participants then practiced naming the 16 pictures, first in
English, and then in Spanish, in the same pre-randomized
order for both language blocks, to ensure name agreement.
In the English block, each picture appeared with a square
around the picture, as a cue to name the item in English
while in the Spanish block the pictures appeared with a
circle around the picture. Again, upon response, the correct
item name appeared below the picture as feedback before
the participant could move on to the next trial.
Each participant practiced switching between naming
three items in Spanish followed by three items in English,
each picture appearing with its corresponding language cue.
These items were randomly selected from the complete list

of items for a total of 12 trials. Before each trial, a fixationcross appeared in the center of the screen for 1000ms, and
the onset of each picture was delayed 500ms after the
fixation disappeared. This ISI was chosen to give ample
time between trials to reduce interference from errors made
on previous trials. The participant practiced naming the
pictures in the cued language, which disappeared when their
naming response was detected.
Participants then had 12 randomly selected practice trials
with the complete task; switching between languages with
the same parameters as the switch-only trials, but with a
distractor word superimposed on the center of the pictured
item. Participants were instructed to name the pictures and
to ignore the distractor word. Finally, participants began the
experimental portion of the combined task, which consisted
of 384 trials with a scheduled, self-timed break halfway
through. See Figure 1 for a schematic of the task design.
After completion of the task, the participants were given
an untimed vocabulary test where all 32 Spanish distractor
items were listed, in a pre-determined randomized order, for
translation into English. Finally, the participants completed
the shortened LEAP-Q (Marian et al., 2007).
Switch:%L1%
(related)%

Switch:%L2%
(related)%

Stay%1:%L1%
(related)%

Stay%2:%L2%
(neutral)%

Stay%2:%L1%
(neutral)%

SOCK%

CRAYON%

LOBO%
####%

####%
ROCK%
Switch:%L1%
(unrelated)%

IRON%
Stay%1:%L1%
(unrelated)%

LECHE%
Switch:%L2%
(unrelated)%

Figure 1: Task schematic of the PWI-language switch
paradigm. Language cues are represented by square (L1)
and circle (L2) around items. Example distractor words are
shown in red.
Design and Analysis Voice key response times were log
transformed and analyzed using mixed effects models
implemented with the lme4 package (version 1.1-7 Bates,
Maechler, Bolker & Walker, 2014) in the statistical software
R version 3.1.1 (R Core Team, 2014).
Note that stay2 trials–the neutral fillers–were excluded
from analyses, therefore all further discussion of stay trials
refers to stay1; correspondingly, distractor conditions are
either related or unrelated, as neutral distractors only
occurred on stay2 trials. Switch condition (switch or stay
language trial) and distractor relatedness (related or
unrelated) were entered as fixed effects using orthogonal
contrast coding. For response time analyses, the maximal
random effects structure was included for both participants
and items (pictures), however only the fixed effects will be
reported here, as these were the effects of theoretical
interest. Because the lmer function does not calculate pvalue for models with random-effect slopes, in part due to

2148

there was no interaction between switch condition and
relatedness (b = 0.39, SE = 0.34, z = 1.15).

1200

Picture Naming Time

difficulty calculating degrees of freedom, t-values with an
absolute value greater than 2 were considered to indicate a
significant effect (Gelman & Hill, 2007). The primary effect
of interest was also evaluated with a chi-square test, based
on a single degree of freedom model comparison.
All trials with naming errors (349, 2.9% of trials) and all
voice key errors (57, 0.5% of all trials) were removed from
the response time data analysis. Additionally, for each
participant, any trials in either English or Spanish for which
the distractor item was not accurately translated on the
vocabulary quiz was removed from analysis (621 trials,
5.4% of accurate naming trials). The most extreme 3% of
values (trials with RTs above the 98.5 percentile and below
the 1.5 percentile) from the accurate dataset were excluded.
Following this, RTs greater than 2 standard deviations from
each subject’s mean (530 trials, 5.04%) were removed from
analysis. In total, these criteria led to the exclusion of 1062
trials (8.9% of total trials).
Accuracy data were analyzed over all trials (removing
only those items that had not been accurately translated on
the vocabulary quiz) using logistic mixed effects models.
Because the accuracy data included very few errors, the
fully specified random effects models were unable to
converge. Therefore for the accuracy analyses the random
intercept models are reported.

1150

1100

stay
switch

1050
Unrelated

Related

Distractor Relatedness

Figure 2: Picture naming RT (ms), as a function of the
language switch condition (stay or switch) and the pictureword relatedness in the concurrent PWI task (unrelated or
related). Plotted data are means of subject means. Error bars
indicate standard error of the mean.

Discussion

Results
As shown in Figure 2, naming was slower in switch than
stay trials (a main effect of switch condition: b = 0.075, SE
= 0.010, t = 7.89), showing the expected language switching
cost. Additionally, naming was slower when pictures
appeared with a related distractor word compared with an
unrelated word (a main effect of relatedness: b = 0.025, SE
= 0.007, t = 3.38), showing an expected PWI semantic
interference effect. Language (L1/L2) did not participate in
any interactions, however switch condition and relatedness
did interact. Surprisingly, this interaction was underadditive (b = -0.027, SE = 0.013, t = -2.18); that is, the
effect of a language switch was smaller when the switch
trial appeared with a related distractor compared with an
unrelated distractor. These findings clearly do not support
the original predictions of an over-additive interaction. This
switching by relatedness interaction was further assessed by
comparing an interactive 2x2 model (switch condition by
relatedness) with a reduced model that included only
additive fixed-effects. A likelihood ratio test confirmed a
better fit for the interactive model (χ²(1) = .42, p < .05).
Error rates showed a similar pattern of results, with
naming responses on switch trials being 2.54% less accurate
than on stay trials (b = 1.27, SE = 0.027, z = -4.68) and
1.48% less accurate when paired with related compared to
unrelated distractors (b = -0.75, SE = 0.029, z = -2.58).
While there was an additional interaction between switch
condition and language, with increased errors on L1
switches (b = 1.01, SE = 0.45, z = 2.26), reflecting a
tendency to incorrectly remain in the L2 rather than switch,

This study sought to more precisely define the role of
inhibitory control in resolving competition in bilingual
lexical access. This was investigated within a limitedresource framework by manipulating the demands on
inhibitory control via semantic relatedness in a picture-word
interference (PWI) paradigm during bilingual language
switching. According to the inhibitory control model
(Green, 1998), bilingual speech production requires
inhibition to overcome competition from the non-target
language and produce the target language. Therefore, in a
switch trial, where this inhibitory control is required, a
competition-inducing distractor word should tax inhibitory
control and therefore interfere with successful inhibition of
the non-target language. That is, the model predicts that
PWI-induced conflict should increase switch costs. The
results show a main effect of switching (switch cost) and
main effect of distractor relatedness (PWI effect). While
there was, in fact, an interaction between switch condition
and relatedness, the interaction was under-additive, wherein
switch costs were smaller during related trials than unrelated
trials. As such, the prediction of increased switch costs
during related trials was clearly not supported.
The strongest interpretation of these results is that
language switching does not rely on inhibitory control, at
least as is required to overcome semantic interference in the
PWI paradigm. That is, these results might suggest that this
specific type of lexical inhibition is not required for the
language switch task, and that the inhibitory control model
as it stands is not supported. These findings are congruent
with other models of bilingual production that focus on
activation, rather than inhibition, to promote the appropriate

2149

lexical item. For example, “persistent activation” (e.g.
Philipp & Koch, 2009) suggests that strong activation of the
weaker task (i.e., the L2) persists, making the upcoming
switch into a dominant task (L1) more difficult. Thus, rather
than dealing with overcoming previous inhibition, persistent
activation is more concerned with current level of activation
and is rooted in the task set inertia hypothesis from the
classic task switch literature (e.g., Wylie & Allport, 2000).
Additional support for a central role of activation, rather
than inhibition, has been demonstrated in task switching by
evidence of a “stay benefit” rather than a switch cost. For
example, De Baene and colleagues (2012) found that
response times were reduced over a number of stay trials,
but not over a number of switch trials, showing a benefit of
staying within a task. Additionally, over a series of stay
trials, a model of activation, rather than recruitment of
additional control processes, better explained neural
activation levels.
Of course, these data do not rule out any role of inhibition
in language switching, but rather question its role in the
scope of a language switching task. In the current findings,
it is possible that taxing inhibitory control may have
disrupted the adaptation over stay trials, thereby reducing
the stay benefit (which, without a baseline to determine
directionality of the effect, would be indistinguishable from
a reduced switch cost).
Another interpretation of these results is to posit that
bilingual language switching does rely on inhibitory control,
but of a type fundamentally different from that required to
overcome interference induced by PWI. Some support for
this interpretation comes from evidence that non-linguistic
cognitive control is unrelated to lexical selection in
monolinguals (Alario, Ziegler, Massol, & deCara, 2012),
which contrasts with significant relationships between
cognitive control and language switching in bilinguals (as
discussed in the introduction). This finding belies the
assumed link between cognitive control and language
control more generally, and corresponds with the underadditive effects of language switching and semantic
interference found in the current experiment.
Although these findings are inconsistent with the
straightforward prediction of a domain-general inhibitory
control model of language switching, it is nevertheless
possible that PWI and language switching do involve the
same underlying inhibitory control processes. One way that
shared processes could lead to the apparently independent
effects in the current study is if the inhibitory control
demands of the two tasks did not overlap in time. That is,
these findings could be explained in terms of a bottleneck in
dual processes (e.g., Ferreira & Pashler, 2002; Pashler,
1989) whereby some, but not all aspects of a given task
require domain general, capacity-limited resources. When
capacity-demanding tasks are presented simultaneously,
they reach a bottleneck, and must be performed in sequence.
Aspects of processing that do not require these resources are
automatically processed and therefore do not contribute to,
and are not affected by, the bottleneck. In the context of the

PWI paradigm, Kleinman (2013) proposed that picture
naming is subject to this attentional bottleneck, however
word reading is automatically processed and so is
unaffected. Thus, in PWI tasks, the distractor word and the
naming task can become separated in time, reducing the
PWI effect. By this account, the language switch trials in the
present experiment might have effectively delayed picture
naming while allowing the PWI distractor word to be read,
processed, and to no longer be sufficiently active as to
induce interference at the point of lexical selection. On the
other hand, picture naming should not be significantly
delayed during stay trials, when there is no additional
conflict; in these trials, both picture naming and distractor
words may be processed at the same time, where the
interference is readily available to take its toll.
This account fits with our findings of reduced costs
during switch trials, where ostensibly the interfering word
has had ample time to decay according to a bottleneck
account. A bottleneck account would not, however, predict
the observed main effect of distractor relatedness, which
shows that, regardless of the switch condition, a
semantically related distractor word did interfere with
lexical selection. Nevertheless, the bottleneck theory may
still apply if the delay caused by the switch condition was
enough to reduce, rather than remove, activation from the
distractor word relative to a stay trial. If this is the case, the
current study’s results may yet be consistent with shared
resources underlying language switching and interference
resolution in the PWI task. Future experiments are necessary
to decipher if these findings are in fact due to the bottleneck
processes, if they reflect a more specific type of inhibitory
control which does not share resources with the PWI task, or
if the lack of over-additive interaction between these tasks
truly reveals that domain general inhibitory control is not
required, at least as it is typically discussed, in bilingual
language switching. In any respect, these data lend
important constraints to the role of inhibitory control in
bilingual lexical access, and suggest revising current models
of bilingual production.

Acknowledgments
We thank Quyen Kieu, Zarsh Bhatti, and Omar Meja for
their help in data collection. This work was supported in
part by NSF IGERT 0801465

References
Abutalebi, J., Della Rosa, P. A., Green, D. W., Hernandez,
M., Scifo, P., Keim, R., … Costa, A. (2012).
Bilingualism tunes the anterior cingulate cortex for
conflict monitoring. Cerebral Cortex, 22(9), 2076–86.
Alario, F., Ziegler, J. C., Massol, S., & Cara, B. De. (2012).
Probing the link between cognitive control and lexical
selection in monolingual speakers. Topics in Cognitive
Psychology, 112, 545–559.
Aristei, S., & Rahman, R. A. (2013). Semantic interference
in language production is due to graded similarity, not

2150

response relevance. Acta Psychologica, 144(3), 571–
582.
Bates, D. Maechler, M., Ben Bolker & Walker, S (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and
S4. R package version 1.1-7. http://CRAN.R
project.org/package=lme4
Bialystok, E. (1999). Cognitive complexity and attentional
control in the bilingual mind. Child Development,
70(3), 636–644.
Bloem, I., & La Heij, W. (2003). Semantic facilitation and
semantic interference in word translation:
Implications for models of lexical access in language
production. Journal of Memory and Language, 48(3),
468–488.
Bobb, S. C., & Wodniecka, Z. (2013). Language switching
in picture naming: What asymmetric switch costs (do
not) tell us about inhibition in bilingual speech
planning. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5),
568–585.
Bonatti LL. Psyscope X (Build 57) (n.d.)
Costa, A., Miozzo, M., & Caramazza, A. (1999). Lexical
selection in bilinguals  : Do words in the bilingual’s
two lexicons compete for selection? Journal of
Memory and Language, 41, 365–397.
Costa, A., & Santesteban, M. (2004). Lexical access in
bilingual speech production: Evidence from language
switching in highly proficient bilinguals and L2
learners. Journal of Memory and Language, 50(4),
491–511.
De Baene, W., Kühn, S., & Brass, M. (2012). Challenging a
decade of brain research on task switching: Brain
activation in the task-switching paradigm reflects
adaptation rather than reconfiguration of task sets.
Human Brain Mapping, 33(3), 639–51.
De Zubicaray, G. I., Wilson, S. J., McMahon, K. L., &
Muthiah, S. (2001). The semantic interference effect
in the picture-word paradigm: An event-related fMRI
study employing overt responses. Human Brain
Mapping, 14, 218–227.
Ferreira, V. S. (2010). Language production. WIREs
Cognitive Science, 1, 834-844.
Ferreira, V. S., & Pashler, H. (2002). Central bottleneck
influences on the processing stages of word
production. Journal of Experimental Psychology
Learning Memory Cognition, 28(6), 1187–1199.
Gelman, A & Hill, J. (2007) Data Analysis Using
Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
Gollan, T., Silverberg, B (2001). Tip-of-the-tongue states in
Hebrew–English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 4, 63-83.
Green, D. W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual lexicosemantic system. Bilingualism: Language and
cognition, 1(02), 67-81.
Kleinman, D. (2013). Resolving semantic interference
during word production requires central attention.

Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 39(6), 1860–77.
Kroll, J. F., Bobb, S. C., & Wodniecka, Z. (2006). Language
selectivity is the exception, not the rule: Arguments
against a fixed locus of language selection in bilingual
speech. Bilingualism, 9(02), 119.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 1–75.
Linck, J. A., Schwieter, J. W., & Sunderman, G. (2012).
Inhibitory control predicts language switching
performance in trilingual speech production.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 15(03), 651–
662.
Marian, V., Blumfield, H., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2007).
The Language Experience and Proficiency
Questionnaire (LEAP-Q): Assessing language profiles
in bilinguals and multilinguals. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 50(August), 940–
967.
Meuter, R. F. I., & Allport, A. (1999). Bilingual language
switching in naming  : Asymmetrical costs of language
selection. Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 25–
40.
Miller, G. (1995). WordNet: A Lexical Database for
English. Communications of the ACM, 38(11) 39-41.
Monsell, S. (2003). Task switching. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(3), 134–140.
Papp, K., & Greenberg, Z. (2013). There is no coherent
evidence for a bilingual advantage in executive
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 66, 232-258.
Pashler, H. (1989). Dissociations and dependencies between
speed and accuracy: Evidence for a two-component
theory of divided attention in simple tasks. Cognitive
Psychology, 21, 469–514.
Philipp, A. M., & Koch, I. (2009). Inhibition in language
switching: what is inhibited when switching between
languages in naming tasks? Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35(5),
1187–95.
R Core Team (2014). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL http://www.Rproject.org/.
Schriefers, H., Meyer, A. S., & Levelt, W. J. M. (1990).
Exploring the time course of lexical access in
language production  : Picture-word interference
studies. Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 86–
102.
Szekeley, A., Jacobsen, T., D’Amico, S., Devescovi, A.,
Andonova, E., Herron, D., …Gerdjikova, I. (2012). A
new on-online resource for psycholinguistic studies.
Journal of Memory and Language, 51(2), 247–250.
Wylie, G., & Allport, A. (2000). Task switching and the
measurement of “switch costs”. Psychological
Research, 63(3-4), 212–33.

2151

