Executive Functions and Conceptual Change in Science and Mathematics Learning
Stella Vosniadou (svosniad@phs.uoa.gr)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, University of Athens
Panepistimioupolis, GR.157 71 Athens – Greece, and
The Flinders University of South Australia

Dimitrios Pnevmantikos (dpnevmat@uowm.gr)
Department of Primary Education, University of Western Macedonia,
GR.531 00, Florina – Greece

Nikos Makris (nmakris@eled.duth.gr)
Department of Primary Education, Democritus University of Thrace,
University Campus, GR.68100 Alexandroupolis – Greece

Kalliopi Ikospentaki (kikospe@phs.uoa.gr)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, University of Athens
Panepistimioupolis, GR.157 71 Athens – Greece
Despina Lepenioti (des_lepenioti@hotmail.com)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, University of Athens
Panepistimioupolis, GR.157 71 Athens – Greece
Anna Chountala (annachountala@gmail.com)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, University of Athens
Panepistimioupolis, GR.157 71 Athens – Greece
Giorgos Kyrianakis (kyrianakis_giorgos@yahoo.gr)
Department of Primary Education, University of Western Macedonia,
GR.531 00, Florina – Greece
Abstract
We investigate the hypothesis that Executive Functions
(EFs) are implicated in the learning of science and
mathematics by examining the relation between
performance in two Science and Mathematics Conceptual
Understanding and Conceptual Change (CU&C) tasks,
and two Stroop-like Inhibition and Shifting EF tasks, in a
group of 69 4th and 6th grader children. The results showed
high correlations between accuracy performance in the
CU&C and EF tasks even when Intelligence Ability (IA)
and Age were partialed out. A path analytic model showed
that performance in the CU&C tasks could be explained
by performance in the EF and IA tasks, which were
positively related to each other. Further analyses showed
that accuracy of performance particularly in the CU&C
tasks could be predicted by performance in the EF tasks,
with high or medium EF scores being a prerequisite for
placement in the group of high CU&C achievers.
Keywords: Executive Functions, Conceptual Change,
Science Learning and Teaching, Mathematics Learning
and Teaching

Executive Functions and Conceptual Change
in Science and Mathematics Learning

One of the main reasons why children find it hard to
understand many concepts in science and mathematics is
because these concepts are incompatible with their prior
knowledge and require major conceptual changes to take
place. For example, cognitive developmental research has
shown that by the time systematic science instruction starts
children have already constructed a naive physics, which is
based on everyday experience and is very different from
currently accepted science (Carey, 2009; Chi, 2008).
Learning science requires considerable conceptual changes
to take place in this naïve physics, such as the construction
of new ontological categories, new representations, and new
epistemological understandings. Similarly, the acquisition
of more advanced concepts in mathematics also requires
fundamental conceptual changes in the initial concept of
number, which is based on natural number knowledge
(Vosniadou & Verschaffel, 2004). Difficulties with
fractions, for example, have been associated with students’
whole number knowledge (i.e. applying whole number
knowledge in situations where this is not appropriate), a
phenomenon known as the whole number bias (Ni & Zhou,
2005). Natural numbers have a different symbolic
representation than fractions, they are discrete and not
dense, and have a different relationship to the unit. Children

2529

do not understand the symbolic representation of fractions;
they often treat fractions’ numerators and denominators as
separate whole numbers (Stafylidou & Vosniadou, 2004),
and do not understand the density and infinite divisibility of
number.
Research in the learning of science and more recently in
the learning of mathematics suggests that initial concepts
based on everyday experience are not replaced by scientific
ones but continue to exist and to influence problem solving
even when conceptual change has been achieved (DeWolf
& Vosniadou, 2015; Dunbar, Fugelsang & Stein, 2007;
Shtulman & Valcarcel, 2012). If it is true that initial
concepts continue to exist alongside the more recently
acquired scientific concepts and are easier and faster to
activate, it then follows that access to scientific concepts
may require the inhibition of initial concepts and the
continuous shifting between initial and scientific concepts.
If this is the case then the learning of science and
mathematics would implicate the types of cognitive abilities
known as Executive Functions (EFs) (e.g. Miyake et al.,
2000).
Executive Functions (EFs) are a set of processes
responsible for the regulation and monitoring of complex
cognitive tasks that require deliberate planning, impulse
control, goal-directed behaviour, and flexible strategy
employment (Miyake et al., 2000). Three EFs are
considered as particularly important: inhibition, shifting,
and updating. Inhibition refers to the ability to suppress
dominant and automatic responses in favour of a more
appropriate goal appropriate response; shifting is defined as
the ability to switch between sets of tasks or strategies, and
updating refers to the ability to update the content of
working memory by replacing old items with new
information. EF abilities develop rapidly during the
preschool and school years (Davidson et al., 2006) and are
highly associated with academic readiness and math and
reading scores (Blair et al., 2007; van de Sluis et al., 2007).
The relationship between CU&C and EFs has not been
systematically investigated so far except in the case of
Theory of Mind (ToM) tasks. In ToM tasks children must
understand that others may hold a belief different from what
they know is true. Young children’s failure in false beliefs
tasks has been explained on the grounds that young children
lack the EF of inhibitory control (Hughes, 1998). Recently
Zaitchik, Igbal and Carey (2013) examined relations
between EF abilities and conceptual change in the domain
of biology. They tested the hypothesis that the variance in
the age at which children construct and deploy their first
explicit theory of biology is due in part to individual
differences in their EF abilities. Their results showed that in
a group of 79 children ranging in age from 5 to 7 years,
individuals’ EF scores significantly predicted their scores in
a battery of tasks assessing knowledge in biology, even after
controlling for age and verbal IQ.
The relationship between EFs and conceptual change
processes required in learning many science and
mathematics concepts is interesting for a number of reasons.

First, it would help to unify domain specific approaches to
development and learning that focus on conceptual
understanding and change and domain general approaches
that focus on general mechanisms. EFs are domain general
mechanisms that may be implicated in important ways in
conceptual change processes. Second, the implication of
EFs may explain why conceptual change learning is
difficult, why they are substantial individual differences in
the acquisition of science and mathematics concepts that
require conceptual change, and why conceptual change is
absent in some adult populations such as individuals with
Williams Syndrome and patients with Alzheimer’s who also
have with impaired EFs (Zaitchik et al., 2013).
The purpose of the present research was to investigate the
relation that EFs have with conceptual understanding and
conceptual change in elementary school students who had
some exposure to systematic science and mathematics
instruction. We hypothesized that EFs, and particularly the
EFs of inhibition and shifting, play an important role in the
construction and re-organization of knowledge and thus in
the acquisition of new concepts required in learning science
and mathematics. We also hypothesized that low EFs may
explain in part the significant individual differences
observed in students’ mathematics and science learning
progressions and their abilities to profit from instruction.
In order to investigate these hypotheses we designed two
computer-based, reaction time conceptual understanding
and change (CU&C) tasks, which investigate the conceptual
understanding and conceptual changes that take place with
development and the learning of science and mathematics,
and which were administered to 4th and 6th grade students:
The Re-Categorization (ReCat) task and the SentencePicture Verification Task (SPV) task. The ReCat task
investigates children’s abilities to categorize words/concepts
in initial and scientific categories. The SPV task assesses
individuals’ abilities to assess the truth or falsity of
common-sense and scientific statements. Two additional
computer-based, reaction time tasks were designed to test
the EFs of Inhibition and Shifting. We predicted high
correlations between performance in the EF and the CU&C
tasks even when age and intellectual ability was partialed
out. We also predicted that the children with low EFs would
have particular difficulty with CU&C tasks and particularly
with those requiring conceptual changes.

Method
Participants
The participants were 69 (29 boys, 40 girls) elementary
school students, 33 4th graders ranging in age from 8.7 to
10.3 years (mean age: 9.7), and 36 6th graders ranging in
age from 11.3 to 13.7 years (mean age: 11.8).

Tasks
The CU&C test battery consisted of two tasks: In the ReCategorization (ReCat) Task a concept/word appeared on
the computer screen and the children were asked to decide
to which of two categories it is a member of. Three
2

2530

representative members were used to denote each of the two
categories. Each word/concept appeared twice during the
task, in two different categorization conditions: In the
Initial condition the participants had to decide between an
initial category and an anomalous category. In the Scientific
condition the participants had to decide between an initial
category and a scientific category. For example, they had to
decide whether the concept ‘force’ belongs with ‘bicycle,
motorcycle, car’ or ‘strength, movement, push’ in the initial
condition or with ‘gravity, friction, reaction’ or ‘strength,
movement, push’ in the scientific condition. In both
conditions, participants had to press the corresponding
keyboard key for whichever category they thought that the
target word was a member of. The items were
counterbalanced for left/right responses. There were 4
practice trials with feedback. The categorization task
included 28 target concepts, which appeared twice, so there
were a total of 56 trials. The concepts were representative
from 5 subject domains: Physics, Chemistry, Astronomy,
Biology, and Mathematics.
In The Sentence-Picture Verification (SPV) Task the
participants verified a total of 136 statements and pictorial
representations. These stimuli provided 4 different
explanations of 34 phenomena from five subject matter
areas: Astronomy, Chemistry, Physics, Biology and
Mathematics. Of the 4 different explanations, 2 were
consistent with both initial and scientific views and 2 were
inconsistent with one of them. For example, the participants
were shown variations of the picture of a man and a spring
(pulling, not pulling, stretching a lot or just touching and
pulling the spring very little) and were asked to verify the
sentences: The man exerts force when the spring is pulled
(Consistent, True), The man exerts force even when the
spring is not pulled (Consistent, False) The man exerts force
only when the spring is stretched (Inconsistent, False), The
man exerts force even when the spring is not stretched
(Inconsistent, True). The participants were instructed to pay
attention both to the verbal statement and to its pictorial
representation. All initial and scientific alternatives were
determined on the basis of existing research.
The EF task battery consisted of two Stroop-like tasks
designed to test Inhibition and Shifting with three different
stimuli, namely words, numbers and shapes. The tasks were
developed for the needs of the current study and were
adapted and presented using the E-prime software for
computer administration. When the stimuli were words, the
participants were instructed to read the word aloud and
press one of four buttons indicating the color in which the
word was printed. In the consistent condition (Con), the
color word and the color in which it was printed were the
same (the word RED was printed in red) while in the
incongruent condition (Incon) the color word and the color
in which it was printed were different (the word RED was
printed in blue). In the case of numbers, the stimuli
represented one of 4 numbers (1, 2, 3, or 4) presented in 1 to
4 repeated digits (for example, 2 could appear as 2, 22, 222,
or 2222). The participants were instructed to read the

number presented on the screen aloud but press one of four
buttons indicating the number of digits. In the case of
shapes, the stimuli presented a large shape consisting of
smaller shapes. For example a triangle could consist of
small triangles (consistent) or small circles (inconsistent).
There were a total of 4 shapes used (triangle, circle, square
and diamond). The participants were asked to name the
large shape but to press the response button indicating the
smaller shape. Each inhibition tasks included a total 90
trials - 45 for the congruent and 45 for the incongruent
condition equally distributed between the three symbolic
systems.
The same stimuli where used in the Shifting task as in
the Inhibition task with the exception that in the Inhibition
task the participants had to follow one specific rule while in
the case of Shifting they had to shift between two rules. For
example, when the stimuli were words, the participants had
to shift between pressing the button to indicate the color of
the word vs. the color in which the word was printed,
depending on the instructions appearing on the screen of the
computer. In the case of numbers they had to shift between
naming the number or the number of digits in which the
number was presented, and in the case of shapes they had to
shift between naming the big geometrical shape or the small
geometrical shapes from which the big geometrical shape
was composed. Letters at the bottom of the screen indicated
which rule was to be used. In the Con condition, participants
had to respond to two consequent trials on the basis of the
same rule, while in the Incon condition participants had to
respond to two consequent trials on the basis of the different
rule. The shifting tasks included a total of 96 trials, 48 for
each condition. To assess intelligence a non-verbal IQ test,
the Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM, Raven, Court &
Raven, 1985), was used.

Procedure
Testing took place in the school’s computer lab in a total of
5 sessions, 30 minutes each. All tasks were presented using
the E-Prime v2.0 software (Schneider et al., 2012) in a
single block, in a pre-randomized order.

Results
In all the analyses the dependent measures used were the
mean percent accurate responses (ACC) and the mean RTs,
in the initial and scientific trials of the CU&C task, and the
consistent and inconsistent trials of the EF tasks. Responses
with reaction times slower than 400ms in the EF tasks and
slower than1000ms for the CU&C tasks were eliminated
from the dataset. Because the two CU&C tasks (ReCat and
SVP) were highly correlated both in accuracy and RTs we
combined their scores into four aggregate CU&C measures:
CU&C initial ACC (α=.88), CU&C initial RT (α=.89),
CU&C scientific ACC (α=.46), and CU&C scientific RT
(α=.75).

3

2531

EFincon .551**
.605**
851** 1
**
Correlation is significant at 0.01 level
Two path-analytic models were applied to test the
dynamic relations between CU&C, EF, and IA (RAVEN’s
score) using the structural equation modeling program
EQSWIN (Bentler, 2003). In the first model, the EFincon
ACC score was used as a measure of EF (i.e., the percentage
of accurate scores on the inconsistent trials of the aggregate
EF on the inhibition and shifting tasks). The target model
specified direct relations of EFs and IA to CU&C initial
ACC, and CU&C scientific ACC, while EF and IA allowed
being correlated each other (see Figure 1). That is, the two
types of conceptual understanding (demanding or not
conceptual change) are regressed on the EFs as well as on
IA, while the correlation between EFs and IA indicate their
sharing common variance. The model demonstrated an
acceptable fit, χ2 (1, N=69) = 9.018, p = .003, CFI = .901,
RMSEA = .343, (90% CI = .163 - .560). Figure 1 shows the
resulting path coefficients of the model for our participants
and the correlations between the EFs and IA. IA was
positively correlated with EFs (r=.49, p < .001). CU&C
scientific ACC was explained by IA (β = .32, p < .001) and
EF (β = .31; p< .001; R2 = .33). Additionally, CU&C initial
ACC was explained by IA (β = .30, p < .001) and EF (β =
.40; p< .001; R2 = .37).

Four separate Principle Component Analyses with
varimax rotation were run on the inconsistent and consistent
responses on the EF tests for ACC and RT. All the analyses
revealed one factor explaining (a) 55.87% of the total
variance in the case of the EF inconsistent accuracy score
(EFincon ACC, α = .83), (b) 42.00% of the total variance
(α=.71) in the case of the EF inconsistent RT (EFincon RT),
(c) 55.67% of the total variance (α=.811) in the case of the
EF consistent accuracy (EFcon ACC), and (d) 41.46% of the
total variance (α=.57) in the case of the EF consistent RT
(EFcon RT). This allowed us to create four aggregate scores
representing accuracy where the higher ACC scores indicate
higher EFs, and where the lower RT scores indicate higher
EFs. See Τable 1for the means and SD.
Table 1: Mean percent accurate response and mean RTs for
the aggregated CU&C and EF tasks.
Task

CU&C
Accuracy

Reaction times

M

SD

M

Initial

80.72

13.18

4400.16

1188.74

Scientific

46.03

7.91

5276.98

1471.52

Task

SD

EF
Accuracy

Figure 1: Executive Functions and Intelligence Ability as
Predictors of CU&C.

Reaction times

M

SD

M

SD

Consistent

75.48

14.47

1884.98

419.39

Inconsistent

42.92

7.80

2067.81

497.95

Significant correlations were obtained between the
aggregate CU&C and EF ACC and RT scores as predicted.
The correlations remained significant even when the
Intellectual Ability (IA) score, as this has been measured
with the RAVEN matrices and Grade were partialed out
(Table2).

Note: ** p < .001.
In the second model the EFincon RT was used as a measure
of EF, and the CU&C initial and CU&C scientific ACC
scores as a measure of CU&C. This model had a weak fit on
the data, χ2 (1, N=69) = 13.369, p < .001, CFI = .757,
RMSEA = .426, (90% CI = .242 - .638).
To examine the second hypothesis, namely whether the
level of EFincon ACC could predict the level of CU&C
initial and CU&C scientific ACC, a prediction analysis
(Froman & Hubert, 1980) was applied on the data.
Participants at the higher percentile of EFincon ACC or of
CU&C scientific and CU&C initial ACC respectively were
classified as high achievers in the given variable, those who
were found on the lower percentile as low achievers, and the
rest as medium achievers. We assumed high or medium
EFincon ACC is necessary to achieve a similar level of
conceptual change (see Table 3 below). The predictions
tested are indicated in the first three columns of Table 3

Table 2: Correlations between the CU&C and EF tasks
when controlling for Grade and IA on ACC and on RT.
Accuracy (ACC)
CU&Cin CU&Csc EFcon
CU&Cin 1
CU&Csc .382**
1
EFcon
.542**
.360**
1
**
EFincon .539
.348**
.876**
**
Correlation is significant at 0.01 level
Reaction Times (RT)
CU&Cin CU&Csc
CU&Cin 1
CU&Csc .873**
1
EFcon
.523**
.534**

EFcon

EFincon

1

EFincon

1
4

2532

(Predicted level of CU&C accuracy). Based on Froman and
Hubert (1980), cells marked with 0 indicate that they are
consistent with the predictions while cells marked with 1 are
not consistent with the predictions. The mark of 0.5
indicates that it is acceptable to find some participants in
these cells. The observed distribution of participants is
indicated in the remaining columns.

inconsistent conditions The EF tasks that we employed,
however, although relatively simple, were not very easy for
the children. There were significant differences in accuracy
between the consistent and the inconsistent aggregate EF
scores (Table 1) that allowed us to use the accuracy scores
as a good measure of EF (see also Davidson et al., 2006 for
similar results with children).
The CU&C tasks allowed us to measure not only
accuracy but also RTs. In all the studies that we know of
that investigate the relationship between academic
performance or conceptual change and EFs (e.g., van de
Sluis, de Jong, & van der Leij, 2007; Zaitchik, et al., 2013)
only accuracy scores are used and compared to EF accuracy
or speed. In contrast, in the present study it was possible to
directly compare the CU&C accuracy scores with the EF
accuracy scores and the CU&C RTs with the EF RTs.
Accuracy scores on the CU&C tasks were interpreted to
indicate the level of conceptual understanding and
conceptual change the participants had achieved. More
specifically, performance on the CU&C initial tasks was
interpreted to indicate initial conceptual understanding,
while performance on the CU&C scientific tasks to indicate
the achievement of conceptual change. We interpreted the
reaction time scores (RTs on accurate responses only), to
indicate how fast the participants can recruit or express their
initial or scientific understanding.
The results of the correlation analysis showed that there
were high correlations between performance in the CU&C
and EF tasks both in accuracy as well as in RTs. Indeed, the
CU&C tasks themselves seemed to function like Executive
Function tasks. In other words, performance in the tasks
consistent with initial understanding was more accurate and
faster compared to performance in the tasks requiring
conceptual change and scientific understanding (Table 1).
These finding are consistent with the existing literature
(Shtulman & Valcarcel, 2012; DeWolf & Vosniadou, 2014)
and support the hypothesis that initial conceptions are not
replaced by scientific ones but continue to exist and to
inhibit access to scientific responses.
There were only low or non-significant correlations
between the EFincon RT and CU&C accuracy. This finding
was clarified better from the path models applied on the
data. The path-analytic model that explained our data was
the one that used the aggregated EFincon ACC score as a
predictor of CU&C accuracy rather than the model where
the aggregated EFincon RT score was used as an index of
EF efficiency. Methodologically these findings indicate that
the EF tasks were relatively difficult for the children and
therefore accuracy was the best measure of EFs instead of
RT. At the theoretical level, they probably show that
EFincon ACC and EFincon RT should be treated as two
distinct aspects of EF performance with the EFincon ACC
score serving as the best indicator of EF across young
participants, (see also Davidson & et al., 2006). No matter
the case our data supply clear evidence for the crucial role
of EF in conceptual change but also in conceptual
understanding.

Table 3: Bivariate Frequency Distribution between EFs and
CU&C
EF
ACC
Level
L
M
H
Total

Predicted level
on CU&C ACC
L
M
H
0
1
1
0.5
0
1
1
0.5
0

Observed
CU&C scientific
ACC
L
M
H
15
4
4
5
13
5
2
7
14
23
23
23

Observed
CU&C initial
ACC
L
M
H
15
5
3
7
8
9
2
9
12
23
23
23

The results showed that the level of EFincon ACC could
predict 44% better the achievement on the CU&C scientific
ACC than if we assumed independence (=. 44, U = .608, z
= 6.625, z > 1.96, p >.005). EFincon ACC could predict
only 29.2% better the achievement on the CU&C initial
ACC (=. 292, U = .615, z = 8.22, z > 1.96, p >.005) than
if we assumed independence. EFincon ACC predicted better
the CU&C scientific ACC than the CU&C initial ACC
performance, but the difference was not statistically
significant (z = 1.14, z < 1.96).
A similar prediction analysis using the EFincon RT as the
level of EF did not produce a significant prediction on
CU&C initial or CU&C scientific ACC. On the other hand,
the analyses showed that the level of IA (scores on the
RAVEN) could predict 29.7% better the achievement on the
CU&C scientific than if we assumed independence (=.
297, U = .604, z = 4.58, z > 1.96, p >.005), and 32% better
the achievement on the CU&C initial (=. 320, U = .607, z
= 8.00, z > 1.96, p >.005) than if we assumed independence.
Although IA predicted better the CU&C initial than the
CU&C scientific ACC performance, this difference was not
statistically significant (z = .219, z <1.96).

Discussion
Τhe results demonstrated that performance in the EF and
CU&C tasks is highly correlated, thus supporting the
hypothesis that EFs are implicated in the conceptual
understanding and conceptual change processes involved in
science and mathematics learning.
The correlations
obtained were between the accuracy scores of the aggregate
CU&C and EF tasks as well as between their RTs.
Accuracy scores on the EFs were interpreted to indicate
that the participants could execute the inhibition and shifting
tasks, and RTs to indicate how fast or easily they could do
so. In many executive function studies, and particularly
those used with adult participants, RTs are used as a
measure of EFs because the tasks are very easy and there is
little difference in accuracy between the consistent and
5

2533

Chi, M. T. H. (2008). Three types of conceptual change: belief
revision, mental model transformation, and categorical
shift. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), Handbook of research on
conceptual change (pp. 61-82). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Davidson, M. C., Amso, D., Anderson, L. C., & Diamond, A.
(2006). Development of cognitive control and executive
functions from 4 to 13 years: Evidence from manipulations
of
memory,
inhibition,
and
task
switching.
Neuropsychologia, 44(11), 2037-2078.
DeWolf, M., & Vosniadou, S. (2015). The representation of
fraction magnitudes and the whole number bias
reconsidered. Learning and Instruction, 37, 39-49
Dunbar, K., Fugelsang, J., & Stein, C. (2007). Do naive theories
ever go away? Using brain and behavior to understand
changes in concepts. In M. Lovett & P. Shah (Eds.),
Thinking with data (pp. 193–206). New York: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Froman, T., & Hubert, L.J. (1980). Application of prediction
analysis to developmental priority. Psychological Bulletin,
136-146.
Hughes R. (1998). Considering the vignette technique and its
application to a study of drug injecting and HIV risk and
safer behaviour. Sociology of Health and Illness 20, 381–
400.
Kline, R. B. (1998). Principles and practice of structural equation
modeling. NY: Guilford Press.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H., &
Howerter, A. (2000). The unity and diversity of executive
functions and their contribution to complex “frontal lobe”
tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41,
49–100.
Ni, Y., & Zhou, Y-D. (2005). Teaching and learning fraction and
rational numbers: The origins and implications of whole
number bias. Educational Psychologist, 40(1), 27–52.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., and Zuccolotto, A. (2012). E-Prime

The results also supported the hypothesis that children
with low EFs would have difficulty with the CU&C tasks,
particularly those requiring conceptual change. The
prediction analysis showed that children who are in the low
EF group are much more likely to be low CU&C achievers
than high or even medium CU&C achievers. The measures
of EF were better predictors of performance in the CU&C
scientific tasks, whereas the measures of IA were better
predictors of performance in the CU&C initial tasks. This
finding suggests the greater involvement of EF compared to
general IA in conceptual change processes, and point to the
importance of EF in tasks that require abstraction,
conceptual organization and particularly conceptual change.
They are also important in explaining the significant
individual differences we find in children’s abilities to profit
from instruction when conceptual changes are required.
This is a preliminary study and the results need to be
replicated with a larger sample. Although the path analysis
was justified on the grounds that the number of participants
was more than five times the number of parameters
analyzed in the path model, the overall sample size does not
meet the requirement for a minimum of 100 participants
(Kline, 1998). Further research is also needed to investigate
developmental changes in performance in the CU&C tasks
with a sample involving different ages in order to examine
whether EF RTs become more predictive of CU&C
accuracy with older participants who would be expected to
find the EF tasks much easier. It would also be interesting
to study the tradeoff between accuracy and RT with
development. Preliminary results from the investigation of
the developmental changes in our sample show that the 6th
grade children were more accurate than the 4th grade
children in both the initial and scientific CU&C responses,
but there were no developmental effects on the RTs. Finally,
it is important to investigate in further studies with older
participants whether CU&C scientific responses become as
accurate and fast as initial ones with the acquisition of
expertise.

User's Guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software Tools, Inc.
Shtulman, A. & Valcarcel, J. (2012) Scientific knowledge
suppresses but does not supplant earlier intuitions.
Cognition, 124, 209-215.
Stafylidou, S., & Vosniadou, S., (2004). The Development of
Students’ Understanding of the Numerical Value of
Fractions. In L. Verschaffel and S. Vosniadou (Guest
Editors), Conceptual Change in Mathematics Learning and
Teaching, Special Issue of Learning and Instruction. 14(5),
pp. 503-518.
Van de Sluis, S., De Jong, P.F., & Van der Leij, A. (2007).
Executive functioning in children, and its relations with
reasoning, reading, and arithmetic. Intelligence, 35 pp.
427–449.
Vosniadou, S., & Verschaffel, L., (2004). Extending the
Conceptual Change Approach to Mathematics Learning
and Teaching. In L., Verschaffel and S. Vosniadou (Guest
Editors), Conceptual Change in Mathematics Learning and
Teaching, Special Issue of Learning and Instruction, 14(5),
pp. 445-451.
Zaitchik, D., Iqbal, Y., & Carey, S. (2013). The effect of executive
function on biological reasoning in young children: An
individual differences study. Child Development, 00, 1–16.

Acknowledgments
This research has been co-financed by the European Union
(European Social Fund – ESF) and Greek national funds
through the Operational Program "Education and Lifelong
Learning" of the National Strategic Reference Framework
(NSRF) - Research Funding Program: THALIS –UOA.

References
Bentler, P. M. (2003). EQS Structural Equations Program for
Windows (Version 6.1 Beta Build 70) [Computer
software]. Encino, CA: Multivariate Software.
Blair, C., & Razza, R. P. (2007). Relating effortful control,
executive function, and false belief understanding to
emerging math and literacy ability in kindergarten. Child
development, 78(2), 647-663.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York: Oxford
University Press.

6

2534

