Finding the return path: allo- versus egocentric perspective
Kai Hamburger (kai.hamburger@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Florian Röser (florian.roeser@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University Giessen, Department of Psychology,
Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science
Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10 F
35394 Giessen, Germany

a typical wayfinding problem. Humans, like many animals,
show capabilities such as path integration (e.g., Mallot,
2012; Wiener, Berthoz, & Wolbers, 2011) and finding
shortcuts (e.g., Golledge, 1997, 1999). However, imagine
being in an unknown city. You walk from the train station to
the university, where you are about to give a presentation.
After your presentation you need to go back to the train
station in order to catch your train. You are in a hurry. What
are you going to do? Reproducing the initial path should be
the perceptually and cognitively easiest solution in this case
(and most promising with respect to avoid getting lost).
Golledge (1995) stated the following: "… a pure retrace
strategy may have been used, thus precluding any ´longest
leg first´ strategies […] indicate that exact route retracing
was a possible option as a route selection strategy." (p. 18).
The general literature on landmark-based wayfinding
provides different approaches to landmark salience, i.e. the
importance of an object at certain locations in order to aid
successful navigation (e.g., Lynch, 1960; Presson &
Montello, 1988; Raubal & Winter, 2002). The majority of
landmark models define landmark salience as inherent
features of an object or intersection (e.g., Sorrows & Hirtle,
1999). In contrast Caduff and Timpf (2008) focus on the
observer with her cognitive abilities and limitations in order
to provide a more observer-based landmark salience
approach.
A central concept in all these models is the position of a
landmark at an intersection (e.g., Klippel & Winter, 2005;
Raubal & Winter, 2002; Röser, Hamburger, Krumnack, &
Knauff, in revision). The ideal position at a four-way
intersection is the position before the intersection in the
direction of turn (position D in Figure 1; Röser, Hamburger,
Krumnack, & Knauff, 2012). This position preference is
dependent on the observer’s perspective (allo- vs.
egocentric) and on their viewing point (Röser et al., in
revision). In the literature, many researchers differentiate
between an egocentric (self-to-object) and allocentric
(object-to-object) perspective (Bryant, 1997; Coluccia,
Mammarella, De Beni, Ittyerah, & Cornoldi, 2007; Klatzky,
1998; Nadel & Hardt, 2004).
We here define allocentric as a birds-eye or map
perspective, so that the information is seen from above
(survey information) and has the same visibility for all parts
of an intersection. Egocentric is here defined as the bodycentered view of the participant standing in the
environment, including different visibilities at an

Abstract
In a series of two experiments we investigated the influence
of an allocentric and egocentric perspective on landmarkbased wayfinding and finding the according return path.
Participants had to learn a route consisting of twelve
intersections with four different verbal landmarks at each
intersection. They were asked to memorize at least one of the
landmarks for providing a route description after the learning
phase, either in the learning direction (initial path) or in the
opposite direction (return path). In the allocentric experiment,
a clear preference and higher performance was demonstrated
for landmarks located at the position before the intersection
and in the direction of turn, while in the egocentric
perspective landmarks in the direction of turn were better
remembered and used more frequently, independent of the
position before or behind the intersection. These results will
be discussed with respect to current research on structural
salience in landmark-based wayfinding.
Keywords: spatial cognition; return path; structural salience;
landmarks; allocentric perspective; egocentric perspective

Introduction
At the past two CogSci conferences we introduced ideas
and empirical research on finding a return path (Hamburger,
Dienelt, Strickrodt, & Röser, 2013; Hinterecker, Strickrodt,
Röser, & Hamburger, 2014). Now, we want to focus on a
new aspect: the perspective of the wayfinder, allocentric
versus egocentric.
Let us start with an example from the fiction literature
(Inheritance) as a very good everyday example:
“Which path should we pick?” asked
Wyrden. “Isn’t it obvious?” asked the
herbalist. “The left one. It’s always the left
one.” […] Eragon could not help himself.
“Left according to which direction? If you
were starting from the other side, left–“ “Left
would be right and right would be left, yes,
yes,” said the herbalist. Her eyes narrowed.
“Sometimes you are too clever for your own
good, …” (Paolini, 2011; p. 338)
If we take this example of a perspective change seriously,
which we should, as we need to find our ways each and
every day of our life, we need to think about wayfinding
strategies and how people manage to avoid getting lost (e.g.,
Dudchenko, 2010). Finding back to the point of departure is

860

intersection (e.g., Winter, 2003; Röser et al., in revision; see
Figure 1).

= 18–32). The percentage of high-school diploma or similar
increased to 74%, while six had a Bachelor’s and four a
Master’s degree. All participants provided informed consent
and participation was voluntary.

Material
Common German nouns with the first letter ranging from
A to L, consisting of six letters and two syllables each
served as material. This resulted in a total of twelve
intersections (48 different words). At each intersection
every word contained the same initial letter. Each landmark
word had to occur at every position at an intersection (four
different routes) and had to be combined with each turning
direction (left, right; resulting in eight different routes).
Since initial and return path were tested, the eight different
versions had to be combined with the two different tasks,
making up for a total of 16 different routes. An exemplary
intersection in the allocentric condition is visualized in
Figure 2. The experiment was run online via
LimeSurvey2.05+ (Schmitz, 2012).

Figure 1: Visibility from two different positions:
initial path (left) and return path (right). X = position
of individual;  = walking direction. In the
allocentric perspective each position is equally
visible for both directions, unlike in the egocentric
perspective. The small images on the bottom
visualize the different points of view in the
egocentric perspective. (image taken from
Hamburger et al., 2013; p. 540)
In the current study the task will be to gather empirical
evidence for the ideal landmark position for providing a
route description in the different conditions: allocentric and
egocentric in combination with initial path and return path.
This will be systematically investigated in two experiments
with an allocentric and egocentric perspective, which results
in the following three hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1: Describing the initial path will result in
higher landmark accuracy than describing the return path.
Hypothesis 2: The position preference depends on the
wayfinder’s task (describing initial vs. return path).

Figure 2: Exemplary intersection in the allocentric
perspective; shown are the four words starting with
the letter A in German language (Abfall = trash;
Achsel = armpit; Anfang = beginning; Alltag =
everyday life).

Hypothesis 3: The described landmark positions differ
between allocentric and egocentric perspective.

Experiment 1 – Initial and return path
allocentric perspective

Procedure

Method

Before the main task’s first instruction was presented,
participants had to answer some demographic and
exploratory questions.
Instruction 1: Participants were asked to memorize the
following path, which will be presented in form of
screenshots, presenting an intersection with four different
landmark words. For each intersection they were asked to
memorize at least one landmark and the associated turning
direction. Depending on the condition assignment,
participants received one of the following instructions:
Instruction 2a: The task was not only to remember the
path (recognition) but also to provide a route description of
the learned path for another person also unfamiliar with this
environment (free recall).

Participants
A total of 127 individuals (79♀, 44♂, four did not provide
gender information) participated in the online-experiment.
They were recruited via an email distributed among all
students of the Justus Liebig University Giessen. The mean
age was 23.96 years (range = 18–46). Sixty-seven percent
(85 participants) indicated to have a high-school diploma or
similar, while 15 participants already had a Bachelor’s and
eight a Master’s degree. For the analysis a total of 62 could
be included, since the others dropped out during the
experiment and did not complete it. The remaining sample
consisted of 44♀ and 18♂ with a mean age of 23.61 (range

861

Instruction 2b: The task was not only to remember the
path (recognition) but also to provide a route description of
the return path (reverse learning order) for another person
also unfamiliar with this environment (free recall).
After Instruction 2 the learning phase started, where the
full route of twelve screenshots had to be learned one after
another; self-paced. The sequence of screenshots was
randomized for each participant to control for sequential
effects across participants. When the learning phase was
over, participants again received the related instructions to
provide an exact route description of the learned path
(Instruction 2a) or of the appropriate return path (Instruction
2b) for the testing phase. They had to fill in the landmarks
and according turning direction into a list consisting of 16
rows and two columns; the first column for the direction and
the second for the corresponding landmark object.

path participants used landmarks located before the
intersection in the direction of turn slightly more often than
for the initial path; landmarks at the remaining positions are
used hardly ever. More importantly, in both cases the position
before the intersection in the direction of turn (relative
position depending on the direction of travel) is by far the
most preferred one (initial path: 83.6% vs. return path:
88.6%).

Discussion

Results
The descriptive results show that participants described a
total of 411 landmarks correctly. The different landmark
words were used equally often (χ2(47)=31.511, p=.960). A
total of 283 correct combinations of landmarks and direction
were provided. For the initial path 84.81% of all described
landmarks were correctly combined with the correct
direction. For the return path this occurred only in 58.89%
of the cases. This difference is statistically insignificant
(t(60)=.886, p=.379). Figure 3 shows the chosen positions of
the correctly described landmarks in combination with the
correct directional information.

Figure 3: Distribution of landmark descriptions for
the initial path (left) and return path (right) in
combination with correct route directions (left/right)
in the allocentric perspective. The gray solid arrows
indicate the learning condition, while the green
dotted arrows indicate the direction at retrieval.
Please note that numbers do not necessarily add up
to 100 due to rounding.
Taken together a significant landmark position preference
is visible (χ2(3)=197.675, p<.001; deviation from an equal
distribution); these position preferences differ significantly
(χ2(3)=15.277, p<.001) for the initial and return path with
respect to the absolute position in the environment
(independent of direction change left or right). For the return

862

Even though the descriptive difference between
performance for the initial path and return path is about
25%, this difference was insignificant due to a large
variance in the data. This contradicts the first hypothesis.
However, describing route directions for the initial path
seems to lead to better recollection than describing the
return path, which has previously been demonstrated
empirically for wayfinding performance (Hamburger et al.,
2013; Hinterecker et al., 2014).
We found some empirical evidence supporting the second
hypothesis. But, in both conditions landmarks located at the
position before the intersection and in the direction of turn
were used for route descriptions in about 85% of cases. This
supports previous findings on the initial path (Röser,
Hamburger, et al., 2012; Röser, Krumnack, Hamburger, &
Knauff, 2012) and further supports the structural importance
of this position during a landmark-based wayfinding process
(Röser et al., in revision), also for the return path.
In general, due to the overall worse performance, it could
be argued that the task presented here might be too difficult
for participants to solve (quite a few trials had to be
eliminated due to errors) and one could ask for an easier
task (e.g., recognition task). However, there are two
opposing reasons: 1) the task provides a high ecological
validity, since it is related to everyday wayfinding
szenarios; 2) an easier task such as recognition of landmarks
does not necessarily lead to better performance, since there
is evidence that recognition data (i.e. landmarks) in this
context might be worse than the wayfinding data (i.e.
landmarks + direction) (e.g., Hamburger & Röser, 2014).
Furthermore, the choice of landmark words which are not
conventionally associated with physical landmarks or
locations might seem odd at a first glance. But, since they
are not associated with any related content, this controls for
semantic and idiosyncratic effects in this context. Since the
objects (words) were used equally often throughout the
experiments, memorability can be assumed to be equal.
We did not control for the correct order of directions and
landmarks, since we are interested in the question about the
ideal position and not in general memory strategies.
However, previous experiments showed that possible
sequential learning effects do not occur (e.g., right, right,
left, etc without landmarks; Hamburger & Röser, 2014).
So far we concentrated on the allocentric perspective and
Experiment 2 will now be realized in the egocentric
perspective. Then, we will also be able to provide
(comparison) data for Hypothesis 3.

Experiment 2 – Initial and return path
egocentric perspective

were provided. For the initial path 77.73% of all described
landmarks were combined with the correct turning direction.
For the return path this occurred in only 66.28% of cases.
This difference is statistically insignificant (t(86)=1.292,
p=.200). Figure 5 shows the chosen positions of the
correctly described landmarks in combination with the
correct directional information. Taken together a significant
landmark position preference is visible (χ2(3)=57.769,
p<.001; deviation from an equal distribution); these position
preferences differ significantly (χ2(3)=60.532, p<.001) for
the initial and return path with respect to the absolute
position in the environment (independent of direction
change left or right). For the initial path, landmarks located
in the direction of turn were described more often, likewise
for the return path. However, for the return path, landmarks
located at the position before the intersection opposite to the
direction of turn (from the perspective of the return path
behind the intersection and in the direction of turn) are used
for route descriptions in 21% of cases (Figure 5).

Method
Participants
A total of 191 individuals (142♀, 42♂, seven did not
provide gender information) participated. They were
recruited via an email distributed among all students of the
Justus Liebig University Giessen. The mean age was 24.53
years (range = 17–77). Sixty-four percent (123 participants)
indicated to have a high-school diploma or similar, while 27
participants already had a Bachelor’s and 16 a Master’s
degree. For the analysis a total of 88 could be included,
since the others dropped out during the experiment and did
not complete it. The remaining sample consisted of 76♀ and
twelve ♂ with a mean age of 23.76 (range = 17–42). The
percentage of high-school diploma or similar increased to
73%, while nine had a Bachelor’s and six a Master’s degree.
All participants provided informed consent and participation
was voluntary.

Material
The material of Experiment 2 was identical to that of
Experiment 1, but now presented in an egocentric
perspective.

Procedure
The procedure of Experiment 2 was identical to the first
experiment’s procedure, except for the perspective change.
Now, participants learned the route and landmark
information in an I-perspective (Figure 4). The position of
the participants was the same at each intersection: in the
middle of the path with a fixed distance to the center of the
intersection. The eye-height was set to 170cm and the
viewing direction was straight ahead.

Figure 5: Distribution of landmark descriptions for
the initial path (left) and return path (right) in
combination with correct route directions (left/right)
in the egocentric perspective. The gray solid arrows
indicate the learning condition, while the green
dotted arrows indicate the direction at retrieval.
Please note that numbers do not necessarily add up
to 100 due to rounding.

Discussion
We again did not find supporting evidence for the first
hypothesis that route directions for the initial path lead to
better recollection than describing the return path. The
difference of about 11% is smaller than compared to
Experiment 1.
For the second hypothesis empirical evidence has been
obtained. For the initial path the positions in the direction of
turn were the preferred ones. For the return path only the
position behind the intersection and opposite to the direction
of turn was hardly ever chosen. The remaining three
positions were chosen more or less equally often. The
findings for the initial path (highest preferences for
landmarks at positions in the direction of turn) underline
previous findings (Röser, Hamburger, et al., 2012; Röser,
Krumnack, et al., 2012). The slight shift within the position

Figure 4: Exemplary intersection in the egocentric
perspective; arrangement and words identical to
Figure 2. “Rechts abbiegen” indicates the directional
information (turn right).

Results
The descriptive results show that participants described a
total of 514 landmarks correctly. The different landmark
words were used equally often (χ2(47)=39.732, p=.765). A
total of 370 correct combinations of landmarks and direction

863

preferences for the return path is a new finding but has
previously been assumed by Hamburger et al. (2013) on a
theoretical basis. Interestingly, for describing the return path
participants additionally used landmarks located at the
position before the intersection opposite to the direction of
turn, which from the perspective of the return path is located
behind the intersection in the direction of turn.
It could be expected that arrows (spatial information)
instead of directional information (verbal) might produce
different patterns of results. However, preliminary
experiments so far do not reveal any differences with
respect to this issue.

General Discussion and Conclusion
Hypothesis 1
Previous experiments supported the assumption of higher
performance for an initial path in comparison to a return
path (Hamburger, et al. 2013; Hinterecker et al., 2014). The
current experiments just provided a descriptive tendency in
the assumed direction. This may be attributed to the
occurrence of a large variance in this rather difficult task of
free landmark-based route description in comparison to
simple recognition.

Figure 6. Change of position preferences. Position D
(invariant) represents the ideal position in all
conditions. In the egocentric conditions positions in
the direction of turn are used most often to describe
an initial path (B and D), while in the return path
condition also position C is used in a substantial
number of descriptions (for further details see text).

Hypothesis 2
In Experiment 1 a significant difference has been obtained
but in both conditions (initial and return path) the position
before the intersection in the direction of turn is chosen at
least five times more often than the other three positions
taken together.
In Experiment 2 the descriptive and statistical results
show a large difference between the initial and the return
path. The findings of the initial path (positions in the
direction of turn; B and D; see Figure 6) correspond to
previous findings (e.g., Klippel & Winter, 2005  for
position D and Röser, Hamburger, et al., 2012; in revision
 for positions B and D). The condition return path reveals
different preferences, in so far that only the position behind
the intersection opposite to the direction of turn (A) was
hardly ever chosen. There is an increasing usage of position
C. This position before the intersection and opposite to the
direction of turn marks the position behind the intersection
in direction of turn from the perspective of the return path.
Meaning that the preference shift from position D to
position C is attributed to a mental transformation of
perspective. Hamburger et al. (2013) predicted that
positions D and A should be the ideal ones when describing
a return path, since they are invariant, meaning that they are
located “at the same position” in both initial path and return
path: position D is located before the intersection in the
direction of turn; position A is located behind the
intersection and opposite to the direction of turn. Thus, no
additional mental transformation from initial to return path
should be required. However, the empirical results
contradict this theoretical assumption. It may not account
for the observed shift from position D to position C.

Hypothesis 3
The difference of the landmark location preference
between the allocentric and egocentric perspective could be
described in terms of viewpoint-based salience (Röser et al,
in revision). In an egocentric perspective the landmarks
differ within the degree of distance and how much of a
landmark is visible (visible part). This influences the
participants’ preferences and leads to an increased choice of
the landmark position behind the intersection in the
direction of turn in the current experiments. Our data for the
initial path fit very well with the assumption and findings of
our landmark salience model (Röser, Hamburger, et al.,
2012; in revision). This model includes the structural
salience, moderated by the viewpoint-based salience and
would predict for the current experiment that both positions
in the direction of turn are used for creating a route
description most and equally often. However, the
differences of landmark usage in route descriptions between
an initial and a return path in the egocentric perspective is
not considered in our model to date.
To consider the task of finding the return path a new
factor should be implemented in the model. We label this
factor task, which is in accordance with one factor of Caduff
and Timpf’s (2008) landmark salience model. Their model
differentiates between different traveling tasks, such as
sightseeing or commuting. We extend this factor with the
task direction of travel. This includes mental rotation/
transformation of viewing and traveling directions, as well
as lingual requirements (Hamburger et al., 2013).

864

In conclusion, in everyday life perspective (egocentric)
there is a shift towards the variant positions, meaning that
they mentally as well as verbally need to be transformed.
Why this increased cognitive load is voluntarily chosen by
people remains an open question for future research.

Representing and Processing Spatial Knowledge (pp. 1–
18). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Klippel, A., & Winter, S. (2005). Structural salience of
landmarks for route discrimination. In A. G. Cohn & D.
Mark (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory. International
Conference COSIT (pp. 347–362). Berlin: Springer.
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Mallot, H. A. (2012). Raumkognition. In H.-O. Karnath &
P. Thier (Hrsg.), Kognitive Neurowissenschaften (pp.
217–224). Heidelberg: Springer.
Nadel, L., & Hardt, O. (2004). The spatial brain.
Neuropsychology, 18, 473–476.
Paolini, C. (2011). Inheritance. London: Doubleday.
Presson, C. C., & Montello, D. R. (1988). Points of
reference in spatial cognition: Stalking the elusive
landmark. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
6(4), 378–381.
Raubal, M., & Winter, S. (2002). Enriching wayfinding
instructions with local landmarks. In M. J. Egenhofer &
D. M. Mark (Eds.), Geographic Information Science,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Vol. 2478, pp. 243–
259). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., Krumnack, A., & Knauff, M.
(2012). The structural salience of landmarks: Results from
an on-line study and a virtual environment experiment.
Journal of Spatial Science, 57(1), 37–50.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., Krumnack, A., & Knauff, M. (in
revision). What is the ideal position of a landmark?
Empirical evidence and a mathematical model for
viewpoint-based and structural salience. Spatial Cognition
and Computation.
Röser, F., Krumnack, A., Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M.
(2012). A four factor model of landmark salience – A new
approach. In N. Rußwinkel, U. Drewitz & H. van Rijn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Cognitive Modeling (ICCM) (pp. 82–87). Berlin.
Schmitz. C. (2012). LimeSurvey: An Open Source survey
tool.
Limesurvey Project
Hamburg,
Germany.
http://www.limesurvey.org
Sorrows, M. E., & Hirtle, S. C. (1999). The nature of
landmarks for real and electronic spaces. In C. Freksa &
D. M. Mark (Eds). Spatial Information Theory: Cognitive
and Computational Foundations of Geographic
Information Science, International Conference COSIT
1999 (pp. 37–50). Stade: Springer.
Wiener, J. M., Berthoz, A., & Wolbers, T. (2011).
Dissociable cognitive mechanisms underlying human path
integration. Experimental Brain Research, 208, 61–71.
Winter, S. (2003). Route adaptive selection of salient
features. In W. Kuhn, M. F. Worboys & S. Timpf (Eds.),
Spatial
Information
Theory:
Cognitive
and
Computational Foundations of Geographic Information
Science, International Conference COSIT (pp. 37–50).
Berlin: Springer.

Acknowledgement
We thank Thomas Hinterecker for his help in setting up
the experiments and Sarah Jane Abbott for proof-reading the
manuscript. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for
their critical comments in order to improve the manuscript.

References
Bryant, D. J. (1997). Representing space in language and
perception. Mind and Language, 12, 236–264.
Caduff, D., & Timpf, S. (2008). On the assessment of
landmark salience for human wayfinding. Cognitive
Processing, 9(4), 249–267.
Coluccia, E., Mammarella, I. C., De Beni, R., Ittyerah, M.,
& Cornoldi, C. (2007). Remembering object position in
the absence of vision: Egocentric, allocentric, and
egocentric decentred frames of reference. Perception, 36,
850–864.
Dudchenko, P. A. (2010). Why people get lost – The
psychology and neuroscience of spatial cognition.
Oxford: University Press.
Golledge, R. G. (1995). Defining the criteria used in path
selection.
Working
paper
UCTC
No.
278.
http://www.uctc.net/papers/278.pdf
Golledge, R. G. (1997). Defining criteria in path selection.
In D. F. Ettema & H. J. P. Timmermans (Eds.), Activitybased approaches to travel analysis (pp. 151–169). New
York: Elsevier.
Golledge, R. G. (1999). Wayfinding Behavior. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hamburger, K., & Röser, F. (2014). The role of landmark
modality and familiarity in human wayfinding. Swiss
Journal of Psychology, 73(4), 205–213.
Hamburger, K., Dienelt, L. E., Strickrodt, M., & Röser, F.
(2013). Spatial cognition: the return path. In M. Knauff,
M. Pauen, N. Sebanz & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 537–542). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Hinterecker, T., Strickrodt, M., Röser, F., & Hamburger, K.
(2014). The influence of structural salience and
verbalization on finding the return path. In P. Bello, M.
Guarini, M. McShane & B. Scassellati (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 613–618). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Klatzky, R. L. (1998). Allocentric and egocentric spatial
representations:
Definitions,
distinctions,
and
interconnections. In C. Freksa, C. Habel & K. F. Wender
(Eds.), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 1404.
Spatial Cognition. An Interdisciplinary Approach to

865

