Folk Judgments of Normality: Part Statistical, Part Evaluative
Adam Bear (adam.bear@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Joshua Knobe (joshua.knobe@yale.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 344 College Street
New Haven, CT 06511 USA
Abstract

propositions (Goldman, 1986); behavioral economists have
shown how norms of cooperation guide moral behavior
(Rand et al., 2014); and linguists have argued that an
understanding of normality plays a role in a number of
important phenomena, including generics (Nickel, 2008)
and progressives (Dowty, 1979).
Nevertheless, most of these research programs have
focused on the downstream consequences of cognition
about normality rather than the nature of normality itself.
Little work has explored how, exactly, the norms
themselves are represented in the mind.
One notable exception comes from the study of causal
judgment (e.g., Hart & Honoré, 1985). Early work in this
area assumed that the relevant notion of normality would be
a purely statistical one (Hilton & Slugoski, 1986), but more
recently, researchers have argued that one can more
accurately predict people’s causal judgments if one
introduces a notion of normality that is in part evaluative
(Halpern & Hitchcock, 2014; Hitchcock & Knobe, 2009;
Knobe & Fraser, 2008).
For example, consider a case in which there are two
different factors, x and y, that are both necessary for an
outcome to arise. Now suppose we ask whether x caused the
outcome. In cases of this type, participants tend to regard x
as more of a cause to the extent that it is statistically
infrequent (Hilton & Slugoski, 1986), but they also tend to
regard x as more of a cause to the extent that it is morally
wrong (Knobe & Fraser, 2008). It has therefore been
suggested that causal judgments might be sensitive to a
more general notion of normality, where x will be
considered more abnormal to the extent that it violates
either statistical norms or evaluative norms (Hitchcock &
Knobe, 2009).
Drawing on this existing research on causal cognition, we
argue, more generally, that people’s normality intuitions
reflect a mixture of both statistical and evaluative
considerations. Specifically, we propose that people’s
normality intuitions are a function of both the average and
the ideal. On this hypothesis, intuitions about the normal
should not be equal either to representations of the average
or to representations of the ideal. Instead, a person’s
intuition about the normal amount should depend on both of
these factors, meaning that it would become higher if either
her representation of the average or her representation of the
ideal were to increase.

Existing research has emphasized the importance of normality
judgments in many aspects of cognition and life (e.g., causal
cognition, gradable adjectives, cooperative behavior). Yet
little work has explored how people actually come to
understand what sorts of things are normal. We argue that
people’s normality intuitions reflect a mixture of statistical
and evaluative considerations. Specifically, we suggest that
people’s intuitions about what is normal can be influenced by
representations both of the average and of the ideal. We test
this idea in three experiments. Experiment 1a demonstrates
that explicit judgments of normality reflect this mixture of
statistical and evaluative considerations. Experiments 1b and
2 then show that the hybrid notion that comes out in these
explicit judgments can also explain people’s judgments about
gradable adjectives. Taken together, these findings have
potential implications not only for normality judgments
themselves, but also for the many other mental activities that
these judgments impact.
Keywords:
philosophy

normality;

moral

cognition;

experimental

Introduction
In our daily lives, we frequently need to judge what kinds of
things are normal or abnormal. Indeed, existing research has
used judgments of normality to explain a diverse array of
phenomena (e.g., Egré & Cova, in press; Halpern &
Hitchcock, 2014; Rand et al., 2014).
But how do we assess what is normal in the first place?
The most obvious view would be that intuitions about
normality are based on purely statistical considerations. For
example, suppose that people are trying to judge what is a
normal amount of television for a person to watch in a day.
They might simply answer by making an estimate about the
average amount of television that people watch in a day.
We propose an alternative view according to which
intuitions about normality are driven by not only statistical
considerations, but also evaluative considerations. That is,
people do not assess what is normal by simply considering
what is average, but also by considering what is ideal.

An Evaluative Theory of Normality
A large body of research has invoked normality to explain
important aspects of cognition and behavior. Philosophers in
epistemology have appealed to a framework of “normal
worlds” to explain when we are justified in believing certain

184

The Present Studies

We suggest that this idea applies across a broad array of
contexts. First, it should apply to people’s judgments in a
wide variety of different domains (the normal amount of
television to watch in a day, the normal percentage of
students who are bullied in a middle school, etc.). More
importantly, the theory is intended to make a strong claim
about how normality is represented in the mind and how it
underlies various other aspects of cognition. Thus, our
proposal applies not only to people’s explicit use of the
word “normal,” but also more implicit measures that tap
into the same cognitive representation.

We begin by examining explicit judgments of normality
(Experiment 1a). We then further explore the phenomenon
using the more indirect measure of judgments about
gradable adjectives, in both a correlational study
(Experiment 1b) and a manipulation study (Experiment 2).
Across all these studies, we ask participants about what is
statistically average and what is evaluatively ideal and then
observe how these variables predict views about normality.
In each case, we predict that judgments of normality will be
impacted both by statistical judgments and by evaluative
judgments.
For each study, we analyze the results using normal linear
regression, but we also apply a convex combination model
that has just one free parameter. Specifically, we fit
participants’ responses (N) to the following equation:

Gradable Adjectives
We examine participants’ normality judgments both by
simply asking them what they think are “normal” amounts
of various quantities and by using a more implicit and
indirect method. Specifically, we look at participants’ use of
gradable adjectives. Consider the distinction people draw
between quantities that are “small” and those that are
“large.” Existing theoretical work on gradable adjectives
explains this distinction by positing two key theoretical
constructs: first, a scale along which any quantity can be
assigned a size; second, a standard on the scale above
which a quantity counts as large (Kennedy, 1999; Kennedy
& McNally, 2005). A question then arises, however, as to
how the threshold itself is determined.
Existing work has shown that purely statistical
considerations do play an important role here (e.g., Barner
& Snedeker, 2008; Lassiter & Goodman, 2014). For
example, suppose one were trying to determine the standard
amount beyond which a number of hours of TV per day
counts as large. In doing this, it would clearly be relevant to
know the average amount of TV that people watch.
However, some intriguing new work by Egré and Cova (in
press) suggests that there may be more to the story. For
example, when told that 5 out of 10 children died in a fire
and 5 survived, people are more inclined to agree that
“many children died” than to agree that “many children
survived.” That is, even though equal numbers of children
survived and died in this scenario—in other words,
descriptive facts about death and survival were equated—
people’s evaluative considerations about the desirability of
survival versus death seemed to affect their intuitions about
“many” (Egré & Cova, in press).
It might be the case that this effect of evaluative content is
specific to people’s use of gradable expressions in language.
But we suggest that this linguistic phenomenon is actually a
symptom of a far more general fact about people’s
representations of normality. Specifically, we argue that
judgments of gradable adjectives are based not merely on
assessments of the average but on assessments of the
normal, which is itself affected by representations both of
the average and of the ideal. Thus, we hypothesize that
participants’ use of gradable adjectives will show the same
pattern as their explicit use of the word “normal,” reflecting
a hybrid of statistical and evaluative considerations.

N = bI + (1 – b)A,
where I is the representation of what is normatively ideal
and A is the representation of what is statistically average.
Intuitively, the free parameter b represents the weight that
people attach to the ideal vs. the average. When b is 0, the
normal is determined entirely by the average. When b is 1, it
is determined entirely by the ideal. Our model predicts that
b will have an intermediate value (i.e., the confidence
interval for b will not overlap with either 0 or 1), suggesting
that the normal is determined in part by the average, in part
by the ideal.
To estimate the value of b, we used linear regression.
Note that the above equation is equivalent to (N – A) = b(I –
A). This equation can then be modeled using simple linear
regression without a constant term.

Experiment 1a
In this experiment, we examine how people’s intuitions
about average and ideal amounts of various behaviors or
events relate to what they think are normal amounts of these
behaviors and events. Recent work by Wysocki
(unpublished data) suggests that people’s explicit use of the
word “normal” in cases like these may be affected by
evaluative considerations. Building on this work, we
developed a list of behaviors and events and then used
exactly the same method to examine both explicit judgments
of normality (Experiment 1a) and gradable adjectives
(Experiment 1b). The hypothesis is that people’s judgments
in both of these cases will be influenced not only by what
they consider average, but also by what they consider ideal.

Method
Ninety participants from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk were
randomly assigned to judge average, ideal, or normal
amounts for a set of 20 behaviors or activities, which were
presented randomly on a single page. (We picked behaviors
and activities that we predicted would have judged averages
that were significantly different from their judged ideals.)
Thus, for all domains, approximately 30 participants were

185

asked questions like “What would you guess is the average
number of hours of TV that a person watches in a day?”;
another 30 participants were asked questions like “What do
you think is the ideal number of hours of TV for a person to
watch in a day?”; and the remaining participants were asked
questions like “What is a normal amount of hours of TV for
a person to watch in a day?”

estimate what amounts would be considered neither large
nor small (the standards).
We again hypothesized that these standard amounts
would not be predicted just by participants’ estimates of
averages, but also by what they judged to be ideal.

Method
One hundred new participants were presented with a single
question about each of our 20 domains from Experiment 1a,
presented in random order on a single page. The questions
had the following format (again taking the TV domain as
our example): “Imagine that a person watches y hours of TV
in a day. Please rate the extent to which you think this is a
large or small number of hours of TV for a person to watch
in a day.” Participants responded on a 7-point scale, ranging
from “very small” to “very large.”
The number y was a randomly selected integer that was
50% likely to fall between the average and ideal values from
Experiment 1a and 50% likely to fall outside this range. In
most cases, there was a 25% chance that a value would be
selected from below the range between the average and
ideal and a 25% chance that a value would be selected from
above this range. However, if this procedure would have
resulted in sampling impossible values (e.g., negative
numbers or percentages greater than 100), we did not
sample these values, but instead increased the number of
possible values on the other end of the distribution. (For
example, if, for some domain, the average was 1 and the
ideal was 4, we would uniformly sample from the integers
between 0 and 7, rather than the integers between -1 and 6.)

Results
Participants’ responses in each condition were averaged for
each of our 20 domains (Table 1). Responses from
participants who failed an attention check or that were 3
standard deviations away from the mean answer for a given
question were excluded.
Since our questions asked about very different kinds of
quantities (hours, calories, etc.), assumptions of normality
were violated. To address this problem, mean responses for
each measure were converted to log scale.
To examine how judgments of averages and ideals affect
normality judgments, we compared a regression model in
which only average judgments predict normal judgments to
a model in which both average and ideal judgments predict
these judgments. The latter model reveals that both judged
averages, β = .70, SE = .09, p < .001, and judged ideals, β =
.33, SE = .07, p = .001, significantly predict normality
judgments. Moreover, the Bayesian Information Criterion
(BIC) for this model (19.48) is lower than that for a model
in which only judged averages predict normality judgments
(30.46), suggesting that it is a more appropriate model of the
observed data.
We also performed the convex combination analysis
discussed above (see “The Present Studies”). This analysis
yields a 95% confidence interval for b of [.18, .39],
demonstrating that participant’s normality judgments are
intermediate between their judgments about what is average
(b > 0) and their judgments about what is ideal (b < 1).

Results
To calculate standards for each domain, participants’ 7point ratings were mapped into a range from -3 to 3, such
that “very small” corresponded to -3 and “very large”
corresponded to 3. Consequently, the zero point on this
scale corresponded to the standard point S, at which some
value is judged to be a neither small nor large amount. We
estimated this standard point using linear regression
according to the following equation:

Discussion
In this experiment, people’s explicit judgments about
normal amounts of various quantities, like hours of
television watching, were best explained by considering
both statistical reasoning (what is considered average) and
evaluative judgments (what is considered ideal).
Of course, this result may reflect something idiosyncratic
about people’s use of the word “normal,” rather than a
deeper truth about people’s representations of normality.
Thus, we use a more implicit measure in the experiments
that follow.

y = b(x – S)
where y corresponded to participants ratings on the -3 to 3
scale, and x corresponded to the randomly queried values
that participants were asked about.
As before, responses from participants who failed our
attention check or who gave responses more than 3 SDs
from the mean responses on a question were excluded from
this analysis.
The estimated values for the standard in each domain are
shown in Table 1.

Experiment 1b
In this study, we examine whether participants’ judged
averages and ideals from Experiment 1a predict a more
implicit measure of normality: the notion of a standard
amount (see Introduction). We assessed this by asking
people the degree to which they thought various quantities
relating to the domains of Experiment 1a were large or
small amounts. Based on these ratings, we could then

Table 1: Mean Average (A), Ideal (I), Normal (N), and
Standard (S) Judgments across Domains from Experiment 1
Domain

186

A

I

N

S

hrs TV watched/day

4.00

2.34

3.03

3.15

sugary drinks/wk

9.67

3.52

7.30

6.50

hrs exercising/wk

standard was estimated to be the point at which the
regression line crosses the x-axis (1984.12 calories).

5.37

7.31

6.77

5.98

2159.26

1757.84

2063.33

1984.12

servings of
vegetables/mnth

34.81

67.67

51.97

54.38

lies told/wk

24.25

2.75

8.43

16.40

mins doctor is
late/appointment

17.78

3.97

18.47

13.48

Next, as done with normality judgments, we examined
whether these standard values could be modeled as a convex
combination of average and ideal values. This analysis
yields a 95% CI for b of [.13, .26], showing that these
standards are once again intermediate between averages and
ideals.

books read/yr

10.07

26.15

9.90

15.24

Discussion

8.04

4.25

8.47

6.27

19.30

1.59

4.82

12.59

calories consumed/day

romantic partners/lifetime
international
conflicts/decade
money cheated on taxes

In conjunction with Experiment 1a, this experiment
provides evidence that people’s representations of normality
are, in fact, influenced by evaluative considerations at a
deep cognitive level. Specifically, the effect of judgments
about what is ideal extends to both explicit measures of
normality and a more implicit measure involving standards
from gradable adjectives.
Nevertheless, these results are only correlational. In
Experiment 2, we test whether manipulating averages and
ideals for a novel category can actually influence how the
standard is represented.

604.56

136.45

636.60

605.53

percent students cheat on
exam

34.64

3.50

15.97

27.39

times checking phone/day

45.33

13.12

37.17

29.67

15.04

5.78

12.73

8.08

6.04

6.00

5.23

6.47

times cleaning home/mnth

5.57

6.75

4.72

6.00

computer crashes/mnth

4.78

0.50

1.60

2.77

Experiment 2

12.64

3.82

11.13

10.73

27.59

2.31

27.26

22.14

16.79

5.91

14.30

10.94

In this study, we experimentally manipulate the average and
ideal sizes of a fictional object called a “stagnar.” We
predicted that, even for this completely novel object,
participants’ representations of the standard would depend
on both the specified average and the specified ideal.

mins waiting for customer
service
times calling
parents/mnth

percent high school
dropouts
percent middle school
students bullied
drinks of frat
brother/weekend

A regression examining the influence of log-converted
judged averages and ideals on log-converted standard
amounts once again finds that both averages, β = .80, SE =
.05, p < .001, and ideals, β = .23, SE = .04, p < .001, impact
these standard values. Moreover, the BIC for this model (1.90) is lower than that for a simpler model in which only
averages predict standard amounts (12.36), indicating that it
is a better model of the data.

Method
Two hundred participants from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
were randomly assigned to receive a certain average and
ideal size (in pixels) for a stagnar. Each of these values was
independently assigned to participants by randomly
sampling from a set of 101 evenly spaced values between
300 and 700 (i.e., the values were all spaced 4 pixels apart).
Participants were first introduced to the concept of an
ideal stagnar. They were presented with a description of a
fictional hunting tool, along with a green bar presented
below this description representing this ideal length for a
stagnar to be effective for hunting. (Note that, in order to
avoid participants’ confusing the concept of an ideal stagnar
with the actual stagnars that were supposed to exist in the
population, we never presented participants with an image
of a stagnar of ideal length. We only presented a green bar
to represent the ideal length at all stages of the experiment.)
After reading this description and viewing this green bar,
participants were told, “If [stagnars] exceed this length too
much, they become too difficult to handle; and if they go
below this length too much, they become too weak to injure
an animal.” Participants had to correctly answer two
comprehension questions about this ideal stagnar length in
order to proceed.
Next, we introduced the average stagnar size by
displaying 10 different stagnars (see Figure 2 for an
example), which all varied around this average. (These 10

Figure 1: Participants’ ratings of the degree to which
various daily calorie amounts are small or large. The

187

stagnars were always drawn from the same underlying
distribution around the average; e.g., the first presented
stagnar was always 80 pixels larger than average, the second
was always 8 pixels smaller than average, and so on.)
Participants were told that “So far, [only] 10 stagnars exist
in the world,” and that, therefore, the stagnars we would
present to them would make up the entire population of
stagnars in existence (not just a sample of the population).
Participants were further told that we were going to show
them each of these stagnars one by one for 5 seconds at a
time, along with the green bar below representing the ideal
stagnar length. Once participants indicated that they were
ready to pay attention, they were presented with each of
these 10 stagnars, with the green bar below each of them, on
separate pages, which auto-advanced every 5 seconds.
After viewing all 10 stagnars and answering our attentioncheck question, participants were told that they would be
asked a few questions about stagnars. To reduce possible
demand characteristics, we attempted to downplay the
importance of our crucial dependent variables, involving
intuitions about size, by indicating that we first wanted to
collect intuitions about the sizes of stagnars, but then we
would ask “one further question.” In reality, this further
question (“Do you think it's better for a stagnar to be smaller
than the ideal or larger than the ideal?”) was unrelated to the
experiment, but was included after the key measures in
order to avoid deception.
On separate pages, participants were asked about 5
different hypothetical stagnars. Once again, the sizes of
these displayed stagnars were randomly sampled (without
replacement) from the 300- to 700-pixel range, spaced 4
pixels apart. For each stagnar shown, participants were
asked, “If there were a stagnar that looked like the
following, to what extent do you think this would be a large
or small stagnar?” and gave answers on a 1–7 scale ranging
from “Very small” (1) to “Very large” (7), with “Neither
small nor large” (4) in the center of the scale.

As in Experiment 1b, we compared this model to a
simpler model in which only the average predicts the
standard. The BIC of the more complex model with the
ideal (1680.84) is lower than that for this simpler model
(1791.36), suggesting it is a better model of the data.
We also examined whether the standard stagnar sizes
could be modeled as a convex combination of the
manipulated average and ideal values. This analysis finds
that standard values are intermediate between averages and
ideals, with a 95% CI for b of [.64, .77].

Discussion
Building on the results of Experiment 1b, this experiment
demonstrates that people’s representations of normality (as
manifested in their use of gradable adjectives) are causally
influenced by both statistical and evaluative notions.
This
experiment
further
suggests
that
these
representations can be updated quickly, with limited
information. Participants in this study had no prior
knowledge about stagnars, and they were introduced to this
category with only a few short sentences and a picture.
Moreover, they were presented with only 10 examples of
the category and were merely shown a green line
representing the ideal size. Nevertheless, participants’
standard stagnar sizes were highly influenced by averages
and ideals.

General Discussion
Three studies suggest that people’s representations of
normality are guided by both statistical and evaluative
considerations. Study 1a shows that people’s explicit
judgments about what are the most normal quantities of
various behaviors or events are driven by what are believed
to be the average and ideal amounts of these quantities.
Study 1b shows that this is also true for the more implicit
representation of a “standard,” based on the use of the
gradable adjectives “large” and “small.” Study 2
demonstrates that these standards can be manipulated by
changing the average and ideal sizes of a novel object
category.
Of course, we suggest that these studies serve as a mere
case study in the context of a broader theory of normality.
For example, although the present studies focused on
quantities of various behaviors and events (e.g., hours of
television watching), the theory of normality we propose
may apply to more qualitative kinds of stimuli, as well.
Indeed, research on concepts suggests that people’s
judgments about prototypical exemplars of categories are
influenced by evaluative (as well as statistical)
considerations (Barsalou, 1985; though see also Kim &
Murphy, 2011). This result could perhaps be explained by
the same theory of normality that explains the data we
observe.
More importantly, as discussed in the Introduction,
normality has been implicated in a number of ongoing
research programs—from epistemology in philosophy to
behavioral economics. If, as we suggest, people’s normality

Figure 2: Example of a “stagnar” presented to participants
in Experiment 2.

Results
Using the same method from Experiment 1b, each
participant’s standard stagnar size was calculated based on
responses to the five questions described above. (Two
participants were excluded from further analysis for failing
the attention check. One additional participant was excluded
from analysis because their judgments of size were
negatively correlated with the sizes of stagnars presented.)
To examine whether both the manipulated average and
manipulated ideal affect participants’ standards, we
regressed standard stagnar sizes on averages and ideals. This
analysis revealed that both averages, β = .19, SE = .04, p <
.001, and ideals, β = .65, SE = .04, p < .001, significantly
predict standard amounts.

188

judgments are affected by both statistical and evaluative
considerations, this theory of normality could help explain
how people use language, how they reason causally, how
they cooperate with others, and how they ultimately do
many other things.

Greene, J. D. (2014). Social heuristics shape intuitive
cooperation. Nature Communications, 5.
Wysocki, T. (Unpublished data). Explicit judgments of
normality. University of Washington in St. Louis.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Paul Egré, Nick Stagnaro and Zoltán
Szabó for valuable help and for comments on an earlier
draft of the present paper.

References
Barner, D., & Snedeker, J. (2008). Compositionality and
statistics in adjective acquisition: 4‐year‐olds interpret
tall and short based on the size distributions of novel noun
referents. Child Development, 79(3), 594-608.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11(4),
629.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague grammar.
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Egré, P. & Cova, F. (in press). Moral asymmetries and the
semantics of “many.” Semantics and Pragmatics.
Goldman, A. I. (1986). Epistemology and cognition.
Harvard University Press.
Halpern, J. Y., & Hitchcock, C. (2014). Graded causation
and defaults. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science.
Hart, H. L. A., & Honoré, T. (1985). Causation in the law.
Oxford University Press.
Hilton, D. J., & Slugoski, B. R. (1986). Knowledge-based
causal attribution: The abnormal conditions focus model.
Psychological review, 93(1), 75.
Hitchcock, C., & Knobe, J. (2009). Cause and norm.
Journal of Philosophy, 106(11), 587-612.
Kennedy, C. (1999). Projecting the adjective: The syntax
and semantics of gradability and comparison. Routledge.
Kennedy, C., & McNally, L. (2005). Scale structure, degree
modification, and the semantics of gradable
predicates. Language, 81, 345-381.
Kim, S., & Murphy, G. L. (2011). Ideals and category
typicality. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37(5), 1092.
Knobe, J., & Fraser, B. (2008). Causal judgment and moral
judgment: Two experiments. In Moral Psychology,
Volume 2 (pp. 441–448). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lassiter, D., & Goodman, N. D. (2014, April). Context,
scale structure, and statistics in the interpretation of
positive-form adjectives. In Proceedings of SALT (Vol.
23, pp. 587-610).
Nickel, B. (2008). Generics and the ways of normality.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 31(6), 629-648.
Rand, D. G., Peysakhovich, A., Kraft-Todd, G. T.,
Newman, G. E., Wurzbacher, O., Nowak, M. A., &

189

