Framing Effects and the Folk Psychiatry of Addiction
Stephen J. Flusberg (stephen.flusberg@purchase.edu)
Michael DellaValle (michael.dellavalle@purchase.edu)
SUNY Purchase College, Department of Psychology
735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase, NY 10577, USA

Paul H. Thibodeau (paul.thibodeau@oberlin.edu)
Oberlin College, Department of Psychology
120 W. Lorain St., Oberlin, OH 44074, USA
Abstract

a few days later for FoxNews.com, Keith Ablow (2014)
expressed a very different point of view:

Clinical disorders are multidimensional phenomena that are
important to both clinicians and the lay public, as well as to
cognitive scientists interested in understanding how people
think and reason about complex domains. To date, however,
little work has examined the factors that influence the folk
psychiatry of addiction. Participants in the present study read
a brief paragraph about addiction pitched at either an abstract
or personal level, followed by a series of questions about the
causes and treatment of drug addiction. We further
manipulated whether addiction was described using a medical
or psychological label. Results revealed that liberals and
conservatives varied dramatically with respect to their folk
psychiatric reasoning, with liberals preferring a more
biological/medical view, which is associated increased
support for medical interventions, reduced feelings of
personal responsibility, and elevated feelings of stigma.
Framing addiction using medical labels and at an abstract
level pushed people towards this biological view, suggesting
that media reports and messaging campaigns may influence
how people conceptualize addiction.

“No quirk of neurochemistry can make you rate getting
high as more important than getting your kids through
life. Only a disorder of character can do that… Philip
Seymour Hoffman never faced and wrestled to the
ground whatever demons had him on the run from his
own life story.”
Ablow rejects the brain disease construal (his quirk of
neurochemistry), instead describing addiction as a disorder
of character that results from a personal failure to defeat
one’s (metaphorical) demons. This paints addiction not as a
biological or medical issue, but as a psychological or
behavioral problem; a physical struggle that an individual
must be strong-willed enough to overcome.
Taken together, these examples seem to reveal very
different beliefs about the nature of drug addiction that have
significant implications for how people understand (a) the
causes of addiction (e.g., is it biological or psychological in
origin?), (b) how we should feel about an individual with an
addiction (e.g., how much are they to blame for their
problem?), and (c) how the addiction should be treated (e.g.,
do they need a medical intervention or are they just not
trying hard enough?).
Interestingly, the proper way to conceptualize addiction
disorders (i.e. are they brain diseases or emergent behavioral
phenomena?) is still hotly contested in the clinical literature
(see, e.g., Heyman, 2013). Here, however, we consider how
this debate plays out amongst members of lay public. In
other words, we examine what may be called the folk
psychiatry (Haslam, 2005) of addiction, as well as the
factors that influence how people think about addiction
problems.
Investigating how people conceptualize addiction and
other clinical disorders is important for cognitive scientists
interested in understanding how people represent and reason
about complex domains. It is also of vital importance to
health professionals and policy makers concerned with
promoting effective treatment seeking behavior and
reducing the stigma associated with mental disorders.
Recent research has helped illuminate some of the factors
that influence how people reason about psychiatric
conditions. Consistent with the analysis above, Ahn,

Keywords: folk psychiatry; framing, addiction, language,
construal, political ideology

Introduction
On February 2, 2014, Oscar award winning actor Phillip
Seymour Hoffman suffered an accidental drug overdose in
his Manhattan home. Journalists, psychologists, bloggers,
and fans immediately went online to express sympathy and
sorrow and to try to understand and explain this unexpected
tragedy. Writing for Time magazine, David Sheff (2014)
lamented:
“[It] wasn’t Hoffman’s fault that he relapsed. It was the
fault of a disease that often includes relapse as a
symptom and the fault of the ineffective treatment he
received... We don’t know what treatments Hoffman
received, but it’s unlikely that it was state-of-the-art
care rooted in the fact that addiction is a brain disease.”
By describing addiction using medical terms like brain
disease, Sheff appears to be trying to mitigate the blame
directed towards Hoffman and to redirect it instead towards
our flawed healthcare system. However, not everyone
conceptualized Hoffman’s addiction in these terms. Writing

722

Proctor, & Flanagan (2009) found that mental health
professionals conceptualize different disorders along a
continuum from the highly biological (e.g., Autism) to the
highly non-biological (e.g., adjustment disorders), which is
associated with how they understand the causes and
preferred treatment options for these conditions (e.g.,
medical treatments tend to be recommended for disorders on
the biological end of the spectrum). This biological/medical
continuum is also a key dimension in folk psychiatric
reasoning (Haslam, 2005), though in general both clinicians
and novices hold less essentialist beliefs about mental
disorders as compared to other medical conditions (Ahn,
Flanagan, Marsh, & Sanislow, 2006).
Importantly, researchers have found that simple
interventions can influence the extent to which people
conceive of complex health conditions as biological, which
in turn affects other cognitive and behavioral outcomes.
Hoyt, Burnette, and Auster-Gussman (2014), for instance,
found that when overweight participants read an article that
described obesity as a disease, they felt less concerned
about their weight and were more likely to make unhealthy
food choices. This suggests that “medicalizing” a complex
health condition like obesity can lead to lowered feelings of
responsibility and control over the issue, leading people to
expend less effort in dealing with it. Similar manipulations,
however, can also lead people to support progressive public
policy interventions that help protect obese individuals
(Thibodeau, Perko, & Flusberg, under review).
Likewise, biological explanations for depression and
generalized anxiety disorder can lead to lowered ascriptions
of personal responsibility for these conditions, along with
increased prognostic pessimism about their duration and
treatment, and a reduction in empathy for individuals with
the disorder (Lebowitz & Ahn, 2014; Lebowitz, Ahn, &
Nolen-Hoeksema, 2013; Lebowitz, Pyun, & Ahn, 2014).
For this reason, and perhaps surprisingly, it seems that
medicalizing a mental disorder can actually cause an
increase in the stigma associated with that disorder by
promoting a more essentialist view of the condition
In the present study, we sought to understand how people
think and reason about addiction, and what factors might
influence how people conceptualize drug addiction in
particular. Participants in our study read a brief paragraph
about addiction and then responded to a series of questions
about the causes of addiction, what individuals with an
addiction should do for treatment, and what society as a
whole should do to address the issue.
We manipulated two key variables in an attempt to
influence folk psychiatric reasoning: language and construal
level. For half of our participants, the first sentence of the
paragraph described addiction using a medical label (disease
or neurological disorder). For the other half, we used a
psychological label (demon or behavioral problem). Recent
research has found that even a one-word linguistic framing
manipulation can affect how people reason about a complex
domain like crime (Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011).
Therefore we hypothesized that being exposed to a medical

label would result in a more biologically oriented mental
model of addiction.
We also manipulated whether the paragraph was pitched
at a relatively abstract level (describing addiction in terms
of general symptoms and statistics) or at a more personal
level (describing the specific addiction issue and symptoms
facing an individual). Research on construal level theory has
found that thinking about behavior in a more abstract way
leads to greater essentialization (Liberman, Trope, &
Stephan, 2007), and therefore we predicted that participants
who read the abstract story would also generate a more
biologically oriented mental model of addiction.
Finally, we were also interested in particular individual
differences that might affect how people conceptualize
addiction. For example, research on obesity has found that
liberals and those with personal experience with obesity
tend to prefer accounts of the condition that attribute less
blame to overweight individuals, like biological and
environmental explanations (Thibodeau, Perko, & Flusberg,
under review). This is consistent with the observation that
conservative ideology is characterized by an emphasis on
personal responsibility, and members of a stigmatized group
are typically motivated to view it as something they do not
have full control over (Oliver & Lee, 2005; see also the
quotations above). Thus we predicted that liberals and those
with a personal experience with addiction would support
more biologically oriented models of addiction.

Experiment
Methods
Participants We recruited and paid 813 participants
through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. We used Turk’s
exclusion capabilities to ensure that participants lived in the
United States and had a good performance record on
pervious tasks (90% or greater). Data from 64 participants
were excluded because they either took the survey more
than once (as evidenced by a repeated IP address; N=17) or
failed our manipulation check (N=47), leaving data from
749 participants for analysis.
Participants ranged in age from 18-79 years old (M =
31.5, SD = 10.7). The political affiliation of participants was
skewed liberal, with 41.5%, 43.8% and 14.7% identifying as
Democrat, Independent, and Republican, respectively. On a
101-point continuous scale of political ideology (0 =
extremely liberal, 100 = extremely conservative), the mean
was 38.7 (SD = 25.4).
Materials & Procedure The study consisted of a 2 (story
type: abstract vs. personal) X 4 (label: demon, behavioral
problem, disease, neurological disorder) between-subjects
design, yielding 8 individual conditions. It was created
using Qualtrics online survey software.
Participants first read a brief paragraph that discussed the
issue of addiction in one of two ways. For half of the
participants, the paragraph was pitched at a more abstract
level, using statistics drawn from the CDC website

723

(www.cdc.gov) to demonstrate that the issue is important
and widespread. For the other half of participants, the
paragraph was pitched at a personal level and described an
individual named John dealing with addiction, detailing
many of the the same symptoms included in the abstract
paragraph as they played out in his life.
For both story types, the first sentence of the paragraph
framed addiction using one of four labels: demon,
behavioral problem, disease, and neurological disorder. We
considered demon and behavioral problem to be
“psychological” labels that treat addiction as person-level
phenomenon and ascribe relatively more blame to the
addict. We considered disease and neurological disorder to
be “medical” labels that treat addiction as a sub-personal,
biologically based phenomenon and ascribe relatively less
blame to the addict1 (see Appendix for full paragraph texts).
After participants read the paragraph, they responded to a
series of target and demographics questions. First, they were
asked, “How should someone deal with drug addiction?”
They had to rank order their top three choices from a list of
seven options (presented in a randomized order) by
dragging their choices into a response box. The options
included: “seek medical treatment” (coded as a medical
response in our analysis), “seek therapy”, “join a support
group like Narcotics Anonymous” (both coded as
psychological responses), “learn self-discipline”, “spend
(more) time with friends and family”, and “see a local
spiritual figure” (coded as informal responses).
Second, they were asked: “What should we as a society
do to deal with the rising rates of drug addiction?” and again
rank ordered their top three choices from a list of options.
The options included “improve education”, “work against
drug stigma by raising awareness” (both coded as education
responses), “reduce economic inequality”, “legalize drugs”,
“harsher punishments and/or more police enforcement for
drug offenses” (all coded as policy responses), “improve
genetic testing / modification / engineering techniques”, and
“better mental health services” (both coded as healthcare
responses).
Third, they were asked: “Why do people become addicted
to drugs?” and again rank ordered their top three choices
from a list of options. The options included: “physical or
chemical abnormality in the brain”, “it is in their genes”
(both coded as biological responses), “bad parenting”,
“living in a bad neighborhood”, “social pressures” (coded as
social responses), “self-medication”, “lack of self discipline

or character”, and “poor life decisions” (coded as individual
responses).
Next, participants used a slider bar ranging from 0 (not at
all responsible) to 100 (completely responsible) to indicate
“How responsible for the current state of their lives are
those who are experiencing drug addiction?” After this they
rank ordered eight different issues based on how much
stigma they associated with each one. The issues included
obesity, anorexia, autism, cigarette smoking, drug addiction,
adultery, dropping out of school, and depression.
Finally, they completed a brief set of demographics
questions, as well as a manipulation check question
(multiple-choice with three response options) to ensure they
were paying attention when they read the original
paragraph. For those who read the abstract paragraph, the
manipulation check required them to indicate in which year
the addiction statistics in the paragraph had been published
(correct response: 2011). For those who read the personal
paragraph, they had to indicate why John started using drugs
(correct response: because his friends were into them). The
demographics questions included age, political affiliation, a
continuous measure of political ideology registered on a
101-point sliding scale ranging from 0 (very liberal) to 100
(very conservative), and a free response to the question:
“have you or any of your friends or family experienced drug
addiction? If so, what was done about it?” (These responses
were coded as “yes”, “no”, and “N/A” for the purpose of our
analyses).

Results & Discussion.
Because our sample was skewed towards Democrats and
Independents, to analyze potential main effects of political
beliefs on folk psychiatric reasoning we used a median split
on our continuous measure of political ideology to create
“liberal” and “conservative” groups consisting of roughly
equal numbers of participants (N = 385 and N = 364,
respectively)2.
For the three questions in which participants rank-ordered
their top three choices, we only present analyses for the top
choice for each question (using the coding scheme described
above).
Treatment We analyzed responses to the question “How
should someone deal with addiction?” in two ways. First,
we conducted a series of chi-square tests of independence to
test for main effects of the story type (abstract or personal),
label type (medical or psychological), political ideology
(median split), and personal experience on treatment
suggestions. Second, we ran a series of logistic regression
models that allowed us to test for interactions between the
experimental manipulations and individual difference
variables on medical treatment.

1
Data from a norming study supported these intuitions: 125 naïve
participants filled out a survey on their first day of an Introduction
to Psychology course where they rated each label (using a 0-100%
scale) on the extent to which a person experiencing such an issue is
generally responsible for the current state of their lives. Pairedsample t-tests revealed no difference in responsibility ratings for
demon (M = 57.0, SD = 29.5) and behavioral problem (M = 55.3,
SD = 28.7; p = .66), but both of these labels yielded reliably higher
responsibility ratings than disease (M = 33.9, SD = 28.3) and
neurological disorder (M = 25.1, SD = 28.9; p’s < .001).

2

Since these groups were also skewed slightly liberal (median =
39), it is likely that we are underestimating the effects of political
ideology on folk psychiatric reasoning in our analyses.

724

The first chi-square test of independence revealed that
people who read the abstract paragraph were more likely to
choose medical treatments, while those who read the
personal paragraph were relatively more likely to choose
psychological treatments, χ2(2) = 12.98, p = .002. This is
consistent with the notion that concrete, personal construals
shift attention to the psychological aspects of a condition,
while abstract construals highlight more enduring patterns
that may best be captured by biological models. We also
found that conservatives were more likely suggest informal
treatment options while liberals were more likely to suggest
medical treatments, χ2(2) = 22.62, p < .001, which is
consistent with the notion that the medicalization of certain
clinical disorders, which downplays personal responsibility,
has more support amongst liberals. We did not find a
difference in treatment suggestions by label, χ2(2) = 2.29, p
= .32, or personal experience, χ2(2) = 0.36, p = .84.

Society Solutions We conducted a similar series of analyses
on responses to the question “How should society deal with
addiction?” Three separate chi-square tests of independence
revealed no effects of the story type, χ2(2) = 3.77, p = .152,
label type, χ2(2)=4.28, p = .12, or personal experience, χ2(2)
= 2.21, p = .33. However, we did find an effect of political
ideology, χ2(2) = 10.29, p = .006: liberals were more likely
to suggest healthcare-based solutions, while conservatives
were more likely to suggest education-based strategies. This
is consistent with the results of the previous question,
suggesting that liberals are more likely to prefer a medical
or biological view of addiction.
Then we conducted a logistic regression to test what
factors made people likely to suggest that society focus on
healthcare. The model revealed a marginal main effect of
story type, β = .489, SE = .286, p = .088: participants who
read a personal narrative were somewhat more likely to
suggest that society focus on healthcare. The model also
revealed a significant interaction between the story and label
types, β = -.961, SE = .410, p = .019: people who read a
personal narrative with a medical label were actually less
likely to suggest that society focus on healthcare. Consistent
with our findings for the previous question, this suggests
that in a personal context, medical labels do not shift people
towards a biological view of addiction (and may in fact have
the opposite effect in some cases).

Psychological
Medical

0.6

Medical Treatment

depression that was framed with a medical label were
especially likely to suggest a medical treatment. No other
main effects or interactions were statistically significant.

0.4

0.2

0.0
Abstract

Personal

Liberal

Abstract

Causes of Addiction Next, we analyzed responses to the
question “Why do people become addicted to drugs?” and
found no main effects of story type, χ2(2) = 2.31, p = .315 or
label type, χ2(2) = .68, p = .71. However we did find that
liberals were more likely to suggest biological causes, while
conservatives were more likely to suggest individual causes,
again consistent with the findings for the first two questions,
χ2(2) = 6.43, p = .04. In addition, we found that people with
personal experience with addiction were more likely to
point to biological causes, while people with no personal
experience were more likely to point to social causes, χ2(2)
=10.34, p < .006. This is consistent with research showing
that people with a stigmatized condition (e.g., obesity) are
more likely to view that condition as caused by biological
factors (Thibodeau, Perko, & Flusberg, under review).
A logistic regression was fit to predict what factors led
people to identify biological causes of addiction as their top
choice (compared to any of the other options). It revealed a
significant main effect of story type, β = 1.040, SE = .485, p
= .032: people who read the personal narrative were more
likely to identify biological causes of addiction. We also
found an interaction between ideology and experience, β = 1.570, SE = .578, p = .007: conservatives with personal
experience of addiction were less likely to emphasize
biological causes. Finally, the model revealed a three-way
interaction between personal experience, ideology, and the

Personal

Conservative

Figure 1. Proportion of participants who suggested a medical
treatment as their top choice by story type, label type, and
ideology. Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals of the
proportions

The logistic regression tested what factors made people
likely to suggest a medical treatment as their top choice
(versus any of the other treatment options). We included
predictors for story type, label type, ideology, and
experience as main effects as well as tests of interactions
between these variables. The resultant model revealed main
effects of the story type, β = .481, SE = .202, p = .017, and
the label type, β = .572, SE = .291, p = .049: the abstract
story and medical labels were associated with more medical
treatment suggestions. The model also revealed an
interaction between ideology and label, β = .654, SE = .291,
p = .025: liberals were more likely to suggest a medical
treatment when they read a medical label (50%) than when
they read a psychological label (43%), whereas
conservatives were equally likely to suggest a medical
treatment regardless of whether they read a medical (35%)
or psychological label (33%). Finally, the model revealed a
3-way interaction between ideology, story type, and label
type, β = .481, SE = .202, p = .017. As illustrated in Figure
1, liberal participants who read an abstract description of

725

Biological Cause of Addiction

label type, β = 1.596, SE = .705, p = .024. As illustrated in
Figure 2, this interaction was driven by liberals lacking
experience with addiction, who were especially likely to
think that the condition resulted from a biological influence
when presented with the medical label.

exposed to a label that seems to ameliorate personal blame
for the condition can actually help reduce beliefs about the
degree of stigma associated with the condition.
Responsibility Ratings Finally, to assess what factors
affected ratings of how responsible for their current
situation someone with an addiction is, we fit a 2 (story
type: abstract vs. personal) X 2 (label style: medical vs.
psychological) ANOVA with the continuous measure of
political ideology included as a covariate. There was no
main effect of story type, F(1, 744) = .84, p = .36, nor was
there an interaction between story type and label style, F(1,
744) = 1.58, p = .21. However, there was a marginal main
effect of label framing, as participants exposed to a
psychological label (M = 72.3, SD = 21.8) rated individuals
with addiction as slightly more responsible for the state of
their life compared to those exposed to a medical label (M =
69.3, SD = 22.3), F(1, 744) = 2.86, p = .09. In addition,
there was a significant effect of political ideology, as more
conservative participants gave higher responsibility ratings,
consistent with a conservative worldview, F(1, 744) = 44.7,
p < .001.

Psychological
Medical

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
No Experience

Yes Experience

Liberal

No Experience

Yes Experience

Conservative

Figure 2. Proportion of participants who believe that addiction
is caused by biological factors shown by label type, whether or not
the participant reported personal experience with addiction, and
ideology. Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals of the
proportions.

80

Stigma We examined participants’ choice of the most
stigmatized condition by coding whether they put addiction
first or not. Participants who read the personal story were
marginally more likely to think that addiction was the most
stigmatized condition, χ2(1) = 2.72, p = .099. There was no
main effect of the label type on stigma, χ2(1) = 2.01, p = .16.
However, liberals in our sample were more likely to view
addiction as the most stigmatized condition, χ2(1) = 6.48, p
= .01. This is consistent with the notion that liberals are
more likely to have biological or medicalized view of
addiction, which previous research has shown to be
associated with greater stigma and lower feelings of
empathy. In addition, we found that people without any
personal experience with addiction were less likely to view
addiction as stigmatized, χ2(1) = 4.42, p = .036. This
suggests that people who have either experienced addiction
themselves or know someone who has are more aware of
the stigma associated with the condition.
A logistic regression revealed a marginal main effect of
story type, β = .484, SE = .281, p = .085, and a significant
main effect of personal experience, β = .942, SE = .313, p =
.003: people who read the personal narrative were
marginally more likely to think that addiction was
associated with an acute stigma; people with experience of
addiction were significantly more likely to think that
addiction was associated with an acute stigma. The model
also revealed an interaction between the label type and
personal experience, β = -.865, SE = .436, p = .047: people
with personal experience with addiction who received the
medical label were less likely to view addiction as
stigmatized. This suggests that among those already aware
of the stigma of addiction due to personal experience, being

Psychological
Medical

Responsibility

75

70

65

60
No Experience

Liberal

Yes Experience

No Experience

Yes Experience

Conservative

Figure 3. Ratings of personal responsibility for addiction –
shown by label type, whether or not the participant reported
personal experience with addiction, and ideology. Error bars
denote standard errors of the means.

General Discussion
The results of this study help shed light on the factors that
influence the folk psychiatry of addiction, even as they raise
important questions for future research.
We found support for our hypothesis that political
ideology and personal experience can impact the folk
psychiatry of addiction in significant, specific ways. Across
the board, conservatives in our sample viewed addicts as
more responsible for the current state of their lives, and
preferred non-biological explanations and treatment options.
As predicted, personal experience with the condition tended
to push people towards a more liberal viewpoint, which was
also associated with a greater perception of stigma attached
to the condition. These findings are consistent with related
work (e.g., Thibodeau, Perko, & Flusberg, under review)

726

and raise important questions about the relationship between
factors like political orientation and reasoning about
complex health conditions, which may have substantial realworld implications.
We also found that framing addiction in an abstract way
(as compared to in a personal narrative) and using a medical
(as opposed to psychological) label led people to adopt a
more biological/medical model of the condition. However,
these effects were nuanced and interacted with other
variables in key ways. For example, the abstract framing led
participants to support more medical treatments and fewer
psychological treatments for the condition, thought it did
not directly affect suggestions for what society should do
about the issue or beliefs about what causes addiction.
Medical labels also led to more support for medical
treatments, but this effect was strongest for liberals who
read an abstract narrative. Similarly, medical labels led only
liberals with no personal experience with addiction to
support more biological causes of the condition; otherwise,
it seemed not to have much of an effect on views of the
nature of the addiction. This suggests that simple framing
manipulations may only impact folk psychiatric beliefs for
certain people under certain task conditions.
Taken together, the results of the present study provide
important information for health professionals, policy
makers, and others who wish to use written or spoken
materials to educate the public about the causes and
treatment of addiction. Though additional research is
required to better understand the relationship between
linguistic and construal level framing and individual
difference factors, this work indicates that media reports and
messaging campaigns may be effective in shaping how
people think and reason about drug addiction.

Lebowitz, M. S., & Ahn, W. K. (2014). Effects of biological
explanations for mental disorders on clinicians’
empathy. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111(50), 17786-17790.
Lebowitz, M. S., Ahn, W. K., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S.
(2013). Fixable or fate? Perceptions of the biology of
depression. Journal
of
consulting
and
clinical
psychology, 81(3), 518.
Lebowitz, M. S., Pyun, J. J., & Ahn, W. K. (2014).
Biological explanations of generalized anxiety disorder:
Effects
on
beliefs
about
prognosis
and
responsibility. Psychiatric Services, 65(4), 498-503.
Liberman, N., Trope, Y., & Stephan, E. (2007).
Psychological distance. Social psychology: Handbook of
basic principles, 2, 353-383.
Oliver, J. E., & Lee, T. (2005). Public opinion and the
politics of obesity in America. Journal of Health Politics,
Policy and Law, 30(5), 923-954.
Sheff, D. (February 2, 2014). How Philip Seymour Hoffman
Could Have Been Saved. Time Opinion. Retrieved from
http://ideas.time.com/2014/02/02/how-philip-seymourhoffman-could-have-been-saved/
Thibodeau, P.H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS
ONE, 6(2): e16782.
Thibodeau, P.H., Perko, V. L., & Flusberg, S. J. (under
review). The relationship between narrative classification
of obesity and support for public policy interventions.

Appendix
Abstract Paragraph: Drug addiction is a [demon / behavioral problem /
disease / neurological disorder] that many Americans are dealing with.
According to statistics published in 2011, about 8% of Americans age 12 or
older need help for substance dependence. This is not just a teenage phase,
however. There are more illicit drug users age 26 or older than there are
between the ages of 12 and 25. Using drugs often causes a decline in work
performance as well as a reduction in health and quality of relationships.
Sometimes, drug use can mask symptoms of or even cause other health
problems. In fact, prolonged drug use is associated with many serious
consequences, including suppressed immune function. Socially
unacceptable actions are common among drug addicts. These include lying
to friends and family and voluntary isolation, which may help keep loved
ones in the dark about the addiction. Surprisingly, only about 11% of those
needing help for drug addiction actually receive it. Unfortunately, more
people are experiencing drug addiction now than at any time in the past 50
years.

References
Ablow, K. (February 6, 2014). Drug dealers didn’t kill
Philip Seymour Hoffman – Hoffman did. FoxNews.com
Opinion. Retrieved from http://www.foxnews.com/
opinion/2014/02/06/drug-dealers-didnt-kill-philipseymour-hoffman-hoffman-did/
Ahn, W. K., Flanagan, E. H., Marsh, J. K., & Sanislow, C.
A. (2006). Beliefs about essences and the reality of
mental disorders. Psychological Science,17(9), 759-766.
Ahn, W. K., Proctor, C. C., & Flanagan, E. H. (2009).
Mental health clinicians’ beliefs about the biological,
psychological, and environmental bases of mental
disorders. Cognitive science, 33(2), 147-182.
Haslam, N. (2005). Dimensions of Folk Psychiatry. Review
of General Psychology, 9(1), 35.
Heyman, G. M. (2013). Addiction: An Emergent
Consequence
of
Elementary
Choice
Principles. Inquiry, 56(5), 428-445.
Hoyt, C.L., Burnette, J.L., & Auster-Gussman, L. (2014).
“Obesity Is a Disease”: Examining the Self-Regulatory
Impact of This Public-Health Message. Psychological
Science, 25, 997-1002.

Personal Paragraph: John is dealing with the [demon / behavioral
problem / disease / neurological disorder] known as drug addiction. He
started using drugs casually a few years ago when he was in college since
all his friends were into it. Last year, his girlfriend broke up with him and
he was passed over for a promotion at work, and his drug use escalated to a
daily routine. John now regularly skips outings with friends and family,
preferring to stay home alone where no one will see him getting high. John
is currently facing real financial problems and struggling to pay his rent
because he is spending so much of his income on drugs. He does not feel
like he can ask his family or friends for help since he does not want them to
know about his drug use. He did try to quit once on his own, but it was too
difficult and he went back to using almost immediately. He doesn’t think
there is anyone who understands or who even wants to help him, which
makes him feel guilty and alone. Meanwhile, his work, relationships, and
health are suffering. He would really like to get back to the way things used
to be but he does not know what to do.

727

