Getting From Here to There! : Testing the Effectiveness of an
Interactive Mathematics Intervention Embedding Perceptual Learning
Erin R. Ottmar (eottmar@indiana.edu)
Indiana University and University of Richmond, 28 Westhampton Way
University of Richmond, VA 23235 USA

David Landy (dlandy@indiana.edu), Robert Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu),
and Erik Weitnauer (eweitnauer@gmail.com)
Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

Abstract
We describe an interactive mathematics technology
intervention From Here to There! (FH2T) that was developed
by our research team. This dynamic program allows users to
manipulate and transform mathematical expressions. In this
paper, we present initial findings from a classroom study that
investigates whether using FH2T improves learning. We
compare learning gains from two different instantiations of
FH2T (retrieval practice and fluid visualizations), as well as a
control group, and investigate the role of prior knowledge and
content exposure in FH2T as possible moderators of learning.
Findings, as well as implications for research and practice are
discussed.
Keywords: mathematical cognition; concepts and percepts;
mathematics education; learning sciences

Introduction
Mastering basic algebraic concepts is extremely
challenging, and many students never accomplish it (NCES,
2011). Often, math instruction emphasizes memorization of
abstract rules (Koedinger & Alibali, 2008). However,
algebraic literacy—the fluent construction, interpretation,
and manipulation of algebraic notations—involves not just
memorizing, but learning appropriate perceptual processes
(Kirshner, 1989; Kellman, Massey, & Son, 2010; Landy &
Goldstone, 2007; Goldstone, Landy, & Son, 2010).
Algebra learning involves seeing expressions and
equations as structured objects, and using these patterns to
perform mathematics (Landy & Goldstone, 2007, 2010).
Although in some cases the visual and perceptual patterns
are fairly easy to see, some object-centered transformations
are not immediately obvious in traditional instruction, and
must be acquired over practice (Braithewaite, Goldstone,
van der Maas, & Landy, under review; Landy, 2010). While
this perceptual-motor understanding of algebraic forms is a
potentially rich source of student understanding, it also
stands as a barrier to learning if visual patterning is not
taught in a controlled manner (Marquis, 1988).
Learning technologies offer a promising new approach to
teaching math that is not possible with traditional instruction
(Clements, 1999; Gee, 2003) and can provide an
environment that contributes to improved student
performance (Samur & Evans, 2012). The National
Mathematics Advisory Panel (2008) highlights algebra as an
area of special concern, and notes that while “technology-

based drill and practice and tutorials can improve student
performance…the available research is insufficient for
identifying the factors that influence the effectiveness of
instructional software” (p. 23-24). Further, approaches that
focus on perceptual-motor training have shown substantial
promise (Ottmar, Landy, & Goldstone, 2012; Kellman,
Massey, & Son, 2010), but are underexplored relative to
other technology-based mathematics interventions. It is
anticipated that training students to see correct algebraic
structures through dynamic transformations may be a
promising approach to teaching algebraic ideas. Rigid
motion is a powerful perceptual grouping mechanism
(Palmer, 1999), and transformations are naturally
memorable and easy to acquire, making these natural tools
for helping students grapple with algebra.
In this paper, we describe a learning technology intended
to help students acquire appropriate perceptual strategies.
We present preliminary findings from two classroom studies
using a dynamic computer-based visualization method
(From Here to There!) designed to enhance middle school
students’ understanding of algebraic concepts and notations.
In our approach, we present symbols as tactile objects
whose structure can be appreciated through exploration and
manipulation. This approach contrasts with interventions
designed to wean students away from perceptual patterns
(Kirshner & Awtry, 2004), which can be seen as detrimental
to understanding (Noguiera de Lima & Tall, 2008).

From Here to There!
From Here to There! (FH2T) is a self-paced interactive
application that introduces students to mathematical content
through discovery-based puzzles. Rather than simply
applying procedures by rewriting different expressions, this
technology allows students to physically and dynamically
interact with algebraic expression elements, providing a
potentially
powerful
source
of
perceptual-motor
experiences. Below we describe the design theory, features,
and goals of the program.

Design Theory and Practice
We approached the construction of FH2T from an iterative
design stance. We built many different versions of the
application instantiating several variations of the basic

1793

Figure 1: Circular calculator to replace expressions.
equation manipulation interface, the tasks or ‘goals’ of the
user, and the broader application context1. For each
iteration, we initially evaluated the system with small
groups of students. Only the most promising programs were
evaluated in classrooms. The experiments reported here
reflect a current state, rather than a conclusion, in this
process.
Notation manipulation was designed to be as much like a
physical environment as possible (Landy, 2010).
Transformations are as visually fluid as feasible: elements
move smoothly, are picked up by the finger, and dropped.
When terms ‘split, as in the transformation a*(b+c) =>
ab+ac, the elements dynamically split.
In order to add or subtract from both sides of an equation,
a user taps the equals sign, then is prompted to enter the
amount and operation they wish to perform. In certain
situations, it is necessary for users to enter numbers that are
not in the problem previously (i.e. adding to an equation, or
breaking a term into factors). In this case, a calculator with a
circular menu is used—numbers, variables, and operations
appear in a circle near their targets, and move continuously
from the menu location into the equation (Figure 1). In the
case of commuting, a+b is turned into b+a by picking up
the a, and moving it rightward (or picking up the b, and
dragging it leftward).
We use a hierarchical structure, with particular worlds
inside a universe (see Figure 2). Each of the 14 worlds cover
a particular focal topic, such as ‘subtracting multiple terms’
and contains a set of about 15-20 problems. Locked worlds
are presented in black and white on the universe screen,
while unlocked worlds are marked in color. Each problem is
intended to take between 10 seconds and 1 minute to solve,
though the difficulty of particular problems varies
considerably. Within each world, problems require users to
learn and use new operations alongside previously acquired
rules.
Points are used to help a user maintain extrinsic
motivation and track their progress (von Ahn, 2013).
Participants receive up to 3 points per problem for

Figure 2: Content Tree Map for From Here to There!
,completing it without making calculation or other structural
errors, and for completing it in the fewest possible number
of steps. Progress is gated by the number of problems
completed: at least 14 of 18 problems have to be solved for
the user to progress to a new world. This allows a user to
avoid extreme frustration by skipping particularly
challenging problems, but still requires a fair bit of success
at each stage. We also balanced scaffolding user assistance
with challenge (Aleven & Koedinger, 2002) by including
delayed ‘hints’ to avoid frustration.
The intelligibility of the goal is also balanced with the
richness of flexible and creative mathematical thinking.
(Polya, 1954). In many math applications, the user activity
seems rote (as in DragonBox), or so thoroughly prescribed
as to preclude creative thought (as in Algebra Touch). FH2T
uses transformation goals: each problem starts with an
equation or expression in a particular form, and states an
end state: the user’s goal is to transform the equation from
the starting form (here) to the ending form (there). This is
intended to help students achieve flexibility in manipulating
equations and expressions, compared to having a fixed goal
such as “solve for x” (Figure 3). In order to achieve their
goal, students perform a series of dynamic interactions,
including decomposing numbers (8=5+3 or 11-3),
combining terms, applying operations to both sides of an
equation, and rearranging terms through commutative,
associative, and distributive properties.
The original vision for FH2T emphasized visual
fluidity. All calculations and transformations were
completed automatically: the user initiated the
transformation, but the resulting expression simply
appeared. However, contrasting approaches suggest that
students benefit from being scaffolded through the specific
steps required to complete a task in a real-world
environment (Tuovinen & Sweller, 1999). Furthermore,

1
We began the current effort from an earlier project,
AlgebraTouch (AT), which was designed by the second author and
Sean Berry in 2007, and has been iteratively improved since then.
AT has an installation base of approximately 50,000 devices, and a
very similar (but not identical) interaction set to that of FH2T.
FH2T branches from a code base of AT. We will discuss the
equation manipulation interface of FH2T, with the understanding
that it mirrors in many ways the AT system.

Figure 3: Sample Problem and Goal State in FH2T

1794

teachers frequently expressed concern that students
wouldn’t learn as well if they did not do the calculations
themselves—a perspective compatible with retrieval-based
learning (McDaniel & Masson, 1985) and desirable
difficulties (Bjork & Bjork, 2011). We take this
consideration up explicitly in our study.

group. Using a pre-post design, we aim to differentiate
between potential mechanisms behind how FH2T produces
gains in notation fluency. We also examine the role of
content exposure within the FH2T program and pretest
scores as potential moderators on achievement.

Study Participants and Procedures

Past Research on From Here to There!
An initial pilot study was conducted to determine whether
FH2T contributed to learning gains. 110 6th-8th grade
students (41% male, 59% female) from six classes in a large
suburban middle school participated in a 4-hour study
during six of their regular math periods. All students worked
through a series of worlds in FH2T at their own pace that
covered mathematical topics ranging from addition and
multiplication to solving linear equations. In this pilot, a
‘reward’ system was built into the program. Students first
encountered interactions in a retrieval practice mode, which
required students to recall and enter correct algebraic and
arithmetic transformations. After they completed the basic
level, they were able to unlock a ‘monster level’, with
especially challenging problems. Once this was completed,
students were awarded the fluid version of the same
interaction,
in
which
correct
calculations
and
transformations were dynamically performed by the system.
This was intended to balance the possible benefits of
retrieval practice with the minimizing of memory load due
to repeated retrievals, and the emphasis on the intended
pedagogical domain of algebraic transformations.
Overall, students’ mathematical understanding improved
8.5% during the 4 class periods. There was no indication of
a floor or ceiling effect: the average accuracy for the
posttest problems was 54% (range: 37%-70%). The gains
were quite large (effect size=0.40, amounting to one full
letter grade) and provide promising results that educational
apps, such as FH2T, may benefit students when used in
combination with classroom instruction. However, due to
the non-experimental design of the pilot, we cannot strongly
conclude that the learning gains observed were caused from
using FH2T, per se.
Since students had regular instruction contemporaneously
with FH2T, it may be that classroom practice led to these
gains rather than dynamic interactions. Secondly, FH2T ran
in two ‘modes’, which may be differentially responsible for
learning gains. When problems were fluidly presented,
participants engaged in fast, fluent practice in visualalgebraic patterns. On the other hand, during the initial,
retrieval practice phase, participants were forced to engage
more explicitly in the specific steps required to solve
problems. Observationally, students responded very
differently to these two modes. Either of these explanations
might plausibly be driving learning gains.

Testing From Here to There!
The present study teases these factors apart by dividing
participants into three conditions: a business-as-usual
control, a retrieval practice group, and a fluid visualizations

Eighty-five sixth and seventh grade students from five
classes in a suburban public middle school in the mid-east
United States participated in this study during their regular
math instruction. All five classes had the same mathematics
teacher and students had never had experience using the
FH2T system.
This study took approximately three hours and occurred
over six 30-minute class periods. First, classes were
randomly assigned into two groups: intervention (3) and
control (2) to ensure that there was not FH2T contamination
within classes. Next, intervention students were then
randomly assigned within classroom to the two intervention
conditions (retrieval practice and fluid visualizations).
Students in the control classrooms did not use FH2T, but
received business as usual instruction.
On day 1, all students completed a 30-item pretest that
assessed students on procedural facility with various
mathematical content. Problems ranged in difficulty from
solving basic arithmetic (ex. 3-5+2-3), distributing terms
(ex. 3*(5+y+3)), to solving linear equations (ex. 5+y=6+3).
Students were presented with a problem and asked to enter
their answers using a keyboard. An additional 5 problems
asked students to determine whether two expressions were
equivalent (ex. does a+b*z+y equal z+y*a+b?).
On days 2-5, students in the intervention classes used
FH2T to solve problems. The version used in this study was
adapted from the pilot in several ways. First, all of the
bonus levels were removed. Next, the ordering of the worlds
was fixed so that all students had to progress through the
content in the same order. Third, the retrieval practice and
fluid transformations modes were separated into conditions,
so that participants used exclusively one or the other
versions of the interaction, embedded within identical
problem sets and task space.
Table 1: Pretest and Adjusted Posttest Mean Scores and
Standard Deviations as a Function of Condition.
Pretest
Condition

M

Posttest-Adjusted

SD

M

SE

Fluid Visualizations

9.92

4.1

10.88

0.55

Retrieval Practice

11.00

5.32

10.46

0.62

Control

10.91

3.49

10.46

0.62

In the retrieval practice mode, the user first moved the
symbols to the appropriate locations to trigger the actions.
Next, the user was prompted to write the appropriate
resulting subexpression. For instance, if the initial

1795

expression was 8-3-2, and the user tapped the right-hand
subtraction, the user would enter “-5”, the result of
combining -3 and -2. In the fluid visualizations mode, the
user only had to tap the subtraction sign to initiate the next
transformation. The result was a more fluid and dynamic
experience since the interface rarely paused.
Students progressed though the worlds at their own pace
and completed as much as they could within the time limit.
On day 6, all students completed a 30-item post-test
assessment, similar in difficulty and form to the pre-test.
Pretest and posttests were coded for accuracy and mean
scores were calculated for each assessment. It is important
to note that the assessment items were designed to measure
transfer to problems that are commonly seen in traditional
textbooks and worksheets and did not match the
transformation goal structure that was presented in the app.

Results
Analysis 1: Do students using FH2T improve more than
students in a control group?
An analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was conducted to
predict Posttest Scores as a function of Condition, with
gender and pre-test scores as covariates. Descriptive
statistics for pre-test and adjusted post-test scores are
presented in Table 1 and a summary of the ANCOVA
results are presented in Table 2. Results show significant
differences in post-test scores between conditions, after
controlling for gender and pretest F(2, 84) =3.61, p<0.05.
Next, gain scores were calculated by taking the difference
between the pre-test and post-test scores. Significant
differences in learning were also found between conditions,
F(2,81)=.4.04, p<0.05 (Figure 3). Post-hoc analyses reveal
that students in the fluid visualizations condition (M=2.10)
gained more than students in both the retrieval practice
(M=-0.22) and control (M=0.22) conditions. No significant
differences were found between the control and retrieval
practice conditions.
Analysis 2: Does more exposure to content within the
FH2T app predict improved mathematics performance
and learning?

Table 2: ANCOVA of Posttest Scores as a Function of
Instructional Condition, With Gender and Pretest Scores as
Covariates.
df
SS
MS
F
η2
Gender

1

31.53

31.53

3.22**

0.04

Pretest

1

1176.47

1176.47

120.01**

0.6

Condition

2

35.37

70.73

3.61**

0.08

Error

90.8

80

784.23

Total

85

12872

Corrected

84

2029.65

One important element to consider is exposure, or how
much of the intervention the students actually completed. In
this study, we use exposure as a measure of fidelity, to
check that greater progress through the program is related to
greater performance. We relied on in-app data to create a
measure of exposure, calculated as the number of worlds
students completed during the duration of the study. On
average, students in the fluid condition completed 6 worlds
(M=6.04, SD=2.36; addition, multiplication, order of
operations + and x, subtraction, division, and order of
operations), while students in the retrieval condition only
completed the first four worlds (M=4.27, SD=1.97).
Students in the control condition, naturally, did not have any
exposure to the program (M=0.00).
A hierarchical linear regression was conducted to
examine whether increased context exposure within the
FH2T app predicted posttest performance, above and
beyond gender, pre-test, and condition. Dummy codes for
the retrieval and control conditions were created to examine
whether learning differences remained after adding this
additional variable. A significant main effect was found for
exposure: for every additional world that the students
completed, their posttest accuracy scores increased by 0.76
problems (effect size=0.48) (Table 3). However, after
considering exposure in the app, differences between groups
were no longer significant.

Table 3: Regression Examining the Contribution of Context Exposure in FH2T on posttest scores

	  	  

ANCOVA
B

SE

Constant

3.83

1.08

Pretest

0.88 **

Gender

Main Effect Exposure
Beta

B

SE

0.71

1.38

0.08

0.77**

0.72**

0.09

0.63

-1.23 t

0.69

-0.13 t

-1.02

0.65

-0.10

Control

-1.77**

0.83

-0.18**

2.97 t

1.62

Retrieval

-2.20**

0.87

-0.21**

Exposure
Exposure x
Pretest
R

2

Beta

Pretest x Exposure

	  

B

SE

Beta

0.71

1.38

0.49**

0.13

0.42**

-1.13

0.63

-0.12

0.30

2.21

1.60

0.22

-0.67

0.94

-0.06

-1.20

0.94

-0.11

0.76**

0.23

0.48

-0.16

0.43

-0.10

	  	  

	  	  

	  	  

0.07**

0.03

0.63**

0.66

	  

0.61

0.64

1796

	  	  

Analysis 3: Does prior knowledge moderate the
relations between exposure to content and improved
mathematics scores?
We examined whether prior knowledge (pre-test scores)
moderated the relation between exposure and posttest
scores. We tested this by adding the interaction term
(exposure x pretest) to the regression. A significant
interaction was found (B=0.07, p<0.01) (Figure 4).

regards to the second possibility, it could be that the
additional gains were a result of the fluid condition
covering more content that the retrieval practice condition
did not get to, but was assessed on the posttest. Future
work should manipulate dosage and content exposure that
students receive to better understand these effects.
Interventions involving the movement of symbolic
forms for algebra learning have been receiving widespread
attention in recent years, both in scientific contexts and by
the public. Qualitatively, these results—and the strong
interest shown by students in solving and discussing
problems—suggest promise for tablet-based technologies
for teaching abstract algebraic content. This work
represents some of the first published outcomes from such
perceptual interventions, and may shed light on functional
mechanisms. In addition, FH2T uniquely focuses on
algebraic transformations with a wide variety of initial
structures and goal states, attempting to help students think
more flexibly about numbers and operations.
Transformations of formal algebraic notation is typically
demotivating and disengaging for many students; however,
students in our studies happily completed several hours of
practice, only occasionally becoming bored. One possible
explanatory framework for this phenomenon comes from
theories of embodiment that suggest that people are
intrinsically more engaged when working with their hands
(Clark, 2008). Another is that algebra is intrinsically
engaging, but that the high cognitive load caused by paperand-pencil calculations interfere with engaged states.
Clearly, much remains to be done.
Although touch-based algebra systems have proved
powerful enough to substantially improve algebra skills,
notation manipulation is only a small fraction of the
important content of algebra. Without connecting to realworld situations, problems, and questions, formal proofs
and derivations are largely inert. Further work is currently
underway to implement an algebra manipulation system in
JavaScript capable of interacting with rich graphics,
figures, charts, and text in an html5/canvashwebpage.

Figure 4: Posttest Scores as a Function of Pre-test
Scores and Exposure

Discussion
Overall, we found strong learning gains on the order of one
third of a standard deviation from practice with FH2T.
These gains seem to be primarily due to practice in the
more fluid and dynamic version of the application;
however, the current approach cannot tease apart whether
this is due to a qualitative difference between retrieving
explicit rules and perceptual training afforded by the fluid
instantiation, or increased topic coverage that the fluid
group received. In line with the first possibility, it is
notable that participants who practiced retrieval in the
application did not show any gains at all, while strong
learning gains were found in the fluid visualizations group.
These results are fully in line with the theory that algebra
literacy comprises strong visual-motor routines (Goldstone,
Landy, & Son, 2010; Landy & Goldstone, 2007). With

Figure 3: Pre-Test and Posttest Scores and Gains by Condition

1797

Acknowledgments

Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33(4),
720-733. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.33.4.720
Marquis, J. (1988). Common mistakes in algebra. In A. F.
Coxford & A. P. Shulte (Eds.), The ideas of algebra, K12: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
Yearbook (pp. 204- 205). Reston, VA: National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics.
McDaniel, M. A., & Masson, M. E. (1985). Altering
memory representations through retrieval. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 11(2), 371.
National Mathematics Advisory Panel (2008). Foundations
for Success: The Final Report of the
National
Mathematics Advisory Panel, U.S. Department of
Education: Washington, DC.
Nogueira de Lima, R. & Tall, D. (2008). Procedural
embodiment and magic in linear equations. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 67(1), 3-18.
Ottmar, E., Landy, D. & Goldstone, R. L. (2012). Teaching
the perceptual structure of algebraic expressions:
Preliminary findings from the Pushing Symbols
intervention. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper
(Eds.) Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2156-2161). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Palmer, S. E. (1999). Vision science: Photons to
phenomenology (Vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Polya, G. (1954). Mathematics and plausible reasoning:
vol 1: Induction and analogy in mathematics. Oxford
University Press.
Robinson, K. M., & Dubé, A. K. (2009). A microgenetic
study of the multiplication and division inversion
concept. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology,
63, 193-200.
Samur, Y. & Evans, M. A. (2012). The effects of serious
games on performance and engagement: A review of the
literature (2001-2011). Poster session presented at the
annual meeting of American Educational Research
Association (AERA), Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.
Tuovinen, J. E., & Sweller, J. (1999). A comparison of
cognitive load associated with discovery learning and
worked
examples. Journal
of
Educational
Psychology, 91(2), 334-341.
von Ahn, L. (2013, March). Duolingo: learn a language for
free while helping to translate the web. In Proceedings of
the 2013 International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces (pp. 1-2). ACM.

This work was funded through a grant awarded by the
Institute of Education Sciences, US Department of
Education (Grant # R305A1100060). We would also like
to thank Jessica Lesky, Thad Martin, Catalina Cupanasoiu
Jamie Blair, Ryan Smout, Emily Kelly, Megan Delauney,
David Brokaw. Aleah Goldin, Taylyn Hulse, and William
Barksdale for their contributions.

References
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. (2002). An effective
metacognitive strategy: learning by
doing
and
explaining
with
a
computer-based
cognitive
tutor. Cognitive Science, 26, 147–179.
Bjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (2011). Making things hard on
yourself, but in a good way: Creating desirable
difficulties to enhance learning. Psychology and the real
world: Essays illustrating fundamental contributions to
society, 56-64.
Braithwaite, D.W., Goldstone, R.L., van der Maas, D.,
& Landy, D. (under review). Perception of Structure in
Symbolic Arithmetic.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment,
action, and cognitive extension: Embodiment, action,
and cognitive extension. Oxford University Press.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about
learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.
Goldstone, R. L., Landy, D., & Son, J. Y. (2010). The
education of perception, Topics in Cognitive Science,
2(2), 265-284. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01055.
Kellman, P. J., Massey, C. M., & Son, J. Y. (2010).
Perceptual learning modules in mathematics:
Enhancing students’ pattern recognition, structure
extraction, and fluency. Topics in Cognitive Science,
2(2), 285-305.
Kirshner, D. & Awtry, T. (2004). Visual salience of
algebraic transformations. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 35(4), 224-257.
Kirshner, D. (1989). The visual syntax of algebra.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,
20(3), 274-287.
Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. M.
(2008). Trade-offs between grounded and abstract
representations: Evidence from algebra problem
solving. Cognitive Science, 32(2), 366-397.
Landy, D. & Goldstone, R. L. (2010). Proximity and
precedence in arithmetic. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 63(10), 1953-1968. doi:
10.1080/17470218.2012.656664
Landy, D. (2010). Toward a physics of equations. In A. K.
Goel, M. Jamnik & N. H, Narayanan (Eds.)
Diagrammatic Representation and Inference: 6th
International Conference, Diagrams 2010, Portland, OR,
August 2010, (pp. 160-166). New York: Springer.
Landy, D. & Goldstone, R. L. (2007). How abstract is
symbolic
thought? Journal
of
Experimental

1798

