How do children construct the color lexicon? :
Restructuring the domain as a connected system
Noburo Saji (saji@kamakura-u.ac.jp)
Department of Child Psychology, Kamakura Women’s University, 6-1-3 Ofuna,
Kamakura, Kanagawa 2570056 Japan

Michiko Asano (asano@rikkyo.ac.jp)
College of Contemporary Psychology, Rikkyo University, 1-2-26 Kitano,
Niiza, Saitama 3528558 Japan

Midori Oishi (rosecoloreddays@gmail.com) and Mutsumi Imai (imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies, Keio University, 5322 Endo,
Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-0882 Japan

Abstract
The present study investigated how children learn the meanings
of basic color words and are immersed into the language-specific
system of the color lexicon. The study examined how children
discover the boundaries of color names by having 3-, 4-, and 5year-old children produce names for 93 color patches. We found
that even 3-year-olds children can map color words to its typical
referents. At the same time, they struggle to delineate the
boundaries between neighboring color words. The results indicated
that, in learning color words, children continuously restructure the
entire semantic domain by discovering and adjusting the linguistic
boundaries between the neighboring words.
Keywords: lexical acquisition; color word; reorganization
process of word meaning

Introduction
The meaning of a word is not determined in isolation from
other words: the boundary of the category denoted by the
word is determined in relation to other words belonging to
the same semantic domain. For example, the meanings of
the color words such as “red”, “orange”, “yellow”, “green”,
“blue” and “purple” are established based on the knowledge
of how the meaning of each word differs from the meanings
of the others. This means that, to acquire adult-like word
meanings, children need to learn a cluster of words in the
same semantic domain and delineate the boundaries among
them. Previous studies have documented that it requires
many years to attain adult-like representation of the entire
semantic domain. Ameel, Malt, & Storms (2008) studied
how Dutch-speaking children aged 5-14 years and adults
named various kinds of containers, and compared their
naming patterns. Saji et al. (2011) examined the process in
which Chinese children acquire representation of 13
Chinese verbs that all denote actions that are named as
“carrying/holding” in English. Both studies found that
children's pattern of labeling objects or actions evolved
gradually over years, during which the semantic domain is
repeatedly restructured.
Thus, to acquire the adult-like representation of the
meaning of a word, children need to know how the word

differs from other words that surround it. This is particularly
critical for color words, as compared to object names,
because the continuous visible color spectrum does not have
natural partitions. Although there has been debates as to
whether universal focal colors exist (Davidoff, 2001; Regier,
Kay, & Cook, 2005), boundaries for referents of color
words are hardly available in the environment. As a
consequence, languages differ widely in the way in which
they divide the continuous visible spectrum by color names
(e.g., Berlin & Kay, 1969; Cook, Kay, & Regier, 2005).
Even among languages that seem to have highly comparable
color vocabulary withthe same number of words and the
corresponding color categories, the boundaries can still vary
considerably. For example, although English and Japanese
both have “brown” (chairo) and “orange” (orenjiiro), the
range covered by the English word “orange” is much wider
than orenjiiro in Japanese. Consequently, the range covered
by chairo is substantially broader than the range English
word “brown” refers to. Given this, children cannot learn a
color name from individual word-to-world mappings alone;
they have to discover the conventional manner in which the
perceptually continuous color spectrum is divided by a set
of words in the particular language they are learning. Here,
however, if the meaning of a color name cannot be learned
without knowing the boundary of the neighboring words,
how can children who know few color words ever get off
from the merry-go-round of not being able to learn a new
color word?
Difficulty in learning color words has long been noted by
developmental psychologists. Bornstein (1985a; 1985b)
suggested that color words were not reliably acquired until
around four to seven years old, which is much slower than
object names or names of other semantic properties such as
shape. Developmental psychologists have proposed that the
color names are difficult because the concept of color is
difficult to understand (e.g., Kowalski & Zimiles, 2006). To
understand the conventional meaning of a color term,
children must understand that the term refers to a property
that is abstracted out from diverse kinds of objects that
differ in other properties such as shape, size, and functions.

2080

Wagner, Dobkins, & Barner (2013) have proposed a
different account. They argue that children have abstracted
the concept of color by the time they begin using color
terms, but they have difficulty in discovering how color
boundaries are marked by the specific language they are
learning. To establish this argument, these authors asked 3year-olds to label 11 pieces of colored pasteboard. By and
large, children’s performance did not conform to adults’
convention, but it was not random, either: The children
consistently overextended the color words to proximal hues
(see also Braisby & Dockrell, 1999). Although Wagner et
al.’s work shed new light on the process of color name
acquisition, it is not yet known how children learn to carve
up the entire visible color spectrum by a set of words
according to the convention of the child’s ambient language.

The Present Study
In this study, we attempt to uncover how children’s initial
representation of the color lexicon is like, and how it
evolves to the mature representation possessed by adults.
Our approach to these questions is different from Wagner et
al.’s study in one important respect. Wagner et al. (2013)
tested children’s knowledge of color words using only
typical referents (i.e., focal colors). In the everyday
situations, however, children see a wide range of colors, and
have to learn how to label them. The real boundaries of
color categories should exist around these non-focal colors
rather than focal colors; to be able to map a color word to its
typical referent does not guarantee that the child understand
the correct (adult-like) range of colors the word refers to.
To investigate how children divide the entire spectrums
into color name categories, we used a total of 93 color
patches that covers the entire spectrum of visible colors,
including not only typical referents but also those in the
periphery of the 11 basic color names. We asked Japanesespeaking children of three age groups (3-, 4-, and 5-yearolds) and adults to label the 93 color patches. Japanese is
considered to have 11 basic color words: shiro (‘white’),
kuro (‘black’), haiiro (‘gray’), aka (‘red’), kiiro (‘yellow’),
midori (‘green’), ao (‘blue’), chairo (‘brown’), orenjiiro
(‘orange’), pinku (‘pink’), murasaki (‘purple’) (Uchikawa &
Boynton, 1987). We attempted to capture the process of
color word learning in two steps. We first examined whether
Japanese-speaking children can map the basic color words
to their typical referents, as was done in earlier studies. We
then explored how children establish lexical boundaries
among neighboring color words. These two steps allowed
us to see the developmental process through which children
gradually acquire both the center and boundaries of color
word meanings.

collected from 20 3-year-olds, 18 4-year-olds, 19 5-yearolds, and 15 adults. Children were recruited from several
preschools in located in the Tokyo Metropolitan area. Adult
subjects were undergraduate and graduate students at Keio
University.
Stimuli.
Ninety-three colors were selected from Practical Color Coordinate System (PCCS) developed by Japan Color
Research Institute, which is widely used for organizing
color for industry and education in Japan. PCCS consist of
14 “tone” categories, each of which has 24 hues. Tone is a
compound concept of lightness and metric chroma (see
http://www.diccolor.com/knowledge/images/pccs06_l.jpg;
also see Nayatani, 2003).
We used colors from seven tones (“light”, “bright”, “soft”,
“vivid”, “dull”, “deep”, and “dark”) out of the 14 tones,
which varied in lightness and chroma, so that the stimulus
colors covered the entire color spectrum. Only half of the 24
hues (with every other even number) in each tone were used
to reduce the number of stimuli. In addition to these 84
chromatic colors (7 tones x 12 hues), we included nine
achromatic colors (black, white, and five different grays
varied in lightness). Each of the 93 colors was presented as
a 2.5cm square patch, which was created by cutting

colored pasteboard distributed by Japan Color Research
Institute. See Figure 1 for the complete stimulus set.
To identify the 11 typical referents for the basic color
words in the current stimuli set, we conducted a pre-study
with 20 adults who did not participate in the main
experiment. In the pre-study, we presented the 93 colors at
once and asked them to choose colors which they thought
were the best referent for each of the 11 basic color words.
We then determined the most frequently selected color as
the typical referent of each basic color word for Japanese
speakers (see Table 1 for 11 selected colors selected).
Procedure.
Children received warm-up trials before the main test.
Children were presented with six pictures of three different
cats, two different dogs and one rabbit, and were asked to
name each picture. This process also allowed us to check
whether the child understood that they could say the same
name more than once across different trials.
In the main experiment, participants were presented with

Experiment
Method
Participants.
A total of 72 native Japanese speaking children and adults
participated in the experiment. The production data was

Figure 1: The 93 color patches for stimuli. Those with
white circles are the typical referents for the 11 basic color
names, which were determined by a pre-test with adults.

2081

the 93 color patches one by one in a random order, and were
asked “kono (this) iro (color) wa (particle) nani (what) iro
(color)”? (“what color is this?”) by the experimenter. Each
color patch was presented only once. Participants observed
the color patches under a standardized lighting condition
that simulated natural daylight (D55) by using Solax XC100AF (Seric Ltd.) on a gray background.

Results
Analysis 1: Were children able to produce appropriate
basic color terms to their typical referents?
We first counted the number of word types produced by
each participant. Compound color names such as aka-cha
(‘red-brown’), or loan words as howaito (‘white’) were
counted as different word types from the basic color words.
Adults on average produced 19.4 different color words,
including ones other than 11 basic color names, such as
giniro (‘silver’), hadairo (‘skin color’) or shuiro
(‘vermilion’). The mean numbers of produced word types
by children were 9.5, 12.1, and 13.6 for 3-, 4-, 5-year-olds,
respectively. Four-year-olds produced more word types than
3-year-olds (p<.02, Bonferroni corrected), but there was no
difference between 4- and 5-year-olds. Although children
produced significantly less color terms than adults (ps <.01,
Bonferroni corrected), they “knew” most of the 11 basic
color names by the age of 3 years.
Table.1: The proportion of children who named colors
with appropriate (i.e., adult-like) basic color words.
Basic color word
shiro (‘white’)
kuro (‘black’)
aka (‘red’)
kiiro (‘yellow’)
midori (‘green’)
ao (‘blue’)
chairo (‘brown’)
orenjiiro (‘orange’)
pinku (‘pink’)
murasaki (‘purple’)
haiiro (‘gray’)

Sample

3-years 4-years
.80
.89
.80
.78
.95
.61
.80
.78
.65
.56
.70
.67
.50
.78
.40
.78
.80
.89
.55
.78
.00
.11

5-years
1.00
1.00
1.00
.95
.84
.84
.74
.63
.89
.79
.05

Next we examined whether children could apply the 11
basic color words for the corresponding typical referents.
Table 1 shows the proportion of children who produced the
appropriate basic color words to the correct referents
determined by the pre-study. In all age groups, children
correctly applied most of the basic color words to the typical
referents except haiiro (‘gray’) significantly above chance
(binomial test, ps< .01). Consistent with the previous studies,
children had a stronger grasp of kuro(‘black’),
shiro(‘white’), pinku(‘pink’) and aka(‘red’) than the other
words as murasaki(‘purple’) or orengiiro(‘orange’), while
they rarely produced haiiro in the experiment (See
Roberson, Davidoff, Davies & Shapiro, 2004; Pitchford &
Mullen, 2002 for similar results).

Analysis 2: How did children’s pattern of color naming
converge with the adults’ pattern?
Analysis 1 showed that even 3-year-old children knew the
central meaning (i.e. typical referent) of the 11 basic color
words in an adult-like manner. However, how did they
delineate the boundaries of the meanings? To examine the
question, we adopted the Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS)
solutions as in Malt & Sloman (1999). MDS provides a
geometrical representation of patterns of similarity on
dimensions that are extracted to maximize goodness of fit in
such a way that inter-point distances on the
multidimensional space correspond to dissimilarities
between objects. We first created a similarity matrix for
each age group. In each matrix, there were 93 rows and 93
columns each representing the 93 stimulus colors. Each cell
contained the number of times the given two color patches
were named with the same color word (Malt, Ameel, Imai,
Gennari, Saji & Majid, 2014).
We first conducted the MDS analysis separately for the
four age groups using the 93X93 matrices. The detected
dimensions mainly divided the chromatic and achromatic
color patches only. This means that the participants rarely
confused their naming for achromatic color patches with
that for chromatic color patches, and this distinction was
over-weighted. Because our main interest here is to examine
how children and adults categorize continuous color
spectrum by names, we carried out a second MDS analysis
with the naming data of 84 chromatic patches, again
separately for the four age groups (Figure 2). We adopted 2dimensional solutions for each age group, because the stress
values were considered to be acceptable (s = .20, .17, .20,
and .07 for 3-, 4-, 5-year-olds and adults, respectively).
Each point in Figure 2 represents each color patch, and the
distances among every two points reflect the similarity of
the two colors in terms of naming. The label for each point
shows the most dominantly produced color name for the
patch. For ease of viewing, the points and labels were
shown in the color of the original stimuli patches. Color
patches labeled with the same dominant color names are
grouped by solid colored lines. The configurations of the
data points were largely different across the four age groups.
To capture this trend quantitatively, we calculated the
Euclidian distances between all possible pairs of the data
points (i.e., color patches) in each MDS space, and
calculated the correlation between the adult group and each
of the three child groups. The correlation values
were .31, .43 and .53 for 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds, respectively.
This indicates that children’s color naming behavior steadily
develops but only slowly, and it takes a long time for
children to become able to name colors in the same way
adults do.

2082

Analysis 3: How did children discover the boundaries of
different color words?
We next examined how children find boundaries among
neighboring color words. In the adult group (Figure 2D), the
colors with the same dominant names were grouped in
cohesive clusters, and colors with different dominant names
were separated from one another. This suggests that the
adults named the patches highly consistently across
individuals, and boundaries among different color names
were clearly delineated. This was not the case with children,
3-year-olds in particular. In the 3-year-olds’ MDS
configuration (Figure 2A), the areas covered by different
dominant names heavily overlapped one another, indicating
that 3-year-olds applied each color name to color patches
that were outside the range in the adults’ convention and
that the pattern of naming was highly inconsistent across
individuals. It should be noted, however, that they tended to

overextend the words to neighboring colors, supporting
Wagner et al (2013)’s view. The 4- and 5-year-olds were in
intermediate stages between the 3-years-olds and the adults
(Figure 2B and 2C). To evaluate this observation
quantitatively, we quantified how exclusively each of the
dominant chromatic color words was used for color patches
against other color words, as given below:

𝐸𝑥𝑐(𝐶1, 𝐶2) =

𝐷 (𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐶1,𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐶2)
.
𝑙
∑𝑘
𝐷(𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐶1,𝐶1
𝑘 )/𝑘+∑1 𝐷(𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐶2,𝐶2𝑙 )/𝑙
1

C1 and C2 represent the two clusters to be compared, and
k and l are the numbers of the points in the clusters. The
numerator calculates the distance between the centroid of
the two clusters; the denominator takes the summation of
the two average distances between the centroid and each
point in the two clusters. So the more the two clusters
overlap, the smaller the ratio becomes; in contrast, the more

ak = aka (‘red’), ao = ao (‘blue’), ch = chairo (‘brown’), h = hadairo (‘skin color’), kii = kiiro (‘yellow’), kim = kimidori (‘yellowish green’),
mid = midori (‘green’), miz = mizuiro (‘light blue’), mur = murasaki (‘purple’), o = orenjiiro (‘orange’), p = pinku (‘pink’)

Figure 2: Multi-Dimensional Scaling solutions for children and adults

2083

Degree of non-overlapping word use

the two clusters were distinguished, the larger the value
becomes. We averaged the degree of boundary (non-)
overlap among the dominant color names for each age group
(Figure 3). The values were 1.02, 1.92, 3.16 and 2.86 for 3-,
4-, 5-year-olds and adults, respectively. The averages are
significantly higher in 5-year-olds and adults than in 3- and
4-year-olds (ps <.01), suggesting that boundary overlap was
more prominent in 3- and 4-year-olds than in 5-year-olds.
3.16

3.5
3
2.5
1.02

1
0.5
0
3-year olds

4-year olds

5-year olds

Adults

Figure 3: The averages of the degree of nonoverlapping

Table 2 and 3 show the degree of boundary (non-)overlap
among eight color names for adults and 3-year-olds,
calculated by the equation above. The distinction between
aka (‘red’) and ao (‘blue’), and that between kiiro (‘yellow’)
and ao (‘blue’) were both evident in adults, as seen in Table
2. However, these distinctions were not so clear in 3-yearolds; they made relatively clear distinctions between midori
(‘green’) vs. chairo (‘brown’) or ao (‘blue’) vs. pinku
(‘pink’), but the distinctions between midori (‘green’) vs. ao
(‘blue’) and aka (‘red’) and chairo (‘brown’) were very
blurred. The matrices of 3-year-olds and adults are not
correlated (r= .04), indicating that the boundaries of words
that are most clearly delineated in adults were not always
clear for children. It is also important to note that, in the 3year-olds MDS configuration, while the boundary between
ao (‘blue’) and midori (‘green’) were largely overlapping
(the degree of boundary overlap between ao and midori
was .12), these two words were distinctively separated from
other basic colors (the degree of boundary overlap between
the two colors and other colors 1.2 on average. See also the
blue and green colored lines in Figure 2). This may suggest
that children first form separate islands of blue/green vs.
others, relying on salient perceptual distinction between
cool and warm colors (see Kay & Maffi, 1999).
Table.2: The degree of boundary (non-)overlap among the
dominant names in adults.
orenjiiro pinku midori
(orange)

pink
midori
kiiro
murasaki
ao
aka
chairo
(brown)

kiiro

(pink) (green) (yellow)

orangeiro
(orange)

pink
midori
kiiro
murasaki
ao
aka
chairo
(brown)

1.92

2
1.5

2.86

Table.3: The degree of boundary (non-)overlap among the
dominant names in 3-years-old.

murasaki ao

aka

pinku midori kiiro murasaki ao aka
(pink) (green) (yellow) (purple) (blue) (red)

1.07
1.81
0.40
1.46
1.41
0.41

2.48
0.96
1.32
1.84
0.42

0.90
1.37
0.12
1.34

0.84
0.75
0.42

0.94
0.82

1.08

0.86

0.68

1.87

0.59

0.84

1.35 0.27

Analysis 4: What guides the adjustment of color name
boundaries?
Analysis 2 and 3 showed that an adult-like lexical system
gradually emerges with development. What guides the
delineation of the color name boundaries? It has been shown
that children are able to distinguish different colors
perceptually long before they initiate word learning
(Bornstein, Kessen, & Weiskopf, 1976). However, it is not
known how their non-linguistic perception of color words
affects acquisition of color names. To address this issue, we
correlated the Euclidean distance between every two color
patches in the naming MDS space with the Euclidean
distance between the corresponding two color patches in the
CIE L*a*b* color space, which was designed such that
mathematical differences in all color ranges correspond to
perceived color differences (Kaatsch, Stadler, & Nietert,
1993). The correlation is high if perceptually similar colors
are named similarly.
The correlation coefficients were .43, .56, .75 and .57 for
3-, 4-, 5-year-old children and adults, respectively, which
were significantly different between each pair of age groups
(z =13.6 ps <.001). The result showed that the impact of
non-linguistic perceptual similarity/distance among color
patches on the naming pattern increases from three to five
years of age and then declines as they further advances in
lexical development. The results may suggest an interesting
possibility: Children first map each of the basic words to the
color construed as the most typical referent by the adults.
They then attempt to find linguistic boundaries among these
words by relying on perceptual distance of the given two
typical colors: after they tentatively sort out the boundaries
by perceptual similarity, they continue to restructure the
semantic domain, and are slowly immersed into the adults’
way of division of the spectrum, which is to some degree
arbitrarily made due to various coincidental forces through
the history of the language (cf. Ameel et al., 2008).

(purple) (blue) (red)

2.01
2.07
1.82
3.53
3.55
4.20

3.00
3.07
1.33
3.01
1.67

1.68
4.01
3.06
4.44

5.06
5.37
5.28

3.15
3.53

6.76

2.18

1.66

2.73

2.30

3.24

4.56 1.39

Discussion
The present study experimentally examined how children
learn the meanings of basic color words and how they are
immersed into the language-specific system of the color
lexicon. Consistent with previous studies (e.g., Wagner et
al., 2013), we found that 3-years old children produced most
of the basic color words correctly when the color patch was

2084

a typical referent for the name. Furthermore, our findings
clearly showed that acquisition of color words continues
after 3 years old; even 4- and 5-year-old children still
struggled to find adult-like boundaries of color names (see
Ameel, et al., 2008 and Ameel, Malt & Storms, 2014 for
similar discussion).
Our results uncovered the developmental trajectory of this
process, and what underlies it. By 3 years of age, children
“have learned” most basic color names in the sense that they
know these words are names of different colors. In their
attempt to organize the color semantic domain, children first
attempt to locate each color word roughly along the
undivided spectrum. Three-year olds are able to map most
basic color names to their typical colors, but categories are
largely overlapping and their boundaries are overextended.
With development, the overextended category boundaries
are gradually narrowed down as the boundaries among
neighboring words are delineated. Importantly, we observed
that the process of boundary delineation occurs
simultaneously across different color words, which suggests
that development of color words takes place as a
consequence of continuous restructuring of the entire color
lexicon rather than a local adjustment of a single word.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by MEXT KAKENHI to Imai
(Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas
#23120003) and Saji (Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B)
#26870573)

References
Ameel, E., Malt, B. C., & Storms, G. (2008). Object naming
and later lexical development: From baby bottle to beer
bottle. Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 262–285.
Ameel, E., Malt, B. C., & Storms, G. (2014). Steps along a
Continuum of Word Knowledge: Later Lexical
Development through the Lens of Receptive Judgments.
Language Learning and Development, 10(3), 234–262.
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their
universality and evolution. Berkeley & Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
Bornstein, M. H. (1985a). Colour-name versus shape-name
learning in young children. Journal of Child Language 12,
387–93.
Bornstein, M. H. (1985b). On the development of colour
naming in young children: data and theory. Brain and
Language 26, 72–93.
Bornstein, M. H., Kessen, W., & Weiskopf, S. (1976). Color
vision and hue categorization in young human infants.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 2, 115.
Braisby, N., & Dockrell, N. (1999). Why is colour naming
difficult? Journal of Child Language, 26, 23-47.
Cook, R. S., Kay, P. & Regier, T. (2005). The world color
survey database: History and use. In Cohen, H. &
Lefebvre, C. (Eds.), Handbook of Categorisation in the
Cognitive Sciences. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Davidoff, J. (2001). Language and perceptual categorisation.
Trends in cognitive sciences, 5, 382-387.
Kaatsch, H.-J., Stadler, M., & Nietert, M. (1993).
Photometric measurement of color changes in livor mortis
as a function of pressure and time: Development of a
computer-aided system for measuring pressure-induced
blanching of livor mortis to estimate time of death.
International Journal of Legal Medicine, 106, 91–97.
Kay, P., & Maffi, L. (1999). Color appearance and the
emergence and evolution of basic color lexicons,
American Anthropologist, 101(4), 743-760.
Kowalski, K., & Zimiles, H. (2006). The relation between
children’s conceptual functioning with color and color
term acquisition. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 94, 301–32.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y.
(1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40(2), 230-262.
Nayatani, Y. (2003). Adequateness of a newly modified
opponent-colors theory. Color Research & Application, 28,
298-307.
Majid, A., Bositer, J.,S., & Bowerman, M. (2008). The
cross-linguistic categorization of everyday events: A stdy
of cutting and breaking, Cognition, 109, 235-250.
Malt, B.C., Gennari, S., Imai, M., Ameel, E., Saji, N., &
Majid, A.(2014). Human Locomotion in Languages:
Constraints on Moving and Meaning.Journal of Memory
and Language, 74, 107-123.
Pitchford, N. J., & Mullen, K. T. (2002). Is the acquisition
of basic colour terms in young children constrained?
Perception, 31, 1349–1370.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Cook, R. S. (2005). Focal colors are
universal after all, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 102, 8386-8391.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I.R.L., & Shapiro, L.R.
(2004). The development of color categories in two
languages: A longitudinal study, Journal of experimental
Psychology: General, 133(4), 554-571.
Saji, N., Imai, M., Saalback, H., Zhang, Y., Shu, H., &
Okada, H. (2011). Word learning does not end at fast
mapping: Evolution of verb meanings through
reorganization of an entire semantic domain. Cognition,
118, 45-61.
Uchikawa, K., & Boynton, R. M. (1987). Categorical color
perception of Japanese observers: Comparison with that of
Americans. Vision Research, 27, 1825-1833.
Wagner, K., Dobkins, K., & Barner, D. (2013). Slow
mapping: Color word learning as a gradual inductive
process. Cognition, 127, 307–317.

2085

