How Grammatical Gender Affects Perspective Taking
Elena Andonova (eandonova@nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia, 1618, Bulgaria

Zornitsa Savcheva (zsavcheva@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia, 1618, Bulgaria

Gergana Todorova (gergana.tv@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia, 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract

Furthermore, although mental simulation may be a
mechanism underlying the embodiment of abstract meaning,
the latter is per se not a universal abstraction but has been
shown to be both body-specific and culture-specific. A
series of studies (e.g., Casasanto, 2009, Casasanto, 2011,
Willems, Hagoort, & Casasanto, 2010) have provided
support for the so-called body-specificity hypothesis of
embodiment, including evidence that right-handers, on the
one hand, and left-handers, on the other, represent abstract
ideas with a positive and negative valence respectively, in
spatially divergent directions of association, in thought,
speech, and gesture. These two groups were also found to
use correspondingly different areas of the brain for
imagining actions and representing the meanings of action
verbs. In fact, in line with the evidence accumulated so far,
this hypothesis has been upgraded to a theory of bodily
relativity (Casasanto, 2011, Casasanto, 2014).
It is not only bodies and their specific experiences that
may differ but also cultural traditions of entire communities.
In Western culture, for example, nodding is commonly
associated with agreement and shaking one’s head is
interpreted as a sign of disagreement. There are, however,
exceptions to this common pattern of association of h ead
movement direction with acceptance vs. rejection, for
example, the cultural convention in Bulgaria is the use of
vertical head movement to mean ‘No’ and side-to-side head
movement to mean ‘Yes.’ Both movement types are also
generally slower, especially the side-to-side affirmative
gesture, in comparison with Westerners’ rather brisk lateral
shake gesture. Thus, these two cultures spatially ‘‘embody’’
agreement via different movement patterns. Such crosscultural habitual bodily movement differences may even
affect certain aspects of cognitive processing that have no
communicative intent (Andonova & Taylor, 2012). These
findings speak in favor of the need to consider the way s in
which embodiment may be grounded in culturally specific
experiences of bodily associations with abstract thought.
If speakers and readers process verbal information in a
way that is based on mental simulation of bodily experience,
then it is reasonable to assume that differences in the
perspective implied by the text from which the situation

This is the first study to examine the influence of gender-sex
congruence (match or mismatch between grammatical gender
markers and participant sex) on the embodied processing of
first-person sentences and images with either an internal or an
external perspective in a picture-sentence verification task in
Bulgarian modeled on Brunye et al.’s (2009) experimental
paradigm. Participants were shown not to discriminate
between perspectives when the grammatical gender was
congruent with their own sex, thus allowing for an agentive
interpretation by the reader. However, in the gender-sex
incongruent condition, a significant 83 ms effect of image
perspective was observed indicating large processing costs for
attempting to adopt an internal perspective when the
participant’s sex was incompatible with the first-person
gender marking, hence with action simulation from an
egocentric perspective. These results are discussed in terms of
embodiment specificity accounts and the experiential basis of
grammar processing.
Keywords: perspective; grammatical gender; embodiment;
Bulgarian.

Introduction
There has been growing consensus in recent years that
mental simulation of depicted events is an integral part of
the process of reading. Although simulation may occur more
naturally when the simulating agent and the narrative
protagonist (actor) share certain identifying characteristics ,
it has been argued that readers may in fact embody various
perspectives associated with multiple characters and bring
this knowledge together in the build-up and upkeep of a
relevant ‘situation model’ implied by narrative text (Zwaan
& Radvansky, 1998). Even though it may be tempting to
expect that the first-person (egocentric simulation)
perspective on events would be the preferred default mode,
this is by no means the general case. Even if told in the firstperson singular, narratives from the viewpoint of characters
with whom readers are reluctant to, or have difficulties to,
identify may turn out to produce the opposite effect of
distancing or misaligning oneself with a character.

102

model is constructed could also affect text comprehension.
In particular, the use of first-person vs. second- or thirdperson perspective as implied by the personal pronoun may
lead to differences in the relative ease of comprehension.
Brunye, Ditman, Mahoney, Augustyn, and Taylor (2009)
have demonstrated that pronoun variation and discourse
context mediate the degree of embodiment experienced
during narrative comprehension as measured by ease of
simulation. Participants in their first experiment read simple
sentences of the kind “I am slicing the tomato” where the
personal pronoun varied between I, you, and he (first-,
second-, and third-person) and saw images that either
depicted a matching action-and-object combination or not.
In this picture-sentence verification task, participants were
faster to respond correctly to internal rather than external
perspective images following the use of both first-person
and second-person pronouns, although the former effect was
only found in the participants analysis and not in the item
analysis. The opposite response latency pattern emerged
with third-person pronouns, i.e., faster verification for
external than for internal-perspective pictures. However,
previous studies using single-sentence stimuli (Borghi et al.,
2004; Brunye et al., 2009) have shown that although
second-person pronouns consistently cued an embodied
agency perspective, first-person pronouns have only been
found to do so inconsistently. In their second experiment, by
introducing a two-sentence context to the protagonist,
Brunye et al. (2009) succeeded in showing that first-person
perspective in text is not associated with agency by
participants when context does not encourage them to
identify with a given character, e.g. I am a deli employee. In
such a case, participants performed the picture-sentence
verification task faster when they were processing the
external than the internal image perspective.
Unlike English, many of the world’s languages, from
Albanian in Albania to Zazaki in Turkey, employ
grammatical gender categories to track down referents in
discourse. Thus, in some of these languages, spoken or
written discourse offers another cue to speaker/writer
identity via the use of a grammatical gender marker on
predicates in syntactic agreement with the first-person
pronoun I. Consider the following examples in Bulgarian:

In order to investigate further the effects of first-person
reference on adopting an embodied agency perspective in
sentence interpretation, we designed an experimental study
that manipulated this particular feature of grammatical
gender in Bulgarian in combination with variation in image
perspective (internal vs. external). As previous studies have
shown more consistent results for the use of second-person
pronouns (Brunye et al., 2009), we focused on first-person
reference forms exclusively given that they may be variably
associated with an internal (embodying) or external agency
interpretation.
We expected to find little or no difference in the accuracy
scores as picture-sentence verification is a relatively easy
task. However, we predicted variation in response latencies
as a function of experimental condition.
If reading first-person sentence descriptions activates an
egocentric (reader’s) perspective rather than an allocentric
(writer’s) perspective, then overall responses to internal
perspective images should be faster than responses to
external perspective images. This is what Brunye et al.
(2009) established in their first experiment.
In addition, assuming an egocentric bias in first-person
sentence interpretation, responses in the gender-sex
incongruent condition should be slower than those in the
gender-sex congruent condition. For example, adopting an
egocentric perspective would be easier for women when the
first-person reference was to an action performed by a
woman as encoded in the gender marker of the predicate
and much more problematic if the marker was of the
masculine gender leading to an interpretation of a male
actor. The opposite pattern would be the case with male
readers of sentences marked for the feminine vs. the
masculine gender. It was less clear in advance, however, if
these two effects would be independent (additive) or
interacting (super-additive), if each would emerge in the
presence of the other. A super-additive effect would
manifest itself statistically in the form of an interaction,
since the responses to each of the two levels of one of the
factors would depend on the level of the other factor.
Generally speaking, we expected an interaction between the
two variables on response times.
Alternatively, if reading first-person sentences does not
automatically trigger an embodied agency interpretation but
allows for multiple viewpoints to be entertained more
readily and simultaneously, i.e., both reader/listener and
writer/speaker as the actor, then these effects should not
emerge as one would expect no cognitive effort to be spent
on switching between perspectives or choosing between
them.

(1) Оцветил съм рибката.
(2) Оцветила съм рибката.
For both examples (1) and (2), the appropriate translation
into English would be ‘I have colored in the fish.’ The firstperson perspective is encoded in the auxiliary verb form
съм. However, the past participle which is part of the
predicate “colored-in” is either in the Masculine gender in
example (1) or in the Feminine gender in example (2). Thus,
a woman speaking a Slavic language (e.g., Bulgarian)
would have to use feminine gender forms as in (2), and men
would express reference to their first-person perspective by
using masculine gender verb forms as in (1). This cue to
referent identity is strong enough without additional context.

Method
The study implemented a 2 x 2 experimental design with
Grammatical Gender - Sex Congruence (congruent vs.
incongruent) and Perspective (internal vs. external) as
within participant factors.

103

Participants
48 participants (14 men and 34 women) took part in the
experiment, mean age 23.27 years. They were university
students within the 19-35 age range who volunteered and/or
participated in exchange for course credit. All were native
speakers of Bulgarian except two whose data were dropped.
Given that the procedure required a right-hand response and
speed of processing was measured, the data of three lefthanded participants (two men, one woman) and one
ambidextrous participant (male) were also excluded. The
data of the remaining 42 participants (11 men and 31
women) were included in the analyses.

(b) internal perspective

Figure 1: Examples of image stimuli taken from the
internal (b) and external (a) perspectives.

Stimuli
72 sentences (32 targets, 32 fillers and 8 practice sentences)
describing simple completed actions were constructed in
Bulgarian such as each sentence included the past participle
of the corresponding verb (e.g., sliced, opened, etc.), the
first-person form of the auxiliary verb ‘be’ (съм) and a
direct object (e.g., tomato, can, box). Furthermore, each
sentence had two forms – one in the masculine gender and
one in the feminine, as indicated by the form of the past
participle of the main verb. Actions described by the
sentences were chosen in such a way so that they could not
be readily identified as something typically performed by
men or women in particular.
Two pictures for each of the 72 action descriptions were
created – one presenting the action scene from an internal
perspective and the other presenting it from an external
perspective. Pictures corresponding to target sentences
always depicted the completed action on the object as
described in the sentence. Pictures used with filler sentences
depicted either the same action (though performed on a
different object), or the same object (though subjected to a
different action) but never a truly matching action-object
combination. In this respect, half of the practice pictures
were similar to target pictures and the other half were
similar to filler pictures.
All pictures were taken from the same viewing distance
(ca. 92 cm) and the same downward angle (ca. 30°). They
were all subsequently turned to grayscale and pasted onto a
white background.

Procedure
The experiment was conducted in sound-attenuating booths.
On a computer screen participants read sentences describing
a completed action after which they saw a picture depicting
the same or different action and/or object. Their task was to
verify, as quickly and accurately as possible, whether the
sentence described the completed action depicted in the
picture or not by pressing one of the two response keys on a
button box. Participants responded with the index finger of
their right hand. Response keys ’ associations with a positive
or negative response were counterbalanced across
participants.
The practice session consisted of 8 pseudorandomized
trials. In the experimental session, the 64 trials were also
pseudorandomized, such as each of the four conditions
contained an equal number of stimuli. Across participants
each stimulus appeared in all possible factor combinations.
Target trials always required a YES response while filler
trials always required a NO response.
Each trial in the practice and the experimental sessions
contained the following sequence of displays : a fixation
cross appeared for 400 ms followed by a sentence which
remained on screen for 3000 ms, then another fixation cross
appeared for 400 ms preceding a picture which was
presented on the screen until a response was registered but
for no more than 2000 ms. An inter trial interval of 1500 ms
separated the distinctive trials.

Results
Out of the set of thirty-two items, two items associated with
technical errors in stimuli presentation were removed from
the data under analysis.
Correct responses to target stimuli were associated with
pressing the Yes button to verify a match between the
meaning of the sentence and the action depicted in the
photograph. Accuracy was calculated on the basis of these
responses. Reaction times were registered for all responses
but were only analyzed for correct responses to target
stimuli. An equivalent number of filler trials were also
included in order to balance for Yes and No responses.

(a) external perspective

104

Filler trials consisted of sentence-picture mismatches and
the correct response in these cases was always negative.

participant sex, i.e., when women read sentences where the
gender-marked verb form was consistent with a female
agent and when men read sentences when the gendermarked form was masculine, thus consistent with a male
agent of the action described. However, in the incongruent
gender-sex condition, response times were significantly
slower when the task required verification of visual stimuli
in the internal than in the external perspective. In fact, there
was an impressive 83 ms difference between participant
means in these two situations.

Response Accuracy
Overall, participants were highly accurate on the picturesentence verification task (M=94.20% SD=9.00%).
Accuracy of response data was analyzed in a 2 (Gender-Sex
Congruence: congruent vs. incongruent) x 2 (Perspective:
internal vs. external) repeated measures ANOVA on
participant means for the mean proportion of correct
responses.
There were no main effects of gender-sex congruence or of
perspective but we found a marginal two-way interaction
between these variables, F (2, 41) = 3.38, p = .073, ηp2 = .076.
Whereas picture-sentence verification judgments were very
similar in the internal picture perspective, participants’
accuracy differed in the external perspective condition in
which their judgment accuracy was higher in those cases
when the grammatical gender of the predicate corresponded
to the participant’s sex, i.e., in cases of gender-sex
congruence (see Table 1).
Table 1: Mean participant accuracy in percentages for
target picture-sentence verification per condition.
Condition

Mean % (SD)

Congruent Internal
Congruent External
Incongruent Internal
Incongruent External

93.32
96.56
94.34
92.56

Figure 2: Mean participant response times (ms) to gendersex congruent vs. incongruent picture-sentence stimuli
shown in an internal vs. external perspective.

(10.68)
(7.72)
(9.98)
(9.08)

A 2 (Gender-Sex Congruence: congruent vs. incongruent) x
2 (Perspective: internal vs. external) repeated measures
analysis of variance on item means for res ponse times
yielded similar statistical results. We found a marginal main
effect of perspective (F (1, 29) = 4.19, p = .050, ηp2 = .126), no
main effect of congruence, and a marginally significant two way interaction between congruence and perspective, (F (1, 29)
= 3.98, p = .056, ηp2 = .121). These results followed the
same pattern as the findings from the analysis of participant
means.

A 2 (Gender-Sex Congruence: congruent vs. incongruent) x
2 (Perspective: internal vs. external) repeated measures
analysis of variance on item means for the proportion of
correct responses yielded no statistically significant results.

Response Latency
Participants responded with an average response latency of
1052 ms (SD=32 ms) in this task. Only response latencies
for correct Yes responses to target picture-sentence stimuli
were analyzed.

Discussion
In this 2 x 2 experimental study on the influence of
grammatical gender on perspective taking in reading simp le
first-person singular action sentences in Bulgarian, we
found an interaction between gender-sex congruence and
image perspective on processing times. Image perspective
varied between internal, from the viewpoint of the reader
looking at the screen, and external, from a 180° rotated
viewpoint. Gender-sex congruence was a factor that
encoded whether the grammatical gender of the predicate
(Masculine vs. Feminine) corresponded to the participant’s
sex (male vs. female, respectively). In comprehension of a
first-person (pronoun) sentence, the existence of such a
correspondence (gender-sex congruence) allows for an
agentive interpretation from the perspective of the reader,

A 2 (Gender-Sex Congruence: congruent vs. incongruent) x
2 (Perspective: internal vs. external) repeated measures
analysis of variance on participant means for response times
produced a main effect of perspective (F (1, 41) = 5.98, p =
.019, ηp2 = .127) and no main effect of congruence.
However, there was a significant two-way interaction
between congruence and perspective, (F (1, 41) = 4.23, p =
.046, ηp2 = .094).
The two-way interaction revealed that participants’ correct
responses did not differ in terms of speed when the
predicate’s grammatical gender was congruent with

105

that is, the reader can identify himself or herself with the
doer of the action described in the sentence. Note, however,
that such a correspondence works as a reliable cue to the
intended referent only in situations where the reader’s sex is
uniquely congruent with the grammatical gender marker. If
both speaker and hearer, or writer and reader, are of the
same sex, then an ambiguity arises as to which of the two
conversational partners is uniquely intended as the referent
since the grammatical marker matches the sex of both
partners. If the two interlocutors differ in terms of their sex,
then only one of them could be seen as the doer of the
action. In the process of reading, however, it is often the
case that the reader is unaware of the writer’s sex, thus
producing greater uncertainty in interpretation.
We found that image perspective and gender-sex
congruence had an interactive influence on verification
processing times and even, though less so, on verification
accuracy. In the gender-sex congruence condition,
participants verified picture-sentence combinations equally
fast in both internal and external perspectives. This result
could be interpreted as evidence that multiple perspectives
are simultaneously present in sentence comprehension in the
absence of a uniquely identifiable referent. However, when
grammatical gender markers and participant sex were not a
fit, then the mismatching grammatical gender cue could
clearly indicate that the first-person reference in such
sentences excluded an embodied agency interpretation on
behalf of readers and only allowed for an interpretation of
the writer of these first-person sentences as the agent of the
completed action described in them. As a result of this,
performing picture-sentence verification on sentences
indicative of a non-participant agent in combination with a
participant aligned image internal perspective led to higher
processing costs as seen in longer response times in
comparison with an image external perspective.
The pattern of results from this study provides an
interesting contrast to some previous findings described in
the literature. For example, unlike Brunye et al.’s (2009)
English-speaking participants, the Bulgarian speakers here
showed no difference between processing internal and
external perspective images when paired up with sentences
where the first-person reference was gender-sex congruent.
In Brunye et al.’s first experiment, participants responded
faster to internal than to external perspective stimuli out of
context allowing the authors to conclude that readers had
adopted an egocentric perspective in sentence interpretation.
The finding from our study is that there was no processing
cost, hence no evidence of a preferred or default perspective
taken in the interpretation of sentences, either egocentric or
allocentric. It appears that in the gender-sex congruent
condition readers were equally at ease with either
interpretation. This result is in line with expectations that
perspective may be ambiguous or uncertain in sentence
comprehension unless there is a clear gender/sex difference
in conversational roles between the reader and writer of the
discourse element. It is also in line with Franklin, Tversky,
and Coon’s (1992) conclusion that speakers comprehending

narrative descriptions of various spatial scenes and multiple
viewpoints on them seemed to take a neutral perspective
when there was more than one probed point of view, rather
than switch perspectives.
It could be argued that the gender-sex congruent condition
in our study is the one that comes closer to the stimuli in
Brunye et al.’s study. The gender-sex incongruent condition
is clearly irrelevant in terms of a comparison with English
language sentences where predicate gender is not a
grammatical feature. It may, however, be difficult to draw
such a comparison, even with the congruent condition. In
one sense, it is neutral or balanced in that it does not
preclude agency to be attributed to one of the conversational
role partners or the other. In a different sense, however, the
very existence of grammatical gender concord in a language
may predispose its speakers to pay extra attention to this
feature and to its extra-linguistic reference. Consider, for
example, recent research on speakers of German, another
language with a three-gender grammatical category on
nouns. Imai, Schalk, Saalbach, and Okada (2010) found that
German speakers projected sex onto grammatical gender
and often made erroneous inferences in line with this
projection. Similarly, German-speaking children appeared
to rely on grammatical gender as a cue when determining
whether a general biological property applies to a given
object (Saalbach, Imai, & Schalk, 2012). In addition, studies
on grammatical gender processing in Bulgarian and Italian
speakers have revealed that men and women exhibited
differential sensitivity to masculine and feminine gender
word forms (Andonova, D’Amico, Devescovi, & Bates ,
2004, Andonova, 2013). Whether or not the presence in a
language of a grammatical category such as gender that
serves a referent indexing function produces a different set
of constraints on processing perspective in comparison with
gender non-marking languages is a question that can better
be answered in future cross-linguistic research.
Alternatively, it can also be addressed in studies on
processing perspective-related sentences within a gender
marking language such as Bulgarian by introducing a
comparison between gender-marked predicates (as in this
study) and gender-neutral predicate forms, for example,
describing actions in the Present tense which may serve as a
baseline.
It is important to point out here that the gender-sex
congruence by perspective interaction was obtained in our
study for first-person sentences describing not currently
depicted actions but completed actions, i.e., actions that had
brought about a result seen in a visually presented scene.
This distinction is important because our results highlight
speakers’ embodied attention to congruently described
action outcomes and not only currently executed actions,
that is, a certain level of abstraction away from the sensorimotor grounding of directly embodied action. However, if
the study had produced a main effect of congruence and no
interaction with perspective, then the interpretation of the
results would have been constrained to an effect of
speakers’ attention to gender-sex congruence as a cue to

106

References

referent identity. The emergence of an interaction with
perspective, however, speaks in favor of an embodied
agency interpretation to these simple first-person sentences.
The interaction outcome is important for another reason
as well. A simple main effect of perspective in this task may
otherwise be due to higher visual processing costs of images
presented in the external perspective. Without an interaction
of perspective with a second variable, this possibility would
be hard to discard. In Brunye et al.’s (2009) study,
additional variables of interest were the manipulation of
first- vs. second- and third-person sentential materials and
context. In our study, the perspective manipulation alone
would not have been sufficient to imply an embodied
interpretation but the interaction between image perspective
and gender-sex congruence enables such a reading of the
results.

Andonova, E. (2013). Gender and Sex: The Experiential
Basis of Grammar. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, &
I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1738-1743). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Andonova, E., D’Amico, S., Devescovi, A., & Bates, E.
(2004). Gender and lexical access in Bulgarian.
Perception & Psychophysics, 66(3), 496-507.
Borghi, A. M., Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2004).
Putting words in perspective. Memory & Cognition,
32(6), 863-873.
Brunyé, T. T., Ditman, T., Mahoney, C. R., Augustyn, J. S.,
& Taylor, H. A. (2009). When you and I share
perspectives pronouns modulate perspective taking during
narrative comprehension. Psychological Science, 20(1),
27-32.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts:
good and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138(3):351–367.
Casasanto, D. (2011). Different bodies, different minds : the
body specificity of language and thought. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 20(6), 378-383.
Casasanto, D. (2014). Bodily relativity. Routledge handbook
of embodied cognition, Routledge, New York, 108-117.
Casasanto, D., & Chrysikou, E. G. (2011). When left is
“right” motor fluency shapes abstract concepts.
Psychological Science, 22(4), 419-422
Corbett, G. G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Corbett, G. G. (2005). ‘The number of genders,’ ‘Sex-based
and non-sex-based gender systems,’ and ‘Gender
assignment systems’ [three chapters and maps]. In
Haspelmath M, Dryer M, Gil D & Comrie B (eds.) World
atlas of language structures. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Franklin, N., Tversky, B., & Coon, V. (1992). Switching
points of view in spatial mental models. Memory &
Cognition, 20(5), 507-518.
Imai, M., Schalk, L., Saalbach, H., & Okada, H. (2010b).
Influence of grammatical gender on deductive reasoning
about sex-specific properties of animals. In R.
Catrambone & S. Ohlsson (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32 nd
annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp.
1160–1165). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Saalbach, H., Imai, M., & Schalk, L. (2012). Grammatical
Gender and Inferences About Biological Properties in
German‐Speaking Children. Cognitive Science, 36(7),
1251-1267.
Willems, R. M., Hagoort, P., & Casasanto, D. (2010). Bodyspecific representations of action verbs neural evidence
from right-and left-handers. Psychological Science, 21(1),
67-74.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models
in language comprehension and memory. Psychological
bulletin, 123(2), 162.

Conclusion
In sum, this is the first study to show effects of grammar
on perspective taking in comprehending simple action
sentences. The grammatical feature that produces an effect
here is grammatical gender, a widespread linguistic
phenomenon (Corbett, 1991, 2005). The grammatical
gender associated with the subject of the sentence in
agreement with the predicate serves as a cue to attributing
agency to a referent, in the case of first-person narratives, to
the writer or potentially the reader of the sentence. While a
correspondence between first-person gender and participant
sex does not uniquely identify the reader as the intend ed
referent, a mismatch between the two is sufficient to signal
that the reader cannot be the agent of the completed action
described in the sentence and thus to induce external
perspective taking in the comprehension process.
It is common to assume that specificity in embodied
processing, as in the differences between left-handers and
right-handers, for example, comes about as a result of
having performed actions in systematically different ways,
although some manipulations such as wearing a
cumbersome glove in a motor-fluency task can reverse the
effects turning right-handers temporarily into “left-handers”
(Willems, Hagoort, & Casasanto, 2010, Casasanto &
Chrysikou, 2011). The alignment or misalignment of
grammatical gender with self-reference is also the product
of a lifetime of experience in a language community and
cultural context. Unlike the reversibility of effects shown
with handedness, however, these associations are difficult to
override. They leave a trace on every aspect of language
processing that embeds grammatical gender reference to
extra-linguistic reality. The experiential basis of grammar
processing and its role in perspective taking and
embodiment are promising directions for future research.

Acknowledgment
We would like to thank four anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft.

107

