How Sharp is Occam’s Razor? Language Statistics in Cognitive Processing
Richard Tillman (R.N.Tillman@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

Sterling Hutchinson (S.C.Hutchinson@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

Max M. Louwerse (M.M.Louwerse@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract
According to the dominant view in cognitive science,
language processing requires perceptual simulation of
symbols. Various experiments have shown that words that
share a perceptual relationship are processed faster. We have
proposed an alternative view in which perceptual cues are
encoded in language. However, experiments supporting
perceptual simulation or language statistics have focused on
concept words. It remains therefore unclear whether the
evidence found for language statistics might actually just be
evidence for perceptual simulations. We presented subjects
with lexical items as well as stimuli unlikely to be represented
in the perceptual world: grammatical items. Results showed
that response times to lexical items could be explained by a
statistical linguistic approach and a perceptual simulation
approach, supporting both perceptual and symbolic accounts.
Results for the responses to grammatical items were
explained by statistical linguistic information but not by a
perceptual simulation account, raising questions about the
principle of parsimony.
Keywords: Language
Perceptual simulation.

statistics;

Embodied

cognition;

Introduction
Over the last two decades a large body of literature has
accumulated that argues that language processing is
fundamentally embodied (Barsalou, 1999; 2008; Glenberg,
1997; Semin & Smith, 2008). That is, words only gain
meaning through their referents to objects or persons in the
world or in the perceptual experiences of the comprehender.
Consequently, when understanding a word, comprehenders
are actually mentally reenacting all prior physical and
perceptual experiences with the referent (Barsalou, 1999;
Barsalou, Santos, Simmons, & Wilson, 2008; Glenberg,
1997). Experimental evidence supports this embodied
cognition account with words being processed faster when
relationships to their real world locations, features, and
attributes are emphasized. For example, sentences
describing objects are processed faster when a primed image
of the word matches the orientation described in the
sentence (Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001). Similarly, facilitative

processing effects were found when words were presented
when words presented in a vertical configuration matched
their expected locations (e.g., attic above basement; Zwaan
& Yaxley, 2003). Similarly, when words referring to flying
animals were presented at the top of the screen, they were
processed faster than when they were presented at the
bottom of the screen (Pecher, van Dantzig, Boot, Zanolie, &
Huber, 2010; Šetić & Domijan, 2007). The same pattern
holds true for up/down metaphors (Meier & Robinson,
2001; Schubert, 2005). Neurological evidence also shows
support for such an embodied cognition account, with
participants activating the same neural mechanisms for
language processing that are active when actually
experiencing or performing the sentence described (Hauk,
Johnsrude, & Pulvermüller, 2004; Tettamanti et al., 2004).
These type of findings have led many to emphasize the
necessity of embodied cognition during language
processing. Indeed, sensorimotor activation has been found
to contribute to language processing in a number of studies
(Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004). Strong accounts like these
suggest that language processing is mental simulation of
sensory and motor systems.
The embodied cognition account is a response to what has
been described as a symbolic account that dominated the
cognitive sciences in the 1970s and 1980s. Symbolic
accounts suggest that meaning is derived from abstract
relationships that words share with other words (Fodor,
1975) which can be found using statistical linguistic
frequencies. In essence, within this framework language
processing is not strictly embodied in nature and does not
necessarily share a direct relation to biomechanical states.
Instead, meaning can also be derived from a linguistic
context where the co-occurrence frequencies of words
contribute to language meaning. These linguistic
connections are (also) relied upon during language
processing.
More recently, the argument has been made that rather
than pitching cognitive processes as either embodied or
symbolic, cognitive processes are likely to be symbolic and
embodied. For instance, the Symbol Interdependency
Hypothesis proposed that language processing can be
explained by both symbolic and embodied mechanisms,

2404

because language encodes perceptual information
(Louwerse, 2007; 2008; 2010; Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010).
When we encounter a word, we create good-enough
representations using language statistics and perceptually
simulate its physical and somatosensory features depending
on the time course of processing, the cognitive task, the
nature of the stimuli, and individual differences (Louwerse
& Connell, 2011; Louwerse & Hutchinson, 2012; Louwerse
& Jeuniaux, 2010). For instance, Louwerse and Jeuniaux
(2010) asked participants to process concept pairs such as
monitor - keyboard placed in a vertical configuration, one
above the other. An embodied cognition account would
argue that these concept pairs are processed by perceptually
simulating that monitors are placed higher than keyboards.
However, linguistic frequencies also show word pairs
monitor-keyboard to be more frequent than keyboardmonitor, which suggests that language encodes perceptual
information (Louwerse, 2008). Louwerse and Jeuniaux
(2010) found that subjects rely on linguistic versus
perceptual information depending on cognitive task and
stimulus. When a concept was presented as a word,
linguistic frequencies better explained response times, but
when concepts were presented as pictures, perceptual
information was the better explanation. Similarly, when
participants performed a semantic judgment task linguistic
frequencies best explained response times, but when
participants performed a perceptual simulation task,
perceptual information better explained response times than
linguistic frequencies. Louwerse and Connell (2010)
extended these findings to demonstrate that linguistic
information is relatively more important during early
processing whereas perceptual information becomes
relatively more important later. In other words, we rely on
linguistic information when quickly processing language but
perceptual information is used during more deliberate
language processing (Louwerse & Hutchinson, 2012).
However, given that language encodes perceptual
information, and given the evidence that language
processing seems to rely on both language statistics and
perceptual simulation, the question needs to be raised how a
language statistics account relates to a perceptual simulation
account. The dominant view suggests that language might
encode perceptual simulation, but there is no role for
language statistics in cognitive processing. Perceptual
simulation is quick (Hauk, Shtyrov, & Pulvermüller, 2008)
and complete (Glenberg, 1997) leaving little to no room for
processing effects that could be attributed to language
statistics. In this scenario statistical linguistic information
does not play a role during processing (Van Dantzig,
Pecher, Zeelenberg, & Barsalou, 2008).
Despite studies demonstrating evidence for a language
statistics account complementary to a perceptual simulation
account (Louwerse, 2008; Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010), this
option cannot be ruled out, because the evidence for
language statistics is also evidence for perceptual simulation
(but see Louwerse, Hutchinson, Tillman, & Recchia, 2014).
To solve this problem we should look at word combinations

that are easy to explain according to a language statistics
account, but are difficult to explain using an embodied
cognition account. For instance, eagle can be perceptually
simulated (e.g., a creature flying in the sky). However, for
abstract words such as anything, perceptual simulation is
considerably harder, if not impossible.
Abstract words can provide a litmus test on whether a
language statistics account should at least be considered in
cognition experiments. If 1) processing of abstract words
(e.g., grammatical items) can be explained by a language
statistics account, but not by a perceptual simulation
account, but 2) processing of concrete words, such as lexical
items, can be explained by both a language statistics account
as well as a perceptual simulation account, Occam’s razor
would dictate that embodied cognition experiments should
at least include language statistics as a covariate. We
conducted an experiment that included stimuli that are
fundamentally non-perceptual, namely grammatical items,
such as the, a, and ought. If language indeed encodes
perceptual information, and effects for statistical linguistic
frequencies (Louwerse, 2008; Louwerse & Connell, 2011;
Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010) cannot simply be attributed to
perceptual simulation, then grammatical items should be
able to be explained through linguistic frequencies despite
their lack of perceptual information. On the other hand, if
language instead must always refer to perceptual
experiences to gain meaning, then linguistic frequencies
should be unable to explain RTs to grammatical items
because such items lack perceptual referents.
We predicted that processing times for perceptual lexical
words would be explained by language statistics, and that
the same would be true for non-perceptual grammatical
items, following the principle of parsimony.

Methods
In a response time (RT) experiment we presented subjects
with pairs of grammatical words (several – both) and pairs
of lexical words (blouse – socks). Items were vertically
presented following Zwaan and Yaxley (2003).

Participants
One hundred and one undergraduate native English speakers
at the University of Memphis participated for extra credit in
a Psychology course.

Materials
The experiment consisted of 20 pairs of grammatical words
(see Table 1). Grammatical words were matched on
syntactic category (i.e., auxiliary, conjunction, determiner,
preposition, pronoun, and quantifier). Because grammatical
items of different categories tend to occur in particular
sequences (Finch and Chater, 1992), we wanted to avoid a
grammatical effect (e.g., of the versus the of). Same part-ofspeech word pairs with the greatest difference in frequency
of a-b versus b-a orders were selected for inclusion in the

2405

experiment. We represent the more frequent order of the
grammatical items (i.e., a-b) as similar to the iconic
relationship of the lexical items. See Table 1.

Table 2. Filler items (lexical).

Table 1. Critical items (grammatical).
Word pair
by - at
anything - everything
his - her
it - me
more - enough
a - my
need - dare
no - any
in - of
could - ought
per - for
several - both
shall - had
some - most
the - our
what - this
to - with
would - should
we - you
an - your

Order 1
18.28
13.89
16.65
17.16
13.55
16.71
7.78
15.56
20.49
8.02
15.57
10.68
10.64
15.23
17.65
17.51
19.64
12.29
17.75
16.50

Order 2
16.22
11.57
14.80
16.27
11.95
16.60
6.82
13.45
20.17
6.85
15.01
9.59
9.09
12.26
17.29
16.06
18.86
11.80
16.18
15.53

To verify these grammatical items were not experienced
through perceptual simulation, but rather through linguistic
experience we obtained perceptual ratings for each word, by
using imagability, concreteness, and meaningfulness scores.
The MRC Psycholinguistic database (Coltheart, 1981)
provides information on different linguistic properties of
words, including properties like imagability, concreteness,
and meaningfulness on a scale of 100-700 for each property
(Gilhooly & Logie, 1980; Paivio, Yuille, & Madigan, 1968;
Toglia & Battig, 1978). Grammatical items included in this
experiment scored low on imagability ratings, M = 272.21
SD = 67.53, concreteness ratings, M = 288.43, SD = 69.36,
and meaningfulness ratings, M = 339.12, SD = 88.51.
An additional 110 lexical items were included in order to
reduce the likelihood of participants’ developing
expectations about the experiment and to demonstrate the
applicability of perceptual simulation during language
processing. Lexical items consisted of semantically related
and unrelated word pairs. See Table 2. Also included were
those word pairs with iconic orientation, extracted from
previous research (Louwerse, 2008; Louwerse & Jeuniaux,
2010; Zwaan & Yaxley, 2003). As the task was to determine
semantic relatedness, lexical words included pairs with high
(cos = .55) versus low (cos = .21) semantic association as
determined by Latent Semantic Analysis (Landauer,
McNamara, Dennis, & Kintsch, 2007). In addition to
semantically related pairs, half of those pairs also shared an
iconic relationship whereby pairs were presented vertically

aisle – slope
bank – money
bar – nail
blossom – tulip
bolt – cent
bone – skull
bowl – basket
cable – platter
cake – duck
camera – film
canoe – river*

ham – surf
helmet – bike*
herb – limb
horn – drum
insect – ant
jet – plane
lamb – chicken
milk – cow
moth – butterfly
palace – crow
paper – desk*

car – road*
carrot – lunch
chair – emerald
cheese – wine
chocolate – cream
clarinet – violin
clover – grass
crocodile – snake
dancer – witch
doctor – stair
eagle – bird
electricity – coal
elephant – monkey
engine – palace

pen – calf
porch – roof*
rain – umbrella*
ram – prince
scissors – pencil
shirt – coat
socks – bath
spinach – rib
sword – queen
tail – owl
toad – frog
tooth – dentist
triangle – circle
trout – fish

flag – priest
flute – nest
fruit – apple
gown – blouse
hall – couch

veil – bush
walnut – blade
walrus – weed
zipper – button

* indicates iconic relationship (i.e., in the vertical orientation the first
word would normally occur above the second word).

on the screen in the same order they would appear in the
world (i.e., sky appears above ground). See Table 2.
Likewise, the other half of pairs appeared with a reverseiconic relationship in an order opposoite of that which
would be expected in the world (i.e., ground appears above
sky). These lexical pairs were included in order to replicate
embodiment effects of prior research (Louwerse, 2008;
Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010; Zwaan & Yaxley, 2003), as
meaningful lexical items share a perceptual relation.

2406

All items were counterbalanced such that all participants
saw all word pairs, but no participant saw the same word
pair in both orders.

Procedure
After signing the requisite consent form, subjects were
presented with grammatical items in the same manner that
Zwaan & Yaxley (2003) presented subjects with meaningful
stimuli. Participants were asked to judge the semantic
relatedness of word pairs presented on an 800x600
computer screen. Words were presented one above another
in a vertical configuration.
Upon presentation of a word pair, participants were asked
to indicate whether the word pair was related in meaning by
pressing designated and counterbalanced yes or no keys.
Subjects were not instructed as to whether grammatical item
pairs should be considered semantically related. All word
pairs were randomly ordered for each participant to negate
any order effects and each trial was separated by a ‘+’
fixation symbol.

Results and Discussion
Twenty-two participants were removed from the analysis
because >30% of their answers to filler items (i.e.,
semantically related items) were incorrect. As it is difficult
to justify why grammatical items should or should not be
judged as semantically related, all responses to grammatical
items were judged to be correct responses. After all,
grammatical items in this experiment were low on
concreteness, imagability, and meaningfulness, but at the
same time they were potentially statistically, conceptually,
or even grammatically related.
All error trials for lexical items were removed. Outliers
were identified as those correct responses greater than 2.5
standard deviations from the mean per subject per item.
Outlier removal resulted in a loss of 3.12% of the data.
Mean RT for lexical items was 1,922ms (SD = 1,186) and
the mean RT for grammatical items was 1,873ms (SD =
1,147).
As in previous studies (Louwerse, 2008; 2011) we
operationalized the bigram linguistic frequencies as the log
frequency of a-b (e.g., a-the) or b-a (e.g., the-a) order of
word pairs. The order frequency of all word pairs within 3-5
word grams was obtained using the large Web 1T 5-gram
corpus (Brants & Franz, 2006).

would be processed faster than those presented in a reverse
iconic orientation. Such findings would lend support to an
embodied cognition account. To check for an iconicity
effect (Louwerse, 2008), we conducted a mixed models
analysis on those filler pairs sharing an iconic relationship.
We specified orientation (either iconic orientation or reverse
iconic orientation) and statistical linguistic frequencies as
fixed factors and participants and items as random factors
(Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008).
The model was fitted using the restricted maximum
likelihood estimation (REML) for the continuous variable
(RT). F-test denominator degrees of freedom were estimated
using the Kenward-Roger’s degrees of freedom adjustment
to reduce the chances of Type I error (Littell, Stroup, &
Freund, 2002). Orientation was marginally significant, F(1,
705) = 3.40, p = .06, with those pairs in an iconic orientation
being processed faster than those pairs in a reverse iconic
orientation. These findings suggest that an embodied
cognition account could explain response times such that
when items are in an expected iconic orientation, they are
processed faster than when they are in an unexpected iconic
orientation. These findings for lexical items indicate that
subjects rely on perceptual information when processing
these words.
Importantly, statistical linguistic frequencies also
explained RTs to lexical items, F(1, 795) = 5.63, p = .02,
with higher frequencies yielding lower RTs. These findings
replicate previous embodied cognition research (Louwerse,
2008; Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010), indicating that subjects
are relying on both perceptual and linguistic information
during language processing. No interactions were found.
See Figure 1.
Differences in RTs to iconic and reverse-iconic word
pairs can be further accounted for by language in that, in the
Web 1T 5-gram corpus (Brants & Franz, 2006), iconic word
pairs are more frequent than reverse iconic word pairs
(Louwerse, 2008). These findings indicate that these iconic
(and reverse-iconic) relations are indeed encoded in

Lexical Items
In order to determine first whether participants performed
the task as expected, we first analyzed the effect of semantic
relatedness as measured by LSA. Indeed, semantically
related lexical items were processed faster when they were
related than when they were unrelated, F(1, 5351) = 6.65, p
< .01.
However the primary objective with using lexical items
was to demonstrate that iconic presentation of lexical pairs

2407

language, such that iconic relations are more frequent, and
easier to process.
Grammatical Items
The language statistics (i.e., statistical linguistic
frequencies) findings for the lexical items, however, might
in fact have to be attributed to perceptual simulation,
because language encodes perceptual information. The
question is whether a statistical linguistic frequency effect
can be found for word pairs that cannot be perceptually
simulated.
In order to isolate and examine the effects of language, a
mixed-effect regression analysis was conducted on RTs to
grammatical items with the bigram frequency as a fixed
factor and participants and items as random factors (Baayen
et al., 2008). For these non-perceptual grammatical words,
the statistical linguistic frequencies again explained RTs,
F(1, 1528) = 5.69, p = .02, with ordered pairs with higher
frequencies yielding lower RTs (see Figure 2). In other
words, the frequency of two grammatical words in a given
(frequent) order was processed faster than the same two
words in the reverse order. These findings demonstrate that
statistical linguistic frequencies can account for RTs that
cannot be explained by embodied perceptual account alone.

perceptual context around them. Results showed the pattern
of an iconicity effect (i.e., iconic items were processed
faster than reverse-iconic items). Statistical linguistic
frequencies explained RTs as well, with higher frequencies
yielding lower RTs. Importantly, the same effect was
obtained for those words pairs for which a perceptual
explanation does not exist: grammatical words.
The findings of the current experiment support the
Symbol Interdependency Hypothesis which states that
language encodes perceptual information, such as their
usual orientation or position, and that statistical linguistic
frequencies explain language processing. In other words,
linguistic information, such as statistical frequency, does not
only refer back to those relevant encoded perceptual
experiences, but in some cases is the driving factor in and of
itself for how we encode language. Grammatical items
provide evidence for linguistic processing that is distinct
and distinguishable from perceptual simulation. At the same
time, as meaningful stimuli are explained by both perceptual
and linguistic factors, it seems likely that language statistics
cannot account for these findings alone either. Rather, to
explain language processing, both language statistics and
perceptual simulation work together.

References

General Discussion
In the current study, our objective was to address the claim
that because language encodes perceptual simulation,
evidence for language statistics might actually just be
evidence for perceptual simulation. In one experiment, we
asked subjects to make semantic judgments about word
pairs presented vertically on a screen. We included both
perceptual word pairs (sky – ground) and non-perceptual (a
– the) grammatical word pairs. By including items that are
devoid of perceptual information (grammatical words) we
determined that in fact language statistics are not simply
further evidence supporting perceptual information, as
language statistics explain RTs to grammatical word pairs
alone, just as these same language statistics explain RTs to
iconic and reverse iconic word pairs that are grounded in the

Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390–412.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–660.
Barsalou, L. W., Santos, A., Simmons, W. K., & Wilson, C.
D. (2008). Language and simulation in conceptual
processing. In M. De Vega, A. M. Glenberg & A. C.
Graesser (Eds.), Symbols, embodiment, and meaning (pp.
245–283). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Brants, T., & Franz, A. (2006). Web 1T 5-gram Version 1.
Philadelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33,
497-505.
Finch, S., & Chater, N. (1992). Bootstrapping syntactic
categories using statistical methods. Background and
experiments in machine learning of natural language,
229, 235.
Fodor, J. (1975). The language of thought. New York:
Crowell.
Gilhooly, K. J., & Logie, R. H. (1980). Age-of-acquisition,
imagery, concreteness, familiarity, and ambiguity
measures for 1,944 words. Behavior Research Methods,
12, 395–427.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 20, 1–55.

2408

Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in human
motor and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 301–307.
Hutchinson, S., & Louwerse, M. M. (2012). The upbeat of
language: Linguistic context and embodiment predict
processing of valence words. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, &
R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 17091714). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Landauer, T., McNamara, D., Dennis, S., & Kintsch, W.
(2007). LSA and meaning: In theory and application.
Handbook of latent semantic analysis. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Littell, R. C., Stroup, W. W., & Freund, R. J. (2002). SAS
for linear models. Cary, NC: SAS Publishing.
Louwerse, M. M. (2007). Symbolic or embodied
representations: A case for symbol interdependency. In T.
Landauer, W. Kintsch, S. Dennis, & D. S. McNamara
(Eds.), Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis (pp. 102–
120). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Louwerse, M. M. (2008). Embodied relations are encoded in
language. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 838–844.
Louwerse, M. M. (2010). Symbol interdependency in
symbolic and embodied cognition. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3, 273–302.
Louwerse, M. M., & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
Linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science, 35, 381–398.
Louwerse, M. M., Hutchinson, S., Tillman, R., & Recchia,
G. (2014). Effect size matters: The role of language
statistics and perceptual simulation in conceptual
processing. Language, Cognition, and Neuroscience.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2014.981552
Louwerse, M. M., & Hutchinson, S. (2012). Neurological
Evidence Linguistic Processes Precede Perceptual
Simulation in Conceptual Processing. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3, 385.
Louwerse, M. M., & Jeuniaux, P. (2010). The linguistic and
embodied nature of conceptual processing. Cognition,
114, 96–104.
Meier, B. P., & Robinson, M. D. (2001). Why the sunny
side is up: Automatic inferences about stimulus valence
based on vertical position. Psychological Science, 15,
243–247.
Paivio, A., Yuille, J. C., & Madigan, S. A. (1968).
Concreteness, imagery, and meaningfulness values for
925 nouns. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 76, 1–
25.
Pecher, D., van Dantzig, S., Boot, I., Zanolie, K., & Huber,
D. E. (2010). Congruency between word position and
meaning is caused by task Induced spatial attention.
Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 1–8.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169–192.
Schubert, T. W. (2005). Your highness: Vertical positions as
perceptual symbols of power. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 89, 1–21.

Semin, G. R., & Smith, E. R. (Eds.). (2008). Embodied
grounding:
Social,
cognitive,
affective,
and
neuroscientific approaches. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Šetić, M., & Domijan, D. (2007). The influence of vertical
spatial orientation on property verification. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 22, 297–312.
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153–156.
Toglia, M. P., & Battig, W. F. (1978). Handbook of
semantic word norms. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Van Dantzig, S., Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Barsalou, L.
W. (2008). Perceptual processing affects conceptual
processing. Cognitive Science, 32, 579–590.
Zwaan, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2003). Spatial iconicity
affects semantic relatedness judgments. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 10, 954–958.

2409

