How do different training tasks modulate our perception and hemispheric
lateralization in the development of perceptual expertise?
Ricky V. Tso (richie13@hku.hk)
Terry K. Au (terryau@hku.hk)
Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)

Department of Psychology, Jockey Club Tower, Centennial Campus,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
Abstract
Holistic processing (HP) and hemispheric lateralization are
both expertise markers of object recognition. For example,
expertise in face and sub-ordinate object perception is shown
to be associated with HP and stronger right hemispheric
lateralization. However, HP is modulated by experiences of
selective attention to parts such as writing experiences of
Chinese characters (Tso, Au, & Hsiao, 2014) and drawing
experiences of faces (Zhou et al., 2011). Meanwhile,
hemispheric lateralization is associated with the decoding
strategy employed in object recognition, such as left
hemispheric lateralization for reading alphabetic scripts and
right hemispheric lateralization for reading logographic
scripts. This study aims at training participants to recognize
the same sets of artificially-created scripts using either wholeword (Logographic) or grapheme-to-phoneme (Alphabetic)
approaches. We found that both approaches induced strong
HP, though the alphabetic approach induced stronger left
hemisphere advantage than the logographic approach. This
training study demonstrates that HP and hemispheric
lateralization are separate processes that are associated with
different perceptual mechanisms.
Keywords: Perceptual expertise, holistic
hemispheric asymmetry, reading, writing,

processing,

Background
The concept of holistic processing (HP) is derived from
Gestalt psychology, which refers to the tendency to integrate
separate features of an object and perceive them as a single
unit that is qualitatively different from the sum of its parts
(Köhler, 1929). HP is a perceptual marker of visual
expertise in subordinate-level object recognition. It is a
perceptual phenomenon commonly observed in face
perception in which all facial parts are integrated and
viewed as a whole (Bukach et al., 2006; though it was
suggested to be an expertise marker limited to face
recognition, c.f. Mckone, Kanwisher, & Duchaine). For
example, training participants to recognize novel artificial
symmetric objects (“Greebles”), Gauthier and colleagues
(1998) found a positive correlation between HP and
expertise
in
within-category
object
recognition.
Consistently, Wong, Palmeri and Gauthier (2009) showed
that participants had an increase in HP when trained to
individualize an artificial object type (“Ziggerins”).
To demonstrate HP for faces, the composite face illusion
can be induced with the composite paradigm: when the
bottom halves of two faces are from different faces, the two

identical top halves of the faces are judged as different
(Rossion, 2013 for a review). This illusion suggests an
obligatory attention to all facial parts and results in failure
of selectively attending to parts (Richler, Wong, & Gauthier,
2011). The composite paradigm demonstrates one type of
configural processing according to Maurer et al. (2002; or
processing objects as a Gestalt, Pomerantz & Portillo,
2011). Using the complete composite paradigm, Tso, Au,
and Hsiao (2014) revealed an inverted U-shape pattern in
HP in learning to read Chinese characters: they showed that
compared with novice, expert readers with limited writing
experiences showed increased HP, while expert readers with
writing experiences showed a reduced holistic effect. This
difference in HP between Chinese readers with and without
writing experiences could mainly be explained by writing
performance, given that reading performance variables had
been statistically controlled. These findings hint at an
increase in HP of Chinese character recognition at the initial
stages of learning, with subsequent writing experiences
reducing the HP. Consistently, artists with face-drawing
experiences also had reduced holistic face processing
compared with ordinary people (Zhou et al., 2012). These
effects thus suggest that HP is modulated by
drawing/writing experiences in which local components are
selectively attended.
Hemispheric asymmetry may be another expertise marker
for object recognition. Neuroimaging studies generally
showed stronger activation in the right occipitotemporal
area for face recognition (Rossion, Hanseeuw, & Dricot,
2012). Complementing this finding, Gauthier and colleagues
(1998) found that as participants were trained to
individualize Greebles, they showed stronger activation in
the right occipitotemporal regions (fusiform face areas).
EEG/ERP studies also showed reliable hemispheric
asymmetries of visual expertise in object perception such as
words/characters (see Hsiao, Shillcock, & Lee, 2007) and
faces, particularly in the ERP components N170 (e.g.,
Maurer et al., 2005; Scott & Nelson, 2007). While
alphabetic word recognition was shown to be more leftlateralized, the Chinese language—a logographic script—
was found to induce either a strong bilateral or rightlateralized activation in the brain (Tan et al, 2001; Hsiao,
Shillcock, & Lee, 2007). The above neuroimaging findings
are consistent with behavioural data of a left visual field
(LVF) (i.e., right hemisphere, RH) advantage in recognizing

1991

Chinese characters and faces, and a right visual field (RVF)
(left hemisphere, LH) advantage for alphabetic word
recognition (Hsiao & Lam, 2013). Consistent with this
lateralization effect, in eye movement studies, viewers also
have a tendency to look at the left side of a face more often
than the right side when processing faces (Leonards &
Scott-Samuel, 2005; Mertens, Siegmund, & Crusser, 1993),
and the left side of a Chinese character more than the right
side when processing Chinese characters (Hsiao & Cottrell,
2009). Moreover, a LVF/RH advantage has been
consistently observed when processing upright faces (e.g.,
Hsiao & Liu, 2012; Leehey et al., 1978; Young, 1984) as
well as for Chinese characters (Tzeng et al., 1979; Cheng &
Yang, 1989). These effects all suggest the involvement of
the RH in face and character recognition (Hsiao, Shieh, &
Cottrell, 2008; Burt & Perrett, 1997). This difference
between alphabetic and logographic script processing
suggests that hemispheric lateralization may depend on the
decoding strategy employed in object recognition.
It remains unclear why Chinese character recognition
differs from the recognition of words in alphabetic
languages in terms of hemisphere lateralization particularly
in the visual system. One account is that this LH advantage
in alphabetic languages is due to the LH lateralization in
phonological processing (Rumsey et al., 1997), or more
specifically, the grapheme-to-phoneme mapping (i.e.
mapping each letter onto a sound) that is heavily involved in
alphabetic word decoding (Voyer, 1996; Maurer and
McCandliss, 2007). Though reading Chinese characters also
involves mapping each character to its pronunciation at the
syllable level, the grapheme-to-phoneme mapping
requirement is less pronounced in reading Chinese script
(Hsiao & Lam, 2013).
Indeed, fMRI studies showed that English readers recruit
brain areas different from those of Chinese readers during
reading processes (e.g., Perfetti et al., 2007), and that
dyslexia in an alphabetic language and in the Chinese script
are marked by different brain abnormalities (e.g. Siok et al.,
2005). Hsiao and Lam (2013) simulated this asymmetry by
applying a hemispheric processing model of face
recognition to visual word recognition; the model
implements a theory of hemispheric asymmetry in
perception that hypothesizes low spatial frequency biases in
the RH and high spatial frequency biases in the LH (Ivry &
Robertson, 1998). They found that the requirement to
decompose words into graphemes for grapheme-phoneme
mapping requires more high spatial frequency/LH
processing than logographic reading. They also found that
stronger left-lateralization correlates with increase lexical
visual similarity. This model provides a computational
explanation for the difference in lateralization between
English and Chinese orthographic processing.
An inverted U-shape development pattern in HP was
discovered for Chinese characters (Tso et al., 2014), but it
remains unclear for alphabetic languages. Since alphabetic
reading involves decomposing a word into graphemes
(Hsiao & Lam, 2013) for grapheme-phoneme mapping, this
decomposition may require more local attention to parts,
and thus may have similar effects as writing experience does

to reduce HP. However, prior studies of real life object
recognition relied on perception of objects with distinctive
shapes and features (e.g., English words of a linear shape in
contrast to Chinese characters of a square configuration),
which were confounding factors to drawing conclusions on
perceptual differences between the recognition of different
objects. Hence, this study aims at training participants to
recognize the same sets of artificially-created characters to
investigate the perceptual changes after learning the
characters. Participants learned the scripts using either
whole-word (logographic) or grapheme-to-phoneme
(alphabetic) approach. If perceptual and hemispheric
lateralization changes occur after the training, the effect
should mainly come from learning the decoding methods
(logographic vs. alphabetic). This is the first of similar
training studies to investigate HP and its association with
hemispheric lateralization of reading alphabetic and
logographic language script.

Methods
Materials
Artificial Korean-like Characters A total of 30 components
were created, all of which were used to make 80 Artificial
Korean-like Characters (AKC). The AKCs were of a topbottom configuration with two top components and one
bottom component in each character—this arrangement
simulated the top-heavy configuration of faces. In the
Alphabetic condition, each component in an AKC
corresponded to a phoneme. Each AKC mapped onto a
syllable with its combination of components following a
consonant-vowel-consonant (CVC) phonological rule. In the
Logographic condition, each AKC was randomly assigned a
syllable pronunciation that appeared in the Alphabetic
condition. If a component appeared in one position, it would
not appear in other positions in an AKC (i.e., the
components in the AKCs were position-specific; see Fig. 1).

a
b
Fig. 1 Examples of (a) AKC components and (b) an
AKC

Participants
6 Cantonese-speaking Chinese participants aged 18 to 23
from the University of Hong Kong were recruited. All
participants had no prior knowledge to Korean hanguls.
They were right-handed according to the Edinburgh
Handedness Inventory with normal or corrected to normal
vision. Half of them were assigned to the logographic
condition while half of them were assigned to the alphabetic
condition.

Procedures
Training Phase Each participant learned all 80 AKCs
during 3 learning sessions in 3 consecutive days. Each

1992

learning session consisted of two blocks with 40 AKCs
learned in each block. Two learning blocks in each learning
session allowed participants to be exposed to all 80 AKCs
per day.
3 Participants were randomly assigned to the Logographic
and 3 to the Alphabetic conditions. In the logographic
condition, each AKC was shown as a whole character for
four times in each trial, accompanying a pronunciation for
that specific AKC in each display on the computer screen.
The first three screens were displayed for 500ms and the last
display in each trial stayed on the screen for the participants
to familiarize with for 5 seconds until the start of the next
trial for the next AKC.
In the alphabetic condition, each AKC was also shown as
a whole character for four times in each trial. A different
component was highlighted in each of the first 3 displays,
accompanied by the pronunciation of the component in each
display, for 500ms. The last display of the AKC is
accompanied by the pronunciation of the whole AKC and
stayed on the screen for the participants to familiarize with
for 5 seconds until the start of the next trial for the next
AKC.
Forced-Choice Quiz. To test for learning progress, after
each learning session, participants completed a ForcedChoice Quiz. In each trial, two AKCs were displayed on the
screen accompanied by a syllable sound—the sound
matched one of the AKCs. Participants chose the AKC that
matched the sound by pressing the corresponding buttons on
a response box. There were a total number of 160 trials with
each AKC-sound pair appearing twice. A feedback on the
correctness with the accumulated percentage of correct
responses was given immediately after making a judgment
before the start of the next trial.
Pretest and Post-test 1) Complete Composite Task: To
measure HP of AKCs, procedures were adopted from Tso et
al. (2014). In each trial, we presented participants with two
AKCs and instructed them to attend to only half (either top
or bottom) of each AKC and judge whether they were the
same or different. In each of the four conditions—same in
congruent trials, different in congruent trials, same in
incongruent trials, and different in incongruent trials—
twenty pairs were presented. We adopted the complete
composite paradigm so that in congruent trials, both
attended and irrelevant halves corresponded to the same
response while in incongruent trials, the attended and
irrelevant halves corresponded to different responses
(Gauthier & Bukach, 2007). The performance difference
between the congruent and incongruent trials measured HP,
reflecting the extent of interference of the irrelevant parts on
the attended parts. This paradigm reduces the influence of
response biases in assessing the HP effect, in contrast to the
partial composite design,in which the irrelevant halves are
always different (Richler, Cheung, & Gauthier, 2011; see
Fig. 2a)
Each trial started with a 1,000 ms of central fixation. A
pair of AKCs was then displayed simultaneously, with one
above and one below the initial fixation point.

During the 500 ms presentation time, participants looked
at each AKC once and responded as quickly and accurately
as possible by pressing corresponding buttons to judge if the
character parts were the same or different. There were 2
blocks; participants were instructed to either attend to the
top halves or the bottom halves of each AKC pairs in each
block. We measured the response time difference between
incongruent trials and congruent trials (i.e., Holistic RT); a
stronger HP effect is marked by a more positive value (Fig.
2b).

Fig. 2. (a) Illustration of stimulus pairs in the
complete composite paradigm; the attended
components are circled in red. (b) Trial sequences.
2) Divided Visual Field Sequential Matching Task: Each
trial started with a 500 ms fixation. Then participants were
presented with an AKC briefly for 150 ms at the center. The
screen then turn blank for another 400 ms until a second
AKC was presented either in the participant’s left visual
field or right visual field, at 1.5° of visual angle away from
the center (with each stimuli subtending a visual angle of
1.5°). Participants judged whether the two stimuli were the
same or different by pressing a button on the response box.
The stimuli presented were the AKCs that appeared in the
training sessions. There were a total of 160 trials, half of
which the pairs of AKCs were different. The response time
was recorded for the judgment of each stimulus. A faster
response time for characters presenting in the left visual
field than the right visual field indicates a right-hemisphere
advantage, and vice versa for a left hemisphere advantage
(See Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. The test sequence in the Divided Visual Field
Sequential Matching Task
Post-test only 1) Forced-Choice Quiz. To test for
recognition accuracy after training, participants completed a
Forced-Choice Quiz identical to the one completed after
each training session. No feedbacks were given.
2) Lexical decision task. After a 500 ms fixation,
participants were presented with an AKC and judged

1993

whether it was a valid character or not by pressing buttons.
We used 40 AKC appeared in the training sessions (real
AKCs), 40 AKC consisted of learned components appearing
at correct locations in the AKC, but of a novel combination
(Pseudo-AKCs), and 40 AKC consisted of components
appearing at locations that had not appeared in AKCs in the
training sessions (Non-AKCs). This task is to test for
participants’ orthographic awareness: the more participants
judged ‘yes’ for Pseudo-AKCs compared with non-AKCs,
the stronger the awareness of the orthographic structures of
the AKCs.

between visual field and condition, F(1, 4) = 26.729, p =
.007. Post-hoc pair-wise comparisons showed a right visual
field advantage in the alphabetic condition in post-test, t(2)
= 5.747, p = .029, while no significant difference in
response time between the left and right visual fields was
found in the logographic condition, t(2) = .938, p = .447
(See Fig. 5).

Results
Holistic Processing
Repeated-measures ANOVA was used to investigate HP
effects measured in the Complete Composite Task
(congruency: congruent vs. incongruent x condition:
Logographic vs. Alphabetic). For holistic RT in the pretest,
there was no main effect of congruency, F(1, 4) = 2.359, p =
.199, no main effect of condition, F(1, 4) = .646, p = .466,
and no interaction between congruency and condition, F(1,
4) = .562, p = .495. For holistic RT in the post-test, there
was a main effect of congruency, F(1, 4) = 20.87, p = .01,
but no main effect of condition, F(1, 4) = .090, p = .779, and
no interaction between congruency and condition, F(1, 4) =
.175, p = .697. Post-hoc pair-wise comparison showed that
participants responded significantly more slowly in
incongruent trials (M = 464.6ms) than in congruent trials (M
= 426.9ms) in the post-test, t(5) = 4.999, p = .004. This
suggested that participants in both the logographic and
alphabetic conditions perceived AKCs more holistically in
the post-test compared with the pretest (See Fig. 4).

Fig.5. Response time LVF and RVF trials of the
Divided Visual Field Sequential Matching Task in
Pretest (left) and Post-test (right; *p < .05).

Naming Accuracy and Orthographic Awareness
Participants in both the alphabetic and logographic
condition had an AKC naming accuracy over 80%, though
the accuracy was marginally higher in the alphabetic than in
the logographic condition, t(5) = 2.667, p = .056.
In the lexical decision task, Repeated-measures ANOVA
(character type: real vs pseudo vs non-AKCs x condition:
logographic vs alphabetic) revealed a significant main effect
in character type, F(2, 5) = 236, p = .000086, but no main
effect was found in condition F(2, 5) = 1.195, p = .336, and
no interaction effect was found between character type and
condition, F(2, 5) = .015, p = .909.
Post-hoc pairwise t-tests showed that non-AKCs were
more likely rejected than real, t(5) = 17.53, p = .000011, and
pseudo-AKCs, t(5) = 14.60, p = .000027. Participants could
identify both real and pseudo-AKCS as valid AKCs with
similar accuracies, t(5) = 2.030, p = .098. This suggests that
participants in both logographic and alphabetic conditions
have similar orthographic awareness (See Fig. 6).

Fig.4. Response time in congruent and incongruent
trials of the HP task in Pretest (left) and Post-test
(right; **p < .05).

Hemispheric lateralization
Repeated-measures ANOVA was used to investigate
hemispheric lateralization measured in the Divided Visual
Field Sequential Matching Task (Visual field: left vs right x
condition: Logographic vs Alphabetic). In the pretest, no
main effect was observed for visual field F(1, 4) = .155, p =
.71, no main effect in condition, F(1, 4) = .161, p = .709,
nor an interaction effect between visual field and condition,
F(1, 4) = .114, p = .753. In the post-test, a significant main
effect was found in visual field, F(1, 4) = 16.398, p = .015,
while a marginal effect was found in condition, F(1,4) =
7.393, p = .053. There was a significant interaction effect

Fig.6. (a) Probability of acceptance of AKC as valid
in the Lexical Decision task, and (b) accuracy in the
AKC naming task (*p < .05).

Discussions
This paper investigated how different learning strategies
modulated two perceptual expertise effects: holistic

1994

processing (HP) and hemispheric lateralization. More
specifically, we examined how learning a set of artificially
created characters (the AKCs) with either a graphemephoneme (alphabetic) approach or a whole-word
(logographic) approach modulated these effects. Consistent
with the expertise hypothesis based on face/object
perception research, participants in the alphabetic and
logographic conditions perceived AKCs more holistically
after training. HP thus seems to be a consistent expertise
marker independent of the decoding strategies employed by
participants to recognize AKCs. This is consistent with Tso,
Au and Hsiao’s (2014) finding that HP is an immediate
perceptual expertise marker. Perhaps learning to recognize
words at the initial stage requires HP to process both
featural and configural information. The results of Tso et al.
(2014) suggest that perhaps HP will then decrease as
participants become experienced in AKCs, especially with
writing experience. The perceptual effect of writing AKCs
can be further investigated. Note, however, that learning to
read AKCs in the grapheme-phoneme approach led to a
marginally higher naming accuracy than in the whole word
approach. This effect is consistent with the beneficial effects
of orthographic transparency: regularity in orthographic
patterns facilitates learning of the script (Ellis et al., 2004).
Nevertheless, participants in both the Alphabetic and
Logographic conditions could identify real and pseudoAKCs as legitimate AKCs and rejected non-AKCs with
similar accuracy. This similarity in orthographic awareness
in participants under both conditions suggested a mental
categorical representation of AKCs despite learning under
different decoding strategies. The enhanced knowledge of
orthography in AKCs is analogous to the own-race
advantage in face perception. Since participants in both
Alphabetic and Logographic conditions showed similar HP
after training, perhaps the increase in HP is associated with
an enhanced categorical representation of visual objects.
This speculation is consistent with studies of face
processing showing that a stronger HP is associated with
own-race face recognition (Tanaka, Kiefer, Bukach, 2004).
Participants in the alphabetic condition showed an
increase in LH/RVF advantage after the training session,
while participants in the Logographic condition did not
show significant changes in the lateralization pattern.
Increase in HP in object recognition was suggested to
correlate with RH lateralization (Gauthier & Tarr, 2002).
However, although the Alphabetic approach increased HP, it
induced a LH lateralization—a stronger phonological
involvement in object recognition led to a stronger leftlateralization.
Thus, in contrast to a prior belief that HP and RH
lateralization are associated (Gauthier et al, 1998; Gauthier
et al, 1999), it seems that they may be two distinctive
processes involving different perceptual mechanisms: HP is
modulated by experiences in selectively attending to parts
and features while hemispheric asymmetry is associated
with the decoding strategy in object recognition. Through
computational modeling, Galmar and Hsiao (2013) showed
that when a face recognition task depended only on featural
information, HP and RH lateralization correlated negatively.

In contrast, when face recognition relied solely on
configural information, there was a positive correlation both
HP and RH lateralization. AKCs learned using the
alphabetic approach may depend more on featural
information than in the logographic approach due to the
requirement of letter identification. According to Galmar
and Hsiao (2013), this may lead to a negative correlation
between HP and RH lateralization, consistent with the
current finding that the alphabetic group showed increased
HP and a RVF/LH advantage. Similarly, Hsiao and Cottrell
(2009) showed that Chinese character expertise is associated
with reduced HP and increased left side bias/RH
lateralization; Tso et al. (2014) showed that writing
experience modulates HP effects but not left side bias/RH
lateralization. Together with these findings, our results
suggested that RH lateralization and HP are separate
processes that coincide with each other, as one becomes an
expert in the recognition of most object types such as faces
or Chinese characters.
This is the first training study to report on the changes in
both HP and hemispheric lateralization in learning to read
an artificial script under different decoding methods (i.e.,
logographic vs. alphabetic). The hemispheric lateralization
effect of learning scripts using a whole-word, logographic
approach is more bilateral, whereas learning a script using a
grapheme-to-phoneme correspondence approach induced a
stronger RVF advantage/LH lateralization. Nevertheless,
both learning approaches induced a similar level of HP
effects, suggesting that HP may be an initial expertise
marker for visual recognition at an early learning stage
regardless of the decoding method involved. This study
suggests that HP and RH lateralization are not always
associated. HP may be induced by a categorical
representation of objects and can be modulated by
sensorimotor experience/online attentional mechanisms,
while hemispheric lateralization may be related to
perceptual representations developed through experience
and thus can be modulated by the decoding method used for
recognition. This study offers a window onto how the nature
of learning experiences may modulate major markers of
expertise in complex object recognition.

Acknowledgement
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project code: HKU 745210H to J. Hsiao). We are
also grateful to Remy Schmitz, Aria Chen, Joey Ma,
Micaela Tang and Wendy Zhang for their input in the
experiment preparation.

References
Bukach, C.M., Gauthier, I., & Tarr, J.M. (2006). Beyond
faces and modularity: The power of an expertise
framework. T.I.C.S., 10, 156-166.
Burt, D. M., Perett, D. I. (1997). Perceptual asymmetries in
judgments of facial attractiveness, age, gender, speech
and expression. Neuropsychologia, 35, 685-693.
Ellis, N.C., Natume, M., Stavropoulou,K., Hoxhallari, L.,
van Daal, V.H.P., Polyzoe, N., Tsipa, M.-L., & Petalas,

1995

M. (2004). The effects of orthographic depth on learning
to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts.
Reading Research Quarterly, 39, 438–468.
Hsiao, J.H., & Cottrell, G. (2009). Not all visual expertise in
holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of Chinese
character recognition. Psychol. Sci., 20(4), 455-463.
Hsiao, J. H., & Lam, S. M. (2013). The modulation of visual
and task characteristics of a writing system on
hemispheric lateralization in visual word recognition - A
computational exploration. Cog. Sci., 37, 861-890.
Hsiao, J. H., Shieh, D., & Cottrell, G. W. (2008).
Convergence of the visual field split: hemispheric
modeling of face and object recognition. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 2298-2307.
Hsiao, J. H., Shillcock, R., & Lee, C. (2007). Neural
correlates of foveal splitting in reading: evidence from an
ERP study of Chinese character recognition.
Neuropsychologia, 45, 1280-1292.
Galmar, B., & Hsiao, J. H. (2013). Holistic processing is not
always a property of right hemisphere processingEvidence from computational modeling of face
recognition. In M., Lee, A., Hirose, Z.-G., Hou, & R. M.,
Kil (Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing.
Gauthier, I., & Bukach, C.M. (2007). Should we reject the
expertise hypothesis? Cognition, 103, 322-330.
Gauthier, I., Williams, P., Tarr, M.J., & Tanaka, J. (1998).
Training "Greeble" experts: Aframework for studying
expert object recognition processes. Vision Res., 38,
2401-2428.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt Psychology. New York:
Liveright.
Leehey, S., Carey, S., Diamond, R., & Cahn, A. (1978).
Upright and inverted faces: The right hemisphere knows
the difference. Cortex, 14, 411–419.
Leonards, U. & Scott-Samuel N.E. (2005). Idiosyncratic
initiation of saccadic faceexploration in humans. Vision
Research, 45, 2677-2684.
Maurer, U., Brandeis, D., & McCandliss, B. (2005). Fast,
visual specialization for reading in English revealed by
the topography of the N170 ERP response. Behavioral &
Brain Functions, 1(1), 13.
Maurer U., & McCandliss, D. (2007). The Development of
visual expertise for words: the contribution of
electrophysiology. In E.L. Grigorenke & A. Naples
(Eds.). Single-Word Reading: Cognitive, behavioral and
biological perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
McKone, E., Kanwisher, N., & Duchaine, B. C. (2007). Can
generic expertise explain special processing for faces?
T.I.C.S., 11, 8-15.
Mertens, I., Siegmund, H., & Grusser, O. J. (1993). Gaze
motor asymmetries in theperception of faces during a
memory task. Neuropsychologia, 31, 989-998.
Perfetti, C. A., Liu, Y., Fiez, J. Nelson, J., Bolger, D. J., &
Tan, L-H. (2007). Reading in two writing systems:
Accommodation and Assimilation in the brain’s reading
network. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 10(2),

131-146. Special issue on “Neurocognitive approaches to
bilingualism: Asian languages”, P. Li (Ed.).
Pomerantz, J. R., & Portillo, M. C. (2011). Grouping and
Emergent Features in Vision: Towards a theory of basic
Gestalts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 37, 1331–1349.
Rossion, B. (2013). The composite face illusion: a whole
window into our understanding of holistic face
perception. Visual Cognition, 21, 139-253.
Rossion, B., Hanseeuw, B., & Dricot, L. (2012). Defining
face perception areas in the human brain: A large scale
factorial fMRI face localizer analysis. Brain and
Cognition 79(2), 138–157.
Richler, J. J., Cheung, O. S., & Gauthier, I. (2011). Beliefs
alter holistic face processing ... if response bias is not
taken into account. Journal of Vision, 11(13):17, 1–13.
Richler, J. J., Wong, Y. K., & Gauthier, I. (2011).
Perceptual expertise as a shift from strategic interference
to automatic holistic processing. Curr Dir. Psychol. Sci.,
20(2), 129-134.
Rumsey, J. M., Horwitz, B., Donohue, B. C., Nace, K.,
Maisog, J. M., & Andreason, P. (1997). Phonological and
orthographic components of word recognition. A PETrCBF study. Brain, 120(5), 739-759.
Scott, L.S. & Nelson, C.A. (2006) Featural and Configural
Face Processing in Adults and Infants: A Behavioral and
Electrophysiological Investigation. Perception, 35(8),
1107-1128.
Siok, W. T., Perfetti, C. R., Jin, Z., & Tan, L. H. (2004).
Biological abnormality of impaired reading is constrained
by culture. Nature, 431, 71-76.
Tso, R. V. Y., Au, T. K., & Hsiao, J. H. (2014). Perceptual
expertise: Can sensorimotor experience change holistic
processing and left side bias? Psychol. Sci., 25(9), 17571767.
Tzeng, O. J. L., Hung, D. L., Cotton, B., & Wang, S. Y.
(1979). Visual lateralization effect in reading Chinese
characters. Nature (London), 282, 499-501.
Voyer, D. (1996). On the magnitude of laterality effects and
sex differences infunctional literalities. Laterality, 1, 5183.
Wong, A.C., Palmeri, T.J., & Gauthier, I. (2009).
Conditions for face-like expertise with objects: Becoming
a ziggerin expert-but which type? Psychol. Sci., 20, 11081117.
Yang, M.J., & Chen, C.M. (1999).Hemisphere differences
in accessing lexical knowledge of Chinese characters.
Laterality, 4, 149-166.
Young, A. W., Hellawell, D., & Hay, D. C. (1987).
Configurational information in face perception.
Perception, 16, 747–759.
Zhou, G., Cheng, Z., Zhang, X., Wong, A.C.-N. (2012).
Smaller holistic processing of faces associated with face
drawing experience. Psychon. B. Rev., 19(2), 157-162.

1996

