Hybrid-Logical Reasoning in the Smarties and Sally-Anne Tasks:
What Goes Wrong When Incorrect Responses are Given?
Torben Braüner (torben@ruc.dk)
Roskilde University, Denmark
Abstract

In a range of works Michiel van Lambalgen and co-authors
have given a detailed logical analysis (but not a full formalization) of the reasoning taking place in the Sally-Anne task
and other false-belief tasks in terms of non-monotonic closed
world reasoning as used in logic programming, see in particular the book (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008). The paper
(Arkoudas & Bringsjord, 2008) describes how the reasoning
in the Sally-Anne task has been implemented in an interactive theorem prover using axioms and proof-rules formulated
in a many-sorted first-order modal logic. The proof-rules employed in (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008) and (Arkoudas
& Bringsjord, 2008) do not explicitly formalize the perspective shift required to pass the Sally-Anne task.
In the papers (Braüner, 2014) and (Braüner, 2013) we gave
a logical analysis of the perspective shift required to give correct answers to the Sally-Anne task and another false-belief
task called the Smarties task, and we demonstrated that these
tasks can be fully formalized in a hybrid-logical natural deduction system originally introduced by Jerry Seligman in the
1990s. Based on the formalizations of (Braüner, 2014) and
(Braüner, 2013), in the present paper we give an analysis of
what goes wrong when incorrect answers are given. In the
following two sections we explain why a natural deduction
system for hybrid modal logic is appropriate to analyse the
reasoning in the Sally-Anne and Smarties tasks, reflecting the
shift between different perspectives.
Since this paper is a follow-up to (Braüner, 2014), but
space limitations only allows a brief recapitulation of the latter paper, the reader is advised to obtain a copy of that paper.

The present paper is a follow-up to the journal paper (Braüner,
2014) which in turn is a revised and extended version of the
conference paper (Braüner, 2013). These papers were concerned with formalizations of the reasoning when giving correct responses to the psychological tests called the Sally-Anne
task and the Smarties task, testing children’s capacity to ascribe false beliefs to others. In the present paper we give an
analysis of what goes wrong when incorrect answers are given.
Our analysis corroborates the claim that children under four
and autistic children have difficulties shifting to a perspective
different from their own.
Keywords: False-belief tasks; hybrid logic; natural deduction

Introduction
In the area of cognitive psychology there is a reasoning task
called the Sally-Anne task. The following is one version.
A child is shown a scene with two doll protagonists, Sally
and Anne, having respectively a basket and a box. Sally
first places a marble into her basket. Then Sally leaves
the scene, and in her absence, the marble is moved by
Anne and hidden in her box. Then Sally returns, and the
child is asked: “Where will Sally look for her marble?”
It is well-known from experiments that most children above
the age of four correctly respond where Sally must falsely
believe the marble to be (in the basket) whereas younger children respond where they know the marble to be (in the box).
For autistic children the cutoff age is higher than four years.
The Sally-Anne task is one out of a family of reasoning
tasks called false-belief tasks showing the same pattern, that
most children above four answer correctly, but autistic children have to be older. Many researchers in cognitive psychology have argued that there is a link between autism and a lack
of what is called theory of mind, which is a capacity to ascribe
mental states to oneself and to others, for example beliefs.
For a very general formulation of the theory of mind deficit
hypothesis of autism, see the book (Baron-Cohen, 1995).
Giving a correct answer to the Sally-Anne task involves a
shift of perspective to another person, namely Sally. You have
to put yourself in another person’s shoes, so to speak.1 Since
the capacity to take another perspective is a precondition for
figuring out the correct answer to the Sally-Anne task and
other false-belief tasks, the fact that autistic children have a
higher cutoff age is taken to support the claim that autists have
a limited or delayed theory of mind.

Hybrid modal logic
In the standard Kripke semantics for modal logic, the truthvalue of a formula is relative to points in a set, that is, a formula is evaluated “locally” at a point, where points usually
are taken to represent possible worlds, times, locations, persons, epistemic states, states in a computer, or something else.
Hybrid logics are extended modal logics where it is possible
to directly refer to such points in the logical object language,
whereby locality can be handled explicitly.
The most basic hybrid logic is obtained by extending ordinary modal logic with nominals, which are propositional
symbols of a new sort, each interpreted in a restricted way,
being true at exactly one point. Most hybrid logics involve
further additional machinery; here we shall consider a kind
of operator called satisfaction operators. The motivation for
adding satisfaction operators is to be able to formalize a statement being true at a particular time, location, or something
else. In general, if a is a nominal and φ is an arbitrary for-

1 This phrase might suggest that we are adopting what is known
as the simulation-theory view of theory of mind. This is a matter
of on-going consideration for us, but at the present stage we use this
terminology in a pre-theoretical sense, since it expresses an intuition
that we are interested in modelling in formal logic.

273

Figure 2: Formalization of the child’s correct response in the
Smarties task (both temporal and person shift versions)

Figure 1: Hybrid-logical rules
a

φ
@a φ

(@I)

@a φ

a

(@E)

[a]

φ

[@a Dp]
Dp

φ1 . . . φn

[φ1 ] . . . [φn ][a]
·
·
·
ψ
(Term)∗

[a]
·
·
·
ψ

[a]
@a Bp

@a Dp

(Name)†

ψ
ψ
∗ φ1 , . . . , φn , and ψ are all satisfaction statements and there
are no undischarged assumptions in the derivation of ψ besides the specified occurrences of φ1 , . . . , φn , and a.
† a does not occur in ψ or in any undischarged assumptions
other than the specified occurrences of a.

mula, then a new formula @a φ can be built, where @a is a
a satisfaction operator. The formula @a φ expresses that the
formula φ is true at one particular point, namely the point to
which the nominal a refers. See the book (Braüner, 2011) for
the formal syntax and semantics of hybrid logic.
When points in the Kripke semantics represent local perspectives (times or persons), hybrid logic can handle the different perspectives in the Sally-Anne and Smarties task.

Bp

@a Bp

(@E)

(P0)
(@I)

(Term)

world. The hypothetical reasoning is formalized by the subderivation delimited by the rule, and the hypothetical world is
the world referred to by the nominal discharged by the rule—
indicated by [a] in the (Term) rule. This nominal might be
called the point-of-view nominal. The (Term) rule captures
particularly well the perspective shift taking place when giving a correct answer to the Sally-Anne and Smarties tasks.

Correct response in the Smarties task
We start with a brief description of how the paper (Braüner,
2014) formalizes the correct reasoning in the Smarties task.
The Smarties task comes in two versions, namely a version
where there is a shift of perspective to an earlier time, and a
version where there is a shift of perspective to another person.
Here is the temporal version.
A child is shown a Smarties tube where unbeknownst to
the child the Smarties have been replaced by pencils.
The child is asked: “What do you think is inside the
tube?” The child answers “Smarties!” The tube is then
shown to contain pencils only. The child is then asked:
“Before this tube was opened, what did you think was
inside?”
First an informal analysis. Let us call the child Peter. Let a
be the time when Peter answers the first question, and t the
time where he answers the second one. To answer the second question, Peter imagines himself being at the earlier time
a where he was asked the first question. At that time he deduced that there were Smarties inside the tube from the fact
that it is a Smarties tube. Imagining being at the time a, Peter reasons that since he at that time deduced that there were
Smarties inside, he must also have come to believe that there
were Smarties inside. Therefore, at t he concludes that at the
earlier time a he believed that there were Smarties inside.
We now extend the language of hybrid logic with two
modal operators, D and B. We make use of the following
symbolizations
p There are Smarties inside the tube
D Peter deduces that ...
B Peter believes that ...
a The time where the first question is answered
and we take the principle
(P0)
Dφ → Bφ
as an axiom. This is principle (9.4) in (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008), page 251.

Seligman’s natural deduction system
Formal proofs built according to the rules of proof systems
can be used to represent (describe the structure of) mathematical arguments as well as arguments in everyday human
practice.
Natural deduction style proofs are meant to formalize the
way human beings actually reason, and there is even experimental support for natural deduction being the mechanism
underlying human deductive reasoning, (Rips, 2008). This is
the main claim of the “mental logic” school in the psychology
of reasoning (whose major competitor is the “mental models”
school, claiming that the mechanism underlying human reasoning is the construction of models).
In general, natural deduction systems have two different
kinds of rules for each connective; there are rules which introduce a connective and there are rules which eliminate a
connective. Natural deduction rules may discharge assumptions which is indicated by putting brackets [ . . . ] around the
assumptions in question.
Now, Seligman’s natural deduction system is obtained by
extending the standard natural deduction system for propositional logic with the rules in Figure 1 (we ignore modal operators since they are not relevant here). The system, which is a
modified version of the system originally introduced by Jerry
Seligman, is taken from Chapter 4 of (Braüner, 2011).
The rules (@I) and (@E) in Figure 1 are the introduction
and elimination rules for the satisfaction operator.
The rule (Term) in Figure 1 enables hypothetical reasoning
where reasoning is about what is the case at a specific possible world (time or person), possibly different from the actual

274

Figure 3: Formalization of the child’s correct response in the Sally-Anne task
[a] [@a S¬m(t0 )]
[a] [@a Sl(basket,t0 )]
Sl(basket,t0 )
Bl(basket,t0 )

(@E)

(P1)

S¬m(t0 )
B¬m(t0 )
¬Bm(t0 )

Bl(basket,t1 )
[a]
@a Sl(basket,t0 ) @a S¬m(t0 ) @a ¬Sm(t1 )

(@E)

(P1)

@a Bl(basket,t2 )

Then the shift of temporal perspective in the Smarties task
can be formalized very directly as the derivation in Figure 2,
where a is the point-of-view nominal, and where we have
used a rule-version of the principle (P0) above (more compact and more in the spirit of natural deduction). The premise
@a Dp says that Peter at the earlier time a deduced that there
were Smarties inside the tube, which he remembers at t.
We also take a look at the person version of the Smarties
task. The only difference between the two versions is the
second question where
“Before this tube was opened, what did you think was
inside?”
is replaced by
“If your mother comes into the room and we show this
tube to her, what will she think is inside?”
To give a correct answer to the latter of these two questions,
the child Peter imagines being the mother coming into the
room. Imagining being the mother, Peter reasons that the
mother must deduce that there are Smarties inside the tube
from the fact that it is a Smarties tube, and from that, she must
also come to believe that there are Smarties inside. Therefore,
Peter concludes that the mother would believe that there are
Smarties inside.
The derivation formalizing this argument is exactly the
same as in the temporal case, Figure 2, but some symbols
are interpreted differently, namely
D Deduces that ...
B Believes that ...
a The imagined mother
So now nominals refer to persons rather than times. Thus,
the premise @a Dp in the derivation in Figure 2 says that the
imagined mother deduces that there are Smarties inside the
tube, which the child doing the reasoning takes to be the case
since the mother is imagined to be present in the room.

¬Sm(t1 )

(P2)

Bl(basket,t2 )
@a Bl(basket,t2 )

[a] [@a ¬Sm(t1 )]

(D)

¬Bm(t1 )

(@E)

(P3)
(P2)

(@I)

(Term)

the scene, t1 is the time at which the marble is moved to the
box, and t2 is the time after Sally has returned when Peter answers the question. To answer the question, Peter imagines
himself being Sally, and he reasons as follows: At the time
t0 when Sally leaves, she believes that the marble is in the
basket since she sees it, and she sees no action to move it, so
when she is away at t1 , she also believes the marble is in the
basket. At t2 , after she has returned, she still believes that the
marble is in the basket since she has not seen Anne moving it
at the time t1 . Therefore, Peter concludes that Sally believes
that the marble is in the basket.
In our formalization we make use of the predicates l(i,t)
and m(t) as well as the modal operators S and B. The argument i in the predicate l(i,t) denotes a location, and the
argument t in l(i,t) and m(t) denotes a timepoint. We take
time to be discrete, and the successor of t is denoted t + 1.
l(i,t) The marble is at location i at time t
m(t) The marble is moved at time t
S
Sees that ...
B
Believes that ...
a
The person Sally
We also make use of the following four principles
(D)
Bφ → ¬B¬φ
(P1)
Sφ → Bφ
(P2)
Bl(i,t) ∧ ¬Bm(t) → Bl(i,t + 1)
(P3)
Bm(t) → Sm(t)
Principle (D) is a common modal axiom and it says that beliefs are consistent, that is, if something is believed, then
its negation is not also believed. Strictly speaking, we use
B¬φ → ¬Bφ which is equivalent to (D).
Principle (P1) formalizes how a belief in something may
be formed, namely by seeing it. This is principle (9.2) in the
book (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008), page 251.
Principle (P2) is remiscent of principle (9.11) in (Stenning
& van Lambalgen, 2008), page 253, and axiom [A5 ] in
(Arkoudas & Bringsjord, 2008), page 20. Principle (P2) formalizes a “principle of inertia” saying that a belief in the predicate l being true is preserved over time, unless it is believed
that an action has taken place causing the predicate to be false.
Principle (P3) encodes the information that seeing the marble being moved is the only way a belief that the marble is

Correct response in the Sally-Anne task
In this section we give a brief description of how (Braüner,
2014) formalizes the correct reasoning in the Sally-Anne task.
Let us call the child Peter again. We shall consider three successive times t0 ,t1 ,t2 where t0 is the time at which Sally leaves

275

being moved can be acquired.
The shift of person perspective in the Sally-Anne task
can now be formalized as the derivation in Figure 3, where
a is the point-of-view nominal. The first two premises
@a Sl(basket,t0 ) and @a S¬m(t0 ) say that Sally at the earlier
time t0 saw that the marble was in the basket and that no action was taken to move it, which the child Peter remembers.
The third premise, @a ¬Sm(t1 ), says that Sally did not see the
marble being moved at the time t1 , this being the case since
she was absent, which Peter remembers.

Figure 4: Formalization of the child’s reasoning in the Smarties task (what is the case from its own perspective)
Sq
b

(@E)

(P1)
(@I)

follows, we will analyze this pattern in the incorrect answers.
To this end we let the propositional symbol q symbolize “The
tube contains pencils”. Then the incorrect answers can be
summed up as follows.

The derivations given in Figure 2 and Figure 3 are formalizations of the reasoning taking place when correct answers
are given to the Smarties and Sally-Anne tasks. The correct
responses are summed up below in Table 1.
Correct response
At the time of question one
Peter believes that
the tube contains Smarties
The imagined mother
believes that
the tube contains Smarties
Sally believes that
the marble is in the basket
at the time t2

Bq
@b Bq

What goes wrong when incorrect responses are
given?

Table 1
Smarties
(temporal
version)
Smarties
(person
version)
Sally-Anne

@b Sq

b

Table 2
Smarties
(temporal
version)
Smarties
(person
version)
Sally-Anne

Formula
@a Bp

@a Bp

@a Bl(basket,t2 )

Incorrect response
At the time of question one
Peter believes that
the tube contains pencils
The imagined mother
believes that
the tube contains pencils
Sally believes that
the marble is in the box
at the time t2

Formula
@a Bq

@a Bq

@a Bl(box,t2 )

The three formulas in Table 2 are false in the scenarios described by the reasoning tasks, but here is an important observation: If we replace the perspective a in the formulas above
by the childs own perspective b, then we obtain true formulas,
namely the following.

As can be seen from Figure 2 and Figure 3, the formulas in
Table 1 are derived via a perspective shift to the point-of-view
nominal a, standing for respectively the time where the first
question is answered, the imagined mother, and the doll Sally.
Let b be the childs own perspective2 , that is, in the temporal
version of the Smarties task, b is the time where the second
question is answered, and in person version of the Smarties
task, and in the Sally-Anne task as well, b is the person Peter.
So to derive the correct answers in Figure 2 and Figure 3,
there is a shift of perspective from b to a, and then back to b.
Now, the derivations of the correct answers in Figure 2 and
Figure 3 do not explicitly tell what goes wrong when incorrect answers are given. But a child either answers correctly, or
tends to give a specific incorrect answer: In case of the Smarties task, the child answers “Pencils”, that is, the real content
of the tube, not “Cereals” or something else irrelevant. Similarly, in the Sally-Anne task, the child reports the real location
of the marble. Thus, there is a systematic tendency to report
one’s own belief, rather than that of another person—a phenomenon which we shall discuss in the next section. In what

Table 3
Smarties
(temporal
version)
Smarties
(person
version)
Sally-Anne

True proposition
At the time of question two
Peter believes that
the tube contains pencils
Peter
believes that
the tube contains pencils
Peter believes that
the marble is in the box
at the time t2

Formula
@b Bq

@b Bq

@b Bl(box,t2 )

Below we demonstrate that the formulas @b Bq and
@b Bl(box,t2 ) in Table 3 are true by giving derivations in
Seligman’s system extended with the principles introduced
in the previous section.
The formula @b Bq in Table 3 can be derived from b and
@b Sq by the very simple derivation in Figure 4, where the
nominal b is true since it is the perspective of the child who
is doing the reasoning, and @b Sq is obviously true in both
the temporal and the person version, in both cases since the
child when the second question is answered sees that there
are pencils inside the tube. The formula @b Bl(box,t2 ) in Table 3 can be derived from b together with @b Sl(box,t1 ) and
@b S¬m(t1 ) by the derivation in Figure 5. Again, the nominal
b is true since it stands for the child Peter who happens to
be the one doing the reasoning. The formulas @b Sl(box,t1 )

2 Note that b is not indicated in the formal derivations in Figure 2
and Figure 3, like it is not part of a formal mathematical proof that it
has been carried out by a certain mathematician. The formal derivation itself does not care whether it is a certain human that carries out
the reasoning, or the reasoning takes place in a computer, or in some
other medium. Note also that b is actually indicated in Figure 4 and
Figure 5, but this is because the latter derivations are about what is
the case from the perspective b, which happens to be the perspective
of the child carrying out the reasoning.

276

of reality, rather than what others might believe of reality, resembles the bias in adults’ mindreading judgements which by
some authors is called a realist bias, cf. (Mitchell, Robinson,
Isaacs, & Nye, 1996), or curse of knowledge, cf. (Birch &
Bloom, 2007). In the present setting, this realist bias, or curse
of knowledge, amounts to reporting what is the case from the
subject’s own perspective, rather than what can be inferred to
be the case from someone else’s perspective.
The paper (Birch & Bloom, 2007) reports a study where the
Sally-Anne scenario is extended such there are four containers instead of just two, and rather than judging where Sally
would look, subjects rated the probability that she would look
in each of the four containers. On some trials, the subjects
knew where the marble really was, like in the original version
of the Sally-Anne task where the subjects knew that the marble was in the box, but on other trials they only knew that it
was in another container than initially. It turned out that when
the subjects knew the real location of the marble, they judged
it more likely that Sally would search in the real location,
compared to when they did not know the real location.
The point above is that the subject’s own knowledge about
the real location is irrelevant—what matters is Sally’s knowledge, which is the same in either case. In particular, note that
whether or not the subject knows the actual location of the
marble, this piece of information is obviously not included in
Sally’s knowledge, which is in line with the fact that the actual location of the marble, namely the box, is not even mentioned in the formalization of the correct response in Figure 3.
Similarly, in the Smarties task, information about the actual
content of the tube, namely pencils, is not involved in drawing the correct conclusion, that is, the propositional symbol q
symbolizing “The tube contains pencils” is not mentioned in
the formalization of the correct response in Figure 2.
The paper (Birch & Bloom, 2007) concerns adult subjects,
but in the paper it is suggested that the difficulty children
under four have on false-belief tasks should partially be accounted for in terms of an exaggerated curse-of-knowledge
bias—not only in terms of conceptual limitations, that is, not
only in terms of a limited concept of belief, or more generally, a limited concept of mental state, which is a common
explanation in the literature.
The authors of (Birch & Bloom, 2007) in their earlier paper
(Birch & Bloom, 2003) reported experiments involving three
to five year old children, where it was demonstrated that three
to four year old children were particularly susceptible to the
curse-of-knowledge bias in comparison to five year old children. With reference to these earlier experiments, as well as
other works, the paper (Birch & Bloom, 2007) calls for further experiments, where variants of false-belief tasks are used
to clarify the role of the curse-of-knowledge bias in children’s
mental-state reasoning.

Figure 5: Formalization of the child’s reasoning in the SallyAnne task (what is the case from its own perspective)
b
b

@b Sl(box,t1 )
Sl(box,t1 )
Bl(box,t1 )

S¬m(t1 )

(@E)

B¬m(t1 )

(P1)
Bl(box,t2 )

b

@b Bl(box,t2 )

@b S¬m(t1 )

¬Bm(t1 )

(@E)

(P1)
(D)
(P2)

(@I)

and @b S¬m(t1 ) say that Peter at the earlier time t1 saw that
the marble was in the box and that no action was taken to
move it, which Peter remembers. From these formulas, the
formula @b Bl(box,t2 ) is derived using the principle of inertia
(P1) and other principles. The principle of inertia is needed
since Peter cannot see the content of the box at t2 , but at t1 he
came to believe that the marble was in the box, and this belief
is preserved over time to t2 , since he does not believe that an
action was taken to move the marble.
Note that the rule (Term) is not used in the derivations in
Figure 4 and Figure 5, and since b is the childs own perspective, there is no shift to a different perspective taking place in
these derivations.
The formulas considered in the three tables above can be
classified along the following two dimensions.
Table 4

Involves the
false statements
p and
l(basket,t2 )
Involves the
true statements
q and
l(box,t2 )

The second
perspective
(the nominal a)
Correct responses
cf. Table 1
@a Bp and
@a Bl(basket,t2 )
Incorrect responses
cf. Table 2
@a Bq and
@a Bl(box,t2 )

The childs own
perspective
(the nominal b)

True statements
cf. Table 3
@b Bq and
@b Bl(box,t2 )

The last table, Table 4, shows a pattern: The child giving
an incorrect response (lower left quarter) reports what is believed to be the case from the childs own perspective (lower
right quarter), and the child does not perform the shift of perspective required to be able to report what is believed to be the
case from the second perspective (upper left quarter). Thus,
this “pattern of failure” gives a formal corroboration of the
claim that children under four and autistic children have difficulties shifting to a perspective different from their own.

Relation to realist bias
In Table 2, and the lower left quarter of Table 4, we summed
up the incorrect responses to the Smarties and Sally-Anne
tasks, where the subjects report their own belief, rather than
that of another person, as required to give a correct answer.
This systematic tendency to report what is believed to be true

Where is the origin of mistakes?
As described earlier, the child giving an incorrect answer does
not perform the shift of perspective required to figure out the

277

correct answer (upper left quarter in Table 4), but instead reports what is believed to be the case from the childs own perspective (lower right quarter in Table 4), namely the formulas
@b Bq and @b Bl(box,t2 ). But as shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5, these two formulas are actually derivable using hybridlogical rules, thus, the incorrect answers can be derived using
logically correct rules, that is, rules living up to a normative
standard of logical correctness. This suggests that the origin
of the mistakes lies in a wrong interpretation of the task, and
not in the underlying logic3 .
This can be analyzed in terms of the two stages in reasoning emphasized in (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008),
namely reasoning to and reasoning from an interpretation:
First one fixes the domain of discourse and the interpretation
of logical and non-logical expressions, and only after this has
been achieved, a set of normatively correct formal rules can
be determined, guiding one’s reasoning. In terms of this distinction, the origin of the mistakes made by young children
and autists seems to be located in the first stage, that is, in the
reasoning to an interpretation of the task, rather than in the
second stage.
According to (Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008), page 25,
the technical part of reasoning to an interpretation involves
i) fixing a formal language,
ii) fixing a semantics for the formal language, and
iii) fixing a definition of valid arguments in the language.
The semantics includes a notion of a mathematical representation of the domain, what we call a model, together with a
definition of satisfaction, connecting the formal language to
the mathematical models. In these technical terms, it seems
plausible that the origin of the mistakes made by young children and autists lies in fixing a semantics, more specifically
a Kripke model including only one perspective, namely the
subject’s own perspective.

in false-belief reasoning using the so-called ACT-R cognitive
architecture.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to the anonymous reviewers for constructive feedback. The author acknowledges the funding received from
The Velux Foundation for the project Hybrid-Logical Proofs
at Work in Cognitive Psychology (VELUX 33305).

References
Arkoudas, K., & Bringsjord, S. (2008). Toward formalizing common-sense psychology: An analysis of the falsebelief task. In T.-B. Ho & Z.-H. Zhou (Eds.), PRICAI
2008: Trends in artificial intelligence (Vol. 5351, pp. 17–
29). Springer-Verlag.
Arslan, B., Taatgen, N., & Verbrugge, R. (2013). Modeling
developmental transitions in reasoning about false beliefs
of others. In Proceedings of the 12th international conference on cognitive modeling (pp. 77–82). Ottawa: Carleton
University.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism
and theory of mind. MIT Press.
Birch, S., & Bloom, P. (2003). Children are cursed: An
asymmetric bias in mental state attribution. Psychological
Science, 14, 283–286.
Birch, S., & Bloom, P. (2007). The curse of knowledge in
reasoning about false beliefs. Psychological Science, 18,
382–386.
Bolander, T. (2014). Seeing is believing: Formalising falsebelief tasks in dynamic epistemic logic. In A. Herzig &
E. Lorini (Eds.), Proceedings of the European conference
on social intelligence (ECSI-2014) (pp. 87–107). IRITCNRS, Toulouse University, France.
Braüner, T. (2011). Hybrid logic and its proof-theory
(Vol. 37). Springer.
Braüner, T. (2013). Hybrid-logical reasoning in false-belief
tasks. In B. Schipper (Ed.), Proceedings of fourteenth conference on theoretical aspects of rationality and knowledge
(TARK) (pp. 186–195). (ISBN 978-0-615-74716-3, available at http://tark.org)
Braüner, T. (2014). Hybrid-logical reasoning in the Smarties
and Sally-Anne tasks. Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 23, 415–439. (Revised and extended version of
(Braüner, 2013))
Mitchell, P., Robinson, E., Isaacs, J., & Nye, R. (1996). Contamination in reasoning about false belief: an instance of
realist bias in adults but not children. Cognition, 59, 1–21.
Rips, L. (2008). Logical approaches to human deductive reasoning. In J. Adler & L. Rips (Eds.), Reasoning: Studies of
human inference and its foundations (pp. 187–205). Cambridge University Press.
Stenning, K., & van Lambalgen, M. (2008). Human reasoning and cognitive science. MIT Press.
van Ditmarsch, H., & Labuschagne, W. (2007). My beliefs
about your beliefs – a case study in theory of mind and
epistemic logic. Synthese, 155, 191–209.

Related work
The approach taken in the present work, based on (Braüner,
2013, 2014), is to model the reasoning in false-belief tasks
from perspective of the subject doing the reasoning. Another
approach is to use dynamic epistemic logic to model the reasoning from a global perspective, that is, from the perspective
of the modeler, see for example (Bolander, 2014).
The paper (van Ditmarsch & Labuschagne, 2007) models
examples of beliefs that agents may have about other agents’
beliefs, one example is an autistic agent that always believes
that other agents have the same beliefs as the agent’s own.
This is modelled by different agents preference relations between states, where an agent prefers one state over another if
the agent considers it more likely. These beliefs turn out to
be frame-characterizable by formulas of epistemic logic.
There are also a number of computational cognitive models
of false-belief tasks, a recent example is (Arslan, Taatgen,
& Verbrugge, 2013), which models the gradual development
3 Thanks to one of the anonymous reviewers for pointing this out.

278

