Ignorance-Based Chance Discovery
Beyond Dark Events
Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section & Computational Philosophy Laboratory, University of Pavia
Pavia, 27100 Italy

Selene Arfini (selene.arfini@gmail.com)
Department of Philosophy, Education and Economical-quantitative Sciences, University of Chieti and Pescara
Chieti-Pescara, 66013 Italy

Tommaso Bertolotti (bertolotti@unipv.it)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section & Computational Philosophy Laboratory, University of Pavia
Pavia, 27100 Italy
Abstract
The human part of chance-discovery is usually analyzed as an
effect of the agent’s knowledge of herself and of her environment. In this paper, setting off from the importance of “understanding the meaning of an impending phenomenon as a
chance,” we will analyze how chance-discovery activities are
affected and driven by the agent’s ignorance, and the relationship she entertains with the latter. More specifically, we will
spell out two kinds of ignorance that are relevant for chancediscovery, also considering which abductive chance-discovery
processes they can be related to.
Keywords: Human Computer Interaction; Chance-Discovery
Methods; Abductive Reasoning; Affordances; Ignorance

Chance Discovery and Relevant Knowledge:
Agents, Environment and Affordances
Chance discovery (and related processes such as chance curation) are defined as the fact of becoming aware of and understanding the significance of a chance: a chance is simply
“an event with significant impact on a human’s decision making” (Oshawa & McBurney, 2003; Maeno & Ohsawa, 2007).
(Ohsawa & Fukuda, 2002), describing “three ways to chance
discovery”, explore as the first way “Human as the Main Part
of Chance Discovery.” Albeit chance-discovery is a humancomputer collaborative process, we will set the focus on the
human part, exploring the inferences that allow human beings
to rely on environmental chances. Hence, we will proceed to
analyze, within an eco-cognitive frame (Magnani, 2009), the
role of human ignorance in chance seeking processes.
An interesting list of features comprehending the human
part of chance discovery is presented by (Maeno & Ohsawa,
2007, p. 1184): a) having a particular interest; b) understanding the meaning of an impending phenomenon as a chance; c)
putting a scenario based on a selected chance into a concrete
shape; d) running a simulation or taking an action based on
the scenario; e) acquiring a new interest.
Our reflection in this paper will be centered on the interplay
between items a) and b), and especially the second one. The
“particular interest,” indeed, and the capability to understand
the “meaning” are crucially influenced by the agent’s knowledge and ignorance. Thus, our goal will be to show how not

only the agent’s knowledge but her ignorance as well is pivotal in the discovery of new chances: namely, we will explore to which extent the second item of the list, understanding the meaning of an impending phenomenon as a chance,
can be warped and still maintain us within a chance-discovery
framework. In order to do so, we will first briefly recapitulate
some cognitive and inferential architectures that enable humans to perform chance-discovery activities (namely affordances and abduction); then we will analyze the impact of
ignorance within those cognitive architectures – and how it
affects chance-discovery especially as far as Maeno and Ohsawa’s “dark events” are concerned.
In this section we will briefly recapitulate two cognitive
and inferential architectures that are crucial in understanding
the human part of chance-discovery. We will also elaborate
how they both concern human beings as knowledge carriers,
yet in the following section we will argue that part of the
chance-discovery process relies on human beings as carriers
of ignorance.

Affordances and Chances
As claimed by eco-cognitive epistemology (Magnani, 2009),
by promoters of the extended cognition paradigm (Clark,
2008) and cognitive niche theorists (K. N. Laland & Feldman,
2006), humans (and some animals) manipulate and distribute
cognitive meanings after having delegated them to suitable
environmental supports. This perspective, strongly situating
human cognition and decision making within their environment, has already been successfully applied to the framework
of chance-discovery (Magnani, 2005; Magnani & Bertolotti,
2013). The activity of cognitive niche construction reveals
something important about human and animal cognitive systems. One of the main tenets of this approach is that humans
do not retain in their memory an explicit and complete representation of the environment and its variables, but they actively manipulate it by picking up information and resources
upon occasion. Information and resources are not only given,
but they are actively sought for and even manufactured. In
this sense, human cognition per se can already be described as
performing activities of chance-discovery, which in turn can

1488

be dramatically increased by computational collaboration. As
already argued (Magnani, 2007), chances – understood as
events with a “significant impact on a human’s decision making” – are data, or clusters of data, bearing a strong affinity
with the concept of affordance, introduced within Gibson’s
ecological psychology (Gibson, 1977): it is thus possible to
rely on such concept in order to better understand the human
part of chance discovery.
Gibson defined “affordance” as what the environment offers, provides, or furnishes. For instance, a chair affords an
opportunity for sitting, air breathing, water swimming, stairs
climbing, and so on. It is important to stress that the notion of chance and that of affordance are not mutually interchangeable. While it could be said that all chances – as
relevant for one’s decision making (and hence one’s behavior) – are affordances, conversely not all affordances rise to
the level of chances. It is nevertheless possible to elaborate
on a shared characterization of affordances and chances, in
their setting a relationship between an agent, her knowledge,
and her environment. Considering the debate between the immediate or mediated nature of affordances (Magnani, 2009,
chap. 6), and consequently whether they can be learned or
not, chance-discovery could embody the natural follow-up to
affordance theory: chance-discovery is indeed about the discovery/construction, via a human-computer interaction and
through effective procedure of data analysis and crystallization, of new complex affordances (clearly learnt and mediated), offering unforeseen possibilities for decision making
and action.

Chance-Discovery and Abduction
The human part of chance-discovery, which we claim is partly
illuminated by human beings’ ability to perceive, pick up
and employ environmental affordances, refers to two important aspects that concern the agent’s knowledge. First, finding/constructing affordances, or discovering chances, deals
with the possibility of understanding certain data as meaningful. Exactly as postulated by Maeno and Ohsawa, it is
about being able to “understand the meaning of an impending phenomenon as a chance.” Second, and following from
that, the emergence of some data as meaningful as a chance
depend on the specific eco-cognitive interaction between a
specific agent and her environment (be it a physical environment, but also an informational one): the possibility of such
emergence seems clearly linked to the person’s cognitive endowments and to her knowledge. As already contended by
(Magnani, 2007), the individuation of an affordance, just like
that of a chance, is an inferential process best framed by the
epistemological notion of abduction, here describing the process of individuating, in an array of data, which are highly
symptomatic of the presence of a chance.
Abduction is a process of inferring certain facts and/or
laws and hypotheses that render some sentences plausible,
that explain or discover some (eventually new) phenomenon
or observation. The introduction of abduction in the discourse
may clarify some puzzling issues proposed by Gibson, espe-

cially the claim concerning the fact that we directly perceive
affordances and that the value and meaning of a thing is clear
at first glance, and consequently let us fully benefit of the
affordance-theory as a theoretical tool to understand chance
discovery. As far as affordances are concerned, organisms
have at their disposal a standard endowment of affordances
(for instance through their wired sensory system, which is
the only cognitive system “available” in the case of simple
organisms), but at the same time they can extend and modify
the range of what they are afforded by through the appropriate cognitive abductive skills (more or less sophisticated).
This is especially the case with human beings, and perfectly
translates as far as it concerns chance-discovery. As maintained by several authors (for example cf. (Magnani, 2009)),
what we see is a result of an embodied process of abductive
cognition. For example, humans are exceptionally skilled at
imposing order on various, even ambiguous, data, which coincided with one of Peirce’s description of abduction.
Magnani has already proposed a fuller description of
the strict relationship between chance-discovery, affordanceperception and abductive cognition (Magnani, 2007), but it
is worth adding how the abductive framework does not only
account for the human inferential engagement in chancediscovery, but also for the computer-based counterpart: the
information artifacts (Amitani & Hori, 2004) or cognitive artifacts (Shibata & Hori, 2004), which represent the multiple
external tools - communication, context shifting, computational devices expressly constructed to the aim of creating opportunities and risks, like KeyGraph, etc. - recently analyzed
by researchers in the field of chance discovery (Oshawa &
McBurney, 2003), can be analyzed in a distributed-cognitive
perspective as integrating the human chance-discovery activity through the replication of abductive patterns. Consider
the methodology for the discovery of hidden chances (dark
events) proposed by Maeno and Ohsawa (Maeno & Ohsawa,
2007): the employed technique of data annealing is the informational counterpart of a physical procedure aimed at improving the workability of a material by a manipulative process.
Annealing in materials science is a heat treatment where
the structure of a material is altered. [. . . ] Similarly,
simulated annealing is a probabilistic technique of computational optimization based on physical formulas describing the annealing in materials science. [. . . ] The
human-computer interactive annealing is similar to the
annealing in materials science and simulated annealing
(p. 1186).
The physical manipulative process is transformed into a
human-computer interactive manipulative process, in which
the object of the informational search is obtained through a
series of computer-generated annealing steps and then sorted
out by a human agent, and in turn processed by the computer,
until the dark event, which is the hidden chance affecting the
whole system, finally emerges: this is an extremely interest-

1489

ing process of chance-discovery inasmuch as it displays an integration of manipulative and selective abductive steps, interchangeably performed by the human or the computer. Maeno
and Ohsawa’s methodology is of crucial importance for our
analysis since the quest for “dark events” – that is latent structures that diffuse into the system, invisible and yet affecting
the system itself – allows for the introduction of the topic of
ignorance, complimentary to that of knowledge, in the framework of chance-discovery.
Abduction, as an inferential process aiming at finding out
explanatory information starting from a cluster of data, concerns indeed the passage from what is known to what is not
known yet. This can be a hidden event, or chance, either regulating the system or which can be exploited to operate on the
same system. Consider the standard three-steps exemplification of abduction provided by C. S. Peirce: 1) The surprising
fact C is observed. 2) But if A were true, C would be a matter
of course. 3) Hence there is reason to suspect that A is true.
The abductive inference allows for hypothesis C to be moved
from what is not know, i.e. one’s ignorance, to what might be
the case. In the example of dark-event discovery proposed by
Maeno and Ohsawa, the method of annealing and selection
could allow for the emergence of the structure of the hidden
command line in an organization, or of an item within a marketing setting that shifts the consumers’ preferences.
In these cases, the type of abduction instantiated by the
chance-discovery mechanism is a selective one, because the
event – albeit previously unknown – is expected within an array of possibility-tokens, or still a possibility-type. In such
cases, as postulated by the second item in the aforementioned
list, what is crucial is the agent’s capability of understand the
meaning of an impending phenomenon as a chance: that is to
say, she is able to recognize and select the event, or chance,
she is looking for. This kind of abduction is differentiated
from the creative one in which the desired hypothesis, or explanation, is not selected among an array of available ones,
either as tokens or as types, but created altogether: it is often
the case of creative scientific hypotheses about new laws or
theories. As regards the detection of dark events, it could be
said that the development of Maeno and Ohsawa’s methodology is the output of creative abductive reasoning, while its
functioning embodies a selective abductive process.

Eco-cognitive abduction, central/peripheral
information, and the role of ignorance in
chance-discovery
So far we have shown how chance-discovery works in relation with the perception of affordances, and how it can be
guided by abductive reasoning as a knowledge-based discovery process. As often argued, the detection of new chances is
analyzed as the recognition of events, or pieces of information, from a given set of data that are already available (either
as tokens or as a category) to the human agent. In this case,
the manipulation of the environment helps the search because of the novel configuration of the affordance-perception,

which improves the discovery of chances among them. Now
we are going to introduce how not only the management of
affordances (and chances) that are available to the subject is
guided by her degree of ignorance – and not solely by that of
her knowledge – but also that chance discovery processes, especially the abduction-based ones, are a task of searching into
one’s ignorance, which can be extremely more productive if
the agent is aware of it.
As far as “understanding the meaning of an impending
phenomenon as a chance” (Maeno & Ohsawa, 2007) is concerned, it is comprehensible how “understanding” can be
used as a synonym of “learning”, that is apprehending the
potential of data that are present, even if still unnoticed until
reached. The presence of data is required in order to organize
the role of the agent in the process: her aim is – as Ohsawa
and Fukuda pointed out – to become aware of a chance and
to explain its significance, considering the chance as a piece
of information about events or situations that is significant
for decision making (Ohsawa & Fukuda, 2002). Nevertheless, the issue regarding chance-discovery is not the presence
of the chance, its availability to the agent who is looking for
it, but the “unnoticed yet” quality that makes it so valuable.
This feature makes chance discovery methods crucial in order to improve areas of knowledge such as the relationship
between an agent and her environment. Hence, if the discovery of chances involves the emergence of a certain awareness
about the unexpected significance of information about data
or events, the state of the agent can be considered as, at least,
partially ignorant about that significance until it is reached.
Nevertheless, while the knowledge-generating processes
are usually studied in order to provide models for chance discovery, the issue concerning how and what kinds of ignorance
interact with those knowledge-generating processes is unsurprisingly overlooked. In order to provide a model involving
the role of ignorance in chance discovery processes we are
going to adopt parts of the “Bubble Thesis” that Woods illustrated in 2005, that implies an ignorance-based model of
our most basic cognitive processes, such as believing (Woods,
2005).
Setting off from the Peircean description of the attainment
of belief – which placates doubt – as the sole function of
thought, Woods’ Bubble Thesis principally aims at comprehending the actual relation between the complex of beliefs
an agent has and her awareness (or lack thereof) about their
correctness or unsteadiness. The outcome of this process is
called epistemic bubble: a first-person knowledge-ascription,
performed by the knowing agent, to whom the difference between knowing something and thinking that she knows that
same thing is unapparent – and the tension that may arise is
always solved in favor of the former (Woods, 2005).
An epistemic bubble containing the piece of information
is a model by which we can confirm that the cognitive confidence of the agent concerning her possession of information
is not completely related to the actual attainment of the information itself. In other words, we can contend that any first-

1490

person knowledge-ascription is characterized by a certain degree of illusion – embodied by the human agent – about the
completeness of the knowledge the agent thinks she possesses
or her perpetual possession of the entire piece of information.
Absurdly, while the agent can afford an almost perfectly clear
third-person perspective view on someone else’s information
possession, she cannot be aware of this matter when she has
to judge her own beliefs.
Obviously, the first-person knowledge-ascription (from
now on FP-KA) can incorporate a smaller or larger degree
of illusion, depending on the type of information, its portability and completeness, the interest of the agent and her psychophysical state. Still, we are interested in how the hidden
parts of information, which our cognition does not contemplate in the knowledge ascription, can turn out to be possible
hidden chances set out of our reach. As it regards the second human feature of chance discovery, “understanding the
meaning of an impending phenomenon as a chance” (Maeno
& Ohsawa, 2007), such becoming aware can be understood
if we talk about the recognition of a chance in the zone that
the agent ignores, that is to say where the degree of illusion
is rooted.
The degree of illusion of the FP-KA has an impact on the
method of chance discovery that we can adopt, but it should
be noticed how the degree of illusion does not necessarily
match the degree of accuracy of the FP-KA. The two levels, as always, depend on the cognitive environment the agent
moves into, and on the affordability of the different pieces
of information she can count on. The dominion of expertise
of the agent is set on the information about which she has a
high degree of FP-KA and a low degree of illusion, i.e. the
knowledge she ascribes herself almost corresponds to what
she really knows. We could see the complex of data an agent
possesses, together with those that is within reach in her cognitive environment, as an agent-centered system. Her topics
of expertise correspond to the central information: she can
easily reach them and her ignorance about them is minimal.
Instead, the information that still is within the agent’s cognitive system but that is not in her dominion of expertise, or
that she is broadly ignorant about, correspond to the peripheral information: she knows something about it but it is not
part of her practical knowledge field. This analysis can be extended to a particular kind of eco-cognitive information, that
is chances.
So, a peripheral chance refers to some information requiring a high degree of illusion in order to be thought as possessed by the agent, and which has a scarce influence on
her actual decision-making. In fact, the agent may think she
knows little about this information, but she knows even less
than that. As we can see all information, affordances and
chances included, involves a part of rightful FP-KA – in the
matter of affordability of the data and the degree of expertise of the agent – and a part of illusion about the availability
or competence about them. The distinction between central
and peripheral information, as we saw, is an effect of how

an agent’s cognition is indeed an eco-cognitive performance,
which sees no sharp division between the information (and
lack thereof) stored within her brain and what is available
in her cognitively meaningful surroundings. It is crucial to
differentiate between central and peripheral information inasmuch as it leads to the individuations of a subdivision in what
is commonly referred to as “ignorance,” which will – in turn
– prove extremely useful in spelling out two different chancediscovery methods.
At this point, we can use yet another feature of abductive
reasoning to understand how to reach (and discover) those
chances that lie on the ignored side of the agent-centered system. Indeed, abduction is a procedure in which something
that lacks epistemic virtue is accepted because it has virtue of
another kind; by saying so not only they referred to the fallacious nature of abduction, but also to the fact that it presents
– as Magnani showed – “an ignorance-preserving (or, better,
an ignorance-mitigating) character” (Magnani, 2013). In fact,
even if abduction constitutively is a response to an ignorance
problem (in this case chance discovery), its structure can be
modeled as a carrier of a complete knowledge-enhancing solution, so that it can be direclty classified as an inference to
the best explanation. In this case the supposed hypotheticalprovisional and ignorance-preserving character of the discovered solution is obliterated: abduction instantly provides the
best solution, without any kind of evaluation (for example
empirical).
In the context of a chance discovery process guided by abductive reasoning, there are two kinds of ignorance that remain preserved:
1. The ignored possibility of other existing chances in a wellknown environment, i.e. within the many kinds of central information the agent possesses. They are part of the
agent’s eco-cognitive system and they would enrich her
knowledge (in the matter of decision-making) on a particular – and already investigated – topic. They are often
already tacitly affecting the decision-making processes of
the agent but, given that they are part of a well-known field,
they are extremely hard to find and spell out. Discovering these chances is effectively about “understanding the
meaning of an impending phenomenon as a chance;” so,
as we will show, they can be seen as the “dark events” presented by Maeno and Ohsawa (Maeno & Ohsawa, 2007).
2. The ignored possibility of the existence of any kind of
chances in a field the agent is quite unaccustomed with, that
is in the agent’s peripheral information. Since they belong
to some topics that are relatively unknown for the agent,
they are easier to find than the previous ones, but their significance as chances can be harder to understand. In this
case – as always using the second feature of chance discovery method presented by Maeno and Ohsawa (Maeno
& Ohsawa, 2007) – there is a lack of understanding of
the meaning of an impending phenomenon (that the agent
ignores) as a chance; yet once that phenomenon emerges

1491

from the peripheral information, it sparks awareness about
the possibility of being understood as a chance. We will
present this type of chances as a richer and further “dark
event.”

Abducing from ignorance: two methods of
ignorance-based chance discovery
The two kinds of ignorance we just spelled out can be investigated through the two types of abduction we have introduced
before: the selective abduction and the creative one. The first
type of ignorance is set within the limits of the agent’s cognitive environment. It is grounded on her own central information and it involves the part of illusion about the actual
knowledge the agent has on her field of expertise. That is, it
requires a specific question to be grasped and so the agent’s
awareness about her own lack. When the illusional FP-KA
is compromised, the agent becomes aware of the information
she lacks: what she needs to solve her problem becomes clear
– and so how to manage this lack. This specific kind of ignorance is, indeed, defined through the agent’s knowledge.
Then, when a chance appears inside of this ignorance it is understandable as a chance: the agent, often, is already looking
for it and the richness of this kind of opportunity (or risk) depends on the agent’s interest. In order to characterize this type
of chance, we can say that it appears to be structurally similar
to the “dark event” described by Maeno and Ohsawa which
“is not visible. The occurrence frequency is very small. It diffuses randomly like an atmosphere because it neither tends to
cling to a particular event cluster nor tends to appear as a pair
with a particular event.” (Maeno & Ohsawa, 2007, p. 1186).
In order to grasp this kind of chance, the agent can enact a
selective abductive inference. It gives the agent the possibility
to inquire into her specific ignorance and find the best explanation, selecting it from a known number of choices (or still
within a type of possible choices). The hypothesis will not
only preserve the ignorance about the unforeseen possibility
that the chosen hypothesis could be less than the best possible chance (and thus letting the chance show its distinctive
trait of being either an opportunity or a risk), but it will also
preserve, or recreate, the degree of illusion about the FP-KA
concerning the newly discovered chance. The new chance
can be understood on the base of the agent’s knowledge system, so she can use her fallacious (but effective) cognitive
recognition to grasp it as a part of her system, and adapt her
decision-making process to its discovery. Obviously it is an
enhancement of how she manages her eco-cognitive structure, but it is already an active part of her decision-making:
as suggested, the agent has only to become “aware of it”, in
order to name it as a chance.
Let us make this process clearer by referring to an actual
example: consider the development of the two latests iPhones
by Apple as a chance-discovery process elaborated on an already well-known system. The developers used the same iOS
operating system, but in order to make their smartphone more
appealing and more affordable to younger generations, they
created the iPhone 5C model, cheaper than the iPhone 5s (and

their predecessor, the iPhone 5), with a colorful plastic shell
and a plastic screen (which are also less prone to cracking
than the glass one of the 5S). They had three problematic issues to tackle and they improved them basing on the fact –
once ignored – that the iPhone was expensive, it had a colorless cover and its shell would last less than what young
consumers – for whom it is designed – prospect. Together
with these problems they selected an alternative to make it
better and, using the smartphone’s appearance as a mine of
chances, they released a cheaper and less imposing version of
the iPhone. The changes were indeed very little, they did not
change any of the iPhone’s substantial traits, but they solved
specific problems. In the view of Apple engineers, the release of the new, “low cost” model was meant as a chance, an
event able to significantly modify the decision-making processes of a new consumership: whether this was a success, it
is still debated almost a year after the release of the iPhone
5C, further corroborating the dual opportunity/risk nature of
a chance – whose settlement sometimes heavily depends on
the perspective the chance is evaluated from.
Making chances emerge from ignorance: creative abduction and chance-discovery The second type of ignorance
is harder to manage than the first. It does not require just
a specific question to be inquired, and so discovered. Since
it concerns peripheral information, it does necessitate more
than the agent’s ordinary expertise in order to be understood:
rather, it requires more patience and resources to be integrated
with the central information. In order to discover a chance inside this kind of ignorance it becomes necessary to change
the eco-cognitive system of the agent and enhancing it with
the perspective that even in zone with peripheral information
there still are plenty useful chances to discover. It also involves a changing into the direction of the interest that it supposed to guide the chance-discovery process. In this case,
there is no possibility to use a selective abduction to direct
the inquiry within such a vast and problematic ignorance. The
method that can shed some light is Magnani’s aforementioned
creative abduction (Magnani, 2009).
Creative abduction does not provide a simple selection
of hypotheses but, through the change of the eco-cognitive
paradigm the agent is in, it provides a brand new field to investigate. When the agent cannot afford a specific question,
or method of enquiry, because she cannot describe what she
does not know – which is indeed unaffordable for her – it becomes necessary to perform a creative context-shift (Maeno
& Ohsawa, 2007) and the almost serendipitous creation of an
alternative pattern. Thus, enquiring within the second type
of ignorance opens the possibility to discover a whole “cluster” of dark events, leading to a multiplicity of new chances.
Abduction also provides an enhancement of the agent’s perspective and knowledge but, in this case, the outcome is more
of a gamble than the one previously described. Indeed, the
required effort is more significant, and the opening of a new
area of knowledge means also to take the risk to push the
lucks into a complete useless direction.

1492

To make an example of this chance discovery process too,
we can refer to the recent invention of the Google Glasses.
The problem was very challenging: the engineers wanted to
create a new generation of devices moving away from the
concept of the already existent computers and portable devices, such as tablets and smartphones. They had a problem
that rose in a cognitive zone that was very peripheral for their
expertise system: they were skilled at improving their operating system and updating the Google tools, but how to find and
develop something utterly new? The story has it that Google
X (the facility that is also realizing the project of driverless
cars) readapted a project born for military use in 1995, and
began to develop the “head-mounted display,” trying to make
it available to civilian purposes (Houston, 2012). Instead of
selecting one of the already available options among their
products, they created a radically new one, answering a problem with a brand new answer. From a very narrow knowledge, they stretched the research field and found out that it
was literally a new ground full of chances to be picked up
and to be offered to consumers: they had (almost) managed
to make the prototype affordable and appealing to mass consumership thanks to the connection with social networking
websites, Google maps, and so on. Plus, Google entered partnerships with eyewear companies to offer variable design to
the product.
Obviously, with this choice both the risk and the opportunity at stake are high. But the opening of a new field of research and development is already a possibility toward compensating errors, misevaluations, or to further improve the
most promising components. In its essence, the choice to discover a dark event through an ignorance-based chance discovery can be – in extreme cases – the invention of an incredibly
resourceful treasure, or the opening of Pandora’s box.

Conclusion
In conclusion, the two ignorance-based chance-discovery
methods we presented assure the ability to discover new
chances and increase the knowledge of the human agent. The
first type is a specification of a well-known area: it can be
helped with computational tools and it requires just the effort
to investigate again a supposedly complete field. At the same
time its outcome is often reliable but limited. On the contrary,
the second method is more problematic and risky: it is a human prerogative and can be seen as an increase of the whole
knowledge field of the agent. At the same time the outcome
can be a big opportunity or a serious risk. In all of these cases,
the range of the enquiry is determined by the dimension and
deepness of the agent’s ignorance: only with this awareness
the chance-discovery process can be allowed to bring serious
results to the chance research.

Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the Mind. Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension. Oxford/New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. E. Shaw
& J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, Acting and Knowing.
Hillsdale, JN: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Houston, T. (2012, April). Google’s project glass augmented
reality glasses begin testing. (Published on The Verge, retrieved on http://bit.ly/1mKRzC7)
K. N. Laland, F. J. O.-S., & Feldman, M. W. (2006). Niches
construction, biological evolution and cultural change. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 1(23), 131-175.
Maeno, Y., & Ohsawa, Y. (2007). Human–computer interactive annealing for discovering invisible dark events. IEEE
Transactions of Industrial Electronics, 54(2), 1184 – 1192.
Magnani, L. (2005). Chance discovery and the disembodiment of mind. In R. Oehlmann, A. Abe, & Y. Ohsawa
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Chance Discovery: from Data Interaction to Scenario Creation, International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2005) (pp.
53–59).
Magnani, L. (2007). Creating chances through cognitive
niche construction. In B. Apolloni, R. J. Howlett, &
J. Lakhmi (Eds.), Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems (pp. 917 – 925). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive Cognition. The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2013). Is abduction ignorance-preserving? conventions, models, and fictions in science. Logic Journal of
the IGPL, 21, 882–914.
Magnani, L., & Bertolotti, T. (2013). Selecting chance curation strategies: Is chance curation related to the richness
of a cognitive niche? International Journal of Knowledge
and System Science, 4(1), 50 – 61.
Ohsawa, Y., & Fukuda, H. (2002). Chance discovery by
stimulated groups of people. Journal of Contingencies and
Crisis Management, 10(3), 129 – 138.
Oshawa, Y., & McBurney, P. (Eds.). (2003). Chance Discovery. Berlin: Springer.
Shibata, H., & Hori, K. (2004). Towards and integrated environment for writing. In A. Abe & R. Oehlmann (Eds.),
The First European Workshop on Chance Discovery (pp.
232–241). Valencia.
Woods, J. (2005). Epistemic bubbles. In S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. Garcez, L. Lamb, & J. Woods (Eds.), We Will
Show Them: Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay (Volume II)
(pp. 731–774). London: College Publications.

References
Amitani, S., & Hori, K. (2004). A method and a system
for supporting the process of chance discovery. In A. Abe
& R. Oehlmann (Eds.), The First European Workshop on
Chance Discovery (pp. 62–71). Valencia.

1493

