Incidental Memory for Naturalistic Scenes: Exposure, Semantics, and Encoding
Moreno I. Coco (micoco@psicologia.ulisboa.pt)
Faculdade de Psicologia, Universidade de Lisboa
Alameda da Universidade, Lisboa, 1649-013, Portugal

Nicholas D. Duran (nicholas.duran@asu.edu)
School of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Arizona State University
Glendale, AZ 85036, USA

Abstract

where a scene depicting ’a boy eating a SANDWICH’ is certainly more plausible than ’a boy eating a BRICK’. Plausibility has been shown to have widespread impact on behavioral (Coco, Malcolm, & Keller, 2014) and neurological processes (Mudrik, Lamy, & Deouell, 2010)). With respect to
visual memory, the plausibility of a scene is known to influence its encoding and subsequent recognition. For example,
Davenport and Potter (2004) found that when an object in the
foreground of a scene (e.g., a priest) is implausible with the
overall background (e.g., a soccer field versus a church), the
ability to later recognize the object significantly declined.
Even so, the memorability of scenes does not depend on
their plausibility content alone, but also on whether the information attended to is actively processed during encoding. One piece of evidence is Makovski, Jiang, and Swallow
(2013)’s study that shows recall for faces improves if participants have to judge the sex of the character depicted during
the encoding phase, compared to when such judgment was
not required.
From this brief review, we can isolate three key factors responsible for mediating the representational strength of complex scenes in visual memory. The first factor is presentation
time, with longer exposures implying more accurate recognitions than short exposures. The second factor is the plausibility of visual scenes, with implausible scenes implying less
accurate recognitions than plausible scenes. And finally, the
type of encoding condition under which visual scenes have
been viewed, with active encoding implying better recognition than passive encoding.
These three factors are not mutually exclusive, and thus it
is unlikely that they will bear independent consequences on
visual memory. In fact, longer presentation time of an implausible visual scene might, for example, aid its recognition;
or conversely, more efficient encoding might result in better
recognition, independent of presentation time. Thus, in this
study, we examine the possible interdependencies between
such factors, building on attempts that have only recently
been explored.

Visual memory for naturalistic scenes is mediated by: amount
of exposure, semantic content, and type of encoding. These
factors might interactively contribute to scene memorability.
Thus, we tracked computer-mouse movements during an encoding phase where participants verified the congruency of
sentence and scene pairs, which varied in plausibility. The
presentation time of the scenes was also manipulated. Subsequently, in an unexpected recognition phase, participants had
to indicate whether they remembered scenes (old and new).
Recognition improved when correct verifications were made
during encoding especially: when the scene was implausible,
the stimuli pair congruent, and for longer presentation times.
When comparing the trajectories between encoding and recognition, we found greater hesitancy during encoding, especially
for implausible scenes in incongruent pairs, decreasing as presentation time increased. These results provide novel insights
into the factors modulating the memorability of naturalistic
scenes.
Keywords: visual memory; action-dynamics; presentation
time; semantic plausibility; active encoding.

Introduction
The visual system needs as little as 20 milliseconds to extract
semantic information from a complex scene for subsequent
decision-making (Thorpe, Fize, & Marlot, 1996). Besides
showing rapid processing, the visual system is also extremely
efficient at retaining in memory information about naturalistic scenes, both for short- and long-term storage (Brady,
Konkle, Gill, Oliva, & Alvarez, 2013). For example, this has
been shown in Potter (1976)’s seminal study, where shortterm recognition of rapidly presented pictures (e.g., 50 ms)
was highly accurate, improving to almost ceiling performance
as the presentation time of the pictures increased. More recently, Konkle, Brady, Alvarez, and Oliva (2010) have found
that recognition of naturalistic scenes can be equally impressive for long-term memory. In their study, participants were
asked to view, for a later recognition test, a long sequence of
naturalistic scenes (2912 items), displayed one by one, and
drawn from different contexts. Even when up to 64 different
scenes were drawn from the same context, recognition accuracy remained well above chance.
However, not all visual scenes are equally memorable; and
the semantic information of the objects contained within a
scene has been found to be a key predictor of its recognition
(Isola, Xiao, Torralba, & Oliva, 2011). Importantly, objects
can be more or less plausible within a certain scene context,

The Present Study
The overarching goal of this study is to investigate how presentation time, plausibility of information, and active encoding contribute to memory formation for naturalistic scenes
and on their subsequent recognition. We do so using an action

405

dynamics framework that tracks the semi-continuous movement of the arm during reaching decisions (Spivey & Dale,
2006). In such a framework, participants are typically presented with two alternative choices at the top of a computer
screen, and response trajectories are monitored en-route to
the response. Analysis of these micro-behaviors have been
shown to correlate with underlying cognitive mechanisms in
a variety of domains spanning deception (Duran, Dale, & McNamara, 2010) to memory (Papesh & Goldinger, 2012).
Participants completed two consecutive tasks: a verification (encoding) task and an unexpected memory (recognition)
task, i.e., participants were not informed that their memory
would be tested. To preview the experiment procedure detailed in section Apparatus and Procedure, during the encoding phase, participants first read a sentence, then viewed a
scene, and finally had to judge whether the content of the pair
of stimuli matched or not (by moving their computer mouse
to a response button). During the recognition phase, participants saw a scene that was either present or not during encoding and had to judge whether they remembered it (again by
moving their computer mouse). These tasks allow us to investigate two primary theoretical questions: (1) Is recognition for
rapidly presented scenes, which are incidentally memorized,
predicted by responses at encoding? (2) Is plausibility of information playing a role on recognition, and if so, how do
responses compare between encoding and recognition?

Figure 1: Experimental design with a full set of crossed pairs of stimuli: Plausibility (Plausible and Implausible) and Congruency (Congruent, Incongruent). The sentence is read self-paced, then a scene
is presented for either 33, 100, 250, or 500ms. The target word (e.g.,
hamburger vs. brick) was always positioned at the end of the sentence.

scale 2 . This ensures that effects observed on the responses
are not contaminated by lexical properties of the stimuli, but
are genuinely triggered by their plausibility. Sentences were
written in Portuguese, and had a fixed length of either seven
or eight words to minimize variability between items. The
sentences were also checked for grammaticality by two independent native-speaking annotators, who also ensured that
the target object depicted in the scene was recognized as the
target word used in the sentence.
The target object was pasted into the scene using the free
software GIMP. The size of each scene was fixed at 550 x
550 pixels. Each scene was presented in two plausibility conditions (plausible: a boy eating an hamburger; implausible:
a boy eating a brick). We crossed plausibility with congruency by pairing each scene in the plausible conditions with
two different sentences, as with Figure 1. We had a total of
224 unique sentences (112 scenes paired with 2 different sentences.

Method
The experimental design crossed Plausibility (plausible, implausible) of information depicted in the sentence and visual scene with the Congruency (congruent, incongruent)
between each pair (i.e., did the two match in content or
not?) (schematically described in Figure 1). Both factors
were within-participants. We also manipulated the Presentation Time of the visual scene (33, 100, 250, 500) betweenparticipants (twelve participants for each presentation time).

Participants
Forty-eight students at the University of Lisbon, all native
speakers of Portuguese, participated in the study for course
credit. The experiment was granted by the Ethics Committee of the Department of Psychology, in accordance with the
University’s Ethics Code of Practice.

Apparatus and Procedure

We selected 56 sentence-scene pairs from a previous study
based on a similar paradigm (Coco & Duran, under review) 1 ,
such that there was no difference in the lexical frequency of
the target word/object between plausible (M = 822.72) and
implausible (M = 909.29) conditions, t(209) = 0.61, p = 0.5;
but that, at the same time, plausible scenes were rated as more
likely (M = 5.20, SD = 0.4) than implausible scenes (M =
1.82, SD = 0.43), t(220) = 60.16, p < .00001, on a Likert

The experiment was designed using Adobe Flash 13.0, which
allows sampling at 60 Hz. The stimuli were presented on a
21” plasma screen at a resolution of 1024 × 768 pixels. Participants sat between 60 and 70 cm from the computer screen.
Calibration of the mouse position was ensured by forcing participants to click on a black target circle (36 pixels across) located precisely at the bottom-center of the screen at the start
of the trial, and throughout its different phases.
During the encoding phase, participants first read a sentence, using a word-by-word self-presentation method, by
clicking on the calibration button located at the bottom of
the screen. After the last word was read, a visual scene was
displayed for either 33, 100, 250 or 500 ms. The scene then

1 Approximately half of the scenes included were taken from the
dataset of Mudrik et al. (2010)

2 Plausibility judgments were collected on a sample of sixty-four
participants, refer to Coco and Duran (under review)

Materials

406

Figure 2: An example of a trial run for the encoding (left) and recognition (right) tasks.

sequence on the recognition of the visual scene.
Our first analysis therefore examines whether correct responses given during recognition, a binomial variable (0, incorrect; 1, correct), were predicted by accuracy at encoding,
also a binomial variable (0,1). We also examined whether
recognition accuracy is mediated by encoding, scene plausibility, and its presentation time.
We expect that accurate encoding should enhance scene recall, particularly when the scenes were plausible, or congruent with an associated sentence. Consistent information is,
in fact, known to be processed more efficiently (Davenport
& Potter, 2004). However, we extend previous literature by
showing that memorability of scenes is enhanced, even when
not explicitly probed by the task, i.e, incidental memory. In
line with previous literature, we also predict that longer presentation times will enhance recognition, with the greatest
gains again for scenes previously processed as plausible and
congruent.
To conduct these analysis, we employed linear mixedeffects models based on the R statistical package lme4 (Bates,
Maechler, & Bolker, 2011), examining recognition accuracy
as a function of a) encoding accuracy, b) whether scenes were
congruent or not with an associated sentence, c) the plausibility of the scene, and c) presentation time.
We construct full linear-mixed effects model, i.e., predictors are entered as main effects as well as in interaction, with
maximal-random structure (MLME, (Barr, Levy, Scheepers,
& Tily, 2013)), where each random variable of the design
(e.g., Participants), is introduced as intercept, and as uncorrelated slope on the predictors of interest (e.g., Plausibility).
The random variables of our design are Participants (48),
treated as a between design variable, and Scenes (112, as we
have 56 scenes in two conditions of Plausibility).
Moreover, we controlled for possible effects of encoding order (the order in which visual scenes were presented)
and recognition order (accounting for fatigue) on recognition
accuracy. This was done by residualising recognition accu-

disappeared and the response buttons (YES, NO), counterbalanced (left/right) between participants, were displayed at the
top of the screen. Once the participant clicked on a response,
on a separate screen, they were asked to rate (four possible
choices) how clearly they saw the scene. As expected, scene
visibility significantly increased as a function of the stimulus presentation time, β = 0.001,t(2710) = 43.72, p < .0001,
hence assessing the validity of this manipulation (refer to Figure 2 (left panel) for an example of encoding trial).
After the encoding phase, an unexpected recognition task
was presented, where participants were asked whether they
remembered scenes from a pool of 56 (28 Old, 7 for each
experimental condition; and 28 New, 14 plausible and 14 implausible) presented one at time. To make these responses, a
scene was presented that participants could view for as long
as they liked. When they were ready to respond, they clicked
on the calibration button, and response buttons (YES, NO) appeared at the top of the screen (identical to the encoding trial,
refer to Figure 2, right panel, for an example of the recognition trial).
Each participant completed a total of 112 randomized trials
(56 in encoding and 56 in recognition). The experiment took
about 30 to 45 minutes to complete.

Analysis
In order to investigate the relationship between encoding and
recognition, we focus our analysis on the old items, where
we have responses for the same items in both encoding and
recognition. From these, we analyzed a total of 1,313 unique
trials. We removed 2% (31 trials) of the data due to encoding
verification times that were greater than 4 standard deviations
from the mean, or due to machine error.
Accuracy Our first research question addresses whether
recognition of naturalistic scenes could be predicted by responses given during encoding. We are especially interested
in whether correct verification of sentence-scene pair congruency (whether it was indeed congruent or not), bears any con-

407

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

90
80
70
60
50

% Accuracy (Recognition)

Congruent
Incongruent

●

40

90
80
70
60
50

●

40

% Accuracy (Recognition)

100

Plausibility
100

Congruency

racy on these two co-variates in a simple linear regression
model (logistic), RecognitionAccuracy ∼ EncodingOrder +
RecognitionOrder, using the R syntax, and taking the residuals obtained as the new DV for inferential analysis 3 .
We report tables with coefficients of the predictor-terms
that were significant at p < .05, rather than all terms. We also
report their standard error, the t − value, and derive p-values,
as calculated from F-test based on Satterthwaite approximation to the effective degrees of freedom.

65

% Accuracy (Encoding)

Response dynamics For our second research question, we
examined 967 trials (≈ 71%) from the larger old-items subset, where accurate responses were given both during encoding (overall accuracy = ≈ 80%) and recognition (overall accuracy = ≈ 90%), and compared the arm movement response
dynamics between the encoding and recognition phases. We
focus on two dynamical measures: (a) latency (the time taken
to move outside an initial region of 100 pixels around the calibration button), which represents the initial hesitancy to commit to a decision, and (b) x-flips (the number of directional
changes on the x-axis), which indicates changes of mind as
the decision unfolds. Response dynamics were calculated using the R-package mousetrack (Coco & Duran, 2015).
We expect latency of the movement to be longer during the
encoding response compared to the recognition response, as
encoding involves a comparison between two stimuli (i.e., a
sentence and a scene), whereas recognition involves recalling
only one stimulus (i.e., the scene)
Moreover, for incongruent and implausible pairs, we also
expect greater latency for encoding, corroborating with our
previous results Coco and Duran (under review). However,
by increasing presentation times, we expect the latency to
start the movement to reduce. We also expect x-flips to corroborate these predictions, where a greater number of x-flips
will be seen during encoding compared to recognition, particularly for those items that were judged as incongruent and
implausible.
We applied similar linear mixed-effects models as above
for each dynamical measure, but with a fixed-effect for Task
(Encoding vs. Recognition) instead of Encoding Accuracy, as
well as, the other experimental variables of interests, Presentation Time, Plausibility and Congruency.

70

75

80

85

Plausible
Implausible
90

95

100

% Accuracy (Encoding)

Figure 3: Scatter plot of recognition accuracy as a function of encoding accuracy. Each point is the mean accuracy of a subject. On
the left panel, we compare the two conditions of Congruency; on the
right panel, we compare the two conditions of Plausibility. The lines
represents the estimate of a generalized linear model fit to the data.
Table 1: Mixed-effect maximal model analysis of recognition accuracy, with centered and contrast-coded fixed effects for Encoding
Accuracy (EA), Congruency (Incongruent: −0.5, Congruent: 0.5),
Plausibility (Implausible: −0.5, Plausible: 0.5), and Presentation
Time (a continuous variable with four values: 33, 100, 250, 500).
Random intercepts and slopes on Participant (48) and Scene (112).
Predictor
Intercept
Presentation
EA:Congruency
EA:Plausibility
EA:Congruency:Presentation
Congruency:Plausibility:Presentation

β
0.003
0.143
0.134
-0.128
-0.228
0.162

SE
0.014
0.036
0.042
0.043
0.114
0.082

t
0.175
3.937
3.206
-2.996
-2.011
1.965

p
0.8
0.0001
0.001
0.004
0.04
0.05

response at encoding was also correct, the recognition of the
scene is facilitated (two-way interaction EA:Congruency, refer to Table 1 for coefficients and their significance.) Implausible scenes are better recognized if they were correctly verified during encoding (two-way interaction EA:Plausibility).
Presentation Time also plays an important role. In line with
previous literature, we find that with increasing presentation
times, recognition accuracy significantly improves. A benefit is found for visual scenes from incongruent pairs, especially when the verification was correct (three-way interaction Encoding Accuracy:Congruency:Presentation Time). Finally, plausible visual scenes in congruent pairs are also more
likely recognized for increasing presentation times (threeways interaction Congruency:Plausibility:Presentation Time.
These results highlight an intriguing dependency between
the type of encoding of visual scenes during a verification
task and their recognition. In particular, if correct verifications were given during encoding, then visual scenes were
more likely to be remembered. However, this was only the
case if the verification was with congruent stimuli. This indicates that correctly accepting as congruent a pair of stimuli
might strengthen their memorability, and therefore enhance
their recognition. Crucially, a similar effect is found on plausibility of stimuli. Recognition for implausible scenes improves if they were correctly verified. Beside confirming the
classic presentation time (SOA) effect, our results go beyond
it by showing that its effect is modulated by congruency of

Results and Discussion
Accuracy
In Figure 3, we illustrate how recognition accuracy relates
to encoding accuracy during the experimental conditions of
Congruency and Plausibility 4 . We find that when the visual
scene was congruent with a sentence in the encoding, and the
3 Note, we opted to residualize these two co-variates, rather than
include them together with the experimental variables of interest in
the lme model, to avoid rather complex models with interactions up
to the fifth order
4 Note, the dependent measure used in the LME is a trial-by-trial
residualized response of recognition accuracy. Means over subjects
are only taken to better visualize the trend as continuous, i.e., at a
trial-by-trial level we only observe 0s or 1s.

408

1200
800
400
0

0

250

500

33

100

250

500

Predictors
Intercept
Task
Congruency
Plausibility
Presentation
Task:Congruency
Task:Plausibility
Task:Presentation

1.5
0.5
33

100
250
Presentation Time (ms)

500

Encoding (Congruent or Plausible)
Encoding (Incongruent or Implausible)

0.0

0.5

1.0

X−flip (count)
1.0
1.5

2.0

100

2.0

33

0.0

Table 2: LME estimates values for the dynamical measures: latency and x-flips. Centered and contrast-coded fixed effects include
Task (Encoding: −0.5, Recognition: 0.5), Congruency (Incongruent:
−0.5, Congruent: 0.5), Plausibility (Implausible: −0.5, Plausibile:
0.5), and Presentation Time (a continuous variable with four values:
33, 100, 250, 500). Random intercepts and slopes on Participant (48)
and Scene (112).

Plausibility

Latency (ms)
400
800
1200

Congruency

33

100
250
Presentation Time (ms)

500

Recognition (Congruent or Plausible)
Recognition (Incongruent or Implausible)

Intercept
Task
Congruency
Task:Congruency
Congruency:Presentation

Figure 4: Bar-plot, mean, and 95% confidence intervals for latency
and x-flips. Compares Encoding (low density bars) and Recognition
(high density bars) items in terms of initial Congruency (congruent
- blue, incongruent - red) and Plausibility (plausible - blue, implausible - red), left and right panels, respectively.

Latency
β
SE
526.854
27.864
-750.008 53.558
-49.529
21.574
-80.251
26.247
-180.802 72.521
109.675
35.948
140.527
50.516
328.152 139.962
X-flips
β
SE
1.038
0.049
-0.849
0.068
-0.171
0.062
0.296
0.095
0.327
0.157

t
18.908
-14.004
-2.296
-3.058
-2.493
3.051
2.782
2.345

p
0.0001
0.0001
0.02
0.002
0.01
0.002
0.005
0.01

t
20.979
-12.501
-2.761
3.124
2.089

p
0.0001
0.0001
0.009
0.002
0.04

fect of Task). Incongruent pairs also triggered more x-flips
(main effect of Congruency). However, increasing presentation time does reduce the number of x-flips for incongruent
trials (two-way interaction Congruency:Presentation Time).
These results confirm that encoding/verification is associated
with more indecisiveness compared to recognition. They also
provide converging evidence with the latency results. Crucially, we observe an interesting two-ways interaction between Task and Congruency, whereby visual scenes correctly
encoded as incongruent, as compared to scenes encoded as
congruent, trigger greater indecisiveness (more x-flips) on the
later recognition task. This suggests that congruency of information at encoding mediates responses downstream when
the same scene has to be recognized, and corroborates similar “transfer” effects observed in recognition accuracy. We do
not find plausibility, however, to play any particular role on
the indecisiveness of the response trajectory.

the stimuli pair, and their plausibility.

Response Dynamics
In Figure 4, we plot the means and confidence intervals for
the dynamical measures of latency and x-flips, collected as
participants responded to the verification task (encoding) and
when accessing the scene from memory (recognition).
We find significantly longer latency times during encoding
compared to recognition (main effect of Task; refer to Table 2). Also, incongruent pairs, and implausible stimuli display longer latencies during encoding and recognition (main
effects of Congruency and Plausibility). Moreover, interactions between Task and Congruency and Task and Plausibility show that these differences are particularly strong during
encoding. In addition, an interaction between Task and Presentation Time indicates that latency time decreases as presentation time increases, again, being most pronounced for
encoding.
These results suggest that verifying the congruency of the
stimulus pair (sentence-scene) during encoding might accrue
a greater cognitive cost than merely recognizing the scene.
Verification does require the comparison and integration of
linguistic and visual content to make a decision, whereas
recognition has relatively fewer demands. This greater cognitive cost is particularly evident for incongruent and implausible scenes: a result corroborating the accuracy analysis, and
aligning with previous literature showing greater difficulty in
processing inconsistent information. Moreover, presentation
time reduces latency time during the more costly encoding
task 5 .
When examining x-flips, we observe greater indecision
(more x-flips) during encoding than recognition (main ef-

Conclusion
A momentary glance is sufficient for the visual system to retain complex information about naturalistic scenes with surprising fidelity (Thorpe et al., 1996; Brady et al., 2013). Even
so, the memorability of scenes still largely depends on their
presentation time, the semantic information they convey, and
the way they are encoded (Potter, 1976; Davenport & Potter, 2004; Makovski et al., 2013). These factors have mostly
been studied independently, but by uncovering their interdependencies, a more integrated understanding of memory processes for visual scenes might be provided.
Using an action dynamics mouse-tracking approach, we
examined how some of these interdependencies mediate
recognition accuracy of naturalistic scenes, and differentially
modulate the moment-to-moment response dynamics during

5 These results are entirely corroborated by overall response time.

409

their encoding and subsequent recognition.
Our results show that the recognition accuracy of visual scenes improves when the scene was correctly encoded
during an initial verification task, where participants had
to assess whether its content matched, or not, in content
with an associated sentence. The improvement effect was
most pronounced in connection with congruent pairs. That
is, when participants correctly indicated that sentence-scene
pairs shared content, it strengthened the memory for those
scenes when assessed in an unexpected follow-up recognition task. Memory might also be strengthened by congruency
of the stimuli, because in such a case, the same message (e.g.,
the boy Moreover, a similar effect was found in connection
with plausibility, but where correct recognition of implausible scenes positively correlated with performance on the initial verification (encoding) task.
This effect is interesting in that recognition for implausible
scenes has been associated with poorer performance in other
studies. But when this information is more actively processed,
such as in the verification task employed here, performance is
improved.
The selected dynamical response measures also aligned
with the accuracy results. We observed, for example, that hesitancy (latency) and indecisiveness (x-flips) were significantly
greater for visual scenes encoded in incongruent pairs. However, hesitancy and indecisiveness decreased as the presentation times of scenes increased during encoding/verification.
Presentation times also had an effect on the accuracy analysis,
where greater presentation times improved later recognition
accuracy, and where it also mediated the effects of congruency, plausibility, and encoding accuracy.
To reiterate, our results highlight the interdependence between presentation time, stimulus plausibility, and active encoding on the long-term memory of visual information. It
also raises possibly interesting questions about the role of explicit feedback or memory task expectations during encoding,
given none were present yet stable memories still occurred.
Moreover, because memories persisted over a somewhat long
delay between encoding and a follow-up recognition task, another direction for follow-up research would be to systematically evaluate the resilience of incidental encoding over
longer time-scales. Doing so would bolster our current goal
of examining the underlying mechanisms contributing to the
memory formation of visual scenes.

Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2011). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using s4 classes.
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., Gill, J., Oliva, A., & Alvarez, G. A.
(2013). Visual long-term memory has the same limit on
fidelity as visual working memory. Psychological Science,
24(6), 981–990.
Coco, M. I., & Duran, N. D. (2015). mousetrack: Mousetracking measures from trajectory data [Computer software
manual]. (R package version 1.0.0)
Coco, M. I., & Duran, N. D. (under review). Action dynamics as revision costs: The interaction of plausibility and
congruency during a verification task.
Coco, M. I., Malcolm, G. L., & Keller, F. (2014). The interplay of bottom-up and top-down mechanisms in visual
guidance during object naming. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 67(6), 1096–1120.
Davenport, J. L., & Potter, M. C. (2004). Scene consistency in
object and background perception. Psychological Science,
15(8), 559–564.
Duran, N., Dale, R., & McNamara, D. (2010). The action
dynamics of overcoming the truth. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 17(4), 486–491.
Isola, P., Xiao, J., Torralba, A., & Oliva, A. (2011). What
makes an image memorable? In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2011 (pp.
145–152).
Konkle, T., Brady, T. F., Alvarez, G. A., & Oliva, A. (2010).
Scene memory is more detailed than you think the role of
categories in visual long-term memory. Psychological Science, 21(11), 1551–1556.
Makovski, T., Jiang, Y. V., & Swallow, K. M. (2013). How do
observers responses affect visual long-term memory? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 39(4), 1097.
Mudrik, L., Lamy, D., & Deouell, L. (2010). ERP evidence
for context congruity effects during simultaneous object scene processing. Neuropsychologia, 48, 507–517.
Papesh, M. H., & Goldinger, S. D. (2012). Memory in motion: Movement dynamics reveal memory strength. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19(5), 906–913.
Potter, M. C. (1976). Short-term conceptual memory for pictures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 2(5), 509.
Spivey, M., & Dale, R. (2006). Continuous dynamics in realtime cognition. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(5), 207–211.
Thorpe, S., Fize, D., & Marlot, C. (1996). Speed of processing in the human visual system. Nature, 381(6582),
520–522.

Acknowledgments
We thank Liad Mudrik for sharing her dataset of scenes with
us. Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia under award number SFRH/BDP/88374/2012 to MIC is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Barr, D., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. (2013). Random
effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep
it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language, 68(3), 255–
278.

410

