Independent Recognition of Numerosity Requires Attention
	  
Saebyul Lee (lee.4172@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 267 Psychology Building
The Ohio State University
1835 Neil Ave., Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 247 Psychology Building
The Ohio State University
1835 Neil Ave., Columbus, OH 43210 USA

	  
Abstract

The overlap of numerical and non-numerical properties
in concrete object arrays raises the question of how these
input dimensions interact. Two studies were conducted
to address this question and showed that changing the
object identity (while retaining the numerosity) and
changing the numerosity (while retaining the object
identity) both resulted in attenuated recognition of object
arrays. However, this interference differed across
development. In adults interference was asymmetrical
(i.e. changing the object identity has greater effect on
memory for numerosity than changed numerosity had on
object identity). In contrast, children showed a
symmetrical pattern of interference. These results imply
that for adults, processing numerosity might be an
attention-demanding process compared to a spontaneous
object perception. Children, however, processed neither
the object identity nor numerosity independently.
Keywords: Numerical cognition; Interference

Despite early sensitivity to quantity (Brannon et al.,
2004; for a review, Cantrell & Smith, 2013; Cordes &
Brannon, 2008,) and environmental support, such as
frequent exposure to number words and visual stimuli,
moving from an initial quantitative ability to a mature
concept of numbers is one of the most challenging tasks
for children. Although the question of how infants
perceive numerosity is hotly debated, there is general
consensus that the initial sensitivity to non-symbolic
numbers was not enough to support the number concept
(Barth et al, 2006; Cary, 2004; Mix, 2002; for a review,
Rips et al., 2008). However, exactly what is lacking of
the early mechanism dealing with non-symbolic
numbers that cannot support the mature number
concept, and whether there is any developmental
change in that mechanism are not yet understood well.
Thus, this study investigated forms of representation of
object arrays as a tool to understand non-symbolic
numerical perception process from young children to
adults.
Perceiving numerosity from a set of concrete objects
intrinsically includes a selection problem because
numerosity is a property of a set, not a property of
individual items. That is, people must attend selectively

to the “numerical” dimension from various object
arrays, while ignoring other perceptual dimensions such
as shape, color, or size. For example, they can
recognize “three-ness” by detecting the common
quantity between three apples and three cars. Numerical
perception from concrete object arrays thus requires
people to select one relevant dimension of the set of
stimuli from an array of multiple irrelevant dimensions
of individual stimuli.
This selection problem, together with the well-known
fact that young children’s selective attention is
immature (Kemler, & Smith 1978; Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2004; for a review, Hanania & Smith, 2010),
suggests that children might have difficulty in
processing a numerical dimension of object arrays in
specific situations. Cantlon et al. (2007) reported that
when objects in a set were not homogeneous but
heterogeneous, 3- to 5-year-olds’ perception of
cardinality was impaired, supporting this prediction.
Mix (2008a) demonstrated that 3-year-olds failed to
perceive equivalence in the number of object arrays,
especially when irrelevant dimensional features of
object arrays were highly varied between sets and
within a set. In a follow-up study, preschoolers’
performance of numerical comparison was also
impaired when the surface similarity of sets was pitted
against numerical equivalence, but not when all sets
contained the same objects (Mix, 2008b). These studies
showed that irrelevant non-numerical properties
interfered with young children’s perception of
numerical equivalence in specific situations.
However, previous studies have considered the
interference as only a failure, instead of as a more
general problem of non-symbolic numerical perception.
As a result, it remains unclear why an irrelevant
perceptual property would affect perception of
numerosity, or whether numerosity affects processing
of the non-numerical property. Answers to these
questions are important for understanding non-symbolic
numerical perception, because in many circumstances
numerical perception requires people to intentionally
integrate non-numerical object properties with
numerical properties, such as enumerating subsets of

1279

object arrays based on sub-categories of objects
(Goldfarb & Treisman, 2013). Therefore, depending on
the context, it makes sense to assume that nonnumerical information surrounding object arrays could
become either relevant or irrelevant features. That
possibly drives people to form different forms of
representations with the same object arrays. In addition,
developmental change in the ability to change a
direction of attention flexibly would allow us to observe
an age-related difference in the variety of the
representation.
To test these predictions, the current study focused on
recognition memory and the relative distance between
studied stimuli and various types of foils. The
recognition memory test allows us to use diverse types
of test stimuli, which provide an efficient tool to
disentangle the participants’ responses to each property
of the object arrays. In addition, we investigated the
interactions between the numerical and non-numerical
properties of object arrays by assessing the memory
sensitivity of each dimension using signal detection
theory, which permits the estimation of the same
performance measure (d’) from a variety of
experimental paradigms (Macmillan & Creelman,
2005). This allowed us to quantify the dimensional
interactions and to directly compare the performance of
adults with that of children, without making additional
assumptions (Kingston & Macmillan, 1995).

Experiment 1

set, completely new arrays having new items across the
two dimensions, and partially new arrays consisting of
combinations of new and old items. For the partially
new arrays, the studied and novel items from one
dimension were combined with the studied and novel
items from the other dimension (e.g., two school buses
and six tall houses). New items in object identity were
double-decker buses, tricycles, army jets, long case
clocks, yellow chairs, and tall houses. The new
numbers were 1, 2, 3, 30, 31, and 32. Each type of test
stimuli set consisted of 12 different object arrays, so the
total number of test stimuli was 48.
To ensure that the distance between studied and
novel stimuli was indeed comparable across the two
dimensions, we asked a separate groups of adults (n =
13) to perform a discrimination task with a set of
concrete objects (for object discrimination) and a set of
dots (for numerical discrimination). The task was to
determine whether a target and a succeeding test item
were exactly the same either in a numerical dimension
or in an object dimension. We compared accuracy and
response times between each dimension. The results
point to virtually equivalent distances between target
and test items across the dimensions (𝑡!""#$!"% 12 <
1, 𝑡!" 12 < 1). These target and test items were used
as studied and novel items in Exp. 1 respectively.
Procedure. Exp. 1 consisted of a training- and a
testing phase. The procedure of Exp. 1 is presented
graphically in Figure1. During the training phase,

The first experiment was designed to develop a new
task to investigate whether numerical and object
properties of sets of objects are processed interactively
or independently of each other. We also investigated
developmental changes in this interaction by testing
adults and 4- to 5-year-olds performing the same task.

Method
Participants. Participants in Exp. 1 included 25
undergraduates enrolled at The Ohio State University
and 36 typically developing 4- and 5-year-olds. The
children were recruited from their childcare centers
around Columbus, Ohio and their parents provided
written consent.
Materials and Design. The stimuli were sets of
colorful arrays of everyday objects. For a training set of
object arrays, pictures of school buses, bicycles,
airplanes, alarm clocks, brown chairs, and short houses
were used. The numerosity of object arrays ranged from
five to ten objects. Thus, six different objects and six
different numbers were used to constitute the training
set of object arrays (e.g., five school buses and six short
houses), resulting in 36 trials.
In the test phase, four different types of stimuli set
were generated: completely old arrays from the training

Figure 1. Examples of training and testing stimuli

1280

participants were instructed to study pictures carefully
and to remember them as best as they could. They were
also informed that they would receive questions about
these pictures later. In the test phase, both numerical
and object questions were given to the participants in
two separate blocks. For example, in the numerical
block, participants were asked whether they saw the
exact same number of objects (regardless of object).
Conversely, in the object block, participants were asked
whether they saw the exact same objects (regardless of
number). Participants received no feedback. Accuracy
rates were recorded.

Results and Discussion
The test stimuli were categorized into congruent- and
incongruent trials. If each dimension of the stimuli
conveyed the same information, such as a studied
numerosity with studied objects or a novel numerosity
with novel objects, the stimuli were labeled as
“congruent trials.” Similarly, if each dimension of the
stimuli conveyed different information, such as a
studied numerosity with novel objects or a novel
numerosity with studied objects, the stimuli were
labeled as “incongruent trials.” Thus, in each testing
dimension, there were two types of old- and new trials:
congruent- and incongruent old stimuli vs. congruentand incongruent new stimuli. This categorization
allowed us to examine the interactions between the two
dimensions of the object arrays. In particular, if
participants made their decisions based only on a
testing dimension, their responses to each type of old
stimuli were expected to be the same, as were their
responses to each type of new stimuli. However, if
participants’ decisions were affected by features from a
non-testing dimension, congruent- and incongruent
trials of either the old- or new stimuli were expected to
yield different responses, which would imply an
interaction between the two dimensions.
To quantify the extent of the interaction, we applied
detection theory and calculated cumulative d’ from
3	  

Cumulative d'

b	  

a

2.5	  

Object	  
Identity	  
Numerosity	  

2	  

1.5	  
1	  

0.5	  
0	  

NN	  

NO	  

ON	  

OO	  

NN	  

NO	  

ON	  

OO	  

Figure 2. A psychometric function for the data of Exp. 1 in
terms of cumulative d’ (a) for adults and (b) for children. The
horizontal axis shows the stimuli types, NN (congruent new
stimuli), NO (incongruent new stimuli), ON (incongruent old
stimuli), and OO (congruent old stimuli).

congruent new trials (NN) to congruent old trials (OO)
by placing the incongruent new trials (NO) and the
incongruent old trials (ON) between them. The value of
cumulative d’ can be obtained between any stimulus
and the endpoint stimulus if responses come from the
same dimension. Since d’ has the mathematical
properties of distance measure, i.e., having true zero
and being unique, it can also represent discriminability
(Macmillan & Creelman, 2005). Thus, in the current
study, by comparing d’s from each dimension, we were
able to investigate whether two dimensions of stimuli,
object identity and numeorosity, were equally
discriminable.
Figure 2 shows the cumulative d’s for each
dimension of object arrays (object identity &
numerosity) separately for adults and children. The
slope of each dimension between stimuli types tells us
how rapidly the perceptual effect grows with stimulus
value – that is, how sensitive the participants are to
systematic changes in stimuli. The total discriminability
of each dimension, total d’ between NN and OO, was
not significantly different for adults, nor for children,
F(1,59) = 1.70, p > .2 – that is, new numerosities were
as equally discriminable as new objects. Furthermore,
the total discriminability of adults was close to (d’ =
2.77), but significantly different from, the
discriminability of an ideal observer, Mobject = 2.52,
T(35) = -2.38, p < .05; Mnumerosity = 2.43, T(35) = -3.47,
p < .05.
To investigate the interaction between two
dimensions of object arrays and any developmental
changes in that interaction, a mixed-design analysis of
variance model (ANOVA) was used. The type of test
stimulus (NN, NO, ON, & OO) and the testing
dimension (Numerosity & Object Identity) were withinsubject variables, and age group was applied as a
between-subject factor. The value of d’s on the test
trials served as the dependent variable.
First, for both age groups, the main effect of the type
of the test stimulus was significant, F(2.13, 125.57) =
!
186.50, p < .001, 𝜂!"#$%"&
= .76. The distance between
congruent and incongruent trials of stimuli, i.e., NN ~
NO, and ON ~ OO, was significantly different. That is,
the participants’ responses in each testing dimension
were clearly influenced by incongruent information of
the non-testing dimension.
Furthermore, the pattern of this interaction changed
depending on the testing dimension, F(2.52, 148.82) =
!
13.84, p < .001, 𝜂!"#$%"&
   = .19. In particular, the
planned comparison analysis on the interaction showed
that when the object identity was a testing dimension,
the distance between OO and ON was much smaller
than that of the numerical dimension, F(1, 59) = 16.30,
p < .001. That is, recognition of each dimension was
significantly impaired by incongruent features from the
non-testing dimension, but the magnitude of

1281

interference was significantly larger in the numerosity
dimension. This asymmetrical pattern was found
exclusively in adults’ performance, F(1, 70) = 8.18, p <
!
.005, 𝜂!"#$%"&
= .11.
The results showed that this novel recognition
paradigm was useful for measuring memory sensitivity
to each dimension of object arrays and investigating the
interactions between them. Both adults and children
showed a similar form of integrated representation in
the numerical dimension by showing interference.
The presence of integrated representations suggests
two possible explanations for the underlying process.
Specifically, as in false memory studies (Roediger &
McDermott, 1995), the underlying “actual” dimension
of the decision in both given dimensions might be unidimensional familiarity. However, if the results confirm
the uni-dimensional familiarity hypothesis, the pattern
of interaction should be the same, regardless of the
testing dimension. Indeed, this was not the case for
adults. Rather, the distribution of the perceived distance
from congruent new trials to each type of trial
demonstrated a clear asymmetrical pattern of
interaction according to the testing dimension.
Another explanation for the underlying process might
be that the multidimensional structure of object arrays
would evoke spontaneous association between both
dimensions during the training, which resulted in
interactive responses between the testing and nontesting dimensions. In particular, since the training did
not require a deeper and abstract processing of each
dimensional feature, adults may process both features in
an integral and perceptually focusing manner, which
would affect their memory sensitivity. In this case,
adults’ perceived decision space would not be
unidimensional, but multidimensional, in an integrated
manner. Moreover, this latter explanation suggests that
the perceived structure of object arrays could change
based on the context (Ashby & Maddox, 1990; Cook &
Odom, 1992; Goldfarb & Treisman, 2013), such as the
testing dimension, as in our current study. Furthermore,
this approach provides developmental change in the

process. Shepp et al. (1976) suggest that only adults can
easily change their perception pattern in response to
task instruction because they have flexible attention
control. Thus, we could expect that when we ask adults
to shift their focused attention to each dimension of
object arrays, their perceived structure of object arrays
would change accordingly, but children would not show
a similar change in their responses. This hypothesis was
tested systemically in Exp. 2.

Experiment 2
During the training phase of Exp. 2, we instructed
participants to focus exclusively on a specific
dimension of the stimuli. This manipulation allowed us
to examine whether directed attention during training
could change the pattern of interactions between the
two dimensions of object arrays, and whether there
were any developmental changes in the effect of
attention manipulation.

Method
Participants. 73 undergraduates who are enrolled at
the Ohio State University and 80 typically developing
4- to 5-year-olds took part in this study.
Procedure. All procedures were the same as in Exp.
1, except for two conditions in the training session:
number and object matching. The procedure of the
training phase is presented graphically in Figure 3.
Participants were randomly assigned to these
conditions, in which they were given different
instructions that manipulated the direction of their
attention to each stimulus dimension. Specifically,
during the training phase, participants in either the
number or object condition were given a delayedmatch-to-sample task based on either numerosity or
object identity of the stimuli, respectively.
In the number condition, when we presented a
standard stimulus to the participants, we asked them to
choose one of the two stimuli that correctly matched the
sample based on numerosity. In this case, later in the
testing phase, responses to the numerical test were used
to calculate numerical memory sensitivity when it was a
target dimension; and responses to object test were used
to calculate object memory sensitivity when it was an
irrelevant dimension.
In the object condition, we asked the participants to
do the same task as in the number condition, but based
on object identity. Their memory responses to the
numerical question denoted numerical memory when it
was an irrelevant dimension; and their memory
responses to the object question denoted object memory
when it was a target dimension. The test phase was
exactly the same as in Exp. 1.

Figure 3. Examples of training stimuli in Experiment2.

1282

!
type, F(1.71, 121.40) = 438.15, p < .001, 𝜂!"#$%"&
  =
.86. However, the main effect of the testing dimension
was not significant, whereas the interaction among the
stimulus type, testing dimension, and training condition
was significant, F(1.55, 109.88) = 10.91, p < .001,
!
𝜂!"#$%"&
= .13.
In particular, when the testing dimension was object
identity, the memory sensitivity pattern between each
stimulus type showed a less integrated form, regardless
of the direction of attention, F(1, 71) = .09. However,
when numerosity was the testing dimension, the
participants’ memory pattern significantly changed by
the attention manipulation, F(1.68, 119.41) = 15.32, p
!
< .001 𝜂!"#$%"&
= .18. Specifically, when numerosity
was a target dimension, the perceived distance (d’)
between NN and NO was zero, and d’ between OO and
ON was significantly decreased compared to when it
was an irrelevant dimension, i.e., numerical memory
sensitivity after object matching training, F(1, 71) =
!
17.73, p < .001, 𝜂!"#$%"&
= .23.
The children’s responses showed quite a different
pattern from those of the adults. The training condition
did not lead to a significant main effect across the
testing dimensions, F(1, 78) = .19. More importantly,
there were no significant interaction effects involving
the training condition. Thus, the external attention
manipulation did not cause any changes to the
children’s behavior. However, the main effect of
stimulus type was strongly significant, F(1.91, 149.06)
!
= 108.18, p < .001 𝜂!"#$%"&
= .58. These results showed
that regardless of the testing dimension, the children’s
responses showed a robust pattern of interaction
between numerosity and object identity.

Results
Memory sensitivity to each dimension for both adults
and children is presented graphically in Figure 4. The
results from Exp. 1 are presented as baseline
performance in Figure 4, but they were not used in the
analysis. A mixed-design ANOVA model was used as
in Exp. 1.
The type of test stimulus (NN, NO, ON, & OO) and
the testing dimension (Numerosity & Object Identity)
served as within-subject variables; the age group and
training condition
(Number matching & Object
matching) were between-subjects variables; and the
value of cumulative d’s on the test trials served as the
dependent variable. Because a four-way interaction
among all of the independent variables was found to be
!
significant, F(1.79, 266.98) = 4.23, p < .05, 𝜂!"#$%"&
=
.03, the results from each age group will be presented
separately.
The ANOVA on the adults’ responses revealed
significant main effects of the training condition, F(1,
!
71) = 7.23, p < .01, 𝜂!"#$%"&
= .09, and the test stimulus
3	  

a	  

c

Cumulative	  d'	  

2.5	  
2	  

1.5	  
1	  

0.5	  
0	  

NN	  

NO	  

ON	  

OO	  

3	  

Cumulative	  d'	  

2.5	  

NN	  

NO	  

d	  

b

ON	  

OO	  

General Discussion

Target	  
Irrelevant	  
Baseline	  

2	  

1.5	  
1	  

0.5	  
0	  

NN	  

NO	  

ON	  

OO	  

NN	  

NO	  

ON	  

OO	  

Figure 4. A psychometric function for the data of Exp. 2 in
terms of cumulative d’: (a) for adults in the object identity
dimension, (b) for adults in the numerosity dimension, (c) for
children in the object identity dimension, and (d) for children
in the numerosity dimension. The results are divided by the
condition whether the testing dimension was target during the
training: Target (the testing dimension was target), Irrelevant
(the testing dimension was irrelevant), Baseline (the results
from Exp.1). The horizontal axis shows the stimuli types as in
Exp. 1, NN (congruent new stimuli), NO (incongruent new
stimuli), ON (incongruent old stimuli), and OO (congruent old
stimuli).

This study was motivated by the finding that
children’s performance in early numerical comparison
tasks is affected by the level of non-numerical
similarities between sets and within a set (Cantlon,
Fink, Safford & Brannon, 2007; Mix, 1999; 2008a;
2008b). This observation suggests that children may
experience difficulty matching a perceived quantity of
object arrays with their numerical value, partially due to
their less robust representation of numerosities from
concrete object arrays. Thus, we examined how robust a
representation – of either numerosity or object identity
– adults and children formed when they perceived
object arrays; and we tested whether external attention
manipulation could change the form of each
representation.
A striking aspect of the results is that adults’ memory
sensitivity of numerosity was severely disrupted by
incongruent features from object property, compared to
the sensitivity of object identity, especially when the
test context did not require the participants to process

1283

numerical dimension exclusively. However, external
manipulation of attention direction successfully
changed this integrated form of numerical
representation into a more independent one. This
change was observed only in the numerical dimension.
This finding suggests that, compared to spontaneous
object perception, perceiving numerical properties from
a set of concrete objects is an attention demanding
process. Adults could form an independent and abstract
numerical representation from concrete object arrays
only when they focused their attention exclusively to
numerosity.
In contrast to adults’ response, attention manipulation
did not change the children’s memory sensitivity at all.
The children’s memory sensitivity denoted a robust
integrated form of representation regardless of the
testing dimension. These results suggest that even if
children were asked to make either object or numerical
decision exclusively, they would continue to consider
both types of features. This pattern of responses may be
automatically driven by their distributed attention
processes.
This robust integrated representation provides
considerable explanation for young children’s
dissociable pattern of responses in different numerical
tasks (Cantlon et al., 2007; Posid & Cordes, in press).
That is, the integrated representation of a studied set of
objects would lead to an increase in the numerical
dissimilarity of new set of objects when it was
presented with heterogeneous objects. That might result
in impaired identification of numerical equivalence and
spared discrimination of numerical difference.
Moreover, the integrated representation also suggests
that children may have difficulty identifying the same
objects when the objects were presented in a slightly
different context like changing the numerosities of
items.
Finally, we also considered and rejected an
alternative explanation for the robust integrated
representations from the children’s responses. It could
be that the children may have relied exclusively on a
specific dimension, and would give the same responses
regardless of the testing dimension. If this was the case,
the children would have failed to discriminate between
incongruent old stimuli and new stimuli. For example,
if the children responded to numerical questions as
object questions, their responses to old numerosities
with new objects would have been the same as those to
new numerosities with new objects. However, the
children’s responses to those two stimuli were
significantly different. Thus, we can conclude that the
children understood questions in the testing phase, but
that their immature selective attention resulted in robust
interference, denoting an integrated representation.

References
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (1990). Integrating information from
separable psychological dimensions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Human Perception and Performance, 16(3), 598–
612.
Barth, H., La Mont, K., Lipton, J., Dehaene, S., Kanwisher, N. &
Spelke, E. (2006) Non-symbolic arithmetic in adults and young
children. Cognition, 98, 199–222.
Brannon, E. M., Abbott, S., & Lutz, D. J. (2004). Number bias for
the discrimination of large visual sets in infancy. Cognition, 93(2),
B59–68.
Cantlon, J., Fink, R., Safford, K., & Brannon, E. M. (2007).
Heterogeneity impairs numerical matching but not numerical
ordering in preschool children. Developmental Science, 10(4),
431–40.
Cantrell, L., & Smith, L. (2013). Open questions and a proposal: a
critical review of the evidence of infant numerical abilities.
Cognition, 128(3), 331-362.
Carey, S. (2004). Bootstrapping and the origins of
concepts. Daedalus, 59-68.
Cook, G. L., & Odom, R. D. (1992). Perception of multidimensional
stimuli: a differential-sensitivity account of cognitive processing
and development. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
54(2), 213–49.
Cordes, S., & Brannon, E. M. (2008). Quantitative competencies in
infancy. Developmental Science, 11(6), 803–8.
Goldfarb, L., & Treisman, A. (2013). Counting Multidimensional
Objects: Implications for the Neural-Synchrony Theory.
Psychological Science, 24(3), 266-271.
Hanania, R., & Smith, L. B. (2010). Selective attention and attention
switching: towards a unified developmental approach.
Developmental Science, 13(4), 622–35.
Kemler, D. G., & Smith, L. B. (1978). Is there a developmental trend
from integrality to separability in perception? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 26(3), 498–507.
Kingston, J., & MacMillan, N. (1995). Integrality of nasalization and
F1 in vowels in isolation and before oral and nasal consonants: A
detection-theoretic application of the Garner paradigm. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 97(2), 1261.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2005). Detection Theory: A
User’s Guide(2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mix, K. (1999). Similarity and numerical equivalence: Appearances
count. Cognitive Development, 14, 269–297.
Mix, K. (2008a). Surface similarity and label knowledge impact early
numerical comparisons. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 26(1), 13–32.
Mix, K. (2008b). Children’s Numerical Equivalence Judgments:
Crossmapping Effects. Cognitive Development, 23(1), 191–203.
Posid, T., & Cordes, S. (in press). Verbal counting moderates
perceptual biases found in children’s cardimality judgments.
Journal of Cognition and Development.
Rips, L. J., Bloomfield, A., & Asmuth, J. (2008). From numerical
concepts to concepts of number. The Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 31, 623–642; discussion 642–687.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Auditory dominance
and its change in the course of development. Child Development,
75, 1387–1401.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21,
803-814.
Shepp, B., & Swartz, K. (1976). Selective attention and the
processing of integral and nonintegral dimensions: A
developmental study. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
73–85.

1284

