Inhibition Failure is Mediated by a Disposition Toward Flexible Thinking
Alexander B. Swan (swan@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Russell Revlin (revlin@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
Abstract
Conflict detection in dual process contexts is a widely studied
phenomenon. However, only a small portion of the
investigations has studied the role of individual differences in
a typical conflict detection paradigm. In this study,
participants completed a modified base-rate neglect task, as
well as the Cognitive Reflection Task (CRT), and two
Thinking Disposition Questionnaires. Results support an
individual differences hypothesis in which the CRT prediction
of accuracy on the base-rate conflict problems is mediated by
the dispositional tendency to engage in flexible thinking.
Keywords: conflict detection, dual process, flexible thinking,
individual differences

Introduction
A classic task in the biases and heuristics program begun by
Tversky and Kahneman (1974) asks participants to make a
judgment about group membership. A typical problem
would look something like this (as appears in De Neys &
Glumicic, 2008):
In a study 1000 people were tested. Among the
participants there were 5 men and 995 women. Jo is a
randomly chosen participant of this study.
Jo is 23 years old and is finishing a degree in
engineering. On Friday nights, Jo likes to go out cruising
with friends while listening to loud music and drinking
beer.
What is most likely?
a. Jo is a man
b. Jo is a woman
In this example, the description of the individual is skewed
heavily toward the stereotype associated with a man, even
though in this sample, women drastically outnumber men.
Due to the mismatch in cued responses (one response cued
by the base-rates and another cued by the stereotypic
description), the above problem represents a typical conflict
problem. If the base-rates were flipped and the description
remained the same, the same answer would be cued by both
sources of information, and there would be no conflict (a
nonconflict problem). This task is called the base-rate
neglect
task
(Tversky
&
Kahneman,
1974).
Overwhelmingly, people choose the stereotype answer when

faced with a conflict problem, which is a result of applying
the representativeness heuristic. In nonconflict problems, it
doesn’t matter what the reason for the choice is, since both
the stereotype and base-rates are congruent (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974). Thus, error decisions made on this task
are classified as a heuristic answer, since stereotypes fall
within the “shortcut”/heuristic route when accessing stored
information and making a decision. More recently, these
findings and others have been explained by a group of
theories called Dual Process Theories (DPT).
Dual process theories have a long and varied history in
psychology (Frankish & Evans, 2009) with a common
theme that human reasoning is characterized by a fast,
automatic heuristic process (Type 1, or T1) and a slow,
deliberate, analytic processing (Type 2, or T2) (e.g., De
Neys, 2012; Evans & Stanovich, 2013; Frankish & Evans,
2009). And in the realm of normative logical reasoning,
heuristic tends to be a pejorative term, usually indicating
that a person has gotten the reasoning problem wrong, or
anti-T2. Note, however, that a reasoner can also arrive at an
incorrect answer using T2 processing (Evans, 2012;
Stanovich, 2011; Thompson, Prowse Turner, & Pennycook,
2011). Due to the automaticity of T1 processing, it is argued
to be the “default” state, and T2 is only engaged when it is
needed (Evans, 2007).
De Neys and Glumicic (2008) have shown that the
heuristics described by Tversky and Kahneman (1974) are
consistently present and the data fit the DPT models well.
Typically, the base-rates (or stereotypes) are chosen on
nonconflict problems, but accuracy on conflict problems
(choosing the base-rate) is dismally low. People prefer to
choose the stereotype answer, and are usually slower on
conflict problems when making this decision because it is
regarded that the conflict within T1 (stereotype vs. baserate) is detected and dealt with by engaging T2 to inhibit the
stereotype answer (Pennycook & Thompson, 2012). In the
latter situation, people are even slower when they get these
conflict problems correct (Pennycook, Fugelsang, &
Koehler, 2012).

Conflict Detection and Resolution in Dual Process
Thinking
There are many models and theories proffered within the
dual process approach and each describes the way a person
might switch back and forth between T1 and T2 thinking.
Clarification has been offered by the addition of two

2314

concepts: conflict detection, in which the reasoner identifies
that there is a conflict between heuristic and logical
processing, and resolution, in which the reasoner decides
which processes to apply (Evans, 2007).
The operation of the mechanisms of conflict detection and
subsequent (or not) resolution is the open question in the
DPT literature. Conflict arises when a solution to a given
problem is found by T1, but T2 has found a different
solution upon further reflection (De Neys, 2012, 2014).
Represented this way, it appears that T2 only enters the
equation when T1 has made an error. The reason for the
error could be due to numerous apparent “shortcomings” of
T1 processing, such as errant heuristics that do not apply to
a given situation, processing that was too fast or incomplete
to fully address the situation, overconfidence, or when an
intuitive solution is patently false (De Neys & Glumicic,
2008; Evans & Curtis-Holmes, 2005; Thompson et al.,
2011).
Recent evidence (De Neys & Franssens, 2009; De Neys &
Glumicic, 2008; Pennycook & Thompson, 2012; Pennycook
et al., 2012) points to the mechanism of conflict
detection/resolution errors as a result of an inhibition
failure. De Neys and Glumicic’s (2008) findings were the
first to support the inhibition failure hypothesis, wherein the
stereotype answer is not inhibited on the conflict problems,
and additional processing time is needed in order to fully
inhibit the intuitive answer and achieve the “correct” answer
(choose the base-rate answer).

Individual Differences in Conflict Detection and
Resolution
Many of the previous studies discussed above (e.g., De
Neys & Glumicic, 2008; Pennycook et al., 2012)
investigated the conflict detection and resolution mechanism
at the group level, describing what the average reasoner
might do in a situation of T1/T2 conflict. While individual
differences have not been fully neglected (e.g., Mevel et al.,
2014; Pennycook et al., 2014), it is still an unresolved issue
within DPT. While the mechanism of conflict detection and
resolution might be universal, it is unclear which failures
plague different types of reasoners. It may be fruitful to
consider shifting to an individual-level analysis, where the
behavior and processes of an individual are cast within the
larger scope of DPT (De Neys, 2014).
In addition, individual differences are key to any good
reasoning theory. Processes such as cognitive style,
cognitive ability, and reasoning performance each
potentially have something to add to the discussion of dual
processing. It is possible that even the most proficient
reasoners fail to choose the correct answer to a reasoning
problem in a systematic way (Svedholm-Häkkinen, 2015)—
why would that be? To answer this question a causal model
of individual differences needs to be developed and tested.
We note that performance on the Cognitive Reflection Test
(CRT; Frederick, 2005), is positively correlated with
performance on the conflict base-rate neglect problems.
Both are direct behavioral measures of conflict detection

and possible resolution. However, the CRT was designed to
immediately measure inhibitory processes and behaviors.
One of the classic problems is as follows: “A bat and a ball
together cost $1.10. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball.
How much does the ball cost?” The intuitive answer that is
cued in the wording of the problem would be 10 cents, but
this answer would be incorrect because of the “more than”
phrasing. The correct answer, upon further reflection, is five
cents. We contend that the inhibition failure hypothesis is
the likely reason why people are biased on base-rate neglect
problems (as opposed to conflict monitoring failures or
storage failures). Thus, we argue that performance on the
CRT is directly related to the propensity for choosing the
base-rate. That is, the ability to inhibit the prepotent
(intuitive) response on CRT word problems is the same
ability that is needed to inhibit the salient stereotype
information in the base-rate neglect problems.
We propose that it may take a specific type of thinking
disposition (or cognitive style) to facilitate the inhibitory
response described above. Although guessing on the CRT
problems or mentally flipping a coin on the base-rate
neglect problems can work to achieve the correct answer
some of the time, performing well on these two tasks
requires a desire on the part of the individual to engage T2
thinking and put forth the effort to correctly solve the
problems. Two scales have been used widely in the DPT
literature to assess these dispositions. The first is the Need
for Cognition scale (NFC; Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao, 1984)
that was designed to get a sense of how much an individual
enjoys analytic thinking and engaging in difficult problemsolving. It would make sense that a person who desires
engagement in thinking would use T2 processing to get a
stronger score on the CRT and base-rate neglect tasks. The
second commonly used thinking disposition scale in the
DPT literature is the Actively Open-minded Thinking scale
(AOT; Stanovich & West, 1997). This scale was created
from a set of various related subscales. It was designed to
measure a participant’s sense of how open-minded they
think they are (conversely, how cognitively rigid they are).
More open-minded individuals tend to think about problems
in a more flexible way, with an assumption that this is
accompanied by T2 processing. These scales measure
different aspects of the propensity to engage in effortful
thinking, though they do correlate positively (Pennycook et
al., 2014). A benefit of these two subjective measures is that
they are independent of the inhibitory processes measured in
the CRT and the base-rate neglect tasks.

Present Study
The present experiment was conducted to examine
individual differences in conflict detection and resolution
using established methodology. Specifically, a multiple
mediation model was tested.
Base-rate neglect has been studied extensively in the last
decade in the conflict detection realm of DPT. However, the
methodology rarely has participants complete more than 20
base-rate problems. In this study, we expose participants to

2315

50 trials of base-rate neglect problems in order to observe
large-scale patterns. It is unknown whether the established
methodology in DPT conflict detection and resolution can
be replicated under conditions where participants are
exposed to more than 20 base-rate problems. Since
individual differences is the vehicle we are using to test the
role of conflict detection in DPT, one way to test the
reliability of a person’s approach to the base-rate neglect
problem is to expose them to a large amount of trials. In
addition, repeated trials increase the sensitivity of the
multiple mediation model.
The predictions for this experiment are as follows: (1)
Performance of participants on conflict problems will be
less accurate than performance on nonconflict problems,
where the “correct answer” is choosing the base-rate on
each problem, replicating recent base-rate neglect
investigations (De Neys & Glumicic, 2008; Pennycook et
al., 2012). (2a) Response times will be slower on conflict
problems than on nonconflict problems, signaling the
deliberation process of T2 engagement (De Neys &
Glumicic, 2008). (2b) Response times on correctly
answered conflict problems will be slower than on
incorrectly answered conflict problems, indicating support
for inhibition failure (De Neys & Bonnefon, 2013). These
two behavioral predictions test the inhibition failure
hypothesis.

Figure 1: The proposed multiple mediation model. The
dashed line in the second grouping indicates the reduced
direct effect of CRT accuracy on conflict problem accuracy.
(3) The multiple mediation model tests an individual
differences hypothesis: performance/accuracy on the CRT
will positively predict performance on conflict problems.
This is because both types of tasks require the participant to
inhibit prepotent (intuitive) response. Moreover, this
relationship is mediated by the disposition of the individual
to engage in analytic and flexible thinking, which is
correlated with engagement of T2 thinking. The two scales
will be entered into a multiple mediation model as
competing mediators to see if both, one, or neither scale
mediates conflict problem performance. Put simply, CRT

accuracy will predict accuracy on the conflict problems, and
this relationship will be mediated by a higher disposition to
engage in analytic and flexible thinking (see Figure 1
above).

Method
Seventy-six psychology undergraduate students (74%
female), with a Mage = 18.54 years (SD = 1.01) participated
in this study for partial course credit.
Each student was introduced to the study and told that
there were four stages to the entire session. Participants first
solved the three problems of the CRT. The CRT is a
behavioral measure that tests a person’s ability to inhibit an
intuitive response on a word problem (Frederick, 2005). In
addition to the bat-and-ball problem described earlier, there
are two other word problems that have careful phrasing to
elicit an intuitive answer that a person would have to inhibit
in order to arrive at the correct answer. Using this
behavioral method allows for an unbiased observation of
cognitive reflectivity not achieved by some subjective
measures.
Next, participants completed the base-rate neglect task.
These were adapted from De Neys and Glumicic (2008).
Participants answered 50 total base-rate problems, with 25
conflict problems and 25 nonconflict problems. The neutral
condition from De Neys and Glumicic was not included to
maximize the contrast in problems type (neutral problems
do not offer stereotypic information).1
In addition to the congruency of the base-rate information
and the stereotype information, there were three expressions
of extreme base-rates (997 to 3, 996 to 4, and 995 to 5). This
was done to vary the presentation of the problems, as well
as to force reading of the base-rate information (it could be
argued that if this information was the same that it would be
ignored).2 Previous research using this methodology has
shown that the extreme base-rates are needed for a strong
contrast between the conflict and nonconflict problems (De
Neys & Glumicic, 2008; Pennycook et al., 2012). The order
of these problems was fully randomized. Additionally, the
answer was randomized, and it was either presented as the
first option or second option (approximately 50% of the
problems for each choice and for each problem type). Once
the participant finished with those problems, they were
given an opportunity to rest for 30 seconds.
Participants were then given the two thinking disposition
questionnaires. These consisted of 18 items from the NFC
scale (Cacioppo et al., 1984) and 41 items from the AOT
scale (Stanovich & West, 1997). The NFC asked questions
1

See De Neys and Glumicic (2008) for pretesting information
regarding strength of stereotype for the problems tested.
Stereotypes tested varied in content: age, gender, race, job-related
groups, and stereotypical characteristics.
2
De Neys and Glumicic (2008) performed pretesting on the
extreme base-rate values to counter this argument and to vary the
numbers in order to draw attention to differences between
problems. Post-hoc analysis in their study showed that the small
variation did not change performance.

2316

to gauge the propensity of the participant to engage in
effortful thinking (T2), such as “I prefer complex to simple
problems.” Participants rated their agreement with the
statements on a five-point Likert scale, where larger values
represented a characteristic quality of the individual and
smaller values represented an uncharacteristic quality of the
individual. The AOT was a composite questionnaire that
gauged the cognitive flexibility of a person. In other words,
it measures how willing an individual is to engage in
effortful processing with information that has the potential
to modify existing beliefs or evaluations. An example of a
question from the AOT: “Difficulties can usually be
overcome by thinking about the problem, rather than
through waiting for good fortune.” Participants rated their
agreement on a six-point Likert scale, where larger values
represented stronger agreement with the statement and
smaller values represented stronger disagreement with the
statement. Each scale had negatively-worded statements that
were then reverse-coded (to prevent response acquiescence).
Each question for each scale was randomized and the
numerical scale appeared below each question.
Finally, a cognitive ability measure was gathered from
participants. Used frequently in the cognitive literature (e.g.,
Stanovich & West, 2000), participants provided their most
recent Scholastic Achievement Test (SAT) score (out of
2400). The majority of the undergraduates who participated
in the study were from the western United States, so this is
the likely standardized test taken prior to coming to college.
Individual scores for subsections of the SAT were not
sought.

response latencies than incorrect conflict problems,
reflecting the engagement of T2 thinking, or at least some
deliberation (inhibition failure hypothesis).
Table 1 shows that Prediction 1 was supported:
Participants chose the base-rate answer on conflict problems
(M = .48, SD = .32) less often than on the nonconflict
problems (M = .90, SD = .08), t(75) = -13.56, p < .001,
Cohen’s d = 1.40, which represents a departure from
accurate responding (larger proportions here represent
choosing the base-rate when it is the correct answer). Table
1 compares these findings to previous investigations of
conflict detection in the base-rate neglect task, corroborating
the presence of the conflict problem effect.
Again, Table 1 shows that Prediction 2a was supported.
Participants took significantly longer to answer conflict
problems (M = 12.5 s, SD = 4.27) than nonconflict problems
(M = 11.0 s, SD = 3.47), t(75) = 5.98, p < .001, d = .36.
However, Prediction 2b was not supported. When correct
judgments of conflict problems were compared with
incorrect judgments, correct judgments had slightly longer
(M = 14.3 s, SD = 5.2) RTs than incorrect judgments (M =
13.9 s, SD = 4.8), but this difference was not reliable (t(67)
= .44, p = .33, d = .44, one-tailed; see Figure 2).4 These
results suggest that the conflict within these problems was
detected, and deliberation did occur, but it is unclear
whether inhibition failure was the culprit in errors on
conflict problems, which is clearer in previous literature
(e.g., De Neys & Glumicic, 2008).

Results
Table 1: Means for accuracy (proportion of base-rate
answer) and response time (sec) for current experiment and
for two related experiments with similar methodology.3
Accuracy

Response Time

Experiment

Con

Noncon

Con

Noncon

Present Study
De Neys &
Glumicic (2008),
Exps. 1 & 2
Pennycook et al.
(2012), Exp. 3

0.48

0.90

12.5

11

0.19

0.94

21

13

0.59

0.95

14.1

11.5

Figure 2: Response times for nonconflict problems and
conflict problems, with conflict problems separated into
whether the response was correct or incorrect.

Behavioral analyses were performed to corroborate previous
research and replicate findings related to materials used (De
Neys & Glumicic, 2008; Pennycook et al., 2012). Two main
predictions were tested: (1) conflict problems would have
lower accuracy scores (not choosing the base-rates) than
nonconflict problems, and (2a and 2b) conflict problems
would have slower response latencies than nonconflict
problems, and correct conflict problems would have slower

Prior to testing the individual differences hypothesis
(Prediction 3), inter-item reliability on the two thinking
dispositions scales was performed. Both scales had good
internal consistency: Cronbach’s α = .84 for the NFC and
.86 for the AOT. These values are similar to those found by
Pennycook et al. (2014). Additionally, these two scales had
a moderate positive correlation, r(74) = .25, p = .03.
The individual differences hypothesis stated that better

3

4

RT values taken from Figure 3, De Neys & Glumicic (2008).
They are approximate values.

Eight participants were removed from this analysis because they
had no incorrect conflict problem judgments.

2317

performers on the CRT would opt to choose the base-rate
more often on conflict problems. Also predicted was that
this relationship would be mediated by the propensity to
engage in analytic and flexible thinking, measured by the
NFC and AOT scales. To test these hypotheses directly, we
applied the Preacher and Hayes (2008) guidelines for
bootstrapping in a multiple mediational regression analysis.
In the first equation, we regressed conflict problem
accuracy on CRT accuracy. As predicted, better performers
on the CRT tended to select the base-rate answer (the
correct answer) on conflict problems (β = .48, p < .001). In
the second equation, we regressed the thinking disposition
scale scores as competing mediators on CRT accuracy. Both
relationships were significant, whereby better performers on
the CRT predicted the propensity to engage in general
analytic thinking (NFC: β = .36, p = .002), as well as
flexible thinking (AOT: β = .32, p = .005). In the third
equation, conflict problem accuracy was regressed on CRT
accuracy and the thinking disposition scales simultaneously.
The model revealed that while flexible thinking, described
by the AOT, was a significant predictor of the base-rate
choice on conflict problems (β = .27, p = .01), a general
propensity to engage in analytic thinking, measured by the
NFC, was not a significant predictor on conflict problems (β
= .13, p = .24). Moreover, the relationship between CRT
accuracy and conflict problem accuracy was reduced from
the first regression equation (β = .35, p = .002). A Sobel test
was conducted to determine if the amount of mediation was
significant; the indirect effect was significant (z = 2.29, p =
.02). Bootstrapping (at 2000 resamples with replacement;
Preacher & Hayes, 2008) confirmed the Sobel test with a
95% CI [.034, .131]. Since the direct path from CRT
accuracy to conflict problem accuracy remained significant,
we conclude that that this relationship is only partially
mediated by flexible thinking. Figure 3 illustrates the
mediation model with beta weights for each path.

Figure 3: Mediation model displaying the causal paths for
each of the variables. Paths are notated by their beta
weights. ***p < .001, **p < .01.

Taken together, these findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that the ability to inhibit the prepotent heuristic
response on the CRT is similar to inhibitory processing in
the base-rate neglect paradigm, and that this relationship in
processing occurs because of the disposition of the
individual to be a flexible thinker when presented with a
judgment problem, but not a product of a general propensity
to think analytically. Furthermore, these effects also suggest
support for the inhibition failure hypothesis in conflict
detection, wherein an individual who is a more flexible
thinker can suppress the intuitive response on both the CRT
and the base-rate neglect task.

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to replicate and extend the
current literature of conflict detection and resolution using
the base-rate neglect paradigm and to add a new causal
model to the individual differences aspect in DPT
investigations (see Figure 3).
In a small modification of the existing methodology of the
base-rate neglect task, similar behavioral performance was
observed (Table 1), increasing the validity of the overall
findings. In addition, some support for the inhibition failure
account through response latencies was observed. Though
the time difference between correct conflict problems and
incorrect conflict problems was not reliable, the medium
effect size is promising for future studies. Perhaps response
times decreased as a function of trials, since participants
were exposed to many problems. Additional data analysis
will be performed to investigate this possibility. The results
show that processing times increase when there is an
informational conflict within the problem. Furthermore,
even more time is needed to properly deliberate and engage
T2 thinking in order to choose the correct answer. As Table
1 suggests, incorrect responses are the result of a failure to
inhibit the salience of the stereotype answer, and the longer
response latency associated with this is indicative of the
overall conflict detection (cf. De Neys & Glumicic, 2008).
A multiple mediation model was tested, adding a causal
account to the discussion of individual differences and
support for the inhibition failure hypothesis. Accuracy on
the CRT predicts subsequent accuracy on conflict base-rate
problems and this relationship is partially mediated by a
flexible thinking disposition. Similarly, Pennycook et al.
(2014) argued that the AOT is a better indicator of
willingness to engage in analytic thinking (flexibility) and
that the NFC is merely a broadly-defined tendency to think
analytically in the realm of conflict detection. The results of
our mediational analysis support the idea that the AOT and
NFC measure two separate aspects of analytic thinking, as
the AOT predicted performance on conflict problems
whereas the NFC did not (cf. Svedholm and Lindeman,
2013).
While this individual differences model shows a
meaningful relationship between accuracy on the CRT,
accuracy on the conflict problems, and a flexible thinking
disposition, it is important to interpret these conclusions

2318

with caution. Individual difference measures are difficult to
separate from other intrinsic motivations a person might
have, but the use of two related but separate scales was an
attempt to overcome this limitation and be more
comprehensive. However, other factors should not be
ignored. For example, cognitive ability has been shown to
be a strong measure of performance in dual process
literature (Stanovich & West, 2000). Stanovich (2011)
argues that T2 thinking is the center for general intelligence
and cognitive ability, and people with higher cognitive
ability have an easier time operating in T2. SAT scores were
gathered for this study, but were not included in the main
analyses or mediation model because initial correlations
indicated that SAT scores were only marginally related to
accuracy on conflict problems (r(72) = .22, p < .10).
Additional measures of cognitive ability are needed to form
a better picture of its relationship to conflict detection and
resolution.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Alexander Hill for data
collection for this project and four anonymous reviewers for
their helpful comments and suggestions.

References
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Kao, C. F. (1984). The
efficient assessment of Need for Cognition. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 48(3), 306–307.
De Neys, W. (2012). Bias and conflict: A case for logical
intuitions. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
7(1), 28–38.
De Neys, W. (2014). Conflict detection, dual processes, and
logical intuitions: Some clarifications. Thinking &
Reasoning, 169–187.
De Neys, W., & Bonnefon, J.-F. (2013). The “whys” and
“whens” of individual differences in thinking biases.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(4), 172–178.
De Neys, W., & Franssens, S. (2009). Belief inhibition
during thinking: Not always winning but at least
taking part. Cognition, 113(1), 45–61.
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in
dual process theories of thinking. Cognition, 106(3),
1248–1299.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2007). On the resolution of conflict in
dual process theories of reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 13(4), 321–339.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2012). Questions and challenges for the
new psychology of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning,
18(1), 5–31.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Curtis-Holmes, J. (2005). Rapid
responding increases belief bias: Evidence for the
dual-process theory of reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 11(4), 382–389.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Stanovich, K. E. (2013). Dual-process
theories of higher cognition: Advancing the debate.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8(3), 223–
241.

Frankish, K., & Evans, J. St. B. T. (2009). The duality of
mind: An historical perspective. In J. St. B. T. Evans
& K. Frankish (Eds.), In two minds: Dual process and
beyond (pp. 1–29). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4),
25–42.
Mevel, K., Poirel, N., Rossi, S., Cassotti, M., Simon, G.,
Houdé, O., & De Neys, W. (2014). Bias detection:
Response confidence evidence for conflict sensitivity
in the ratio bias task. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology.
Pennycook, G., Cheyne, J. A., Barr, N., Koehler, D. J., &
Fugelsang, J. A. (2014). Cognitive style and
religiosity: The role of conflict detection. Memory &
Cognition, 42(1), 1–10.
Pennycook, G., Fugelsang, J. A., & Koehler, D. J. (2012).
Are we good at detecting conflict during reasoning?
Cognition, 124(1), 101–106.
Pennycook, G., & Thompson, V. A. (2012). Reasoning with
base rates is routine, relatively effortless, and context
dependent. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19(3),
528–534.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and
resampling strategies for assessing and comparing
indirect effects in multiple mediator models.
Behavior Research Methods, 40, 879-891.
Stanovich, K. E. (2011). Rationality and the reflective mind.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1997). Reasoning
independently of prior belief and individual
differences in actively open-minded thinking. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 89(2), 342–357.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the
rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
23(5), 645–65; discussion 665–726.
Svedholm, A. M., & Lindeman, M. (2013). The separate
roles of the reflective mind and involuntary inhibitory
control in gatekeeping paranormal beliefs and the
underlying intuitive confusions. British Journal of
Psychology, 104(3), 303-319.
Svedholm-Häkkinen, A. M. (2015). Highly reflective
reasoners show no signs of belief inhibition. Acta
Psychologica, 154, 69–76.
Thompson, V. A., Prowse Turner, J. A., & Pennycook, G.
(2011). Intuition, reason, and metacognition.
Cognitive Psychology, 63(3), 107–40.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgement under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.

2319

