Insight and Cognitive Ecosystems
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk

Sune Vork Steffensen
Centre for Human Interactivity, University of Southern Denmark
Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, DENMARK
s.v.steffensen@sdu.dk

Gaëlle Vallée-Tourangeau and Angeliki Makri
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
g.vallee-tourangeau/a.makri@kingston.ac.uk
Abstract
Outside the cognitive psychologist’s laboratory, problem
solving is an activity that takes place in a rich web of
interactions involving people and artifacts. Through this
interactivity, a reasoner’s comprehension of the problem
emerges from a coalition of internal and external
resources. In the experiment presented here, interactivity
was explored under laboratory conditions. Participants
were invited to solve an insight problem, the so-called
17 Animals problem. The solution to this problem
involves the spatial arrangements of sets. The problem
masquerades as an arithmetic problem, which creates a
difficult impasse to overcome. Problem solving took
place in two different ecosystems: in one, participants
were given a stylus and an electronic tablet to sketch out
a model of the solution; in a second, participants could
interact with artifacts that corresponded to the problem’s
physical constituent features to build a model of the
solution. Participants in the sketch group were never
able to break the impasse, that is to abandon their
interpretation of the problem as one requiring an
arithmetic solution. Participants in the model building
group were more likely to break the impasse and
discover a productive action trajectory that helped them
identify a plausible solution. Video evidence revealed
substantial differences in the manner with which
participants ‘thought’ about the problem as a function of
the type of interactivity afforded by the two cognitive
ecosystems. Insight was enacted through model building
activity.
Keywords: Problem
cognition, enactivism

solving,

insight,

distributed

Introduction
Problem solving research as traditionally conducted under
laboratory conditions is constrained and guided by a
number of related methodological and theoretical
commitments. Psychologists commonly couch their

2457

explanation in terms of mental representation:
“representation occurs when a problem solver builds an
internal mental representation of a problem” (Mayer,
1995, p. 4). Research focuses on identifying and
measuring
the
processes
that
modify
these
representations. An influential perspective on solving socalled insight problems is Ohlsson’s (1992)
representational change theory (or its more generic
activation redistribution variant formulated in Ohlsson’s
2011 Deep learning book). Insight results from breaking
out of an initial impasse, which in turn reflects mental
processes—elaboration,
re-encoding,
constraint
relaxation—that transform the representation into one that
more clearly anticipates the solution. Since this is a
mentalist story, “representational change processes do not
correspond to any particular overt behaviors” (Ohlsson,
2011, p. 113).
Fleck and Weisberg (2004; 2013) elaborated a
framework to capture the different problem solving
strategies triggered when participants repeatedly fail to
solve an insight problem. In the early stages, a solution
may be proposed through analysis of the problem
elements. However a persistent impasse necessitates the
restructuring of the problem representation: “insight
typically results in solution after a restructuring of the
problem, i.e., the solver changes the initial representation
of the problem to a new one, in an attempt to develop a
new method of solution” (Fleck & Weisberg, 2013, p.
436). Verbal protocols are used as the primary window
onto the nature of that representation and the problem
solving strategies that are driven by that representation.
As the science of problem solving research proceeds on
the basis of a mental representation of the world, the
world quickly becomes secondary. Under the auspices of
this paradigm, the physical presentation of the problem—

its perceptual features and materiality, and the behavioral
interactions it affords—remains a peripheral, incidental
detail of the experimental procedure.
In Fleck and Weisberg (2013) participants worked
through a series of problems. Some of these problems
were text descriptions, for example The Socks problem
read “if you have black socks and brown socks in your
drawer, mixed in the ratio 4:5, how many socks will you
have to take out to be sure of having a pair of the same
color?” (p. 446). Others were descriptions supported by a
set of objects that could be manipulated in working
toward a solution, for example The Triangle of Coins
problem: 10 actual coins configure a southern-pointing
triangle and participants read “The triangle points to the
bottom of the page. How can you move only three coins
and make the triangle point to the top of the page” (p.
447). This difference in presentation does not reflect an
explicit manipulation of the experimental procedure; in
fact it attracts no commentary from the researchers. The
resulting difference in problem solving activity is never
attributed to a difference in interactivity. Fleck and
Weisberg (2013, Table 2, p. 456) report data that indicate
that when participants are given artifacts and can interact
with a physical presentation of the problem, evidence of
restructuring as reflected in the verbal protocols, is much
more likely (67%) than when they are not (18%). The
authors also propose two types of restructuring,
conceptually driven and data driven. The former is guided
by analytic mental processes, whereas the latter reflects
engagement with the world without intentionality.
However the two verbal protocols cited in Fleck and
Weisberg (2013)—both from participants interacting with
artifacts incidentally—are not sufficiently detailed to
permit the isolation and exact segmentation of planning
and acting, but in both cases illustrate substantial changes
to the physical model of the problem, narrated by the
participants (for a more detailed discussion see ValléeTourangeau,
2015).
Unsurprisingly
data-driven
restructuring was recorded only with problems presented
with manipulable objects (see Table 3, p. 451). These
differences attract no reflection or analysis from Fleck
and Weisberg.

Cognitive Ecosystems
We would argue that an important, albeit implicit, reason
for failing to comment on the role of interactivity in
problem solving is the methodological and theoretical
commitment to formulating an explanation in terms of
mental processes that transform a mental representation of
the world. Solving problems, however, outside the
cognitive psychologist’s laboratory first involves
changing the world. That is, problem solutions are
reflected in changes in the world; these physical changes
are the evidence of a solution. Problem solving in the
world involves tools, maps, models—some ready made
models as those used in teaching organic chemistry

2458

(Toon, 2011), some reflecting constructions using
artifacts at hands, like the table top model of a city’s
landmarks described in Noë (2012)—and unfolds within a
set of spatio-temporal coordinates. Solving problems in
the world primarily involves action: To solve problems is
to act in the word.
The aim of the present experiment was to investigate
problem solving enacted within different cognitive
ecosystems populated with different artifacts that cued
and afforded different actions (Hutchins, 2010). The
ecosystem explored in the experiment described below is
scaled down to fit laboratory conditions, but cashes in on
a fundamental Gibsonian insight that psychology must
proceed from a characterization of the organismenvironment coupling (Järvilehto, 1998). From the
perspective of material engagement theory (Malafouris,
2013), agency and intentionality emerge from interactions
with artifacts, and different cognitive ecosystems may
well lead reasoners along very different problem solving
paths. Participants were filmed as they labored a solution.
We chose a difficult problem, a so-called insight problem,
which would cue a misleading interpretation. The
problem selected was 17 animals, a version of the 27
animals problem described in Metcalfe and Wiebe (1987):
how to arrange 17 animals in 4 pens in such a manner that
there is an odd number of animals in each pen (a “pure”
insight problem according to Weisberg, 1995). This
problem masquerades as one involving an arithmetic
solution, but can only be solved by overlapping or
embedding some of or all of the pens.
Two different ecosystems were created. In the first,
participants worked on the solution with a stylus and an
electronic tablet. Essentially a traditional pen and paper
environment, but with the tablet we could also record the
exact sketching and erasing sequences. In the second, a
different group of participants worked on the solution by
building a model with artifacts (pipe cleaning pieces) to
construct pens within which they placed animal figurines.
No writing instrument were provided, no sketching or
history of prior construction could be consulted.
In the tablet system, people can draw, write, erase
symbolic representations such as words and numbers. The
system favours a more abstract contemplation of the
problem and may perpetuate the arithmetic interpretation
of the problem. Since the range of actions is limited, the
overlapping insight may rarely be enacted. In addition, a
written symbol or a drawn animal enclosure on an
electronic tablet cannot be accidentally re-shaped or
moved through serendipitous movements. In the 3D
system, model building involves playing with props in a
game of make believe (cf. Toon, 2011). Without pen and
paper, stylus and tablet, participants may be less inclined
to simulate moves in the world, to think in abstract terms.
Activity is focused on the building of pens from the outset
and engagement with the materiality of the stuff—flexible
pipe cleaning pieces of various lengths—enacts specific

behavior that produces certain shapes and arrangements.
Attention is more easily deflected away from an
arithmetic contemplation of the problem represented and
instantiated by numbers: rather the model is a
representative of the world (Noë, 2012) and people
directly act in the world. In addition, inexact or hesitant
movements coupled with the relative lack of robustness of
the material employed can unintentionally transform the
world into one that more directly helps the reasoner see a
solution. Thus problem restructuring, that is the physical
restructuring of the elements that configure the problem,
may be more easily enacted in the model building
condition.

Method

Tablet. In this condition, participants were given a
stylus and an electronic tablet (148mm X 197mm) with
which to sketch a solution to the 17A problem; participants
could draw and erase their workings with the stylus. The
participants’ sketches were saved as MP4 video clips.
3D Model. In this condition, participants were given
approximately 20 pieces of pipe cleaners varying in length
(short 20cm and long 30cm pieces) and 17 zebra paper
clips (that could also stand on four legs). Participants did
not have a pen or piece of paper with which to sketch their
solution; rather they had to build a model of the solution.
Table 1: The four features of the numbers, animals and
pens dimensions in the tablet and 3D-model conditions.
Screenshots taken every 30 seconds were coded for the
presence or absence of these features.

Participants
Tablet Condition

Fifty psychology undergraduate and postgraduate students
(44 females) received course credits for their participation
(Mage = 24.2, SD = 8.1): Participants were randomly
allocated to either the Tablet condition (n = 24) or the 3D
model condition (n = 26).

Problem Solving Task
Participants were invited to solve the following problem
(the 17 animals problem or 17A henceforth): How do you
put 17 animals in four enclosures in such a manner that
there is an odd number of animals in each of the four pens?
On the basis of pilot work we were confident that this
problem encouraged an arithmetic strategy, that is, that
participants would aim to solve the problem by dividing 17
into 4 odd-numbered groups of animals. Figure 1
illustrates possible solutions to this problem, which must
involve some degree of overlap between sets.

Figure 1: Possible solutions to the 17A problem.

All participants were first presented with a pencil and a
blank sheet of paper and given three minutes to sketch
possible solutions to the problem. No participant knew the
solution to the problem or sketched overlapping pens
during that initial period. After an interval of
approximately 25 minutes—during which they completed
a series of unrelated memory tasks—participants were
allocated to either the tablet or the 3D-model condition and
were given 10 additional minutes to solve the 17A
problem. Participants in both conditions worked on the
17A problem on a table (118cm X 74cm) in an observation
laboratory fitted with an overhead camera.

2459

3D Model Condition

NUMBERS
Feature
1 Number listed

Definition

NUMBERS
Feature

Definition

1 Distinct grouping

A grouped but not in a P

2 Number individuated Separate N outside P circled, underscored

2 Marked grouping

Group of distinct A marked or moved

3 Number modified

N struck off or transformed through arithmetic

3 Group held in hand More than one A held in hand

4 Number change

New N added

4 Group change

New group of A

Separate N listed outside P

ANIMALS

ANIMALS

1 Animals in pen

A as countable objects in a P

1 Animals in pen

A deliberately placed in a P

2 Animals listed

A as countable objects outside a P

2 Animals listed

Unrgouped or stray A outside P

3 Animals individuated A as objects marked or moved

3 Animals individuated Single A pointed, touched, held, or moved

4 Animals change

4 Animals change

Different number of A in P

1 Pens present

P built

Different number of A in P

PENS
1 Pens present

P drawn

PENS

2 Pens shape change P shape different

2 Pens shape change P shape different

3 Pens number

Number of P different

3 Pens number

Number of P different

4 Pens overlapping

P overlapping

4 Pens overlapping

P overlapping

Note. Under Definition, N = Numbers, A = Animals, P = Pens

Coding
The participants’ problem solving efforts were filmed with
an overhead camera. Screenshots from the video data were
taken at 30-second intervals and coded along three
dimensions to capture the focus of the problem solving
activity: (i) numbers; (ii) animals; (iii) pens. The numbers
dimension captured the extent to which the screenshot
reflected the manipulation of whole numbers (as opposed
to treating animals as individuated and countable objects);
the animals dimension coded features of the sketch or
models where animals were moved and treated as
individual objects; the pens dimension coded efforts to
draw or build pens of different size, shape, number and
spatial arrangement. Each dimension was defined in terms
of four features (see Table 1), the presence or absence of
which was coded with a 1 or 0, for a maximum score of 4.
A 10-minute session was segmented into 20 screenshots;
the first and fourth author coded each screenshot
independently. The correlations between the coders’
average score for each participant along each of the three
dimensions in the tablet condition ranged between .838 to
.972; for the screenshots in the 3D model condition, these
correlations ranged between .860 and .952. There was thus
substantial agreement between coders; subsequent
discussions resolved the few cases of disagreement.

Solvers n = 6

Partial Solvers n = 4

Overlappers n = 3

Non-solvers n = 10

Figure 2: Screen captures using the Procreate app of participants' sketches in the tablet condition (left panels; green background added
for contrast); end screenshots of participants' construction in the 3D model condition (right panels).

The agreed coding scores were then averaged across the
first 5 minutes of the problem session and across the last 5
minutes to capture whether the focus of the problem
solving efforts changed over time.

Results
None of the participants solved the problem during the
initial three-minute period. All participants sketched
answers that clearly illustrated an interpretation of the
problem as requiring an arithmetic solution. After a 25-min
interval, participants were given an additional 10 minutes
to solve the problem. Of the 24 participants in the tablet
condition, none solved the problem in the 10-minute period
(see the left half of Fig. 2 for illustrations of the
participants’ sketching). That is, participants worked for
the entire 10-minute period on discovering how an odd
number could be split into 4 odd quantities.
Of the 26 participants in the 3D model condition, three
systematically clipped the zebras onto the pipe cleaners
during the 10-minute problem solving period. This was
indeed an affordance of the artifacts employed in this
condition, but an unforeseen one when the material was
initially piloted. In effect, by clipping the zebras onto the
pipe cleaners, these participants could never discover the
solution to the problem, since an animal could not be
placed into more than one pen simultaneously. This type of
problem solving trajectory would not have been possible
had we chosen any other type of non-clipping figurines to
correspond to the ‘animals’ in the problems. As a result,
we chose to remove these three participants from all
subsequent analyses. Of the remaining 23 participants, 6
solved the problem outright (see Fig. 2, right panels) and 4
offered partial solutions—that is solutions with
overlapping sets, but ones for which a set intersection is
taken as a separate pen, and while there is an odd number
of animals in each resulting enclosure, this results in a five-

2460

pen solution. Of the 13 who did not solve the problem, 3
worked with overlapping sets but were unable to arrange
the animals in a correct manner, and 10 built enclosures
that never overlapped. Thus 10 participants provided full
or partial solutions to the problem in the 3D model
condition, compared to none in the tablet condition, a
significant difference, χ2(1, N = 47) = 13.26, p < .001,
Cramer’s V = .531; a more conservative test including only
the 6 solvers who provided perfect solutions was also
significant, χ2(1, N = 47) = 7.18, p = .007, Cramer’s V =
.391. In both cases, the size of the effect was large.

Focus of Problem Solving Activity
The focus of problem solving activity was measured along
three dimensions during the 10-minute video-recorded
session: Numbers, animals and pens. At the end of each
30-sec segments, a screenshot of the participants’ sketch
(in the tablet condition) or the participants’ model (in the
3D model condition) was coded in terms of the features of
these three dimensions (as defined in the Method section).
We calculated the average mean scores along each of
the three dimensions for the first five and the last five
minutes of the 10-minute problem-solving period; these
are plotted in Figure 3. A few observations: In the tablet
condition, participants were more likely to list and modify
numbers and change the number of animals in the pens
than to sketch different types of pens, and these tendencies
were more pronounced in the last 5 minutes of the problem
solving session. In fact, for participants who drew pens,
once they were drawn, the pens were generally not altered,
and remained an invariant presence with which various
calculations and animal permutations were attempted. In
the 3D model condition, participants were more likely to
change the shape and spatial arrangement of the pens and
work out how animals fit into those arrangements, than to
heap animals in groupings of various sizes outside the pens

to determine an arithmetic solution. Unlike in the tablet
condition, the level of focus on the animals and pens was
high from the start, whereas the focus on manipulating
numbers, low in the first half of the session, decreased
further in the second half, the reverse pattern to the one
observed in the tablet condition. A 3 (dimensions) x 2
(time block) x 2 (groups) mixed analysis of variance
(ANOVA) revealed that the main effect of dimension was
significant, F(2, 82) = 13.5, p < .001, ηp2 = .248, the main
effect of time was significant, F(1, 41) = 15.4, p < .001, ηp2
= .272 but the main effect of group was not, F < 1. The
more interesting pattern is reflected in the significant
dimension by group interaction, F(2, 82) = 20.2, p < .001,
ηp2 = .330, which explained the largest amount of variance
in the data. This confirms that while numbers was a
relatively important dimension in the tablet condition, it
was not in the 3D model condition, while the reverse
pattern was observed for the pens dimension.
Tablet

Mean Average Score

2.25

First 5m

3D Model

Last 5m

2.25

2.00

2.00

1.75

1.75

1.50

1.50

1.25

1.25

1.00

1.00

0.75

0.75

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.25

0.00

0.00

Numbers

Animals

Pens

Numbers

Animals

Pens

Figure 3: Average mean score for each of the three coding
dimensions for the first five and the last five minutes in the tablet
condition (left panel) and the 3D model condition (right panel).
Error bars are standard errors.

Arithmetic Focus Index. On the basis of the scores on
the numbers and pens dimensions, an arithmetic focus
index was calculated, for each participant, by taking the
sum of the scores on the numbers dimension within a time
block and dividing it by the total of the scores on the
numbers and pens dimensions. The closer to zero the
resulting ratio is, the weaker the focus on numbers relative
to pens. Figure 4 plots the arithmetic focus index in the
first five and last five minutes in the tablet and 3D model
condition. The large group difference is not surprising
since participants in the 3D model condition manipulated
the objects given to them, namely pipe cleaners and
animals, whereas those working with the tablet had a
medium with which to list and modify numbers. What is
more interesting in these data is the fact that the arithmetic
focus index increased in the second half of the problem
solving session in the tablet condition, but decreased in
that time period in the 3D model condition. This pattern
suggests that the arithmetic interpretation of the problem
exerted a stronger influence on the participants’ thinking in
the last five minutes of the session in the tablet condition,
whereas it exerted a weaker influence on the participants’
problem solving activity in the 3D model condition. A 2
(group) by 2 (time block) mixed ANOVA confirmed these

2461

impressions: the main effect of group was significant, F(1,
41) = 21.3, p < .001, ηp2 = .342, the main effect of time
was not significant, F < 1, but the group by time
interaction was significant, F(1, 41) = 7.20, p = .010, ηp2 =
.149.

Figure 4: Mean arithmetic focus index in the tablet and 3D
model groups for the first and last five minutes of problem
solving activity. Error bars are standard errors.

Discussion
The role of interactivity in insight problem solving was
explored in different cognitive ecosystems. Participants
were invited to solve the 17A problem in a tablet
condition—functionally equivalent to pen and paper—or
were asked to build a model of the solution by constructing
enclosures and manipulating animal tokens, and this
without a writing instrument with which to sketch possible
solutions. The 17A problem is a difficult problem. Every
participant sought an arithmetic solution during an initial
three-minute period. Participants subsequently assigned to
the tablet condition persevered in their effort to evince an
arithmetic solution. The quixotic focus is impressive in
light of the rudimentary arithmetic obstacle. Yet, the
university students who were assigned to this condition
were unable to explore an alternative path to solution. In
turn, 44% of the participants constructed models that
produced full or partial solutions involving overlapping
sets in the 3D model condition. The focus of the problem
solving activity differed in the two groups. Participants in
the tablet condition worked with numbers and varied the
number of animals in four non-overlapping and relatively
stable pen configurations. Furthermore, a focus on
numbers increased in the last five minutes of the problem
solving session. Participants in the 3D model condition
built models. From the outset they were much more
focused on the shape and arrangement of the pens. The
thinking environment in the 3D model condition did not
lend itself to the manipulation and transformation of
numbers as symbols.
At one level of analysis, participants solved the same
problem in both conditions. But the cognitive ecologies
were very different. The cognitive ecosystems

implemented in the tablet and 3D model conditions were
populated with different tools, arrayed in a different
physical space, prompted and cued a different range of
actions. Participants enacted different hunches and
explored different paths to solution in these different
ecologies. The problem was more easily restructured when
participants engaged in model building activity. The
genesis of insight can be understood as an enacted
phenomenon produced through the interactivity that
couples an agent to the material world: Interactivity is an
ontological substrate (Steffensen, 2013). A mentalist
perspective focusing on internal processes that restructure
a mental representation does not alert researchers to the
importance of interactivity and the materiality of the
artifacts that populate the ecosystem. While a mentalist
perspective may acknowledge the role of the environment
in shaping internal representations, the associated
ontological and methodological commitments make it
difficult to predict how problem-solving performance may
differ in environments that support different types of
interactivity.
These findings have important implications for the
psychology of problem solving. Understanding how people
solve problems must proceed from an appreciation of the
dynamic coupling between a reasoner and her
environment. Fleck and Weisberg (2013) reported but did
not comment on the fact that, in their data, restructuring
was more likely to occur when participants could
manipulate the physical elements of a problem. They
probably did not comment on this feature of their findings
because they did not assume it would make a difference: If
cognition only takes place in the head, it should not. But
the problem solving data reported here clearly show that it
makes all the difference; the resulting cognitive ecosystem
is not a mere implementation detail. How and why people
solve a problem reflects a contingent spatio-temporal
trajectory (Vallée-Tourangeau & Vallée-Tourangeau,
2014) and different ecosystems may lead to different
trajectories: To understand how people solve problems we
need to understand how different systems with different
properties and affordances may lead to different problemsolving trajectories. More qualitative analyses reflecting a
detailed coding of actions and the resulting dynamic
configuration of the problem presentation—with its
shifting topography of affordances—will likely offer a
better explanation of how, why and when someone
achieves insight. Methodologically this program of
research can only proceed by ensuring that interaction with
the physical constituents of a problem presentation is made
possible.

Acknowledgements
We thank Erica Mundhal for her help in developing the
material in one of the experimental conditions as well as

2462

Johanne Bjørndahl, Matthew Harvey and Miroslav Sirota
for helpful comments on a previous version of this
manuscript.

References
Fleck, J. I., & Weisberg, R. W. (2004). The use of verbal
protocols as data: An analysis f insight in the Candle
problem. Memory and Cognition, 32, 990-1006.
Fleck, J. I., & Weisberg, R. W. (2013). Insight versus
analysis: Evidence for diverse methods in problem
solving. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 436-463.
Hutchins, E. (2010). Cognitive ecology. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 2, 705-715.
Järvilehto, T. (1998). The theory of the organismenvironment system: I. Description of the theory.
Integrative Physiological and Behavioral Science, 33,
321-334.
Malafouris, L. (2013). How things shape the mind: A
theory of material engagement. London: MIT Press.
Mayer, R. E. (1995). The search for insight: Grappling
with Gestalt psychology’s unanswered questions.
Insight and problem solving. In R. J. Sternberg and J.
E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp. 3-32).
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Metcalfe, J., & Wiebe, D. (1987). Intuition in insight and
noninsight problem solving. Memory & Cognition, 15,
238-246.
Noë, A. (2012). Varieties of presence. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information-processing explanations of
insight and related phenomena. In M. T. Keane & K. J.
Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the psychology of thinking
(pp. 1- 44). Hemel Hempstead, UK: Harvester
Wheatsheaf.
Ohlsson, S. (2011). Deep learning: How the mind
overrides experience. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Steffensen, S. V. (2013). Human interactivity: Problemsolving, solution probing and verbal patterns in the
wild. In S. J. Cowley, & F. Vallée-Tourangeau (Eds.),
Cognition beyond the brain: Computation, interactivity
and human artifice (pp. 195-221). London: SpringerVerlag.
Toon, A. (2011). Playing with molecules. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science, 42, 580-589.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2015). Insight, interactivity and
materiality. Manuscript under review.
Vallée-Tourangeau, G., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2014).
The spatio-temporal dynamics of systemic thinking.
Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 21, 113-127.
Weisberg, R. W. (1995). Prolegomena to theories of
insight in problem solving: A taxonomy of problems.
In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature
of Insight (pp. 157-196). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

