Intellectualism and Psychology
Jack Marley-Payne (marley_p@mit.edu)
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02145 USA

Abstract

psychological kind. This suggests a new approach to
investigating knowledge – and plausibly the folk
psychological concepts more generally – one that builds
upon the pragmatist tradition.

Intellectualism – the thesis that know-how is a kind of knowthat – has proved difficult to assess by the traditional
philosophical method of conceptual analysis. Recently, some
authors have argued that we should instead look to results in
psychology – specifically whether all procedural knowledge
is declarative knowledge. I argue that such an approach is
unsatisfactory, since the concepts employed in psychology do
not map onto our concepts of knowledge in any neat way.
There is no straightforward psychological interpretation of the
intellectualist thesis.

2. Articulating Psychologism
To begin, we must clarify the topic of investigation. We are
looking at whether psychologism delivers an interesting
verdict on the intellectualist thesis, which can be understood
as follows:

Keywords: Intellectualism; knowledge; know-how

1. Introduction
It’s a widely held belief that conceptual analysis is an
ineffective approach to understanding knowledge. And it’s
natural to think this deficiency extends to the question of
intellectualism – that is, the claim that knowing-how is a
kind of knowing that. But if we aren’t to assess this thesis
by examining our intuitions, then what should we do
instead? An influential and exciting view is that we must
look to psychology – I’ll call this approach psychologism.
Looking to our best scientific theory of the mind seems a
sure-fire way to obtain interesting results relevant to both
philosophy of mind and epistemology. According to many
proponents of psychologism, the intellectualist thesis boils
down to the claim that all procedural knowledge is
declarative knowledge. This is a tractable empirical question
– indeed, it’s plausibly one that that has already been
answered in the negative. Thus psychologism promises to
resolve a long-standing seemingly intractable philosophical
debate.
In this paper I will examine whether psychologism does
provide an attractive solution to intellectualism. I will argue
that it does not – at least not as advertised. Contrary to what
proponents of psychologism claim, the knowthat/declarative knowledge identification does not go
through smoothly. Instead psychologism forces us towards
either revisionism or even eliminativism about knowledge.
The reason for this is that there is no single psychological
kind that can be identified with know-that (or know-how). If
all there was to know about attitude states was determined
by psychology, it would appear there is no place for
knowledge in a mature picture of the mind.
I suggest, in my final remarks, that this conclusion
should be resisted, in virtue of the practical significance of
knowledge attribution. Attributing knowledge to our peers is
an incredibly useful practice, whether or not it latches onto a

Intellectualism: For S to know how to φ just is for S to
know that p, for an appropriate proposition p.1 (p will
contain information on how one should φ)
This thesis is highly contentious, since paradigm cases of
know-how and know-that are very different from each other.
In particular, when a subject knows that p, she will typically
assert that p if asked, whereas the same cannot be said for
know-how. I know that Morpeth is a town in the north of
England, and will say so if anyone asks. In contrast, though
I know how to ride a bike, I am unable to articulate many of
the essential features of this activity. For example, until
recently I would confidently assert that one must lean right
when approaching a turn to the right. However, I recently
learned (from Elga & Rayo (ms)) that one must initially lean
left – and of course I had been leaning this way all along.
On a traditional approach, one must weigh the intuitions
counting for and against intellectualism, and go with those
that seem, on balance, stronger. There is reason to be
pessimistic about this strategy’s prospects. It’s unclear that
there is a satisfactory way to balance the competing
intuitions so the debate seems bound for an impasse.
Further, even if we do come up with an answer that
maximizes intuition satisfaction, it’s unclear why such a
thing is of serious philosophical interest.2
Psychologism seems to offer a remedy to these troubles.
According to the view, intellectualism is an empirical thesis
to be decided by investigation into our psychological
structure. Know-how and know-that are psychological
1

The phrase ‘just is’ stands for some sort of equivalence
between the two propositions flanking it. The minimal
reading of this is as of having minimal truth conditions (i.e.
as ‘if and only if’). This will do for our purposes since even
the minimal version of intellectualism is highly contested.
2
This line of argument is forcefully pushed by Devitt
(2011) and Kornblith (2002)

1524

states, and thus it is for psychology to determine whether
the former is an instance of the latter. This gives us the
following:
Psychologism: Find the appropriate psychological kinds to
be identified with know-how and know-that, then
investigate (experimentally) the relationship between the
two kinds of state.
The preliminary problem faced by psychologism is to give
conditions for when a psychological kind is fit for
identification with a folk concept such as know-how or
know-that. What could justify identifying know-that and
know-how with declarative knowledge and procedural
knowledge respectively?3 As Devitt notes, many cognitive
scientists themselves make such identifications, so one
might be tempted to think we should defer to the experts
here – but this would be a mistake. 4 It is clear that
psychologists can be pretty loose with the term ‘knowledge’
– they are rarely concerned with whether the states in
questions meet a justification condition, and in some cases
don’t even care whether it’s factive.5 By analogy, we
shouldn’t conclude that fairly simple computers have mental
states from the fact that computer scientists talk about what
such systems ‘know’ – theorists will often use such terms
opportunistically, if it allows them to communicate the gist
of their ideas in a snappy way. This suggests we should
have independent means to check whether their use is valid.
One needs to show that the relevant psychological kind
possesses features that make it a suitable candidate for
knowledge. The key question is: what are the criteria for
something being a ‘suitable candidate’? The standard line
here is to look for the natural kind which roughly fits with
the folk application conditions. Therefore, we need a
psychological kind which is present in a good number of
paradigm cases of knowledge, and that satisfies some of the
central intuitive principles about knowledge states.6
Crucially, these criteria of fit must be loose enough to
remain neutral on the contested intuitions surrounding
knowledge, otherwise we will fail to avoid the impasse that
upset conceptual analysis.7
In a best case scenario, there will be a unique
psychological kind meeting the uncontentious criteria for
knowledge that – being present in (enough) paradigmatic
cases of know-that, and not present in (too many) clear cut
3

This claim is made by Adams (2009), Devitt (2011) and
Wallis (2008).
4
See Devitt (2011). However, Stanley points to instances in
which psychologists reject these identifications – see his
(2011) ch 7.
5
See Machery (2009) p 8
6
This approach is defended by Kornblith (2002) and
Weatherson (2003)
7
Both Devitt (2011) and Adams (2009) move a little too
quickly from the inaccessibility of procedural knowledge, to
the conclusion that it is not know-that.

cases of an absence of knowledge. One will be able to
identify this state with know-that without begging any
conceptual questions, and then go on to investigate whether
such a state is present in typical cases of know-how – an
empirical question!
If there are too many kinds in the ball-park,
psychologism will be unable to select a candidate
unambiguously. To see this, let’s assume that in paradigm
cases of knowledge, one can both assert the relevant
information and use it to guide action. Take my knowledge
that David Lewis taught at Princeton. I can both assert this
when asked and use this information to guide action where
necessary (for example, if a friend tells me to meet them at
Lewis’ university). So I have a token knowledge state which
is an instance of both a restrictive type (call it F) which
entails assertibility, and a broader type (call it G) which only
requires action guidance. Now if only one out of F and G is
a psychologically significant kind then psychologism tells
us that this state is know-that – and we have a solution to
intellectualism one way or the other, depending on whether
it’s the narrow or broad state. However, if both are
psychologically significant kinds, psychologism will not
deliver a verdict as to which is know-that – since both fit
roughly with our ordinary concept of knowledge. Thus the
plausibility of psychologism hinges on whether the
uniqueness condition is met. In the next section, I’ll argue
that an examination of the evidence provides reason for
scepticism.

3. Assessing Psychologism
We need to investigate whether the proposed psychological
reduction is plausible. To do this, we must get clear on what
the declarative/procedural distinction amounts to. As
Stanley (2011) argues, it is not entirely clear how this
distinction is to be understood in psychology – as opposed
to computer science where it originated.8 A first pass
attempt at this would be to identify states of know-that with
sentential representations – in contrast with the cognitive
machinery that manipulates such representations.9 This
seems like a reasonable gloss on what it is for a state to be
declarative rather than merely procedural.
Of course not just any sentential representation is fit to
be identified with knowledge. A basic point is that not all
sentences can be knowledge states since some of them will
be false and others may function as desires rather than as
information. So to get something plausible we need to add
in the assumption that there is a psychologically significant
distinction between those sentential representations that are
information states and those that are desires or any other
8

Though Stanley raises some interesting problems for
psychologism, I don’t think he considers the strongest
version of the view before dismissing it. I aim to remedy
this here.
9
And thus following in the footsteps of the traditional
sentential account of belief proposed by Fodor (1975).

1525

attitudes. Second, we need to assume that there is a
psychological distinction between information states that are
true and (appropriately) justified and thus knowledge as
opposed to mere belief. The best bet for this, would be to
single out representations formed as a result of nondefective (and so reliable) processes. If no psychological
kind meets these rough criteria, it’s natural to take
psychologism to entail that there’s no such thing as
knowledge, only belief.
An old objection to this kind of view is that it holds our
account of knowledge hostage to empirical assumptions
about the nature of the mind – if it turns out there is no
language of thought, it seems that there will be no
knowledge states. However, since we’re assuming (for
dialectical purposes) conceptual analysis is mistaken, this
argument should not impress us. We shouldn’t expect to be
able come up with conditions for knowledge that are a
priori secure – this leads to futility. Instead, it’s enough that
our account be based on premises that are good working
assumptions, given our current empirical knowledge. It’s
widely held that the claim that our mental system involves
sentential representations is a good working assumption – at
least I won’t dispute this in what follows.
However, a sentential account is in danger of getting the
scope of knowledge that radically wrong. All sorts of clearly
sub-personal states quite possibly involve sentential
representation, such as pre-perceptual visual processing
(roughly, the process that turns the two-dimensional retinal
images into a single 3D perception.)10
Fortunately, there is a psychologically significant
distinction that promises to rule out such clearly subpersonal states: that between representations in modules and
representations in the central system.11 Thus, I think the best
bet for a psychological state that lines up with know-that is,
roughly, a sentential representation in the central system. It
is not question begging since it doesn’t build-in an
articulation condition; it is a substantive empirical question
whether we have conscious access to all centrally stored
sentential representations. Further, this is the reduction
Devitt seems to lean towards, which suggests we’re on the
right track.12 Thus we arrive at the following:
Psychological Knowledge: S knows that p iff p is true, and S
has a centrally stored sentential representation with p as its
content and such that the representation is non-defectively
formed.
If such an account were empirically secure – i.e. if its
commitments were plausible working assumptions – and if
it fit roughly with our intuitive notion of knowledge, then
psychologism would be a promising approach. However, I
will argue that this is not the case. There are a number of

reasons to doubt the assumptions built into Psychological
Knowledge.
The first problem concerns the notion of a central
system. Though it seems safe to assume that mental
processes involve sentential representations, the same
cannot be said for the presence of a central system. On the
one hand, there have been many challenges concerning the
extent to which the perceptual systems do in fact constitute
modules. As Prinz notes, there is a great deal of evidence
suggesting there can be top-down influence on our
perceptual states – for example when listening to a sentence
with a deleted phoneme, we will hear the sound that makes
for a coherent sentence. He notes that “If subjects hear,
“The ‘eel is on the axel,” they experience a “w” sound in the
gap. If they hear, “The ‘eel is on the orange,” they
experience a “p” sound.”13
On the other hand, many authors reject the idea of a
single central system and suggest the mind is ‘massively
modular’ so that even the representations involved in the
various conscious processes do not constitute a single
integrated system.14 Pinker, for example, argues that the
mind has separate modules dedicated to, among other
things, humour, mindreading and sexuality. Together, this
suggests that it is at the very least an open question whether
psychology will present a clear cut distinction between
central and non-central representational states, fit to mark
the boundaries of know-that.
Another worry comes from junk sentences in the longterm memory. It’s plausible to think that a whole lot of
information gets stored in our long-term memory that is
almost never employed. Mandelbaum (2014) argues that
every proposition we ever entertain is stored in long-term
memory, based primarily on the memory asymmetry results
of Gilbert et al. (1990). The psychology of judgements and
decision-making investigates whether and when various bits
of information are employed in guiding action.15 The key
point for our purposes is that a sentential representation
(even one in the central system) must stand in the
appropriate relations to the mind’s heuristic machinery to be
of significance. It’s not clear that there is a psychologically
significant distinction between those representations apt to
get called up in a range of situations and those which are
generally idle – see Mandelbaum (2014) for an argument
that all stored sentences are of a kind, from the perspective
of psychological theory. This suggests that Psychological
Knowledge would require radically expanding the extension
of knowledge, to include all sorts of things we have no
interest in.
A different set of empirical considerations arise from the
fact that there are quite possibly many mental states which
are not sentential representations – yet seem like instances
of knowledge. One example of this is visual memory. Often
13

10

This problem is noted by Stich (1978).
11
See Fodor (1983).
12
See Devitt (2011) p 210.

Prinz (2006) p. 31. The results on phoneme deletion come
from (Warren & Warren, 1970).
14
See Pinker (1997), Carruthers (2006).
15
See, e.g., Payne and Bettman (2004)

1526

our behaviour is guided by visual memory – this is both
consciously accessible and has an action-guiding role.
However, whether mental images involve purely sentential
representation is an open question. It is rejected
categorically by Kosslyn (1996), and in more moderate
fashion by Tye (2000).16
A second example is that of analogue magnitude states.
Beck (2012) has argued that a distinct type of representation
is formed when we have to make a snap judgment about the
magnitude (number, length etc.) of some object(s) – when
we are not able to count or measure it. In his words we form
a ‘noisy, analogue’ representation; one that allows us to
make rough judgements but not fine-grained ones. If Beck is
right, such states cannot be sentential representations but we
might still want to classify them as knowledge. Therefore,
even if there is a respectable psychological kind lining up
with the notion of a sentential representation in the central
system, it quite possible that such a kind will exclude much
of what we want to count as knowledge.
This shows that it is far from a safe bet that
Psychological Knowledge gets us a state that fits nicely with
our concept of knowledge. Moreover, I think the discussion
also shows that no amendment will be able to rectify this.
It’s plausible to think that our best taxonomy of
psychological states will be very fine-grained. First, this will
include different kinds of analogue and sentential states.
Second, states can be classified according to which module
they belong to – whether these are traditional perceptual
modules or the modules involved in central processes
entertained by Pinker. Third, states can be classified in
terms of how likely they are to be accessed in different
circumstances, in virtue of the agent’s structure of
heuristics. Any single one of the categories is going to be
too narrow to identify with knowledge. Moreover, there
doesn’t appear to be a single theoretically privileged way of
grouping together a certain collection of these fine-grained
states as different kinds of know-that – there is no
theoretically privileged place to draw the line.

4. Conclusion
At this point the hard-core psychologist might argue that the
correct conclusion to draw is an error theory about
knowledge. Either, we should go with Psychological
Knowledge despite the radical consequences, or replace our
single concept of knowledge with a family of more finegrained notions – or perhaps we should scrap talk of
knowledge entirely!17 If the only alternative is a return to
conceptual analysis, this may be an alternative we have to
live with.
A worry I have is that our current practice of knowledge
ascription is incredibly useful. And it’s not clear that the
16

Though Pylyshyn (1981) defends a sentential account of
mental imagery.
17
This is what Churchland (1981) proposes in the case of
belief.

psychological loaded concepts we have to replace it can
replicate this utility. I’m tempted, therefore, towards a view
on which we move away from both conceptual analysis and
psychologism, and instead focus on the practical role of
knowledge. This suggest a view more in line with the
pragmatist tradition, though it’s most closely aligned with
recent work by Edward Craig (1990) and Sally Haslanger
(2012). Indeed this may prove a fruitful methodology for
investigating folk psychology more generally – if
psychological reductions are equally implausible for other
folk concepts, which I suspect will be the case. Whatever
one makes of this potential step forward, though, I hope to
have shown that psychologism is not a comfortable resting
place.

References
Adams, M. P. (2009). Empirical evidence and the
knowledge-that/knowledge-how
distinction. Synthese, 170(1), 97-114.
Beck, J. (2012). The generality constraint and the structure
of thought. Mind, 121(483), 563-600.
Carruthers, P. (2006). The architecture of the mind. Oxford
University Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1981). Eliminative materialism and the
propositional attitudes. The Journal of Philosophy, 67-90.
Craig, E. (1990). Knowledge and the state of nature: An
essay in conceptual synthesis.
Devitt, M. (2011). Methodology and the nature of knowing
how. The Journal of Philosophy, 108(4), 205-218.
Elga, A. & Rayo, A. (ms). Fragmentation and Information
Access.
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The language of thought (Vol. 5).
Harvard University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind: An essay on
faculty psychology. MIT press.
Gilbert, D., D. Krull, and M. Malone. 1990. “Unbelieving
the Unbelievable: Some Problems in the Rejection of False
Information.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
59 (4): 601–13.
Haslanger,
S.
(2012). Resisting
reality:
Social
construction and social critique. Oxford University Press.
Kornblith, H. (2002). Knowledge and its Place in Nature.
Oxford University Press
Kosslyn, S. M. (1996). Image and brain: The resolution of
the imagery debate. MIT press.
Lewis, D. (1972). Psychophysical and theoretical
identifications. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 50(3),
249-258.
Mandelbaum,
E.
(2014).
Thinking
is
believing. Inquiry, 57(1), 55-96.
Machery, E. (2009). Doing without concepts (p. 210).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Payne, J. W., & Bettman, J. R. (2004). Walking with the
scarecrow: The information processing approach to
decision research. Blackwell handbook of judgment and
decision making, 110-132.

1527

Pinker, S. (1997). How the Mind Works.
Prinz, J. (2006). Is the mind really modular. Contemporary
debates in cognitive science, 22-36.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1981). The imagery debate: Analogue
media
versus
tacit
knowledge. Psychological
review, 88(1), 16.
Stanley, J. (2011). Know how. Oxford University Press.
Stanley, J., & Williamson, T. (2001). Knowing how. The
Journal of Philosophy, 411-444.
Stich, S. P. (1978). Beliefs and subdoxastic
states. Philosophy of Science, 499-518.
Tye, M. (2000). The Imagery Debate. Mit Press.
Wallis, C. (2008). Consciousness, context, and knowhow. Synthese, 160(1), 123-153.
Warren, R. M., & Warren, R. P. (1970). Auditory
illusions and confusions. Scientific American, 223, 30-36.
Weatherson,
B.
(2003).
What
good
are
counterexamples?. Philosophical Studies, 115(1), 1-31.

1528

