Interactivity, Expertise and Individual Differences
in Mental Arithmetic
Lisa G. Guthrie, Charlotte Harris and Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau
Department of Psychology, Kingston University,
Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, UNITED KINGDOM

l.guthrie/c.harris/f.vallee-tourangeau @kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
Participants completed long single digit sums in two
interactivity contexts. In a low interactivity condition sums
were solved with hands down. In a second, high
interactivity condition participants used moveable tokens.
As expected accuracy and efficiency was greater in the high
compared to the low interactivity condition. In addition,
participants were profiled in terms of working memory
capacity, numeracy, math anxiety and expertise in math.
All of these measures predicted calculation errors in the
low interactivity conditions; however, in the high
interactivity condition, participants’ performance was not
determined by any of these variables. We also developed a
scale to measure task engagement: Participants were
significantly more engaged with the task when they
completed the sums in the high interactivity condition.
However engagement level did not correlate with
calculation error, suggesting improvement in performance
with tokens was not the result of greater task engagement.
Interactivity transformed the deployment of arithmetic
skills, ameliorated performance, and helped to reduce the
difference in performance between individuals of low and
high math expertise.
Keywords: Interactivity; arithmetic; expertise;
anxiety; working memory; task engagement.

math

Introduction
Mental arithmetic is commonly construed as an operation
to be completed in the head by virtue of the word
‘Mental’. However, in practice individuals use the world
around them to complete simple math tasks. Scripture
(1891, p. 2) explained how the eminent “calculators” of
the day used artefacts when learning the fundamentals of
math. These math prodigies described learning arithmetic
from pebbles, peas, marbles, shot and dominoes, at times
without any awareness of rudimentary terms such as
multiply. Their expertise in completing large calculations
using simple times tables was acquired through the
physical arrangement of these manipulables.
Children appear to learn to calculate by using their
fingers in conjunction with repeating the names of the
numbers aloud (Butterworth, 2005). In addition Alibali
and DiRusso (1999) found that while gesturing is an aid to
encouraging counting accuracy in children, touching items
when counting facilitates more accurate performance than
simply pointing to countable items.
Mental arithmetic pervades everyday life, with simple
sums frequently performed without the use of artefacts.
However, as the problem increases in complexity we may
resort to pen and paper or in counting a handful of change

we may lay out the coins, grouping common coins
together during the tallying. Classrooms frequently use
interactive instruction when introducing mathematical
concepts to children (Martin & Schwarz, 2005; Fyfe,
McNeil, Son & Goldstone, 2014). The world is saturated
with number-based artefacts, and it is thought that
paleolithic artefacts, such as calendars and clay tokens,
contributed to the evolution of human numerical concepts
(De Smedt & De Cruz, 2011; Malafouris, 2013). Even
low interactivity mathematics, such as mental arithmetic,
appears to rely on internal representations of number lines
(Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003). This reliance on
graphical or physical representations suggests that
mathematics tasks could be enhanced by the use of
interactivity with amenable external artefacts. Thus
interactivity has an obvious impact on mathematical
problem solving.
Solving a mental arithmetic problem can place high
demands on limited working memory storage capacity and
processes (DeStefano & LeFevre, 2004; Butterworth,
2006). When internal cognitive resources are strained,
people naturally mine their external surroundings in order
to augment cognition (Kirsh, 2013). During mathematical
calculations, individuals, adults and children alike, may
use gestures, and fingers to point and count (GoldinMeadow, Nusbaum, Kelly, & Wagner, 2001; Carlson,
Avraamides Cary, & Strasberg, 2007). Experts and
novices have been shown to devise shortcuts and
procedures drawn from their interaction with the world in
order to reduce the load on working memory
(Butterworth, 2006; Kirsh, 1995). Thinking does not
simply take place ‘in the head’ but rather emerges from an
interaction with artefacts in the world. “Cognition has no
location” it is a dynamic interplay between internal and
external resources (Malafouris, 2013, p. 85).

Expertise
Expertise in a particular domain is often attributed to
innate aptitudes (Ericsson & Charness, 1994.) Galton
(1892) proposed that “intellectual powers”, along with the
enthusiasm for hard work were inherited gifts with these
innate abilities almost certainly guaranteeing eminence (p.
16). In response to his cousin’s opinion, Darwin
maintained, “men did not differ much in intellect, only
zeal and hard work; I still think this is an eminently
important difference.” (Galton, 1908, p. 290). Ensuing
research and theories have indicated that high levels of
performance and expertise are mediated by ongoing
acquisition and consolidation of skills (Eriscsson &

842

Charness, 1994; Sternberg, 1999) In the case of
mathematical expertise a number of factors have been
identified as contributors to exceptional performance
including working memory, deliberate practice, intrinsic
reward in the success of solving a problem (Butterworth,
2006; Ericsson & Charness, 1994.)
Interactivity in problem solving has been attributed
with diminishing the load on working memory as some of
the limited internal memory storage is unburdened onto
the external world (Kirsh, 1995; Vallée-Tourangeau,
2013). Furthermore, other executive functions and
strategy selection may benefit from the dynamic problem
configuration enacted through interactivity.

Math Anxiety
The strain on working memory during mental arithmetic
may be exacerbated when the individual experiences math
anxiety as this anxiety utilises cognitive resources that
would otherwise be directed at the problem (Ashcraft &
Kirk, 2001; Ashcraft & Ridley, 2005). Math anxiety is
typically associated with feelings of tension, uneasiness,
confusion and fear when faced with solving math
problems either in the classroom, workplace or daily life
(Richardson & Suinn, 1975; Ashcraft & Moore, 2009).
Math-anxious individuals have repeatedly been shown to
perform less well in math than their less anxious
counterparts (Hembree, 1990; Ma, 1999; Lyons &
Beilock, 2011). Ma (1999) conjectures that those exposed
extensively to mathematics may have greater control over
their anxiety, even suggesting that these feelings of
anxiety may be channeled to an improved level of
performance. In a study investigating math anxiety and
interactivity Vallée-Tourangeau, Sirota, and Villejoubert
(2013) found that math anxiety was highly correlated with
calculation error in a low interactivity condition where
participants could not modify the problem presentation
nor use their hands to point at numbers; however, in a
high interactivity condition where participants could
shape and reshape the problem presentation, math anxiety
was no longer a predictor of calculation error. They
argued that in the higher interactivity condition, a
dynamic problem presentation wrought through action
transforms working memory capacity, not only in terms of
storage but also executive function skills, mitigating the
impact of performance anxiety.

Task Engagement
The experience of learning and achievement are
potentially influenced by active engagement in the
performance of academic tasks in the classroom
(Shernoff, Csikszentmihalyi, Schneider, & Shernoff,
2003). Students report a greater sense of engagement with
perception of control and relevance to the real world
(Shernoff et al., 2003; Newmann, Wehlage, & Lamborn,
1992). Affective variables such as enjoyment, interest and
challenge have been associated with academic success,
thus positive emotions elicited by the task experience
contributes to increased problem-solving capacities and
improved mathematical performance (Hembree, 1990;
Shernoff et al., 2003). In turn difficulty in performing
tasks may be experienced as a result of negative affect

(Storbeck & Clore, 2007). Increasing the level of
interactivity when solving a math problem has been
shown to positively impact the level of engagement
(Guthrie & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2015). This implies that
giving participants control over their environment may
directly increase affect and engagement in the task
compared to the level of engagement in a low interactivity
environment.

The Current Experiment
Highly enactive approaches to math have been shown to
increase efficiency and accuracy, while reducing
calculation error (Vallée-Tourangeau, 2013). In the
current experiment, participants varying in math expertise
were invited to complete simple sums. These sums were
composed of either 11 or 17 numbers. This task does not
challenge the arithmetic knowledge and skills of collegeeducated participants; nonetheless in the absence of pen
and paper, accuracy requires good working memory
capacity and executive function skills especially when
dealing with longer sums. The aim was to investigate
whether any changes in performance were related to the
mode of problem solving. We designed two reasoning
contexts: In a first low-interactivity context, participants
were shown a random configuration of numbers, and were
asked to calculate the sum with hands on table. In a
second high-interactivity context, the same configurations
were presented with number tokens, and participants were
free to move them and re-arrange the problem
presentation as they calculated an answer. The focus being
on the effect of interactivity without and with artifacts,
namely the wooden tokens, in facilitating an improvement
in performance. A selection of tests and questionnaires
were also included in the experimental session to measure
individual differences implicated in mental arithmetic
such as math anxiety, working memory, numeracy, math
expertise and engagement. A dynamic, high interactivity
environment using artefacts as opposed to a low
interactivity quasi-static one may encourage more
efficient calculations, reflecting better skills, through the
dynamic reconfiguration of the problem. A high degree
of interactivity may improve performance for participants
with lower math expertise. In contrast, the performance of
participants with a higher degree of math expertise may
not vary greatly as a function of interactivity since their
well-practiced internal resources may work efficiently and
creatively when dealing with numbers.

Method
Participants
Sixty participants (38 women, Mage = 21.3, SD = 2.37)
were recruited from a variety of academic backgrounds.
Thirty-two psychology undergraduates participated in
exchange for credits, 21 undergraduates from other
disciplines volunteered to participate and seven additional
participants either working in a highly numerical field
(e.g., accounting), or recently graduated with a math
discipline degree also participated voluntarily.

843

Materials and Measures
Arithmetic Task. Each participant was presented with
two sets of simple additions, each composed of five 11
and five 17 single-digit numbers. These additions were
performed in two interactivity conditions. In the low
interactivity condition, participants were given a sheet of
A4 paper, with numbers to be summed distributed
randomly on the page (see Fig. 1, left panel). While
adding the numbers, participants were instructed to keep
their hands flat on the table. In the high interactivity
condition, participants were given a similar set of sums,
with the same distribution, but presented as moveable
numbered wooden tokens (1.2 cm in diameter; see Fig. 1,
right panel). On completing each sum participants were
requested to announce the answer aloud to the researcher.
Low Interactivity

HIgh Interactivity

Figure 1: The sum was presented on a sheet of A4 as a random
configuration of digits in the low interactivity condition (left
panel); participants in that condition kept their hands flat on the
table top. In the high interactivity condition, the sums were
presented with movable wooden tokens (right panel) which
participants touched, moved, grouped, as they saw fit.

Math Anxiety. Participants completed a 25-item
Mathematics Anxiety Scale-UK (MAS-UK; Hunt, ClarkCarter & Sheffield, 2011). The questionnaire consisted of
a series of situations with participants asked to indicate
how anxious they would feel in those situations, on a
Likert-style scale, with 1 = “not at all” and 5 = “very
much”. Items included statements such as “Working out
how much your shopping bill comes to” or “Taking a
math exam”.
Objective Numeracy. A basic arithmetic scale (BAS)
was used to test participants’ objective numeracy. It
consisted of 60 simple arithmetic problems (such as 7x8 =
?). Participants were required to write the answers on the
paper provided, in the order presented, completing as
many as possible in 60 seconds.
Working Memory. Participants completed two working
memory tasks. The computation-span task, testing both
processing and storage of numbers, while a non-numerical
visuo-spatial task, the Corsi block task, testing the
temporary storage of visual and spatial information.
Computation-span task. The computation-span task
(Ashcraft & Kirk, 2001) required participants to answer
simple arithmetic problems (e.g., 2 + 8 = ?, 12 – 4 = ?),
before recalling the second number of these problems
(e.g., 8, 4). Sequences of equations ranged from 1 – 7 and
participants had to process each sum and recall the
relevant digit correctly to score a point.
Corsi block task. In this version of the Corsi Block
task participants were shown ten sequences of shaded
blocks in a 4 x 4 matrix on a computer screen. The
number of blocks to be remembered in each sequence

increased from 2 to 6 blocks in length. Participants scored
one point for each correctly ordered block, thus the
maximum score was 40.
Math Expertise. We developed an instrument to evaluate
math expertise based on experience. Four questions were
related to math grades at school such as, “Have you taken
math GSCE (or equivalent)?”, this was scored as a binary
‘yes’ = 1, ‘no’ = 0; “If yes, please indicate which grade”,
this was scored as ‘A*/A’ = 4, ‘B’ = 3, ‘C’ =2, ‘<C’ =1
‘N/A’ = 0. Three questions asked for details on current
university degree, any past university degree and current
job if applicable. The responses were given a score from
1-4 where 4 = a math-heavy degree or job and 1 = no
degree or job. The highest score from these three
questions was used to measure math experience in terms
of degree and employment. This score was added to the
responses on math education to provide a continuous
numerical measure of math expertise.
Task Engagement Scale. The Task Engagement Scale
(TES) was developed to gauge a participant’s engagement
and enjoyment during a task. The 9-item scale was based
on Shernoff et al. (2003) who identified three key
components of task engagement: concentration,
enjoyment and interest. The scale asked participants to
rate how anxious they felt; how easy, pleasurable, fun,
threatening, stressful, tiresome, or effortful the task was;
and how motivated they were to perform well in the task.
Each item was scored on an 8-point Likert scale, labeled
from zero (definitely not) to seven (definitely yes): The
higher the score the more positive the attitude toward the
task. Participants completed the TES after the 10 sums in
each interactivity condition. The alpha reliability of the
nine-item scale for both interactivity conditions indicated
that the scale had good reliability (Low interactivity,
Cronbach’s α = .77; High interactivity, Cronbach’s α=
.81).

Procedure
The length of the additions (11 or 17-digits) and level of
interactivity (high, low) were repeated measures factors
yielding four conditions. The presentation order of these
conditions was counterbalanced across participants. The
sets of sums for each interactivity condition were
separated by at least one other task (either the MAS-UK,
BAS, Computation-span or Corsi Block). The other tasks
were presented at either the beginning or the end of the
session and their order was counterbalanced across
participants. Each experimental condition was followed
by the TES, and the experiment ended with a math
experience questionnaire. The working memory tasks
were presented on a computer with all other tasks being
presented on paper. The experimental session lasted
approximately an hour.
Mental arithmetic performance was measured in terms
of accuracy (proportion of sums correct), latency to
solution, absolute calculation error and efficiency.
Absolute calculation error was defined as the absolute
error from the correct answer. Therefore, if the participant
answered 52 and the correct answer was 50, the absolute
calculation error would be 2, if the participant answered
48 the absolute calculation error would also be 2. A

844

participant’s efficiency was his or her proportion correct
answers over the proportion of time used to calculate a set
of sums. This proportion was derived by taking the
participant’s mean latency divided by the mean latency of
the slowest quartile of participants. Thus, if a participant’s
accuracy for a series of five sums was .6, and her average
latency to complete these sums was 40% of the average of
the slowest participants, then her efficiency ratio would be
.6/.4 or 1.5. Ratios at or above 1 reflect efficient
reasoning; ratios below 1 reflect inefficient reasoning.

Results
Overall Arithmetic Performance
Accuracy. The mean percent correct, as reported in the
top right panel of Figure 2, was greater in the high
interactivity condition than the low interactivity condition
for both sum lengths. A 2 (Interactivity: Low and high) x2
(Sum length: 11-digit and 17-digit) repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) indicated a significant
main effect of interactivity, F(1,59) = 30.04, p < .001, η2
= .34 and sum length F(1,59) = 21.23, p < .001, η2 =
.265; however, the interaction was not significant , F < 1.
Absolute Calculation Error. The mean absolute
calculation error (Fig. 2, bottom left panel) was lower in
the high interactivity condition than in the low
interactivity condition regardless of the sum length. A 2x2
repeated measures ANOVA indicated a significant main
effect of interactivity, F(1,59) = 11.01, p = .002, η2 = .16
and sum length F(1,59) = 17.20, p < .001, η2 = .23.
However, there was no significant interaction, F < 1.
Accuracy
90%

Low Interactivity

Mean Latency (s)

Mean Percent Correct

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

40

Efficiency

4.5

1.60

Mean Efficiency Ratio

Mean Absolute Error

4.0

1.5
1.0
0.5

11-digit

17-digit

4

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

C-Span

Corsi

Exp

TES-L

TES-H

ACE-L

ACE-H

-

-.47
-

**

-.46

**

-.23

-.68

**

-.13

.07

-.51

**

.10

.60

**

.30

**

.65

**

.18

-.02

-.48

**

-.23

.39

**

.59

**

.25

-.05

-.50

**

-.24

.36

**

-.04

-.08

-.17

.14

.02

-.52

-

.61

-

-

-

-

**

-.07
**

.04

-.23

-.22

.04

.14

-

.29

*

-

1.40

Expertise, Working Memory and Math Anxiety

1.20
1.00
0.80
0.60

0.0

3

2
OBJ-N

Note: * p < .05, ** p < .01. MAS = Math anxiety; OBJ-N = Objective
numeracy (basic arithmetic skill); C-span = Computation-span; Corsi =
Visuo-spatial working memory; Exp = Math expertise (continuous
measure); TES-L = Task engagement in the low interactivity condition;
TES-H = Task engagement in the high interactivity condition; ACE-L =
Absolute calculation error in the low interactivity condition; ACE-H =
Absolute calculation error in the high interactivity condition.

20

1.80

5.0

2.0

2

1
MAS

30

0

2.5

1

9

Absloute Calculation Error

3.0

Table 1: Correlation matrix for average absolute
calculation error, individual difference measures of math
anxiety, objective numeracy, working memory
(computation-span and Corsi blocks), math expertise and
task engagement in both interactivity conditions (df = 58).

8

10

3.5

Participants were more engaged in the high interactivity
condition (M = 44.13, SD = 9.2) than in the low
interactivity condition (M = 37.8, SD = 8.8). This
difference was significant, t (59) = -6.16, p < .001. There
were no significant correlations between TES and the
measures of performance (see Table 1).

7
50

70%

50%

Task Engagement Scale

6

60

80%

60%

Efficiency. Participants were less efficient when
calculating the sums in the low interactivity condition
than when using tokens across both sets of sums (see Fig.
2, bottom right panel). The efficiency ratio decreased for
longer sums, although it was still larger in the high
interactivity condition. A 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA
indicated a significant main effect of interactivity, F(1,59)
= 22.01, p < .001, η2 = .27 and sum length F(1,59) =
17.11, p < .001, η2 = .225; the interaction, however, was
not significant, F < 1.

5

Latency

High Interactivity

significant interaction between sum length and condition
F(1,59) = 6.68, p = .012, η2 = .10.

11-digit

17-digit

Figure 2: Mean percent correct (top left), mean latency (top
right), mean absolute calculation error (bottom left) mean
calculation efficiency (bottom right) as a function of sum length
(11-digit and 17-digit sums) in the low (light grey bars) and high
(dark grey bars) interactivity condition. Error bars are standard
errors of the mean.

Latency. While latency to completion was influenced by
sum length, interactivity level resulted in very little
difference in latency (see Fig. 2, top right panel). In a 2x2
repeated measures ANOVA the main effect of
interactivity was not significant, F(1,59) = 1.42, p = .239,
η2 = .02. However, there was a significant main effect of
sum length F(1,59) = 201.60, p < .001, η2 = .78 and a

Relative to calculation error, accuracy is a course-grained
measure; participants were only able to score 0-5 and
accuracy does not discriminate between small and large
calculation errors. Absolute calculation error was
therefore chosen for further analysis above the other three
performance measures for its resolution and for capturing
the most important aspect of arithmetic performance: the
solutions themselves. The mean absolute calculation
errors in the 11 and 17-digit sums were averaged for each
participant creating two new variables, overall mean
absolute calculation error in the low interactivity
condition (M = 3.38, SD = 3.49) and in the high
interactivity condition (M = 1.85, SD = 2.27). The mean
absolute calculation error in the low interactivity
condition was significantly greater than in the high
interactivity condition, t(59) = 3.31, p = .002.

845

In order to evaluate the influence of individual
differences on performance, math anxiety, numeracy,
working memory and expertise were correlated with
calculation error (see Table 1). There were a number of
highly significant correlations observed in the low
interactivity condition: Math anxiety, r(58) = -.51, p <
.001; objective numeracy, r(58) = -.48, p < .001;
computation-span, r(58) = -.50, p < .001; expertise, r(58)
= -.52, p < .001. However, in the high interactivity
condition none of these variables predicted absolute
calculation error; the largest non-significant correlation
involved the computation-span, r(58) = -.24, p = .064.

Discussion
Participants completed two sets of addition problems: one
set was completed with restricted hand movement
reducing interactivity; the other using round numbered
wooden tokens increasing the opportunity to reconfigure
the problem presentation as the sum was calculated.
Generally, participants answered more sums accurately,
achieved higher efficiency ratios and the calculation error
was lower in the high interactivity condition. Latency,
however, remained constant across the two levels of
interactivity for the short and long additions, suggesting
improvements in other measures were related to the mode
of problem solving, rather than the time required to
complete the addition. This improvement in performance
could not be attributed to extraneous between-subject
factors, such as individual differences, because of the
repeated measures design employed in this experiment: all
participants completed the sums in both interactivity
conditions. The results support our claim that high degree
of interactivity improves the performance of those with
less math expertise in these simple arithmetic problems.
The strong correlation between objective numeracy
and expertise, r(58) = .59, p < .001, indicated that our
measure of expertise reflected the arithmetic proficiency
of an individual. With a static problem presentation and
hands down on the table, participants’ performance
reflected their arithmetic and working memory skills. The
lack of correlations with arithmetic performance and
expertise in the high interactivity condition implied that
the manipulation of number tokens augmented the
arithmetic skills of participants with less math expertise
such as to render their performance indistinguishable from
those with greater expertise.
The influence of math anxiety on performance was
dramatically different as a function of interactivity. When
interactivity with the world was low, math anxiety had a
significant impact on performance: Higher math anxiety
scores were related with greater calculation error. In turn,
the high interactivity context eliminated the variance in
performance explained by math anxiety. This implies that
even on these simple math tasks, a dynamic presentation
offering a greater level of interactivity may assist in
reducing or controlling the impact of math anxiety on
mental arithmetic performance.
The enhancements in performance of the lesser skilled
individuals in the high interactivity condition may be
attributed to off-loading working memory onto the
external environment. The two measures of working

memory, computation-span and the Corsi block task, were
moderately correlated, r(58) = .30, p < .01. Computationspan correlated highly with numeracy and expertise
supporting claims that working memory is a contributing
factor to mental arithmetic skill (see Butterworth, 2006).
Our computation-span test was designed to reflect a
conventional complex span task requiring some numerical
skill; unsurprisingly, this correlated with measures of
math skill in the low interactivity condition, more
interestingly it did not correlate with performance in the
high interactivity condition. The Corsi task, as a measure
of visuo-spatial working memory was deliberately
selected to reduce the reliance on numeracy. Corsi scores
did not correlate with performance in either condition of
interactivity. The findings here are consistent with
previous mental arithmetic research conducted in lower
interactivity environments indicating that the short-term
storage component of the visuo-spatial sketchpad played a
small role in mathematical performance (Lee, Ng, Ng, &
Lim, 2004). Span tasks, such as the computation-span
assess an individual’s working memory in both processing
and storage, whereas the Corsi test as designed here
gauges storage capacity only. These results suggest high
interactivity does not simply function as a means for offloading working memory storage; rather the manipulation
of the tokens scaffolds thinking enhancing the
participants’ calculations (Kirsh, 2013).
Individuals were more engaged in the task when given
the opportunity to use the tokens than when they had to
maintain their hands on the table. This pattern in the level
of engagement did not change as a function of math
expertise. Notably performance, as measured by absolute
calculation error, was not influenced by how engaged
participants were in the task. Participants might have felt
more engaged when completing the task with tokens, but
the level of engagement did not in itself explain the
improvement in arithmetic performance in the high
interactivity condition.
Expertise in the domain of mathematics may be
attributable to factors including practice, intrinsic reward
and components of working memory. This paper has
shown that a systemic perspective on mental arithmetic
helps us better understand how resources internal and
external to the participants are configured dynamically to
reflect expertise and skills at solving simple mathematical
problems.

References
Alibali, M.W., & DiRusso, A.A. (1999). The function of
gesture in learning to count: More than keeping track.
Cognitive Development, 14, 37-56.
Ashcraft, M. H., & Kirk, E. P. (2001). The relationships
among working memory, math anxiety, and
performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 224-237.
Ashcraft, M. H., & Moore, A. M. (2009). Mathematics
anxiety and the affective drop in performance. Journal
of Psychoeducational Assessment, 27, 197-205.
Ashcraft, M. H., & Ridley, K. S. (2005) Math anxiety and
its cognitive consequences: A tutorial review. In J. I.

846

D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical
cognition (pp. 315-327). New York: Psychology Press.
Butterworth, B. (2005). The development of arithmetical
abilities. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry,
46, 3-18.
Butterworth, B. (2006). Mathematical Expertise. In
Ericsson K. A., Charness N., Feltovich P. J. and
Hoffman R. R. (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of
expertise and expert performance (pp. 553-568). New
York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press.
Carlson, R. A., Avraamides, M. N., Cary, M., &
Strasberg, S. (2007). What do the hands externalize in
simple arithmetic? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33,
747–756.
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen, L. (2003).
Three parietal circuits for number processing.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 1, 487-506.
De Smedt, B. & De Cruz, H. (2011). The role of material
culture in human time representations: Calendrical
systems as extensions of mental time travel. Adaptive
Behaviour, 19, 63-76.
DeStefano, D., & LeFevre, J.-A. (2004). The role of
working memory in mental arithmetic. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 16, 353-386.
Ericsson, K.A. & Charness, N. (1994). Expert
performance: Its structure and acquisition. American
Psychologist, 49, 725-747.
Fyfe, E.R., McNeil, N.M., Son, J,Y. & Goldstone, R.L.
(2014). Concreteness fading in mathematics and
science instruction: A systematic review. Educational
Psychological Review, 26, 9-25.
Galton, F. (1908). Memories of my life. London: Methuen.
Galton, F. (1892). Hereditary Genius: An inquiry into its
laws and consequences (2nd ed.). London: MacMillan.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S. D., &
Wagner, S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing
lightens the load. Psychological Science, 12, 516-522.
Guthrie, L.G., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2015).
Interactivity and mental Arithmetic: Coupling mind
and world transforms and enhances performance.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Hembree, R. (1990). The nature effects and relief of
mathematics anxiety. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 21, 33-46.
Hunt, T. E., Clark-Carter, D., & Sheffield, D. (2011) The
development and part validation of a UK scale for
mathematics anxiety. Journal of Psychoeducational
Assessment, 29, 455-466.
Kirsh, D. (1995). Complementary strategies: Why we use
our hands when we think. In J. M. Moore & J. L.
Lehman (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 212-217). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Publishers.

Kirsh, D. (2013). Thinking with external representation.
In S. J. Cowley, & F. Vallée-Tourangeau (Eds.),
Cognition
beyond
the
brain:
Computation,
interactivity and human artifice (pp. 171-194).
London: Springer-Verlag.
Lee, K., Ng, S-F., Ng, E-L. & Lim, Z-Y. (2004). Working
memory and literacy as predictors of performance on
algebraic word problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 89, 140-158.
Lyons, I.M. & Beilock, S.L. (2011). Mathematics anxiety:
Separating the math from the anxiety. Cerebral
Cortex, 22, 2102-2110.
Ma, X. (1999). A meta-analysis of the relationship
between anxiety toward mathematics and achievement
in mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics
Education, 30, 520-540.
Malafouris, L. (2013). How things shape the mind: A
theory of material engagement. Cambridge, MA :
MIT.
Martin, M. & Schwartz, D.L. (2005) Physically
distributed learning: Adapting reinterpreting physical
environments in the development of fraction concepts.
Cognitive Science, 29, 587-625.
Newmann, F. M., Wehlage, G. G., & Lamborn, S. D.
(1992). The signifiance and sources of student
engagement. F. M. (Ed.) Student engagement and
schievment in American secondary schools (pp. 1139). New York : Teachers College Press Columbia
University.
Ricardson, F.C., & Suinn, R.M. (1972). The mathematics
anxiety rating scale. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 19, 551-554.
Scripture, E.W. (1891). Arithmetical prodigies. American
Journal of Psychology, 4, 1-59.
Shernoff, D. J., Csikszentmihaly, M., Schneider, B., &
Shernoff, E. S. (2003). Student engagement in high
school classrooms from the perspective of flow theory.
School Psychology Quarterly, 18, 158-176.
Sternberg, R.J. (1999). Intelligence as developing
expertise. Contemporary Educational Psychology 24,
359–375.
Storbeck, J., & Clore, G.L. (2007). On the
interdependence of cognition and emotion. Cognition
and Emotion, 21, 1212-1237.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Sirota, M., & Villejoubert, G.
(2013). Reducing the impact of math anxiety on
mental arithmetic: The importance of distributed
cognition. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
3615-3620). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2013). Interactivity, efficiency,
and individual differences in mental arithmetic.
Experimental Psychology, 60, 302-311.

847

