Interruption-recovery training transfers to novel tasks
Winston E. Jones (winston.jones@psllab.org)
Jarrod Moss (jarrod.moss@msstate.edu)
Department of Psychology, PO Box 6161
Mississippi State, MS 39762 USA
Abstract
Interruption interference is a significant decrease in
performance that follows task interruption. This interference
is often studied using a primary and interrupting task pair.
Evidence suggests that interruption interference can be
reduced through practice by exposing individuals to many
interruptions. However, the evidence that this skill transfers
beyond the tasks being trained is less clear. In particular,
these practice effects may only occur when the same
interrupting/primary task pairs are involved. A transfer
paradigm was implemented to assess the transfer of
interruption-recovery skill. Participants in separate conditions
performed either the Tower of Hanoi or the Tower of London
primary task during a training block and a transfer block of
trials. Trials were interrupted by another task, and the primary
measure was the time taken to resume the interrupted task.
Significantly lower resumption times at the beginning of the
transfer block lead to the conclusion that interruption
recovery skill can be transferred to a novel task.
Keywords: interruptions; skill acquisition; transfer

Introduction
Interruptions involve the suspension of task performance in
order to perform a second, interrupting task. Handling
interruptions has been found to result in robust costs to both
speed and accuracy when compared to non-interrupted
performance (e.g., Hodgetts & Jones, 2006; Trafton et al.,
2003). Therefore, along with research that has sought to
identify the sources of interruption interference, research
has also explored possible means for mitigating interruption
interference by improving recovery from interruption via
training (e.g., Cades et al., 2011).
Research examining interruption interference has often
used the Memory for Goals theory to explain interference
effects (Altmann & Trafton, 2002). In this theory, the
likelihood of successful interruption recovery depends on
the level of activation of the interrupted task’s goal-state
information in memory. This theory is implemented with
the ACT-R architecture (Anderson, 2007), which includes a
long-term declarative memory in which activation of
memories decays with time unless strengthened by rehearsal
or retrieval. If the activation of a memory drops below the
retrieval threshold, then retrieval will fail unless further
activated by a cue in the environment that spreads activation
to that memory. Level of activation in memory affects the
speed and accuracy of retrieval. Therefore, the resumption
lag (i.e., the time taken to resume a primary task following
the end of an interruption) is affected by the amount of goal
state rehearsal prior to or during an interruption because this
rehearsal raises the goal’s level of activation of in memory.

Initial evidence that interruption handling could be
improved through practice used a three-block paradigm
where individuals performed a task while being interrupted
multiple times either with a warning prior to the interruption
or with no warning (Trafton et al., 2003). Resumption lag
decreased from earlier to later blocks, providing evidence
that interruption recovery improved with practice. However,
this effect only occurred in the no-warning condition, so the
practice effect might be an adaptation only to events that did
not include warning time for preparation.
The possibility of improving interruption recovery
through training was further addressed in a later study using
a similar primary/interrupting task paradigm in which
resumption lag times were compared across individuals who
had varying exposure to interruptions in a three-session
AAA AAB ABB design where A blocks received no
interruptions and B blocks received interruptions (Cades,
Trafton, & Boehm-Davis, 2006). Individuals improved their
resumption lag with more exposure to interruptions. These
results supported the possibility of a general interruption
recovery skill by which interruption handling can be trained.
To examine the possibility that interruption recovery skill
was independent of task skill, a similar three-session study
design was used that manipulated the onset of a new
interrupting task rather than the onset of interruptions (i.e.,
an AAA, AAB, ABB design where the letters now
correspond to different interrupting tasks). Resumption lag
did not improve and temporarily got worse during the first
block including the new interrupting task (Cades et al.,
2011). These results support the conclusion that resumption
lag improvements might be confined to a practiced
primary/interrupting task pair. However, it is still not clear
whether improvements in resumption lag might transfer to a
new primary task if the interrupting task were held constant.
There are theoretical reasons why one might find transfer
in the case of a similar interrupting task being paired with a
new primary task. Singley and Anderson (1989) describe
transfer as being dependent on the amount of overlapping
production rules between two tasks. More recently, Taatgen
(2013) has proposed that transfer between two tasks can
occur as long as they share common Primitive Information
Processing Elements (PRIMs) at a finer level of detail than
the production rule. In the case of interruption recovery
skill, the PRIMs responsible for interrupting task execution
or those responsible for preparing to engage in a common
interrupting task might provide an account of transfer
between new primary tasks with the same interrupting task.
Furthermore, the interrupting or primary tasks may not have
to be identical, but instead they may simply have to share
enough PRIMs. Because many interruptions involve the

1027

encoding of interrupted task-state information and a switch
between tasks, this account indicates that it may be possible
to see a more task-general interruption recovery process
(i.e., task state or goal rehearsal).
Prior to engaging in a detailed task analysis, including
understanding the overlapping PRIMs, it seemed prudent to
first explore whether transfer could be observed in an
interruption paradigm in which transfer of resumption lag
improvements could be examined. The current study
therefore tests the general interruption recovery skill
hypothesis in which transfer of resumption lag
improvements is assessed when both the interrupting task
and primary task differ between training and transfer. In
addition, because previous studies concluded that recovery
skill is task-pair specific, the study design included an
assessment of whether transfer occurred when the
interrupting task stays the same but the primary task
changes (i.e., a common-interrupting-task hypothesis).
A counterbalanced experiment design (e.g., A-B B-A)
was implemented to evaluate transfer using between-group
comparisons (Singley & Anderson, 1989). In these analyses,
Task A trial blocks (i.e., yellow cells in Table 1) are
compared to each other and Task B trial blocks (i.e., red
cells in Table 1) are compared to each other across
conditions. Using the example shown in Table 1, transfer
from task B to task A is examined by comparing the
performance at the beginning of the transfer block of the BA condition to see if it is better than performance at the
beginning of the training block of the A-B condition.
Table 1: Design of experiment to assess transfer
Condition
Training
Transfer
A-B
Task A
Task B
B-A
Task B
Task A

Method
Participants
Participants were 178 Mississippi State University students
who received partial course credit. Eight participants were
excluded from analyses because they did not perform the
interrupting tasks with at least 70% accuracy, and three
were removed for non-compliance during the experiment.

Tasks and Materials
Two primary tasks (Tower of London and Tower of Hanoi)
and two interrupting tasks were used in this study, all of
which were implemented and presented via computer. In the
primary tasks, participants had the goal of moving a set of
five discs one-at-a-time until the arrangement on the three
pegs matched a target image that was displayed at the top of
the screen as shown in Figure 1 for the Tower of London.
The Tower of Hanoi was selected as a task in this study
because previous research has used it to explore the
behavioral effects on goal/subgoal retrieval after various
durations of suspension (Anderson & Douglass, 2001), and

it has also been used in interruption research (Altmann &
Trafton, 2002). It has been used in this prior research due to
the subgoaling required to complete the task. Therefore,
during an interruption, there is significant task-related
information that, if recalled, would speed up resuming the
task. In Tower of Hanoi trials, participants had to move each
of five different-sized discs into the goal configuration with
the constraints that only one disc could be moved at a time
and larger discs could not be placed on top of smaller discs.

Figure 1: Tower of London task trial screen. The goal
configuration is at the top, the current state is presented at
the bottom of the screen. The Tower of Hanoi task interface
was similar except that the discs were of different sizes.
The Tower of London was selected because of its
similarity (i.e., visual features, response method, and task
goal) to the Tower of Hanoi as well as its use in previous
interruption studies from which this version of the task was
adapted (Hodgetts & Jones, 2003, 2006). It also has a
significant subgoaling component. In Tower of London
trials, all discs were the same size, but no more than three
discs were allowed on a single peg at a time.
There were two possible interrupting tasks: addition and
matching. The addition task required solving randomlygenerated two-digit addition problems. Participants typed
responses for these trials into a text box using the keyboard
as shown in Figure 2. The matching task presented visual
matching trials from Thurstone's Perceptual Speed test
(Thurstone & Jeffrey, 1984). Participants solved these
problems by selecting a figure that matched the target figure
using the keyboard. Each trial had a target figure on the left
and a set of five potential matches as shown in Figure 3.

Design and Procedure
Each participant was randomly assigned into one of six
experimental conditions. The six conditions in this study
were designed in order to address the primary research
question regarding the ability to transfer interruption
recovery skill across both primary and interrupting task
changes. The order of tasks in each condition is shown in
Table 2 such that there are three separate A-B pairs that can
be assessed as explained earlier in Table 1. Participants
performed two blocks of 30 puzzle trials over the course of
the experiment session (i.e., training and transfer blocks)

1028

with the primary puzzle task switching between blocks. The
order of puzzle presentation was counterbalanced across
groups so that half received Tower of Hanoi trials in the first
block and Tower of London trials in the second block while
the other half received Tower of London trials in the first
block and Tower of Hanoi trials in the second block. This
design sets up the necessary between-subject transfer
comparison between conditions 1 and 2 because the transfer
block in condition 2 is the same primary task as the training
block in condition 1 and vice versa. Conditions 1 and 2
serve as a replication of a prior unpublished study in which
the interrupting task was not manipulated (Jones & Moss,
2013). The method of the prior study was identical to that of
conditions 1 and 2 but did not include conditions 3-6.
Conditions 3-6 have a different interrupting task between
their first and second blocks. The order of the interrupting
tasks was also counterbalanced across these four conditions.

Figure 2: Example two-digit addition trial.

Figure 3: Example visual matching trial.
Instructions to participants described the Tower of
London and Tower of Hanoi tasks as “puzzles”, and
participants were told that all puzzle trials could be
completed in exactly six moves. A six-second delay at the
beginning of each puzzle trial, along with a written prompt,
instructed participants to plan their moves in order to
minimize task difficulty. This planning prompt was used to
encourage use of a planned sequence of subgoals. Move
attempts that did not follow the six-move solution path
resulted in a written error message, and the attempt did not
move the selected disc. Thus, participants were not allowed
to deviate from the minimum solution path.
Interruptions occurred without warning in predetermined
puzzle trials throughout the experiment. Only one

interruption could occur during any given puzzle trial.
Interruptions occurred following critical moves within the
six-move sequence of each trial. Critical moves were
identified as those that involved a 2- or 3-move sequence to
move blocking disc(s) out of the way in order to move a
disc to its goal location. The critical move was the final
move in such a sequence. All interruptions occurred at these
moves. In other words, participants were interrupted just
after they had moved the blocking disc(s) out of the way but
before they could move the blocked disc. Recalling this goal
information should speed up resumption of the task relative
to having to reconstruct the next move from the interface.
Critical moves always occurred after either the second,
third, or fourth move in a six-move solution sequence. All
interruptions lasted approximately 20 s, during which time
participants completed as many trials of the interrupting task
as possible. The interrupting task was designed to terminate
when a component trial was completed and the duration of
the interruption had been at least 20 s.
All participants had 31 total interruptions over the course
of the session. Tower of Hanoi blocks had 17 interruptions
and Tower of London blocks 14 interruptions. Originally,
the intent was to have 15 interruptions across both tasks, but
a programming error led to more interruptions being
presented in the Tower of Hanoi task.
Written instructions for the primary and interrupting task
were provided just prior to each block of trials. Following
the written instructions, two practice trials were given to
familiarize participants with the response interface. No
interruptions occurred during practice trials. Tower of
London and Tower of Hanoi practice trials were simpler
one- and three-move trials meant to demonstrate both how
to select and move discs and how match the target disc
arrangement displayed at the top of the screen. Addition and
matching practice trials were identical in complexity to
those seen during interruptions.

Results
Resumption Lag Improvements
Consistent with prior research, resumption lag was the
primary dependent measure to assess the impact of
interruptions. Resumption lag was measured as the amount
of time between the end of the final trial of the interrupting
task and the first mouse click in the primary task.
The first set of analyses was performed on conditions 1
and 2. This analysis assesses the common-interrupting-task

Table 2: Tasks performed in each condition and resumption lag results. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Training Block
Transfer Block
Condition N
Primary Task
1
2
3
4
5
6

31
26
28
28
28
26

Tower of Hanoi
Tower of London
Tower of Hanoi
Tower of London
Tower of Hanoi
Tower of London

Interrupting
Task
Addition
Addition
Addition
Addition
Matching
Matching

Resumption
Lag (s)
5.65 (0.30)
3.47 (0.19)
5.67 (0.37)
3.34 (0.22)
5.45 (0.44)
3.46 (0.24)

1029

Primary Task
Tower of London
Tower of Hanoi
Tower of London
Tower of Hanoi
Tower of London
Tower of Hanoi

Interrupting
Task
Addition
Addition
Matching
Matching
Addition
Addition

Resumption
Lag (s)
2.40 (0.18)
3.83 (0.33)
2.80 (0.23)
4.00 (0.44)
2.80 (0.22)
3.66 (0.39)

transfer hypothesis because in these conditions the primary
task changed but the interrupting task did not. Because it
was anticipated that the largest effect of transfer would be
seen early in the second block due to skill acquisition, only
the first four interruption events for the training and transfer
tasks were used. Separate two-way ANOVAs for each
primary task with a within-subject factor of interruption
serial order (first through fourth interruption) and a
between-subject factor of block (training, transfer) were run.
In other words, for the Tower of Hanoi ANOVA, the
resumption lag for the first four interruption events in
condition 1 (training block) were compared to the first four
interruption events in condition 2 (transfer block).
Resumption lags were smaller during transfer in both the
Tower of Hanoi, F(1, 55) = 16.17, p < 0.001, and the Tower
of London, F(1, 55) = 16.62, p < 0.001. These results
replicate prior unpublished results using the same method
for these two conditions (Jones & Moss, 2013) showing that
this cross-task transfer effect is robust.
The second set of analyses involving conditions 3-6 was
performed across condition pairs that manipulated both
primary and interrupting tasks. Within a condition, neither
the primary task nor the interrupting task was the same
between training and transfer blocks. Conditions 3 and 6
were compared and conditions 4 and 5 were compared in
the same manner as condition 1 and 2 above. For the Tower
of Hanoi, transfer resumption lags in condition 6 were
smaller than training in condition 3, F(1, 52) = 14.02, p <
0.001. Likewise, the comparison of resumption lag times
between the Tower of Hanoi blocks of conditions 4 and 5
were significantly lower in the transfer block, F(1, 54) =
5.30, p = 0.025. This result is consistent with the hypothesis
that interruption recovery skill transfers even when neither
the primary nor interrupting task is identical. The
comparison of the Tower of London resumption lags in
conditions 4 and 5, however, only showed a significant
difference at the α = .10 level, F(1, 54) = 3.12, p = 0.084.
Similarly the Tower of London resumption lags between
conditions 3 and 6 were also only significant at the α = .10
level, F(1, 52) = 3.92, p = 0.053, indicating that recovery
skill transfer might still be occurring between these trial
blocks but with a smaller effect size.
In order to assess whether these marginally significant
results in the Tower of London task were due to lack of
power, data from the Tower of London training blocks in
conditions 4 and 6 were combined (i.e., collapsing across
differences in the interrupting task). Data from the Tower of

London transfer blocks in conditions 3 and 5 were also
combined. As a prerequisite for this collapse across
interrupting task, the data were examined using a set of ttests to see whether the interrupting task did indeed have an
effect on the resumption lag. For example, the resumption
lags from condition 3 training were compared to the
resumption lags from condition 5 training (differing in
interrupting task). None of the t-tests revealed a significant
difference in resumption lag due to interrupting task, so the
data were collapsed across the interrupting task differences.
Resumption lag data from the combined conditions were
analyzed using the same ANOVA design as the earlier
analyses. Resumption lag times in the combined Tower of
London transfer blocks were significantly lower than those
for the combined training block, F(1, 108) = 7.11, p =
0.009. This finding is consistent with the marginally
significant results being due to lack of power, and it
supports the hypothesis that resumption lag improvements
transfer to new interrupting/primary task pairs.

Primary and Interrupting Task Results

Table 3 shows that interruption task accuracy was high
across conditions and did not differ significantly between
conditions. Solution times for the primary tasks were
analyzed to evaluate whether significant skill in performing
the disc-moving tasks was transferred between tasks. Such
transfer could potentially be related to interruption skill
transfer. Solution time data for the Tower of Hanoi and
Tower of London were compared using the same blockcondition pairings used to analyze the resumption lag data.
All solution time analyses were performed using only noninterrupted trial data, because interrupted-trial solution time
improvements could reflect improvements in interruption
recovery skill. Because solution time was more reflective of
individual problem difficulty than a serial-order skill
acquisition effect, all non-interrupted trials within a block
were averaged and t-tests were used.
In conditions 1 and 2, training on one primary task did not
lead to lower times in the transfer block for either the Tower
of Hanoi, t(55) = 1.21, or the Tower of London, t(55) =
0.35. For conditions 3 and 6, Tower of Hanoi times did
differ, t(52) = 3.18, p = 0.003, but Tower of London times
did not, t(52) = -0.61. For conditions 4 and 5, Tower of
Hanoi times were lower in the transfer block, t(54) = -2.35,
p = 0.02, but Tower of London times were not, t(54) = 1.25.
In summary, primary task transfer was limited and not as
consistent as the resumption lag transfer effects.
Table 3: Non-interrupted primary task performance and interruption task accuracy. Standard error in parentheses.

Condition

1
2
3
4
5
6

Training Block
Primary Primary Task
Task
Sol. Time (s)
Hanoi
19.02 (1.05)
London
14.74 (0.99)
Hanoi
20.19 (1.25)
London
15.12 (0.79)
Hanoi
19.47 (1.19)
London
14.97 (0.90)

Int. Task
Addition
Addition
Addition
Addition
Matching
Matching

Interruption
Accuracy
89.67% (0.84)
89.32% (1.01)
90.85% (1.12)
91.77% (1.22)
93.52% (0.62)
92.40% (1.20)

1030

Transfer Block
Primary Primary Task
Task
Sol. Time (s)
London 13.51 (0.87)
Hanoi
17.25 (0.99)
London 14.19 (0.90)
Hanoi
16.10 (0.82)
London 13.66 (0.86)
Hanoi
15.52 (0.72)

Int. Task
Addition
Addition
Matching
Matching
Addition
Addition

Interruption
Accuracy
88.92% (0.91)
89.36% (0.88)
91.17% (1.31)
92.98% (0.71)
91.29% (1.28)
90.71% (1.16)

Discussion
Cross-task transfer of interruption recovery skill was
explored in the current study. Previous evidence had
suggested that resumption lag times decreased with practice
dealing with interruptions, but there was no evidence that
interruption recovery skill could transfer to new tasks. The
current study used a paradigm designed to maximize
detection of transfer. Two hypotheses were explored. First,
the common-interrupting-task hypothesis predicted transfer
between primary tasks if the interrupting task was the same
in training and transfer blocks. This hypothesis was
supported by the results showing transfer in conditions 1
and 2 of the current study. One explanation of these results
could be that it was skill on the interrupting task that was
transferring, but this explanation is not consistent with the
results testing the second hypothesis.
The second hypothesis examined was that cross-task
transfer would occur when the interrupting task was
different from that trained. The results of the current study’s
comparison of conditions 3-6 support this hypothesis.
Resumption lags were found to be significantly lower at the
beginning of the transfer block when participants had
already practiced interruptions during an earlier trial block
even if the primary task and interrupting task were different.
The fact that this second hypothesis was supported in the
current study means that there is an apparent discrepancy
with those of Cades et al. (2011) who did not find continued
improvements in resumption lag when the interrupting task
was switched (keeping the same primary task). There are a
number of differences between the current study and theirs
that might explain the difference, including the complexity
of the primary and interrupting tasks. However, a close
examination of their Experiment 3 shows that they did not
find that resumption lags get worse when the interrupting
task was changed, but instead they found that resumption
lags did not continue to show a practice-related decrease
when the interrupting task was changed. The fact that
resumption lags did not show an increase when the
interrupting task was changed may be indicative of transfer
occurring. Therefore, there may not be a discrepancy at all.
The current study used primary tasks with similar features
to control for differences in complexity. However the data
indicate that interruption recovery was easier in Tower of
London trials than in Tower of Hanoi trials, resulting in
generally lower resumption lags and lower effect sizes for
resumption lag improvements in Tower of London trials.
This effect size difference showed up in the transfer
analyses for Tower of London in which a larger sample size
was needed to find a statistically significant transfer effect
(by collapsing across different interrupting tasks).
In terms of a theoretical understanding of the current
results, theories of skill transfer (Singley & Anderson, 1989;
Taatgen, 2013), provide mechanisms that might explain the
results. There may be common PRIMs involved in
recovering Tower of Hanoi and Tower of London taskrelated information. The number of common PRIMs in the
recovery process would then be correlated with the amount

of transfer. Based on the Memory for Goals theory,
resumption from interruptions always involves the encoding
and retrieval of goal-state information when suspending a
task (Altmann & Trafton, 2002). Because the primary goal
of this recovery procedure (i.e., retrieving an incomplete
goal state) is consistent across any interruption event, then
interruption recovery skill can be expected to be based on
improvements in the ability to encode, maintain, and
retrieve goal-state information at certain times before,
during, and following an interruption. Because most
interruptions involve this common recovery procedure,
some degree of skill transfer might occur across interruption
events.
At some abstract level, the basic strategy of encoding and
retrieving goal-state information is common across all types
of resumptions from an interruption. Therefore, the results
of the current study, which show transfer of interruption
recovery skill, support the concept of a general procedure
for recovering from interruptions. However, even if there
exist some task-general processes (i.e., productions) for
recovering task-related information, these general processes
would become specialized to specific tasks as skill is
acquired (Anderson, 2007). Therefore it is likely that
aspects of the primary and interrupting task become
incorporated into such productions, and transfer then
becomes partially a function of the similarity between tasks
(similarity among primary tasks, interrupting tasks, or both).
It is also possible that characteristics of how the
interruption occurs could affect transfer independently of
the similarity of different interrupting tasks. For example,
differences in resumption lag improvement between warned
and unwarned interruptions (e.g., Trafton et al., 2003) can
be explained by the opportunity to strengthen goal
information in memory prior to the interruption. This
warning time provides an opportunity to make primary task
resumption easier. In this example, common PRIMs might
exist with other interruptions that provide a warning period.
Conversely, common PRIMs that improve the success rate
of primary task resumption might be present in the recovery
process for unwarned interruptions.
Individuals may also develop interruption-handling
strategies that take advantage of characteristics of certain
interruption types. One example of such a strategy has been
suggested in prior research that found that participants who
could choose when to switch to an interrupting task tended
to delay switching until they reached states of lower
processing demand on the primary task (Salvucci &
Bogunovich, 2010). In a hypothetical model of this strategy,
a production rule would evaluate primary task information
in working memory at time of interruption onset to
determine whether to take immediate action on the
interrupting task or to defer it. This production rule might
then transfer to other similar situations.
Similarly, interruptions with inherent structures that
facilitate the recovery procedure (e.g., warned interruptions)
would only provide minimal skill transfer to interruptions
lacking such structure (e.g., unwarned interruptions). Future

1031

research is needed to assess how well transfer can occur
between different types of interruptions and the differences
in processing that separate interruptions into meaningful
skill types. Computational models of interruption recovery
procedures would be particularly useful for evaluating the
skills that individuals acquire to handle different
interruption types as well as how this skill might transfer. In
particular, it should be fairly straightforward to implement
models of the Tower of Hanoi and Tower of London within
ACT-R because such models already exist for some
versions of the architecture. Then, the PRIM theory could
be used to examine predicted transfer in our tasks as well as
how transfer would be affected by different experimental or
training manipulations. This modeling endeavor is part of
planned future research.
This study also has implications for the design of future
interruption studies. Previous research has used primary and
interrupting tasks with differing procedural and processing
elements. These designs have probably stemmed from a
common conceptualization that any task can be interrupted
by any other task in a real-world setting. Although these
designs are useful for evaluating naturalistic performance,
studies attempting to examine interruption recovery transfer
effects and the mechanisms that underlie recovery skill will
likely require more detailed task comparisons in order to
accurately evaluate how and when transfer occurs.
Some limitations in the design of the current study should
be noted. The programming error that resulted in differing
numbers of interruption events between the Tower of
London and Tower of Hanoi tasks blocks meant that
participants received varying amounts of practice depending
on which primary task they received first, which could lead
to differences in the amount of acquired skill. Given that
Tower of London blocks received fewer interruptions and
Tower of Hanoi transfer effects were stronger overall,
however, this difference in number of interruptions might
not have been great enough to seriously impact the data.
Another limitation, however, was that different Tower of
London and Tower of Hanoi trials were presented in the
same order for all participants meaning that any problemspecific difficulty effects were confounded with skill
acquisition effects across time. Randomizing the problem
order in future studies would allow problem difficulty
effects to be examined separately from skill acquisition
within a block of problems.
Also, of course, the two primary tasks in this study were
selected to be similar (i.e., both disc moving problems).
Transfer in resumption might also be explained as simply
due to the similarities in task structure or even similarities in
the appearance of the task user interface. Additional studies
are planned to assess these possibilities.
Overall, the findings of this study provide new insight
into the nature of interruption handling skills. The finding of
cross-task transfer in resumption lags following an
interruption is novel. Further research is required to
document how well, or poorly, interruption recovery skill
can transfer to different interruption types as well as

delineate the cognitive mechanisms that differentiate
interruption events from one another in order to better
understand the occurrence of interruption-handling skill
transfer.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Office of Naval Research
grant N000141310251 awarded to the second author. We
would also like to acknowledge Adrian Lewis, Skylar
Swindle, Caitlin Spencer, Philip Liu, Riley Gordon, and
Chelsea Howd for their assistance with data collection.

References
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39–83.
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe? New York: Oxford Press.
Anderson, J. R., & Douglass, S. (2001). Tower of Hanoi:
Evidence for the cost of goal retrieval. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27(6), 1331–1346.
Cades, D. M., Boehm-Davis, D. A., Trafton, J. G., & Monk,
C. A. (2011). Mitigating disruptive effects of interruptions
through training: What needs to be practiced? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17(2), 97–109.
Cades, D. M., Trafton, J. G., & Boehm-Davis, D. A. (2006).
Mitigating Disruptions: Can Resuming an Interrupted
Task Be Trained? In Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society (Vol. 50, pp. 368–371).
Hodgetts, H. M., & Jones, D. M. (2003). Interruptions in the
Tower of London task: Can Preparation Minimise
Disruption? In Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society (Vol. 47, pp. 1000–1004).
Hodgetts, H. M., & Jones, D. M. (2006). Contextual Cues
Aid Recovery from Interruption: The Role of Associative
Activation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(5), 1120 – 1132.
Jones, W. E., & Moss, J. (2013). Decreasing the costs of
interruptions: Interruption recovery as a trainable and
transferable skill. Poster presented at the meeting of the
Psychonomics Society, Toronto, Canada.
Salvucci, D. D., & Bogunovich, P. (2010). Multitasking and
Monotasking: The Effects of Mental Workload on
Deferred Task Interruptions. In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 85–88).
Singley, M. K., & Anderson, J. R. (1989). The transfer of
cognitive skill. Harvard University Press.
Taatgen, N. A. (2013). The nature and transfer of cognitive
skills. Psychological Review, 120(3), 439–471.
Thurstone, L. L., & Jeffrey, T. E. (1984). Space Thinking
(Flags). Rosemont, IL: London House.
Trafton, J. G., Altmann, E. M., Brock, D. P., & Mintz, F. E.
(2003). Preparing to resume an interrupted task: effects of
prospective goal encoding and retrospective rehearsal.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58(5),
83–603.

1032

