“Jack is a True Scientist”: On the Content of Dual Character Concepts
Guillermo Del Pinal (ged2102@columbia.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Columbia University, USA
Department of Philosophy, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany

Kevin Reuter (kevin.reuter@rub.de)
Department of Philosophy, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
Abstract

(2) a. There is a sense in which Mark is clearly not a
father.
b. However, if you think about what it really means
to be a father, you would have to say that Mark is a
true father after all

The concepts expressed by social role terms such as arti st
and scientist are unique. In a series of experiments, Knobe,
Prasada, and Newman (2013) show that these terms allow
two independent criteria for categorisation, one of which
is inherently normative. This paper presents and tests a
novel account of the content of these ‘dual character
concepts’. We argue that the normative dimension of dual
character concepts represents commitments to fulfill certain
idealized functions. We then present evidence that the
normative dimension is a central dimension in the
conceptual structure of dual character concepts. Finally,
we show that our account is both descriptively and
explanatorily adequate.

The experiments presented by Knobe et al. (2013) suggest
that most of us would accept these statements, and that this
basic pattern generalizes to other social role terms such as
artist and scientist. Now, not all social roles are equally
acceptable in this basic dual pattern scenario. In particular,
terms such as doorman and welder obtain lower
acceptability ratings in cases parallel to (1-b) and (2-b).
Knobe et al. argue that to explain these acceptability
patterns, we need to assume that DCCs have a unique
internal structure. They agree with the traditional view that
we often use concrete or salient features to categorize objects,
even when we know that some entities might (i) have these
features and not fall under the category, or (ii) lack these
features and still fall under the category (Lakoff, 1973;
Gelman, 2003). For example, we know that some substance
might look exactly like gold and not be gold, and that some
animal that lacks the typical tiger coat might still be a tiger.
But what distinguishes, in the first instance, DCCs from
other kinds of lexical concepts is that DCCs include a
normative dimension on which modifiers such as true
operate.
What is the content of the normative dimension? The
experiments of Knobe et al. partially address that question,
but a full answer requires additional refinements and
experimental tests. In what follows, we present an account of
DCCs that explicitly addresses this question. Specifically,
we will test and defend the following hypotheses: (i) the
normative dimension represents the commitment to fulfil the
idealized functions associated with DCCs, and (ii) this
dimension is central to DCCs. On this view, someone
counts as a true father not because he actually fulfills the
idealized function of a father, but because he is committed to
doing so, even if he happens to fail. In addition, this
commitment is a central dimension of the category of
fathers, i.e., it is a dimension which explains the inclusion
of other concrete features associated with fathers.
In §2 we present a preliminary study used to generate
stimuli for our experiments. In §3 we present and in §4 we
test our account. In §5 we argue that our theory of DCCs is
explanatorily adequate.

Keywords: dual character concepts; social cognition; social
role concepts.

1 Introduction
In a recent paper, Knobe, Prasada, and Newman (2013)
present a series of original experiments designed to show
that the concepts expressed by terms such as artist and
scientist have two independent criteria for categorization,
one of which is inherently normative. They call this unique
class of concepts ‘dual character concepts’ (DCCs). The
present work presents and defends an account of the content
of DCCs. To illustrate the basic properties of DCCs
consider the following scenarios. John has two biological
children. He materially provides them with all their needs,
including food, proper schooling, and some nice toys.
However, John does not think doing so is his duty; in fact,
he is only a good father because he thinks that his behavior
will advance his career as a politician. Is John really a
father? In response, consider whether you agree with (1-a)
and (1-b):
(1) a. There is a sense in which John is clearly a father.
b. However, if you think about what it really means
to be a father, you would have to say that John is not
a true father after all.
Now, imagine that John’s career foundered and that he
abandoned his two kids. Fortunately, John’s brother, Mark,
who has no biological children, decided to care for the kids.
Mark is not as materially successful as John. Often he can’t
provide the kids with some of their needs. Still, Mark really
loves the kids and works very hard to make sure they have
everything they need. Is Mark really a father? In response,
consider whether you agree with (2-a) and (2-b):
1

554

al. classified as DCCs is 5.52 (SE = .16) and for controls is
4.71 (SE = .15). An independent t-test was performed,
t(256) = 3.743; p < .001, indicating that the difference
between DCCs and social role controls is highly significant.

2 Preliminary Study
Our study of DCCs focuses on social role terms such as
firefighter, bartender, and scientist. Broadly speaking,
these terms pick out professional social roles. Knobe,
Prasada, and Newman (2013) argue that one way to
determine whether a term expresses a DCC is to consider its
acceptability
under
true-modification.
By
‘truemodification’ we mean sentences of the form of (3), i.e., in
which the predicate is modified by true:
(3) Jack is a true scientist.
The basic idea is that, in this kind of linguistic
construction, the true-modifier operates on the normative
dimension. Scientist is a paradigmatic DCC, hence (3)
seems perfectly acceptable. For terms that arguably have
either no normative dimension or no default value on it,
true-modifications will seem less acceptable, as in (4):
(4) Jack is a true cashier.

Figure 1: Acceptability-ratings for true-modifications of 18
social role concepts.

As this example illustrates, not all social role terms are
equally acceptable under true-modification. Whether this
means that only some social role terms are really DCCs—as
Knobe et al. (2013) and Leslie (2014) seem to think—is an
issue that we shall discuss later. For now, let us simply call
social role terms which receive low acceptability ratings in
true-modifications ‘weak DCCs’ and those which receive
high-acceptability ratings ‘strong DCCs’. Although we
should distinguish between weak and strong DCCs, it is
also important to note that DCCs are highly context
sensitive (Leslie 2014). More precisely: adding a context
can increase the acceptability ratings of true-modifications
involving social role terms that, in other conditions, receive
low ratings. This suggests that one way of investigating the
content of DCCs is to examine the interaction between
contextual parameters and shifts in the acceptability of weak
and strong DCCs in true-modifications. We follow this
strategy in Study 1. Given this aim, we need a set of
stimuli that allows us to trace and compare the behavior of
weak and strong DCCs. The aim of the following
preliminary study is to generate such a set. All subjects who
participated in our experiments were recruited through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk system for human intelligence
tasks.

This preliminary study replicates a key result of Knobe et
al. (2013). When judging the acceptability of true-modifications, the mean rating for DCCs such as artist is
significantly higher than the mean rating for the social role
controls such as doorman. At the same time, if we list the
individual ratings, as in Figure 1, we can see that there is a
smooth transition between the acceptability ratings of the
highest and lowest rated DCCs. This suggests that we
should talk instead of strong and weak DCCs. To examine
and compare the effect of context on the ratings of DCCs in
our subsequent experiment, we used a median split dividing
the concepts into strong and weak DCCs.

3 The normative dimension of DCCs
What is the content of the normative dimension of DCCs?
When we say that the concept expressed by scientist
includes a ‘normative component’ and not only a set of
concrete features, what exactly are we claiming is
represented? Knobe et al. (2013) raise some key points.
First, this dimension has to do with abstract values. What
they mean by this is revealed in their examples: for scientist
the abstract value is something like the quest for impartial
truths and explanations. Second, the normative dimension
of a class must be distinguished from its typical function.
The normative dimension seems to directly interact with
modifiers such as true but not directly with modifiers such
as good, taken in the sense of ‘useful or efficient’ (see Knobe
et al. (2013)’s experiment 1). In the intended reading, a
good calculator is an artifact that is good for its function;
similarly for social roles such as efficient or skillful
scientist. However, we can imagine scenarios in which
someone can be a true scientist without being, yet, a skillful
scientist. We can also imagine scenarios in which someone
can be a skillful scientist without, ultimately, being a true
scientist (see study 1 in §4.1). Since, in the intended
reading, the acceptability of good/skillful vs. true scientist
can dissociate, it seems clear that the normative dimension
does not directly represent the typical function of the class.
Knobe et al. (2013) do not commit to a more specific

Method
276 subjects participated in this preliminary study. Each
participant received a single question of the form Jack is a
true x without any context. Following Knobe et al. (2013)’s
measure, participants were then asked to rate how
natural/weird this sentence sounded on a 7-point Likert scale
from ‘1’ meaning ‘sounds weird’ to ‘7’ meaning ‘sounds
natural’. We used all the professional-role concepts that in
Knobe et al. (2013)’s original study were classified as either
DCCs or controls.

Results and Discussion
The average ratings for each individual concept are shown in
Figure 1. The mean rating for those concepts that Knobe et
2

555

claim about the content of the normative dimension; but
building on their results, Leslie (2014) makes a concrete
proposal. Leslie agrees that the normative dimension of
DCCs does not represent their typical function, but she
argues that it represents something that is closely related,
namely, their ‘ideal function’. On this view, we can say that
a scientist that completely resists empirical demands to
modify or abandon his theory is not a true scientist because
he is not satisfying the ideal function of a scientist, which is
something like building theories that are responsive to
empirical evidence, among other things. Leslie’s proposal
can be implemented in different ways. One way is to assume
that the idealized function is represented directly. On this
view, the normative dimension of scientist would represent
something like the search for empirically constrained truths
and theories. However, this is not the best way to
implement Leslie’s proposal. For it is in tension with the
basic observation, mentioned above, according to which
someone who tries hard but often fails to embody the ideal
function of a father or scientist can still count as a true father
or scientist. Study 1 below confirms this basic intuition.
A better way to implement Leslie’s proposal, in our
view, is to hold that what really counts to satisfy the
normative dimension is not so much whether someone
actually fulfills the idealized function to some non-trivial
degree, but rather whether someone is committed to fulfill
the idealized function. Consider an example of nonprofessional or not yet skillful scientist, Jim. On this view,
we can still say that Jim is a true scientist as long as he is
clearly committed to the ideals of producing theories and
views that are responsive to evidence. So according to this
account, there are many contexts in which someone who
fails as a scientist nevertheless counts as a true scientist, as
long as s/he has the required commitments.
Our hypothesis then is that we can dissociate the
property of actually fulfilling the idealized function from that
being committed to fulfill the idealized function, and that
what ultimately matters for satisfying the normative
dimension is the commitment. Study 1 below tests and
supports this view of the relation between commitments,
idealized functions and the content of the normative
dimension of DCCs. To be clear, our claim is not that
evidence that an entity fulfills the idealized function does not
matter for satisfying the normative dimension of DCCs.
After all, that someone is a really an efficient or skillful
scientist is often a reliable sign that s/he is committed to
being a scientist. Our claim is that, when pitted against each
other, being committed to fulfill the idealized function is
more important for satisfying the normative dimension of
DCCs than simply being able to fulfill that function.

in their Experiment 2 (the most relevant for our purposes)
do not assert that the relevant individuals are good or
skillful at their role; hence they cannot be used to support
the alleged dissociation between the functional and the
normative dimensions. To directly test the hypothesis that
what matters for the normative dimension is not whether
one is skilled or efficient, but rather whether one is
committed, we presented subjects with ‘high-function’ and
‘high-devotion’ contexts and compared their effects on the
acceptability of true-modifications. The high-function
context highlights Jack’s high skill as an x. We were
particularly interested to see whether an explicit highfunction context would increase the acceptability ratings of
true-modifications of weak DCCs. The high-devotion
context highlights Jack’s high devotion to being an x. If our
view is correct, the high-devotion context should have a
stronger and more positive impact on the acceptability of
true-modifications than the high-function context.

Method
We used the 18 social role concepts tested in the
preliminary study. Based on those results, we did a median
split, dividing them into weak DCCs (caseworker,
doorman, cashier, waiter, tailor, teacher, minister,
optician, bartender) and strong DCCs (baker, welder,
firefighter, scientist, artist, mechanic, comedian, musician,
soldier ). To examine how high-function (HF) and highdevotion (HD) contexts interact with the normative
dimension, we presented 271 subjects with HF contexts and
a different group of 294 subjects with HD contexts. The
respective contexts read as follows:
(HF) Jack is an artist/doorman. He is really skilled
and highly efficient at his job.
(HD) Jack is an artist/doorman. He really likes his
job and is completely devoted to it.
After being presented with a HF or HD context, participants
were then asked to rate whether the sentence Jack is a true
artist/doorman sounded weird (1), natural (7), or anything
in between. We computed the mean values of people’s
responses given HF and HD contexts, and compared them
with the mean values in the no-context condition (see
preliminary study).

4 Experimental Studies
4.1 Study 1
We have argued that the normative dimension does not
directly represent typical or ideal functions, but rather
represents these as the objects of commitments. What is the
evidence for this? The vignettes used by Knobe et al. (2013)

Figure 2: Acceptability-ratings for strong and weak DCCs in
the no-context condition (left), in the high function context
(middle), and in the high devotion context (right).
3

556

true-modifications for weak DCCs. In addition, high
function contexts have a negative influence on strong DCCs,
and a lack of effect on the acceptability of weak DCCs.
Together, these results support the hypothesis that the
normative dimension of DCCs represents commitments to
fulfill the function of social roles.

Results
The average ratings for strong and weak DCCs in all three
conditions are shown in Figure 2. We applied a 3 x 2
ANOVA with participants' ratings as the dependent measure
and the independent factors Context with three levels (nocontext, HF, HD) and Concept (strong DCCs, weak DCCs).
The analysis reveals highly significant main effects of both
Context, F(2; 835) = 10.571; p < 0.001, and Concept,
F(835) = 46.227; p < 0.001. For all 18 social role concepts,
the HD context raises the mean value from 5.04 (no-context)
to 5.37 (SE = 0.10), whereas the HF context decreases the
value to 4.68 (SE = 0.11). Moreover, a highly significant
interaction occurs between Context and Concept, F(2; 835)
= 4.807; p = 0.008. For strong DCCs, the HF context
decreases the participants' ratings from 5.74 to 5.04, while
the HD context has no effect on people's ratings. In contrast,
for weak DCCs, the HF context has no effect, whereas the
HD context strongly increases their average value from 4.38
(no-context) to 5.15.

4.2 Study 2
This study was designed to directly compare the idealized
function and the commitment dimensions represented by
DCCs. Instead of investigating social role concepts under
true-modifications, we wanted to compare, in terms of their
corresponding centrality, the function and the commitment
to the function in the structure of DCCs. To do this, we had
to select a measure of conceptual centrality. Sloman et al.
(1998) show that there is a direct correlation between the
centrality and the immutability of features. The
immutability of a feature or dimension reflects how much
the internal structure of a concept depends on that feature or
dimension. The basic idea is simple. The centrality of a
feature in a conceptual representation C reflects the degree to
which other features in C depend on it, i.e., the degree to
which it lends conceptual coherence. This means that it
should be easier to mentally transform a non-central
compared to a central feature of C. For example, it should be
easier to think of a gun that is neither black nor made of
steel, than to think of a gun that is not made to shoot. This
is what we mean by the `mutability' of a feature. As our
measure of mutability, hence of conceptual centrality, we
chose a paradigm introduced by Sloman et al. (1998), called
`surprise'. In this paradigm, experimenters ask participants
to rate how surprised they would be to encounter an instance
of the category that does not have some feature. The basic
idea is that `instances missing mutable features should be
less surprising than instances missing immutable features on
the assumption that surprise is related to the difficulty of
adapting an object representation to a concept. Adaptation
should be easy if the object is missing a mutable feature but
hard if it is missing an immutable feature' (Sloman et al.,
1998)

Discussion
The comparative influence of high-function and highdevotion contexts on strong and weak DCCs strongly
supports our hypothesis that the normative dimension of
DCCs represents the commitments to fulfill the relevant
function. Paradigmatic representatives of strong DCCs are
terms such as scientist and artist. Recall that, as established
in our preliminary study, strong DCCs are those DCCs that
already obtain high acceptability ratings under truemodification in the no-context condition. In other words,
knowing that some random Jack is a scientist suggests to
participants, even without further information, that Jack is
likely also committed to the role of a scientist. In contrast,
weak DCCs such as doorman and cashier are those DCCs
that obtained lower ratings in the no context condition. In
other words, merely knowing that Jack is a cashier does not
suggest to participants, to the same degree as with strong
DCCs, that Jack satisfies the respective commitments.
Unsurprisingly, then, a high-devotion context is less
informative, and hence has almost no effect, on the
acceptability ratings of strong DCCs. Crucially, however, a
high-devotion context basically turns weak DCCs into
strong DCCs.
Our results also show that high function contexts
decrease the acceptability of true-modifications. This further
supports the view that the normative dimension of DCCs
does not directly represent the typical functions. In
particular, even though weak DCCs have space to increase
their ratings under true-modification, high function contexts
did not increase their acceptability. To illustrate, knowing
that Jack is a skilled waiter does not increase the
acceptability of the claim that Jack is a true waiter. What
about the negative effect of high function contexts on the
acceptability ratings of strong DCCs? This is probably due
to pragmatic effects. Asserting that Jack is a skilled artist
can plausibly be taken as evidence that he is at most only a
skilled artist, hence that he lacks something which is
relevant to his being a true artist. Overall, Study 1 shows
that a high devotion context increases the acceptability of

Method
117 subjects took part in experiment 3. Each participant was
asked to evaluate one question that was randomly selected
from the following two categories: (1) Commitment to fulfill
Idealized Function, e.g. How surprised would you be to
encounter an artist who does not care about creating
inspiring works of art?; (2) Idealised Function, e.g. How
surprised would you be to encounter an artist who does not
create inspiring works of art? Subjects were asked to answer
the question on a 7 point Likert scale from 1 = ‘not at all
surprised' to 7 = `very surprised'. We investigated the social
role concepts artist, musician, scientist.

Results
We compared the mean values between both conditions, i.e.
we were interested in whether there is a significant difference
between the commitment to fulfill an idealized function and
4

557

the idealized function itself. An independent t-test resulted
in a significant result t(115) = 2.164; p = 0.003. The mean
values are shown in Figure 3:

theory of DCCs. We have argued that the lexical concepts
expressed by words such as scientist are DCCs with a
normative dimension. The precise content of the normative
dimension was postulated to explain the linguistic behavior
of the corresponding nouns. Assuming our account explains
the relevant data, we can say that it is ‘descriptively
adequate’. However, why should there be a normative
dimension in the conceptual structure of DCCs at all? In
particular, why should social roles, but not other types of
concepts, have a normative dimension? If we want our
account of DCCs to also meet the demands of ‘explanatory
adequacy’, we have to confront these questions. We have to
explain why, given the basic function of concepts and
categorization in cognition, and given the (metaphysical)
properties of classes such as social roles, it should turn out
that the normative is part of the conceptual structure of
concepts such as scientist and artist.
Following Rosch (1999), we assume that the formation
of prototypes is guided by two basic principles of
categorization, one having to do with the function of a
conceptual system, and the other with the metaphysical
structure of the perceived world:
Cognitive economy. The goal of our conceptual system
is to provide maximum information about the
environment with the least cognitive effort. It is to an
organism’s advantage to have as many properties as
possible predictable from knowing any one property.
Perceived world structure. The perceived world is not
an unstructured set of equiprobable co-occurring features.
Rather, objects and events in the world are perceived as
having high-correlational structure.
To see how these principles interact in concept formation,
consider an example. Suppose you interact with objects y
and z. How will they behave in possible future scenarios?
To answer this question, you need to categorize y and z.
Suppose y and z are golden yellow, but that y is static
whereas z moves in all sorts of elaborate ways. At some
point, you conclude that y is a gold ring and z is a bee. You
can then make many predictions about their behavior,
within a range that is useful for most ordinary purposes.
Now, the behavior of the bee is much more complicated,
and you might have to use some form of means-ends
reasoning. Still, for most ordinary purposes, the repertoire of
basic goals which we use to interact with a random bee--e.g., that it wants pollen and will protect the hive---is based
on its kind and context. For some purposes, we might
subdivide the kinds of bees, and this will determine a more
refined set of functions, but even in this case there is clearly
no use in representing bees in terms of the normative
dimension, i.e., in terms of their ‘commitments’.
However, to add flexible social entities such as humans
onto the perceived environment is to add a key layer of
complexity. The behavior of humans is, given the demands
of everyday life, radically unpredictable from the sorts of
general biological facts we use to understand other animals.
To predict human behavior in any useful way, one needs to
know more than just the general biological kinds under
which they fall and certain facts of the environment. In
particular, one needs to know their social roles and the
functions of those roles. Furthermore, one key property of

Figure 3: Comparison between average ratings for how
surprised people would be if they encountered a person who
(1) is not committed (Commitment) to carrying out her / his
social role vs. (2) a person who does not fulfill the idealized
function of her / his social role (Idealized Function).

Discussion
Figure 3 compares the centrality ratings for the normative
dimension (i.e. the commitment to fulfill the idealized
function) and the function dimension (i.e., the function
itself)). Crucially, the normative dimension is significantly
less mutable, hence more central, than the representation of
the function. To illustrate, this means that although actually
producing empirically informed theories is a central feature
of the concept associated with scientist, the commitment to
produce such theories is an even more central feature. In
addition, the result that although not an essence, the
normative dimension is a central dimension of DCCs has a
very important consequence for a particular foundational
challenge that could be raised against DCCs. Some theorists
might accept that the normative dimension is associated
with the concepts expressed by social role terms such as
scientist and artist, but insist that, properly speaking, it is
not part of their conceptual structure. If this was the case, the
normative dimension should be highly mutable, which is
inconsistent with the results of this experiment. For Study 2
shows that the normative dimension is an integral part, and
possibly one of the most central parts, of the conceptual
structures of certain social role concepts.

5. General Discussion
We have argued that the content of the normative
dimension represents commitments to fulfill certain
idealized functions. So the structure of DCCs includes, at
least, the following dimensions: perceptual (how typical
scientists look), functional (function of scientists), and
normative (commitment to perform a certain function).
Furthermore, the normative dimension seems to be, in the
case of strong DCCs, a relatively central and immutable
dimension.
Knobe et al. (2013) raise an important challenge to any
5

558

social roles is that, within certain parameters, they are often
voluntary. Since Jack can choose to be a salesman or
scientist, and since Jack can also choose to change roles, it
is useful to categorize Jack in terms of his commitments.
To generalize: human behavior is such that knowing their
commitments is fundamental to make useful categorizations
and predictions. In particular, it is useful to know not only
whether Jack is good or bad at something, but also whether
he is committed to it. Suppose you know that Jack is a
really good pianist. Will he become a professional pianist?
Hard to say. Suppose that you know, in addition, that Jack
is committed to being a pianist. Then predicting his future
behavior is easier. Suppose, on the other hand, that John is
not a particularly good pianist. Will he become a
professional pianist? Unlikely, but still hard to say.
Suppose you find out that he is committed to being a
pianist. You can predict, with some confidence, that he will
keep playing, despite his current level.
Almost everyone is, at some point in their development,
quite bad at performing the functions of their future social
roles; however, whether they will eventually perform those
functions, and whether they will become good at them,
depends to a large extent on their commitments. That social
role concepts encode the function and normative dimensions
allows us, in various contexts, to make entirely different
predictions, crucial to determine how someone will behave
in certain conditions. Hence, despite the high-level talk of
`abstract values' and `normative dimensions', there is
nothing mysterious about why, given the basic function of
categorization and certain basic properties of the flexibility of
human behavior, many of our social role concepts should
include a dimension that encodes the relevant commitments.
Without this dimension, our predictions regarding the
behavior of others would be substantially impoverished.
This account of the explanatory adequacy of our theory of
DCCs explains why there are weak and strong DCCs. In our
view, DCCs capture certain aspects of the basic structure of
the perceived human social world, including sets of cooccurring features. Now it is widely believed---often
correctly---that membership in some social roles requires a
greater degree of commitment and effort than membership in
others. Cognitive Economy and Perceive World Structure
entail that social role concepts should trace these differences.
If we compare the weak (e.g., doorman) and strong DCCs
(e.g., scientist), we can easily see that their orderings (see
Figure 1 above) reflects a common cultural valuation along
those lines.

will have implications for theories of everyday social
categorization and judgments.

References
Gelman, S. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday though. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Knobe, J., Prasada, S., Newman, G.E. (2013). Dual
character concepts and the normative dimension of
conceptual representation. Cognition ,127, 242–257.
Lakoff, G. (1973). Hedges: A study in meaning criteria and
the logic of fuzzy concepts. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 2, 458-508.
Laurence, S., Margolis, E. (1999). Concepts and cognitive
science. In E. Margolis and S. Laurence (Eds.), Concepts:
Core Readings, Chapter 1, pp. 3–81. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Leslie, S.-J. (2014). “Hilllary Clinton is the only man in
the Obama administration”: Dual character concepts,
generics and gender. Analytic Philosophy. forthcoming.
Rosch, E. (1999). Principles of categorization. In E.
Margolis and S. Laurence (Eds.), Concepts: Core
Readings, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., Ahn, W. (1998). Feature
Centrality and Conceptual Coherence. Cognitive Science,
22(2), 189-228.

Conclusion
We have seen that various social role concepts are dual
character concepts (DCCs), and others are either weak or can
be easily coerced into DCCs. We defended an account of the
normative dimension of DCCs according to which this
dimension represents commitments to fulfill the idealized
function of a certain social role. We also showed that this
dimension is central to their conceptual structure.
Judgments involving social role concepts such as artist,
scientist and friend are an essential part of social cognition,
hence we expect that our account of the content of DCCs
6

559

