Knowing what he could have shown: The role of alternatives in children’s
evaluation of under-informative teachers
Hyowon Gweon (gweon@stanford.edu)

Mika Asaba (masaba@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University

Abstract

the other is about what he did and did not say. However,
in both cases, Jim failed to conform to Grice’s cooperative
principle, particularly the maxim of quantity (Grice, 1975);
see also Horn, 1972, 1984). While Nora reasonably expected
Jim to understand the basics of pragmatics in communication,
he did not provide sufficient or strong enough information for
Nora to draw accurate conclusions in both cases. Given these
two transgressions, she should be rightly irritated with Jim,
because as adults, we expect others to provide information
that is requisite to the communicative context.

What underlies young children’s failure in evaluating underinformative teachers? We explore the hypothesis that children have difficulty representing relevant alternatives; knowing what the teacher could have done. Children rated two
teachers who demonstrated toys to a naı̈ve learner. One group
first observed a fully informative teacher and then an underinformative teacher, while the other group saw the reverse order. Six- and seven-year-olds successfully rated the underinformative teacher lower than the fully-informative teacher
regardless of the order (Exp.1). However, four- and five-yearolds showed this pattern only when they saw the fully informative teacher first (Exp.2). Given a binary choice after seeing
both teachers, four-year-olds showed a preference for the fully
informative teacher (Exp.3). We discuss these results in light
of recent literature on children’s understanding of pragmatic
violations in linguistic communication; the contrast between
the fully informative vs. under-informative teachers might help
children understand what the teacher could have shown.
Keywords: cognitive development, pragmatics, scalar implicature, pedagogical reasoning, Theory of Mind

When learning from people who are expected to be knowledgeable and helpful, even very young children readily draw
inferences that go beyond the face value of the provided evidence. For instance, when a teacher demonstrates one interesting function of a novel toy, preschoolers infer that the
toy has only one function(Bonawitz et al., 2011). This inference rests on the assumption that the data were selected
to be maximally helpful; if the toy had additional functions,
the teacher would have chosen to show those, too. A more
recent study has shown that six- and seven-year-old children are sensitive to teachers who violate pedagogical sampling and provide under-informative evidence (Gweon, Pelton, Konopka, & Schulz, 2014). In this study, older children
observed a puppet teacher demonstrate one interesting function of a toy for a naı̈ve learner. One group of children (Teach
1/1) saw a fully informative teacher, because the toy actually
had just one function. Another group (Teach 1/4) saw the
same teacher who demonstrated the same function, but his
teaching was under-informative because the toy in fact had
three additional functions. Critically, the appearance of the
toy and the teacher’s behaviors were identical across conditions. However, children’s rating for the under-informative
(Teach 1/4) teacher was significantly lower than children’s
rating for the fully informative teacher (Teach 1/1). Thus
these results suggest that by around age 6, children appropriately evaluate Jim’s presentation of the fancy new device;
although his demonstration was true of the device, it was incomplete and misleading.

Nora arrived at the gym and noticed a shiny new device.
Her trainer, Jim, proudly showed her how to measure weight
on the device. Left unimpressed, she thought, “That is nothing but a fancy-looking scale!” Much to her surprise, she
discovered that the device was a state-of-the-art body composition analyzer with many useful functions. Later, as Nora
walked over to the treadmill area, Jim called out, “Some of
the treadmills are broken!” She kept walking over, intending
to use a machine that wasn’t broken, only to find out that in
fact, all of the treadmills were broken. Nora shook her head
and fumed in frustration. Where did Jim go wrong?
Jim’s first mistake was a violation of pedagogical sampling. In pedagogical contexts, learners expect a knowledgeable, helpful teacher to select and provide the evidence that is
likely to increase the learner’s belief in the correct hypothesis
(Shafto, Goodman, & Frank, 2012). He failed to understand
that demonstrating one function would imply that there’s only
one function, because Nora considers him to be a knowledgeable, helpful trainer. By showing how to measure weight but
omitting other functions, he provided under-informative pedagogy that misled Nora to believe that the new device is just
a scale. In other words, Jim committed a “sin of omission”.
Jim’s second mistake was a violation of pragmatic implicature; he failed to understand that saying “some of the treadmills” implies “not all of the treadmills”. Because the use of
an intermediate item on an implied scale (e.g., some treadmills) suggests that a stronger alternative (e.g., all treadmills)
does not apply, his statement was logically true but nonetheless misleading.
At a quick glance, these two mistakes might seem rather
different; one is about what he did and did not show, and

Prior developmental work on pragmatic implicature suggests that 6- and 7-year-olds can also evaluate Jim’s statement
about treadmills as misleading. However, a number of studies showed that children under 6 years of age have difficulty
recognizing such pragmatic violations. For instance, young
children consider the sentence “the boy ate some cookies” as
acceptable even when in fact, he ate all the cookies (Noveck,
2001; Papafragou & Musolino, 2003; Huang & Snedeker,
2009; Papafragou, 2006), failing to reject logically true but
pragmatically infelicitous statements that are analogous to

848

Jim’s comment about treadmills. More recent studies have
suggested that younger children’s (4- and 5-year-olds) failures may arise from difficulties aside from a genuine inability to draw pragmatic implicature (Barner, Brooks, & Bale,
2011; Skordos & Papafragou, 2014; Katsos & Bishop, 2011).
If the ability to evaluate Jim’s two mistakes - violations
of pedagogical sampling and violations of pragmatic implicature - depends on the same cognitive capacities, we might
expect that children under age 6 would also experience difficulty recognizing differentially evaluating teachers based on
informativeness. In the current study, we investigate young
children’s ability to evaluate under-informative pedagogy, or
“sins of omission”.
In light of this prior work on children’s successes and
failures in pragmatic implicature tasks, we can consider a
few possibilities. First, young children might have no trouble recognizing and evaluating under-informative pedagogy.
Once they expect teachers to engage in pedagogical sampling
and constrain their inferences accordingly (Bonawitz et al.,
2011), the ability to evaluate those who violate this expectation might come for free. This would suggest little commonality between children’s ability to detect under-informative
pedagogy and pragmatically infelicitous utterances.
Second, young children might fail to accurately evaluate sins of omission because they are simply more tolerant
of under-informative pedagogy. Katsos and Bishop (2011)
showed that even though 5- and 6-year-olds fail to reject pragmatically infelicitous speakers (e.g., “the boy ate some of the
cookies” when he in fact ate all the cookies), they reward
such speakers less than fully informative ones given a 3-point
scale. Thus children who observe under-informative pedagogy might feel less inclined to penalize the teacher, even
though they notice the violation of pedagogical sampling.
Finally, we consider the possibility that young children fail
to evaluate under-informative pedagogy because they have
difficulty representing relevant alternative actions; that is, understanding what else the teacher could have done. A related
body of work comes from recent developmental literature on
children’s sensitivity to under-informative utterances, showing that even 4- and 5-year-olds successfully reject pragmatically infelicitous utterances when the relevant alternatives are
made salient in context (e.g., the speaker says, “only the cat
and the dog are sleeping” rather than “some of the animals are
sleeping” given a picture of a cow, a cat, and a dog sleeping;
Barner et al., 2011, see also Skordos & Papafragou, 2014).
Similarly, in order to recognize sins of omission in pedagogical contexts, young children might require a clear representation of what the teacher could have shown in addition to his
under-informative demonstration.
In order to explore these hypotheses, we designed a task
in which children observed a fully-informative teacher and
an under-informative teacher and rated them sequentially. In
Experiment 1, we first replicated 6- and 7-year-olds’ ability
to evaluate under-informative teachers (Gweon et al., 2014)
using a novel within-subjects paradigm. In Experiment 2, we

used this task with two separate groups of 4- and 5-year-olds
to see if younger children’s evaluations are affected by order.
If sensitivity to under-informative pedagogy is independent
of the ability to detect other violations of pragmatic implicature, younger children might succeed on this task regardless
of the order. If younger children simply show higher tolerance to under-informativeness, children would fail to differentiate the two teachers regardless of the order. However,
if knowing the alternative helps, the order in which children
observed the two teachers would have a significant impact
on children’s performance. That is, children would successfully provide lower ratings for the under-informative teacher
if they had seen the fully informative teacher first (because
this would help them represent what the under-informative
teacher could have done), but not when they see the underinformative teacher first. To further explore the role of contrastive alternatives in children’s performance, in Experiment
3 we presented 4-year-olds with a direct contrast between the
two teachers by using a binary choice paradigm.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we used a modified version of Gweon et al.
(2014)’s task to (a) replicate its findings with the same age
group, 6- and 7-year-old children, and (b) test whether there
is an effect of teacher order. This modified version allowed us
to get a pair of ratings from each child, one for a teacher who
commits a sin of omission by demonstrating just one of four
functions of a toy, and another for a teacher who still shows
just one function of a different toy that only has one function. By presenting the two teachers in different orders, we
asked whether children’s relative ratings of the two teachers
are influenced by the order in which they were presented.

Methods
Subjects Twenty-eight six- and seven-year-olds were recruited from a local museum, MAge (SD): 7.05(.54), range:
6.07 - 7.90, and were randomly assigned to the Teach 1/1
First condition (N = 14) or Teach 1/4 First condition (N =
14). An additional six children were dropped from analysis
due to experimental error (N = 2), failure to report the number
of functions on the toy (N = 2), or failure to rate the Incorrect
Teacher lower than the Correct Teacher (N = 2).
Materials Stimuli were presented as videos on a 13-inch
Macbook Pro using MATLAB and PsychToolBox. Two
custom-made toys, one yellow and one gray, were used in the
videos. The yellow toy had four causal affordances; twisting a purple knob activated a wind-up mechanism, pressing
a yellow button activated LED lights, pressing a green button activated a spinning light, and pressing an orange button
played music tunes. The gray toy also had four causal affordances; pressing a purple tab made a beeping sound, pressing
a grey tab produced a buzzing sound, pulling down a flap on
one side revealed a hidden mirror, and pulling down a flap on
another side revealed a hidden embroidered duck. Although
both toys had four functions, each toy could be presented as

849

a toy with four functions (Four-Function Toy in the Teach
1/4 trial) or presented as if it just had a single function (OneFunction Toy in the Teach 1/1 trial). The type of toy was
counterbalanced throughout; half the children saw the yellow
toy in the Teach 1/1 trial and the gray toy in the Teach 1/4
trial, while the other half saw the reverse. Four hand puppets
were used as the Toy Teachers (Paul and Bill) and Incorrect
and Correct Teachers (Sally and Laura). An Elmo puppet
was used as a naı̈ve learner. Children used a rating scale with
tick marks (0 - 20) and a magnetic marker to evaluate each
teacher. The scale was split into four different colored sections, and along with faces that varied from frowny to smiley
to serve as anchor points between the sections.

the other toy was always taught by Bill. Children in the Teach
1/1 First condition saw the Teach 1/1 trial first and then saw
the Teach 1/4 trial; Children in the Teach 1/4 First condition
saw the reverse order.
After rating Toy Teachers, children watched two more
teacher puppets teach Elmo the names of simple household
objects. The Correct Teacher provided the correct names of
two objects (referring to a stuffed carrot as a ‘carrot’ and a
toy plane as a ‘plane’). The Incorrect Teacher provided the
incorrect names of two different objects (referring to a ball
as a ‘cup’, and a stuffed tiger as ‘cow’). After each teacher
provided names for the objects, the experimenter brought out
the same scale and asked the child to rate the teacher. The
order of the Correct and Incorrect teachers was counterbalanced, such that half of the children in both the Teach 1/1
First and Teach 1/4 First conditions first viewed the Correct
teacher first and the other half viewed the Incorrect teacher
first. These additional ratings were collected to identify children who did not understand the difference between true and
false information or those who did not yet understand how to
use the rating scale.

Procedure The procedure was similar to Experiment 1 in
Gweon et al. (2014), except that the stimuli were presented as
videos rather than live action, and that participants observed
and rated two Toy Teachers sequentially. Participants were
tested in a quiet room inside the museum. All participants
received a brief training with the rating scale before the procedures began. Each child saw two trials, one Teach 1/1 trial,
and one Teach 1/4 trial, in varying orders depending on the
condition. Each trial consisted of three phases: Exploration,
Teaching, and Rating (see Figure 1).
(1) Exploration: Children first watched a video of an adult
exploring the toy. In the Teach 1/1 trial, the adult said,“I wonder what this toy does!” and discovered one function of the
toy (wind-up mechanism on the yellow toy; beep on the gray
toy), while acknowledging that other parts don’t do anything.
At the end of the video, she exclaimed, ”This toy does one
thing!” In the Teach 1/4 trial, the adult discovered all four
functions of the toy, and said ”This toy does four things!”
1 . Children were then asked how many things the toy does.
If the child could not answer or gave an incorrect answer,
the experimenter replayed the video and prompted the child
again. We dropped and replaced children (N = 2) who were
unable to report the correct number of functions after the second viewing.
(2) Teaching: Children then watched a video of a Toy
Teacher teaching Elmo about the toy from the Exploration
phase. The Toy Teacher said, “Hi, I’m Paul (Bill), and I know
all about this toy. I’m going to show you how it works!” Critically, in both the Teach 1/1 and Teach 1/4 trials, children
watched the Toy Teacher demonstrate just one function. Thus
the Toy Teacher was fully informative in the Teach 1/1 trials
and under-informative in the Teach 1/4 trials.
(3) Rating: The experimenter then brought out the scale
and asked the child,“How helpful was Paul (Bill) in teaching Elmo?” The participant indicated his or her response by
placing the marker on the rating scale. Then the same procedure (Exploration, Teaching and Rating) was repeated with
the other trial. The type of toy and the trial type was counterbalanced throughout. One toy was always taught by Paul, and

Results and Discussion
We first asked whether our results replicated Gweon et al.
(2014) by comparing the average ratings for the Teach 1/1
and Teach 1/4 trials, collapsing across conditions. In line with
previous findings, 6- and 7-year-olds gave a higher rating for
the Toy Teacher in the Teach 1/1 trials than the Teach 1/4
trials (Teach 1/1 vs. Teach 1/4: M(SD) = 15.30(4.73) vs.
8.25(5.77), t(27) = 5.851, p < .001).
To ask whether the order of the Toy Teachers affected
ratings, we performed a 2(Trial: Teach 1/1, Teach 1/4) by
2(Condition: Teach 1/1 First, Teach 1/4 First) mixed ANOVA
with Trial as a within-subjects factor and Condition as a
between-subjects factor. The results revealed a significant effect of Trial, F(1,26) = 33.013, p < .001, η2p = .56, no main
effect of Condition, F(1,26) = .294, p = ns, and no interaction
between Condition and Trial, F(1,26) = .036, p = ns.
These results replicate findings from Gweon et al. (2014),
showing that that by age 6, children reliably detect sins of
omission in pedagogical contexts and appropriately evaluate
teachers depending on whether they provided fully informative or under-informative information.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we ask whether younger children (4- and
5-year-olds) also show the same pattern as older children, or
whether their ratings are influenced by the order in which they
observed and rated different teachers.

Methods
Subjects Thirty-two 5-year-olds (MAge (SD) = 5.45(.30),
range = 5.00-5.95) and thirty-two 4-year-olds (MAge (SD) =
4.51(.30), range = 4.07 - 4.99) were recruited from a local
museum or a University-affiliated nursery school (N=16 in
each condition). Following Gweon et al. (2014), an additional

1 We ensured that the adults did not deliver any pedagogical cues;
they initially claimed to be naı̈ve about the toy, their utterances were
self-directed, and they never made eye contact with the camera.

850

larly, 4-year-olds in the Teach 1/1 First condition gave higher
ratings in the Teach 1/1 trials than Teach 1/4 trials (Teach
1/1 vs. Teach 1/4: M(SD) = 17.94(5.21) vs. 11.25(8.27),
t(15) = 3.14, p = .007), whereas 4-year-olds in the Teach 1/4
First condition did not show this pattern (Teach 1/1 vs. Teach
1/4: 15.88(5.50) vs. 14.69(7.18), t(15) = .81, p = ns).
Finally, we compared the ratings between Teach 1/1 and
Teach 1/4 teachers using just the first trials, as if the children
were run in the original single-trial paradigm used in Gweon
et al. (2014). For both 4-year-olds and 5-year-olds, we did not
see a significant difference in children’s ratings for fully vs.
under-informative teachers (4-year-olds: Teach 1/1 vs. Teach
1/4: M(SD) = 17.94(5.21) vs. 14.69(7.18), t(27) = 1.47, p =
ns, 5 yr olds: Teach 1/1 vs. Teach 1/4 : M(SD) = 16.28(5.94)
vs. 15.25(7.19),t(28) = .44, p = ns).
These results suggest that 4- and 5-year-olds’ ratings were
highly influenced by the order in which they saw different trials. When children first saw a fully-informative Toy
Teacher, children were able to give a lower rating for the
under-informative Toy Teacher, but those who saw the reverse
order failed to penalize the under-informative Toy Teacher.
One possible interpretation is that the results reflect a simple bias to provide a generous rating for anyone they evaluate
first. If the baseline rating is higher in younger children, then
even though they understood that the Teach 1/1 teacher was
better than the Teach 1/4 teacher, they might have been unable to rate him higher simply because they had first given a
very generous rating to the Teach 1/4 teacher. If this is the
case, then children might be willing to provide a high rating
even for a teacher who provides obviously false information.
While unlikely, we addressed this alternative with an independent group of 4- and 5-year-olds (MAge (SD) = 5.22(.52),
range = 4.37 - 5.97) and asked children to rate a teacher who
provided false information (Incorrect Teacher). We compared
the average rating for this Incorrect Teacher to the average rating for the Teach 1/4 Toy Teacher in the Teach 1/4 First condition. Children who rated the Incorrect Teacher first gave a
significantly lower rating compared to the children who rated
the 1/4 Toy Teacher first (Incorrect vs. Teach 1/4: M(SD) =
9.58(8.38) vs. 16.62(6.39), t(17) = 2.56, p = .02). Furthermore, while 3 of 12 children gave the highest possible rating
to the Incorrect Teacher, 17 out of 24 children in the combined 4- and 5-year-old group gave the highest rating for the
Teach 1/4 Teacher (Fisher’s exact, p = .01)2 .
These results suggest that the younger children were anchored well on the scale, and the failure to distinguish fully
informative and under-informative teachers in the Teach 1/4
First group was not due to a higher baseline rating. Children
were able to appropriately penalize teachers who provided
false information, but they struggled to penalize those who
provided incomplete information.

Figure 1: Procedures in Exp. 1 & 2 and the rating scale.
22 4-year-olds and 12 5-year-olds were excluded from analysis because they rated the Incorrect Teacher the same as or
higher than the Correct teacher.
Materials

The stimuli were identical as in Exp. 1.

Procedure Five-year-olds were trained on the same 21point rating scale as in Experiment 1. Because pilot data suggested that 4-year-olds often get confused during the training, we removed the smaller tick marks between the main
anchor points that effectively converted the 21-point scale to
a 5-point scale (for 4-year-olds only). These scores were then
converted back to 21 points for comparisons with other data
(mapping from 21- to 5-point scale: 0 to 1, 5 to 2, 10 to 3, 15
to 4, 20 to 5). The procedures were identical.

Results and Discussion
First, we looked at ratings for the Toy Teachers by collapsing
across conditions in each age group. 4-year-olds and 5-yearolds rated the Toy Teacher higher in the Teach 1/1 trials than
in the Teach 1/4 trials (4-year-olds: Teach 1/1 vs. Teach 1/4:
M(SD) = 16.91(5.37) vs. 12.97(7.81), t(31) = 2.83, p = .007;
5 yr olds: Teach 1/1 vs. Teach 1/4: M(SD) = 15.78(5.26) vs.
12.81(7.57),t(31) = 2.61, p = .014).
For each age group, we asked whether condition (order of
trials) affected children’s ratings. We performed a 2(Trial:
Teach 1/1, Teach 1/4) by 2(Condition: Teach 1/1 First, Teach
1/4 First) mixed ANOVA with Trial as a within-subjects factor and Condition as a between-subjects factor. For 5-yearolds, the results revealed a significant effect of Trial, F(1,30)
= 8.41,p = .007, η2p = .22, no effect of Condition, F(1,30) =
.969, p = ns, and a significant interaction between Condition
and Trial, F(1,30) = 8.231, p = .007, η2p = .22 . We saw the
same pattern in 4-year-olds, with a significant effect of Trial,
F(1,30) = 9.26, p = .005, η2p = .24, no effect of Condition,
F(1,30) = .122, p = ns, and a significant interaction between
Condition and Trial, F(1,30) = 4.52, p = .042, η2p = .13.
Planned comparisons revealed that 5-year-olds in the Teach
1/1 First condition gave higher ratings in the Teach 1/1 trial
than the Teach 1/4 trial (Teach 1/1 vs. Teach 1/4: M(SD) =
16.28(5.94) vs. 10.31(7.33), t(15) = 4.22, p = .001). However, 5-year-olds in the Teach 1/4 First condition failed to
show this distinction (Teach 1/1 vs. Teach 1/4: M(SD) =
15.28(4.62) vs. 15.25(7.19), t(15) = .021, p = ns). Simi-

2 There were no differences between ratings to the Incorrect
Teacher when the child saw this teacher first or when observed in
the Teach 1/4 First condition, p = .196.

851

General Discussion
Across three experiments, our results show 4- and 5-yearolds’ limited success in evaluating under-informative pedagogy. More specifically, children successfully evaluated
under-informative teachers only if they had seen the fullyinformative teacher first. These results are in stark contrast
with older children’s success (age 6 - 7) who reliably distinguished the two teachers regardless of order. However, given
a clear contrast between the two teachers, even 4-year-olds
showed a robust success in distinguishing the two.
These results are most consistent with the hypothesis that
children’s judgments of sins of omission are affected by the
availability of alternatives (i.e., what the teacher could have
shown), and suggests that the same constraints might underlie children’s failures in evaluating violations of pragmatic
implicature and their failures in evaluating under-informative
teachers. Barner et al. (2011) suggests that children have difficulty with scalar implicature tasks because they do not know
that the word all is an alternative to the word some; they cannot represent that the speaker could have said “all of the animals are sleeping” to describe a picture in which three of three
animals are sleeping. Thus children even fail to reject false
sentences like “only some of the animals are sleeping”. However, when an equivalent sentence allows the relevant scale to
be constructed from the contextual information, children reject the sentence “only the dog and the cat are sleeping”. Similarly, our results suggest that seeing a teacher who provides
a fully informative demonstration establishes a contrast that
facilitates evaluation of the under-informative teacher; seeing
the Teach 1/1 teacher first allows children to understand what
the Teach 1/4 teacher could have done, making it easier for
children to penalize him for his “sin of omission”.
Our results also suggest that young children are not simply more tolerant of under-informativeness. Recent data suggest that 5- and 6-year-olds fail to reject under-informative
utterances but appropriately reward under-informative speakers less than fully-informative ones (Katsos & Bishop, 2011),
suggesting that the gradedness of the measure could mask
children’s performance. However, high tolerance of pragmatic infelicity alone cannot account for our data. If children
were simply generous with pragmatic violations, younger
children should have shown similar ratings for the underinformative teacher regardless of the order. Furthermore, we
would have seen a linear increase with age in the difference
between Teach 1/1 and Teach 1/4 ratings. These patterns were
not clear in our data. However, our data do not conclusively
rule out the possibility that a reluctance to reject or penalize
others might further complicate their ability to detect sins of
omission (as well as other violations of pragmatic implicatures), and further studies should study the role of different
factors that contribute to children’s failure in both domains.
Why are alternatives important in interpreting others’ actions? Although some of our goal-directed actions are executed in well-established patterns, there are often many degrees of freedom in how we behave in the world. For instance,

Figure 2: Results from Exp. 1 & 2 (***p < 0.001, **p <
0.01, *p < 0.05).

Experiment 3
Results from Experiment 2 suggest that although four- and
five-year-olds appropriately evaluate sins of omission if, and
only if, they saw the fully informative teacher first, and that
this limitation is not due to a high baseline rating. Moreover, the data were inconsistent with the possibility that children’s difficulty arise from their higher tolerance for underinformativeness; if this were true, children’s ratings for the
under-informative teacher would not have been affected by
order. Our data are more consistent with the possibility that
young children successfully evaluate under-informative pedagogy when the alternatives are made clear in the context (i.e.,
having seen a teacher who provides fully informative demonstration). In Experiment 3, we test this hypothesis with a
more specific prediction. If alternatives matter, then presenting young children with binary choice between the teachers
should also lead to success; watching two teachers back-toback should create a clear contextual contrast, and children
should succeed regardless of the teacher order.

Methods
Subjects Twenty-three 4-year-olds were recruited from a
University-affiliated nursery school, MAge (SD) = 4.45 (.26),
range: 4.00 - 4.97.
Materials

Stimuli were identical as in Exp. 1 & 2.

Procedure Procedures were similar to Exp. 1 & 2, except
that instead of rating after each trial, children first watched
both trials (Teach 1/1 and Teach 1/4, order counterbalanced)
and were asked to choose between the two teachers. The experimenter placed the actual Toy Teacher puppets on the table, equidistant from the child, and asked: “Who did a better
job of teaching Elmo? Paul, or Bill?” Children indicated their
choice by pointing, touching, saying the puppet’s name.

Results and Discussion
Children showed a clear preference for the Teach 1/1 teacher
over the Teach 1/4 teacher (17 of 23; p = .035, by binomial
test). Thus given a clear contrast between fully vs. underinformative teachers (i.e., having seen both teachers back-toback), even four-year-olds reliably chose teachers who provide complete information.

852

a teacher might be not very helpful because he didn’t know
much, his voice is too soft, or because he demonstrates things
too quickly. In the context of our experiment, young children
might have trouble understanding that the completeness of his
demonstration is the relevant dimension for evaluation; however, upon observing someone who provides full information
about a toy, children might understand that informativeness,
or completeness, is the dimension on which they should evaluate the teacher. Thus one interesting prediction is that the
type of alternatives matter; for instance, even though it is
still a “good” teacher, seeing a teacher who was simply correct about a toy’s function should not help children evaluate
under-informative teacher (see also Skordos & Papafragou,
2014, for related data on scalar implicature). Testing this prediction will further clarify the role of contrastive context and
alternative representations in children’s social evaluations.

tive principle (Grice, 1975). The current study provides an
important empirical link between some of the most distinctively human behaviors: teaching and communication.

Acknowledgements
We thank Hannah Pelton & Cristina Spicer for help with filming stimulil, Shivani Kaushal & Ilona Bass for help with data
collection, and Laura Schulz, Mike Frank, Tamar Kushnir, &
Desmond Ong for helpful comments and discussions. We are
also grateful to Bing Nursery School, Palo Alto Junior Museum & Zoo, Boston Children’s Museum, and the families
who participated. This work was funded by Varieties of Understanding grant from the John Templeton Foundation.

References
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children’s pragmatic
inference. Cognition, 118(1), 84–93.
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D.,
Spelke, E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword
of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration
and discovery. Cognition, 120(3), 322–330.
Foppolo, F., Guasti, M. T., & Chierchia, G. (2012). Scalar implicatures in child language: Give children a chance. Language learning and development, 8(4), 365–394.
Grice, H. (1975). Logic and conversation’in p. cole and j.
morgan (eds.) syntax and semantics volume 3: Speech acts.
Academic Press, New York.
Gweon, H., Pelton, H., Konopka, J. A., & Schulz, L. E.
(2014). Sins of omission: Children selectively explore
when teachers are under-informative. Cognition, 132(3),
335–341.
Huang, Y. T., & Snedeker, J. (2009). Semantic meaning
and pragmatic interpretation in 5-year-olds: evidence from
real-time spoken language comprehension. Developmental
Psychology, 45(6), 1723–1739.
Katsos, N., & Bishop, D. V. (2011). Pragmatic tolerance:
Implications for the acquisition of informativeness and implicature. Cognition, 120(1), 67–81.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: Experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78, 165-188.
Papafragou, A. (2006). From scalar semantics to implicature:
children’s interpretation of aspectuals. J Child Lang, 33(4),
721-57.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar implicatures:
experiments at the semantics-pragmatics interface. Cognition, 86(3), 253–282.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2012). Learning
From Others: The Consequences of Psychological Reasoning for Human Learning. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 7(4), 341–351.
Skordos, D., & Papafragou, A. (2014). Scalar inferences in
5-year-olds: the role of alternatives. Proceedings from the
38th Annual Boston University Conference on Language
Development., Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

Relatedly, results from Exp. 3 suggest that even 4-yearolds can encode and retain the teachers’ actions regardless of
the order; given binary choice, children showed a robust preference for the more informative teacher. Therefore, the role
of alternatives (i.e., seeing the Teach 1/1 teacher first) seems
to be in interpreting observed actions of others, rather than in
deciding what to attend to or what to remember. This points
to a possible importance of Theory of Mind – the ability to explain and predict others’ actions in terms of their unobservable mental states – in our ability to generate and represent
alternatives actions of others. Indeed, a key factor in the ability to compute scalar implicature is lexical knowledge (e.g.,
Barner et al., 2011), and similarly, knowledge of available
action repertoires would be important for interpreting others’ actions. However, the ability to represent an unobservable state of the world or another person’s mind might also
be a key factor in understanding our pragmatic competence
(Foppolo, Guasti, & Chierchia, 2012), and we look forward
to future work that directly investigates this link.
In the current study, we modified our previous single-trial
task (Gweon et al., 2014) to specifically test the hypothesis
that accessing alternatives is requisite to younger children’s
appropriate evaluations of under-informative demonstrations.
In the absence of this prediction, one could have easily used a
between-subject paradigm to test this younger population and
concluded that 4- and 5-year-olds “do not yet recognize sins
of omission”. We were able to detect this competence only by
asking children to evaluate both teachers. Our findings highlight the importance of carefully considering the limitations
of experimental designs particularly when drawing conclusions about developmental trajectory.
Even from early in life, humans constantly communicate
with, and learn from, each other. Even though the format
of information and the modalities by which we communicate
might vary across contexts, we are always tuned to others’ intentions and knowledge, and we attempt to infer what others
mean by going beyond the evidence. From this perspective,
violations of pedagogical sampling and violations of scalar
implicature are both failures to conform to Grice’s coopera-

853

