Language evolution in the lab tends toward informative communication
Alexandra Carstensen1 (abc@berkeley.edu)
Jing Xu4 (jing.xu@jhmi.edu)
Cameron T. Smith2 (vmpfc1@berkeley.edu)
Terry Regier2,3 (terry.regier@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology,1 Department of Linguistics,2 Cognitive Science Program3
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287 USA4

Regier’s (2012) kinship study, Levinson (2012) pointed out
that although that research explains cross-language semantic
variation in communicative terms, it does not tell us “where
our categories come from” (p. 989); that is, it does not
establish what process gives rise to the diverse attested
systems of informative categories. Levinson suggested that
a possible answer to that question may lie in a line of
experimental work that explores human simulation of
cultural transmission in the laboratory, and “shows how
categories get honed through iterated learning across
simulated generations” (p. 989). We agree that prior work
explaining cross-language semantic variation in terms of
informative communication has not yet addressed this
central question, and we address it here.

Abstract
Why do languages parcel human experience into categories in
the ways they do? Languages vary widely in their category
systems but not arbitrarily, and one possibility is that this
constrained variation reflects universal communicative needs.
Consistent with this idea, it has been shown that attested
category systems tend to support highly informative
communication. However it is not yet known what process
produces these informative systems. Here we show that
human simulation of cultural transmission in the lab produces
systems of semantic categories that converge toward greater
informativeness, in the domains of color and spatial relations.
These findings suggest that larger-scale cultural transmission
over historical time could have produced the diverse yet
informative category systems found in the world’s languages.
Keywords: Informative communication, language evolution,
iterated learning, cultural transmission, spatial cognition,
color naming, semantic universals.

Iterated learning and category systems
The general idea behind iterated learning studies is that of
a chain or sequence of learners. The first person in the chain
produces some behavior; the next person in the chain
observes that behavior, learns from it, and then produces
behavior of her own; that learned behavior is then observed
by the next person in the chain, who learns from it, and so
on. This experimental paradigm is meant to capture in
miniature the transmission and alteration of cultural
information across generations; the learned behavior
generally changes as it is filtered through the chain of
learners.
Iterated learning and related learning studies have
produced a number of findings that are directly relevant to
the development of informative category systems. Kirby et
al. (2008) showed that iterated learning of artificial
languages resulted in those languages gradually becoming
more structured, suggesting that linguistic structure could
emerge from the dynamics of cultural transmission.
Fedzechkina et al. (2012), in a non-iterated but relevant
learning study, showed that learners of an artificial language
restructured their input in a way that increases the efficiency
of the learned system—specifically, learners preferentially
deployed case marking in contexts in which it was highly
informative, although that bias was not present in the input.
This finding establishes the general principle that learners
may alter their input in the direction of greater efficiency.
However, the study did not examine the learning of systems

The origins of semantic diversity
Languages vary widely in their fundamental units of
meaning—the concepts and categories they encode in single
words or other basic forms. For example, some languages
have a single color term spanning green and blue (Berlin &
Kay, 1969), and some have a spatial term that captures the
notion of being in water (Levinson & Meira, 2003: 496),
neither of which is captured by a single word in English.
Yet at the same time, similar or identical meanings often
appear in unrelated languages. What explains this pattern of
wide yet constrained variation?
An existing proposal suggests an explanation in terms of
the functional need for efficient communication: that is,
communication that is highly informative yet requires only
minimal cognitive resources. There may be many ways for
systems to be communicatively efficient, and the different
category systems that we see across languages may
represent different language-specific solutions to this shared
communicative challenge. This idea has accounted for
cross-language semantic variation in the domains of color
(Regier et al., 2007; 2015), kinship (Kemp & Regier, 2012),
spatial relations (Khetarpal et al., 2013), and number (Xu &
Regier, 2014).
However, this prior work has also left an important
question unaddressed. In a commentary on Kemp and

303

of semantic categories, and it is unknown whether the
principle they established generalizes to the shaping of such
systems. Finally, Xu et al. (2013) conducted an iterated
learning study that did examine the learning of semantic
category systems—but did not examine informativeness
(see also Silvey et al., 2015). Xu et al. (2013) showed that
iterated learning of color names produces systems of named
color categories that are similar to those found in the
world’s languages. It is known that naturally-occurring
color naming systems tend to support informative
communication (e.g. Regier et al., 2015), so Xu et al.’s
(2013) results indirectly suggest that iterated learning may
lead to greater informativeness in category systems.
However they did not directly test whether that is the case,
and did not examine any semantic domain other than color.
Taken as a whole, the literature reviewed above leaves
open two major relevant questions. (1) Does iterated
learning of category systems in fact produce systems of
greater informativeness? (2) If so, is this tendency toward
informativeness found across different semantic domains?
We pursue these questions here, to see whether they provide
an answer to the challenge posed by Levinson (2012).
In what follows, we first present a computational
framework for exploring semantic systems through the lens
of informative communication. We then present two studies.
In the first, we reanalyze the color naming data of Xu et al.
(2013), and ask whether those data reveal convergence
toward informative color naming systems. In the second
study, we conduct an analogous iterated learning experiment
in the domain of spatial relations, and ask the same question
of those data. To preview our results, we find that in both
domains, systems of semantic categories become
increasingly informative through the process of iterated
learning. We conclude that the informative yet varied
systems of categories in the world’s languages may have
resulted from larger-scale processes of cultural transmission.

intended to approximate the speaker’s distribution s but is
necessarily less precise, because the word w is semantically
broad.

Figure 1: A scenario illustrating informative
communication. From Regier et al. (2015).
The listener distribution is determined in different ways
for different semantic domains, depending on the character
of the domain. In the color and space analyses below, as in
our earlier work in these domains (Regier et al., 2007; 2015;
Khetarpal et al., 2013), we assume a similarity-based
listener distribution: the listener reconstructs the speaker’s
intended meaning by assigning mass to each object i in the
domain (here, each color i) as a function of how similar i is
to the objects in the category named by w:
l (i ) ∝

∑ sim(i, j )

j∈cat ( w )

(1)

This captures the intuition that category-central referents
(those with high similarities to other members) are the most
expected targets when that category is used. The similarity
sim(i,j) between objects i and j is determined separately for
different domains, as described in our studies below.
Given the speaker s and listener l distributions, we define
the communicative cost c(t) of communicating object t
under a given semantic system to be the information lost in
communication: that is, the information lost when l is taken
as an approximation to s. We formalize this as the KullbackLeibler divergence between s and l. In the case of speaker
certainty as assumed here, this quantity reduces to surprisal:

Informative communication
We take a semantic system to be informative to the extent
that it supports accurate mental reconstruction by a listener
of a speaker’s intended message (Kemp & Regier, 2012;
Regier et al., 2015). Figure 1 illustrates this idea in the
context of communicating about color in English.
In the figure, time and causality flow from left to right.
The speaker has in mind a particular target color t drawn
from the universe U of all colors, shown here for simplicity
as a 1-dimensional spectrum. The speaker represents this
target color as a probability distribution s over U, centered
at t. In our treatment below, we will assume that the speaker
is certain of the target object, so that s(t)=1 and s(i)=0 ∀i≠t,
but the framework can be generalized to accommodate
speaker uncertainty about the target. The speaker wishes to
communicate the target color to the listener, and so uses a
word w: here, the English word blue. Having heard this
word, the listener then attempts to mentally reconstruct the
speaker’s representation s, given w. The listener’s
reconstruction is also a probability distribution, l, and is

c(t ) = DKL ( s || l ) = ∑ s (i ) log 2
i∈U

s (i )
1
= log 2
l (i )
l (t )

(2)

Finally, we define the communicative cost for the domain
as a whole to be the expected communicative cost over all
objects in the domain universe U:
E[c ] = ∑ n(i )c(i )
i∈U

(3)

Here n(i) is the probability that the speaker will wish to
talk about object i. In the analyses below, as in our earlier
work in color and space (Regier et al., 2007; 2015;
Khetarpal et al., 2013), we assume for simplicity that n(i) is
uniform. We take a semantic system to be informative to the
extent that it exhibits low E[c]. A system could increase its
informativeness through the addition of more categories; in
our analyses we control for this possibility by comparing
(groups of) systems with the same number of categories.

304

Study 1: Color
Communicative cost. In order to assess the informativeness
of a given color naming system, we need to specify how
similarity is determined in that domain (recall Equation 1).
As in earlier work in this domain (Regier et al., 2007; 2015),
we take the similarity of two colors i and j to be a Gaussian
function of the perceptual distance between them:

Xu et al. (2013) showed that iterated learning of color
naming yields categorical partitions of color space that are
similar to color naming systems found in the world’s
languages. They measured the distance between color
categories produced in their experiment and those in the
World Color Survey (WCS: Cook et al., 2005), the largest
existing publicly available database of color naming data,
containing color naming data from speakers of 110
languages of non-industrialized societies. Xu et al. (2013)
found that as color naming systems in their iterated learning
task were transmitted across generations of learners, the
systems became more similar to those in WCS languages. In
a separate study, Regier et al. (2015) assessed the
communicative cost of color naming systems in the
languages of the WCS, using the formal framework
described above, and showed that the majority of these
systems are highly informative, despite their diversity.
Taken together, these earlier findings suggest that color
naming systems produced under iterated learning may come
to resemble those found in languages through gradual
increases in informativeness over generations. However,
that proposal of increasing informativeness under iterated
learning has not been directly tested. We test it here, by
reanalyzing the color naming data from Xu et al. (2013)’s
iterated learning experiment in terms of the framework
described above.

sim(i, j ) = exp(−c × dist (i, j ) 2 )

(4)

Following Regier et al. (2007; 2015), the scaling factor c is
set to .001 for all analyses reported here, and dist(i,j) is the
distance between colors i and j in the CIELAB color space.
Given this, we can now assess the informativeness of a
given color naming system following Equations 1-4.
Results
Figure 2 (blue line, right y-axis) shows the average
communicative cost E[c] of the 20 color naming systems in
Xu et al’s (2013) study, over the 13 generations of that
study. Generation 0 corresponds to the random initial
partitions supplied to the first generation of participants in
training.

Methods
Iterated learning of color. Xu et al. (2013) trained an
initial generation of 20 participants on random partitions of
color space into 3-6 categories, and then asked them to
recall those categories by labeling a set of color chips
accordingly. The next set of 20 participants each studied the
assignment of labels to color chips of a single first
generation learner, and created their own labelings in turn,
which were then used to train the subsequent generation.
This procedure was iterated over 20 chains of learners with
13 generations of learners each. In each generation of each
chain, participants created a full color naming system by
assigning a category label to each of the 330 color chips in
the color naming array used in the WCS. Xu et al. then
measured the dissimilarity between these transmitted
category systems, at each generation, and the color naming
systems of the WCS. They measured dissimilarity using
variation of information (VI: Meilă, 2007), a distance
measure between different groupings of the same set of
items.

Figure 2: Average distance to WCS languages (red; left yaxis), and communicative cost (blue; right y-axis) of
artificial systems of color categories, over generations of
iterated learning. Bars indicate standard error of the mean.
It can be seen that these color naming systems exhibit
decreasing communicative cost (increasing informativeness)
over the first four generations of learners, after which no
further systematic change is seen. This pattern of change
over time closely parallels that seen in the similarity of labgenerated color naming systems to those of actual languages
(red line). This finding suggests that artificial color naming
systems come to resemble those found in languages through
a transmission process that favors systems of greater
informativeness.

The data in Figure 2 (red line, left y-axis) are from Xu et
al. (2013). These data show that as color naming systems
are filtered through generations of learners, they become
more similar to the natural systems of the WCS, as Xu et al.
reported. We wish to ascertain whether this change also
reflects a gradual increase in informativeness, brought about
through transmission.

Study 2: Spatial relations
Does iterated learning lead to increasing informativeness
across multiple domains, or only in the domain of color? To

305

answer this question, we conducted an analogous study in a
different semantic domain, that of spatial relations.
Languages categorize the spatial domain in a wide variety
of ways that nonetheless show certain recurring tendencies
(e.g. Levinson & Meira, 2003). Figure 3 gives a quick sense
for this variation.

Participants were instructed to learn spatial categories
from an “alien language” by observing a series of scenes
paired with visual sentences. In each training trial, a scene
from the TRPS was presented for 5 seconds along with a
visual sentence describing that scene in a hypothetical alien
language. The visual sentence consisted of three smaller
images beneath the main scene, as shown in Figure 4. The
visual sentences showed the figure and ground objects from
the main scene separately, and a colored patch indicating the
alien spatial category to which the spatial relationship
between figure and ground belongs. For example, in Figure
4, the participant is labeling the spatial relation apple-inbowl as belonging to the category marked by red. Other
scenes would be labeled by other colors, for a total of four
color-coded categories.

Figure 3: Ten spatial relations, as categorized in two
languages: Tiriyó and Yélî-Dnye.
Adapted from Levinson & Meira (2003).

Figure 4: Example test and training trials from two
consecutive generations of a transmission chain.

Additionally, spatial systems across languages tend to
support informative communication (Khetarpal et al., 2013).
In both of these respects, space is like color. However it is
unlike color in that it is more complex. Perceptual color
space is defined with respect to just three dimensions: hue,
saturation, and lightness. In contrast, the mental
representations underlying the kinds of spatial relations
shown in Figure 3 appear to rely on a much wider range of
spatial features (Levinson & Meira, 2003; Xu & Kemp,
2010).

Participants completed two training sessions in which
each of the 71 TRPS scenes was presented one at a time in
random order paired with a color representing the spatial
category to which that scene belongs. After two rounds of
training, participants were shown the scenes and visual
sentences a final time, but without the color label, and
categorized each spatial relationship according to the alien
language by pressing colored keys to indicate category
assignments. Color labels and their locations on the
keyboard were counterbalanced across participants within
each iterated learning chain.
As in Xu et al.’s (2013) study, each of the 5 chains was
initialized as a random partition of the 71 TRPS scenes into
four roughly equally-sized categories, which the first
participants in each chain studied during training and
attempted to reproduce in the following test session. All
subsequent participants in each chain were trained on the
responses of the previous participant and were instructed to
reproduce them as closely as possible, but were not aware
that any of the data had any connection to other participants.
We excluded any participants whose categorization
accuracy was at or below chance or who reported that they
relied principally on non-spatial information (e.g. the
objects involved) to learn the spatial categories.

We considered spatial naming data, collected both in the
field and in the lab, relative to a standard stimulus set: the
Topological Relations Picture Series (TRPS: Bowerman &
Pederson, 1992). The spatial scenes in Figure 3 above are
from the TRPS. The full TRPS is a set of 71 such line
drawings depicting different spatial relations. Each image
shows an orange figure object located relative to a black
background object. We wished to discover whether iterated
learning of category systems over these stimuli would
converge toward the spatial systems of natural languages,
and toward greater informativeness, in a parallel to the color
findings reported above.
Methods
Iterated learning of spatial relations. 50 undergraduates at
UC Berkeley took part in the study in return for class credit,
forming 5 transmission chains of 10 generations each. Each
participant completed an iterated learning task in which they
studied and then attempted to recall category assignments
for 4-category partitions of the 71 TRPS scenes.

Distance to languages. Analogous to Xu et al. (2013), we
measured the dissimilarity between these transmitted spatial
category systems at each generation, and the spatial systems
of languages. Our target languages were a convenience
sample: Arabic, Basque, Chichewa, Dutch, English,
Japanese, Maijɨki, Mandarin Chinese, and Spanish. All the

306

spatial naming data we drew on from these languages are
unpublished. The data were collected either by our group
(Arabic, Chichewa, Japanese, Mandarin Chinese, Spanish),
or by collaborators who kindly shared their data with us and
whom we gratefully acknowledge below (remaining
languages). All data were collected relative to the TRPS
scenes. For each language, we assigned to each TRPS scene
the spatial term that was applied to that scene by the
plurality of native speakers interviewed. This procedure
yielded labels for all TRPS scenes, in each language.
Following Xu et al. (2013), we used variation of
information (VI) to measure the distance between category
systems obtained through iterated learning, and those found
in these languages.

For comparison, Figure 5 (blue line, right y-axis) shows the
average communicative cost of category systems across
generations in our experiment. As in the case of color, this
quantity also decreases as systems are transmitted from
generation to generation, showing that transmitted spatial
systems become more informative as they are transmitted.
Moreover, again as in the case of color, this decrease closely
tracks the decrease in distance to language, suggesting that
iterated learning produces spatial systems that resemble
those of languages through a transmission process that
favors informative categories.
A natural concern is that the participants in our
experiment may have been influenced by their knowledge of
English, and that the increasing proximity of the learned
systems to those of actual languages may have been driven
by English semantic structuring. We feel this concern
should be lessened by three observations (not shown in the
figure): (1) the learned category systems get progressively
closer to all languages considered, including those with
categories that cross-cut English spatial terms; (2) the
learned category systems are closer to some other languages
(e.g. Arabic, Chichewa, and Mandarin Chinese) than they
are to English; and (3) the same qualitative results obtain
when English is excluded from the set of languages to
which the learned category systems are compared. Given
this, it seems plausible that the increasing proximity to
languages may have been driven in large part by universal
semantic tendencies and cognitive forces, rather than by the
English language itself.
Increases in both informativeness and language-like
semantic structuring are illustrated below in Figure 6. The
figure shows scenes from a single category at the beginning
(left panel) and end (right panel) of our experiment. After
transmission through 10 generations of learners, the
meaning of the category has been altered through the loss of
many initial members depicting a wide variety of spatial
relations, down to a set of scenes exemplifying a novel
relational category that expresses the notion “tightly
around”, or encirclement and tight fit. This spatial notion is
intuitively clear, yet does not correspond to a single spatial
term in English, the primary language of our participants.

Communicative cost. In order to assess informativeness for
spatial relations, as for color, we needed an independent
measure of similarity. We took the similarity between any
two spatial relations stimuli to be determined by pile-sorting
of those stimuli in a separate study. Khetarpal et al. (2010)
asked native English speakers to sort the TRPS scenes into
piles based on the similarity of the spatial relationships they
depict. We took the similarity of any two scenes to be the
proportion of participants who sorted those two scenes into
the same pile in Khetarpal et al.’s (2010) data. Given this
specification of similarity, we assessed the informativeness
of spatial naming systems following Equations 1-3.
Results
Figure 5 (red line, left y-axis) shows the average distance
(VI) between the spatial naming systems generated through
iterated learning, and those of our language sample. This
distance gradually decreases, as the systems are shaped by
transmission from generation to generation. Thus, as in the
case of color, iterated learning leads to spatial naming
systems that become increasingly similar to those of natural
languages.

Figure 5: Average distance to languages (red; left y-axis),
and communicative cost (blue; right y-axis) of artificial
systems of spatial categories, over generations of iterated
learning. Bars indicate standard error of the mean.

Figure 6: Representative scenes showing the semantic
reorganization of a single category over transmission.

307

efficient communication. PNAS, 109, 17897-17902.
Kemp, C., & Regier, T. (2012). Kinship categories across
languages reflect general communicative principles.
Science, 336, 1049-1054.
Khetarpal, N., Majid, A., Malt, B., Sloman, S., & Regier, T.
(2010). Similarity judgments reflect both language and
cross-language tendencies: Evidence from two semantic
domains. In S. Ohlsson and R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Khetarpal, N., Neveu, G., Majid, A., Michael, L., & Regier,
T. (2013). Spatial terms across languages support nearoptimal communication: Evidence from Peruvian
Amazonia, and computational analyses. In M. Knauff, M.
Pauen, N. Sebanz, and I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
PNAS, 105, 10681-10686.
Levinson, S.C. (2012). Kinship and human thought.
Science, 336, 988-989.
Levinson, S.C. & Meira, S. (2003). 'Natural concepts' in the
spatial topological domain—Adpositional meanings in
crosslinguistic perspective: An exercise in semantic
typology. Language, 79, 485-516.
Meilă, M. (2007). Comparing clusterings: An information
based distance. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 98, 873895.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. PNAS, 104,
1436-1441.
Regier, T., Kemp, C., & Kay, P. (2015). Word meanings
across languages support efficient communication. In B.
MacWhinney & W. O’Grady (Eds.), The handbook of
language emergence (pp. 237-263). Hoboken, NJ:
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
Silvey, C., Kirby, S. & Smith, K. (2015). Word meanings
evolve to selectively preserve distinctions on salient
dimensions. Cognitive Science, 39, 212-226.
Xu, J., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. (2013). Cultural
transmission results in convergence towards colour term
universals. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 280,
20123073.
Xu, Y. & Kemp, C. (2010). Constructing spatial concepts
from universal primitives. In S. Ohlsson & R.
Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Xu, Y. & Regier, T. (2014). Numeral systems across
languages support efficient communication: From
approximate numerosity to recursion. In P. Bello et al.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.

Discussion and conclusions
We have shown that iterated learning produces semantic
systems that tend toward informative category structure, and
also toward similarity with human languages. We find this
pattern in two domains—color and spatial relations—
suggesting that it may hold more generally across domains.
To the extent that these findings do generalize, they suggest
an answer to Levinson’s (2012) question of how diverse
category systems across languages assume their highly
informative character.
A number of questions are left open by our findings.
Would similar findings have been obtained if we had made
other, but still reasonable, assumptions in our formalization
of informative communication? Do these results extend to
other semantic domains? Perhaps most importantly, do the
results scale up to transmission in a larger social context?
These questions are left open for future research. Despite
these caveats, however, our initial findings reported here do
suggest support for a specific account of the origins of the
semantic diversity seen in the world’s languages, as a
natural result of shared communicative principles, operating
across communities of language learners, and across time.

Acknowledgments
We thank Shubha Guha for assistance with early piloting
and design of the experimental paradigm; Asifa Majid,
Naveen Khetarpal, Grace Neveu, and Lev Michael for
kindly sharing their spatial naming data; Vanessa Matalon,
Ana Cuevas, Maggie Soun, Katie Chen, and Aaliyah Ichino
for help in collecting additional spatial naming data; and
Yang Xu and Joshua Abbott for valuable comments. We
also thank Thomas Griffiths for help procuring data archives
and Naveen Khetarpal for sharing pile-sort data and
software. This work was supported by NSF under grant
SBE-1041707, the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center
(SILC), and under NSF Graduate Research Fellowship grant
DGE 1106400.

References
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their
universality and evolution. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Bowerman, M., & Pederson, E. (1992). Cross-linguistic
studies of spatial semantic organization. In Annual Report
of the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 1992
(pp. 53-56).
Cook, R., Kay, P., & Regier, T. (2005). The World Color
Survey database: History and use. In H. Cohen and C.
Lefebvre (Eds.), Handbook of categorization in cognitive
science (pp. 223-242). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T.F., & Newport, E.L. (2012).
Language learners restructure their input to facilitate

308

