Large-scale investigations of variability in children’s first words
Rose M. Schneider

Daniel Yurovsky

Michael C. Frank

rschneid@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

yurovsky@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
A child’s first word is an important step towards language. Aggregated across children, the distribution of these first productive uses of language can act as a window into early cognitive and linguistic development. We investigate both the variability and predictability in children’s first words across four
new datasets. We find, first, that children’s first words tend to
emerge earlier than previously estimated: more than 75 percent
of children produce their first word before their first birthday.
Second, we find a high degree of consistency in the types of
things children name in their first words, independent of the
age at which they are produced. Finally, we show that the particular words that children produce first are predictable from
two linguistic factors: input frequency and phonological complexity. Together, our results suggest a degree of independence
between early conceptual and linguistic development.
Keywords: Language acquisition, word learning, cognitive
development

Introduction
Over the course of their first years, children rapidly go from
speechless infants to toddlers producing and learning language at an astounding rate (Fenson et al., 1994). Marking
the beginning of productive language, a child’s first word is
an important and measurable insight into what a child is willing and able to talk about at that point in development. Yet, in
contrast to later behaviors, children’s first words often emerge
during intimate moments between children and caregivers,
and are difficult for external observers to record or measure.
Here we leverage large-scale data from parental reports to
ask what children’s first words reveal about two key issues
in early language learning: the time-course of the emergence
of language, and the relation between conceptual and linguistic development. In three sets of analyses, we explore when
a first word is likely to emerge, the semantic category distributions of these words, and some factors that predict first
words.
Infants begin to show an aptitude for language from a very
early point in development. By 1-month, infants already
prefer to listen to child-directed speech over adult-directed
speech (Cooper & Aslin, 1990). Over their first year, infants
are learning to recognize and segment the distinctive sounds
and word forms of their native language (Kuhl, 2004; Werker
& Curtin, 2005). Additionally, by 6–9 months, many infants
already show a tendency to look to named targets when they
hear common nouns, suggesting early beginnings for formmeaning mapping as well (Tincoff & Jusczyk, 2012; Bergelson & Swingley, 2012). Infants’ abilities to comprehend language thus appear to be reasonably well-developed prior to

12 months. Furthermore, as early as 12 weeks, children also
begin producing the sounds of their native language in babble,
suggesting an early beginning to linguistic production (Kuhl,
2004). However, developmental norms suggest that the typical child will produce their first word at 12 months. Is this
early lag between comprehension and production real, or only
apparent?
What is the relationship between children’s linguistic and
conceptual development? Typically-developing monolingual
children show correlations between some cognitive achievements and their language production; for example, acquisition of words about disappearance is correlated with comprehension of object permanence (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1986).
But at a larger scale, conceptual development appears to
play a more limited role: 2–5-year-old international adoptees
learning English for the first time show the same gross patterns of development in vocabulary composition as monolingual infants. (Snedeker, Geren, & Shafto, 2007). There
are also striking convergences in early words across very
different cultural contexts (Tardif, 2007). Do patterns of
first word productions—and their distribution across semantic
categories—suggest any broader relationships between language acquisition and cognitive development?
Because very early language is difficult to observe in the
lab, in this study we leverage parent reports to learn about
children’s first words, and what they can reveal about the relationship between early conceptual and linguistic development. A child’s first word is highly memorable for parents,
and many parents record this milestone in baby books. We
define a true “first word” as the consistent use of a form to
communicate a particular meaning, whether or not that form
matches the adult target form. While recognizing that parents may not share this definition, intuitively, we believe this
is what parents tend to think they are reporting when they report first words, and found support for this across our datasets
in reports of first words as a phonological approximations of
adult targets.
Parent report has both substantial disadvantages and real
advantages as a scientific measurement. One issue with
any self-report measure is that there is no way to validate
participants’ responses. Another complication is that parents may be biased observers, and interpret word-like babble as productive communication. Additionally, the recollection of a first word may be subject to errors in memory
recall, or other retrospective biases. Nevertheless, parent report is widely used as a measure of early child language, e.g.
in the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inven-

2110

tory (CDI), a vocabulary checklist that is both a reliable and
valid measure of early vocabulary (Fenson et al., 1994, 2007,
although the reliability of the earliest ages of the CDI has
been questioned; Feldman et al., 2000). Additionally, selfreports are very easy to collect, making them ideal for largescale investigations like the present study.
To address issues of bias in self-report, we gathered data
from four sources. The first dataset was a survey filled out
by parents who were members of a local children’s museum. These parents were an ethnically diverse population
with a higher education level than the general population and
a demonstrated interest in their child’s development, likely
leading to a high level of engagement in their children’s early
language. Our second dataset was the Amazon Mechanical
Turk parent population; this community is more diverse in
terms of age, gender, education level, and socio-economic
status (SES). Our third dataset came from parents in the psycholinguistic research community. We selected this population for its familiarity with the subject and because this community was most likely to have written records about first
words. The data we received from all three of these surveys was generally very consistent, both within and across
datasets, leading us to believe at the very least that any bias
in one was likely in operation across all three.
Our final dataset was drawn from Wordbank, a large, open
repository of CDI form data that aggregates across several
samples including the updated CDI norming sample (Fenson
et al., 2007). We chose this dataset because the CDI form
asks a parent to report their child’s current productive vocabulary, and thus is free from any retrospective reporting biases
that may skew our other surveys. Because the CDI contains
a fixed set of words, it constrains the space of possible first
words but also facilitates comparative analyses by reducing
the space to a small, representative set.
Drawing on these datasets, we investigate the time-course
of the emergence of productive language and potential factors
that might lead to individual differences in linguistic development. First, we analyze variability in the age of first word
onset, finding that 75% of children are reported as producing a word prior to 12 months. Second, we ask whether the
range of of first words varies with children’s chronological
age, allowing us to ask about the relationship between linguistic and conceptual development. This analysis yields no measurable differences, indicating that linguistic factors—rather
than conceptual ones—likely constrain the set of first words.
Finally, we show that two specific linguistic factors, input frequency and phonetic complexity, both predict the words that
children are likely to say first.

General Methods
Data for the study come from four datasets. Three of the four
were surveys specifically designed for this study.

Dataset 1: Museum Member Survey
Participants We sent out a very brief survey on children’s
first words to subscribed members of a large local children’s
museum. We received responses for 502 children (215 female, 285 male, and 2 with no reported sex; M age = 11 mo.,
median = 10 mo.). Several responses were translated into English where possible; one response could not be translated
and was excluded from further analysis.

Method Parents completed a web-based survey. The survey asked parents to report their child’s first word (excluding
“mama” and “dada”), the word referent, a description of the
situation surrounding the first word, the child’s age at time of
utterance (10 mo. or younger, 11 mo., 12 mo., 13 mo., 14
mo.), the child’s current age, and sex. Parents answered for
only one child in this survey. We standardized responses and
corrected obvious spelling errors. When the meaning of the
word was not immediately apparent, we relied on the parent’s
description of the circumstances surrounding the word and/or
the parent’s classification of the word type.
Exclusion of “mama” and “dada” While many parents reported that their child’s first word was “mama” or “dada” (or
some equivalent or variant), we excluded these children from
our analyses. First, parents may be motivated to hear these
words very early in babble, even when the word is not being
used in a meaningful or consistent way. Second, we were interested in the range of concepts represented in the words we
analyzed. Therefore, we stressed in our surveys that parents
were to report their children’s first word other than “mama”
or “dada” to avoid this possibility and to detect a larger range
of conceptual types. Additionally in the MTurk dataset, we
included a question asking whether the child’s first word was
“mama”, “dada,” or another first word. In total, 1107/1650
(67%) of children were reported to produce “mama” (N =
618) or “dada” (N = 489) first rather than another word (N =
543).

Dataset 2: Amazon Mechanical Turk
Participants We recruited 1000 parents from Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to complete an in-depth survey on
their children’s first words. We restricted the survey to parents
in the United States. This survey allowed parents to answer
for multiple children. We received responses for 1671 children (813 female, 858 male; M age = 10 mo., median = 10
mo.). Responses from 20 children were excluded from subsequent analyses because they had not yet spoken (M age =
2.7 mo., median = 2 mo.). Responses in other languages were
translated into English where possible; one response was excluded. After exclusions, this dataset contained responses
from 996 parents and 1650 children’s first words. Caregiver
education levels were highly diverse (Elementary = 3; Some
high school = 15; High school = 166; Some college = 309;
College = 346; Some graduate school = 26; Graduate school
= 131; N = 996).
Method This survey was an extended version of the Museum survey, allowing for input for multiple children, and
asking the respondent to list their highest level of education,
child’s birth order, sex, first word (excluding “mama” and
“dada”), word type, addressee of the first word, age at time
of the word (0–24+ months), current age (0–18+ years), and
both the languages of the first word and typically spoken at
home.
Data were handled as in Dataset 1. Due to the larger sample size, more phonological and morphological variations appeared in parents’ reports of children’s productions. A final
standardized form was selected, and the various original first
word forms were recoded as that standardized form. For example, “Dog dog,” “Doggy,” “Doggie,” and “Dogie” were all

2111

Museum
Ball
Hi
Dog
Uh–Oh
Duck
Car
No
Cat
Bye
Up, More

Psycholinguists
Up
More
Hi
Cat
Bye

Wordbank
Baa Baa
Uh–Oh
Yum Yum
Woof Woof
Hi
Vroom
This
Meow
Bottle
Ball

1.00

Cumulative Probability of First Word

MTurk
Dog
No
Ball
Bottle
Hi
Bye
Kitty
Baba
Cat
Milk

0.75

0.50
Dataset
MTurk
Museum

0.25

Psycholinguists
Wordbank

0.00

Table 1: Top ten first words (excluding “mama” and “dada”) from
each of the four datasets we examined. Words repeated across more
than 2 datasets are bolded. Included are only words with more than
1 instance.

coded as “Dog.” When necessary, we relied on the parent’s
description of the situation in this coding process.

Dataset 3: Psycholinguists
Participants We sent out a brief survey on children’s first
words to subscribed members of a Psycholinguistics listserv.
We received 52 responses from this survey (26 female, 26
male; M age = 11.16 mo., median 11 mo.).
Method Questions included on the survey were: The approximate phonological form of the first word, the age of
utterance, when the parent recorded the word (if at all), the
child’s sex, the target word, the child’s birth order (first or
later born), and the child’s current age. Data were handled
similarly to Datasets 1 and 2.

Dataset 4: Wordbank
Participants At the time of our analysis, the Wordbank
database contained 8889 unique CDI Words and Gestures
administrations. From these, we selected the 76 Englishspeaking children whose parents reported that they produced
exactly one word (31 female, 45 male, M age = 10.63 mo.,
median = 11 mo.). Caregiver education levels were fairly diverse (Some high school = 4; High school = 24; Some college = 21; College = 17; Some graduate school = 1; Graduate
school = 9).
Data preparation As responses were taken directly from
the CDI, no data preparation was necessary.

Analyses
Table 1 shows the top ten words from each dataset. Overall,
there is substantial consistency across the four datasets, with
“Hi” appearing in all four, and “Bye”, “Ball”, “Dog”/“Woof
Woof”, and “Cat” appearing in three.
Below we report three primary analyses. Analysis 1 examines the age of first production, Analysis 2 describes the
semantic categories of these words, and Analysis 3 predicts
which words tend to be produced on the basis of phonological
complexity and input frequency.

Analysis 1: Age of First Word
Despite evidence for very early word comprehension (Tincoff
& Jusczyk, 2012; Bergelson & Swingley, 2012), conventional
wisdom holds that the first word emerges around 12 months.

0

4

8

12

Age (months)

16

20

24

Figure 1: Cumulative probability of a child having produced her
first word across development. In all datasets, more than 75% percent of children had produced their first word by their first birthday and more than half had produced their first word by 10 months.
Shaded regions show 95% confidence intervals computed by nonparametric bootstrap.

However, a child’s first word is almost exclusively heard by
a parent or other caretaker. Is this reported lag between comprehension and production real or apparent?
Using data from a total of 2,279 children we plotted the
cumulative probability of a child having produced a first word
as a function of their age and dataset (Figure 1). Prior to
12 months, approximately 75% of children had produced a
first word, across all four datasets. This result was strikingly
consistent across datasets, despite significant variance in the
tails.
Data from the Museum survey were truncated due to a “ten
months or earlier” response option and showed the least age
variability, with respondents modally choosing the earliest
option. Data from Wordbank were also truncated due to the 8
month cutoff for the use of the CDI (as well as data sparsity
in the oldest ages); nevertheless, Wordbank data showed the
earliest word productions. One possibility is this may reflect
a bias towards reporting at least one word, given the process
of going through the entire CDI checklist; another possibility
is that seeing the checklist allows parents to more thoroughly
consider their child’s early productions.
Data from the MTurk survey showed a broader distribution
of ages, perhaps due to the greater diversity (as well as larger
size) of this sample. Some children were reported to be producing words implausibly early (e.g., 4 months). These responses are very likely (though not, to be fair, with absolute
certainty) the result of reporting errors or biases. To estimate
retrospective reporting biases, we regressed the mean age of
first words against the time since the event in our largest
dataset (MTurk, which had the most fine-grained age data),
but did not find a significant relationship, suggesting no biases of this type that we could measure. On the other end
of the spectrum, some respondents reported first words appearing after 18 months, a timeline which might raise clinical
concerns. Indeed, in a population as large as this one, there
are almost certainly some children with speech-language delays or other developmental disorders. Thus, this dataset is
potentially valuable for estimating the right tail of the distribution in a diverse population.

2112

Data Set
MTurk
Museum
Psycholinguists
Wordbank

Finally, the Psycholinguist dataset shows a relatively later
and steeper onset of word production than the other three
(though it still reaches 75% around 11 months). Given the
high level of education of the respondents, it is likely that
these children would have large early vocabularies (e.g. Hart
& Risley, 1995, et seq.). On the other hand, the majority
of these respondents recorded their child’s first word at the
time of production, decreasing concerns about retrospective
report. Additionally, these respondents had training in psycholinguistics and were more likely to apply a more stringent
standard (we shared our definition of a first word with respondents in the survey instructions). Thus we view the lack
of very early respondents as prima facie evidence that first
words before 9 months are rarer than our other surveys might
lead us to believe.
In sum, we see some evidence for over-optimism (estimating first words earlier than we might expect) in a number of
our datasets. It must be noted that, as our surveys were designed exclusively to ask about a child’s first word, parents of
later producers who had not spoken a first word yet may have
been unwilling to take the survey, potentially skewing the age
of production earlier. However, across the Museum, MTurk,
and Psycholinguist datasets, more than 50% of the children
were currently older than 2 years, so it is possible that laterproducers are included in these datasets. Additionally, we
saw no evidence of retrospective reporting biases. A plausible account of this pattern is that first words—whether detected optimistically or realistically—are a memorable event
whose date and context are recalled well. In addition, despite
differences in the tails, there was a striking convergence between datasets in suggesting that most children in our sample
produced a first word prior to their first birthday.

Routines, Toys, and People were all frequent first word categories, and all seemed equally compelling as a first word
for both early and later producers. Data for later speakers in
Wordbank was sparse, because children were selected for this
analysis when they were producing exactly one word, according to parental report on the CDI, and only 27 children met
this criterion.

The variability in children’s age of first production gives us
a natural tool for asking about the relationship between conceptual and linguistic development. All things being equal
between age groups, younger children should be less conceptually sophisticated and hence might produce words for a
more restricted range of concepts.1 Alternatively, if the concepts that children most want to talk about are present early
(Snedeker et al., 2007; Snedeker, Geren, & Shafto, 2012;
Gleitman, 1990), we should predict no difference in the distribution of first words for older and younger children.
We ask here whether older children show a different distribution of first words. We assigned words to the categories
that appear on the CDI instrument (e.g., animals, games and
routines, toys, people, etc.) and conducted our analysis over
the category distribution of words (a loose proxy for their
semantic distribution). We assigned CDI categories consistently across datasets for words that did not appear on the
CDI word list. Ninety-one children were excluded because
their first word could not be categorized.
Figure 2 shows the frequencies of the CDI categories split
by age (<12 mo., >12 mo.) and grouped by dataset. Especially in the two larger datasets, the distribution across categories was virtually indistinguishable. Animals, Games and
course, younger producers might be on average more conceptually sophisticated than older producers, but the current analysis
assumes that other developmental factors (e.g. phonological development, language experience, etc.) also vary.

First Word
(-0.31, 0.13)
(-0.12, 0.52)
(0.00, 1.11)
(-0.59, 0.69)

Table 2: 95% confidence intervals on differences in the entropy
of First CDI Category and First Word between older and younger
children.

Analysis 2: Independence of Age and First Word

1 Of

CDI Category
(-0.22, 0.04)
(-0.25, 0.28)
(0.00, 1.33)
(-0.76, 0.84)

To quantify differences in variability across age, we asked
whether the entropy of children’s word or category distributions were different for our older and younger children
(Shannon, 1948). Differences in entropy would signal differences in the breadth of the distribution across words or categories. Because entropy is sensitive to sample size, for each
dataset we split children into older and younger groups, and
then down-sampled the larger group to the size of the smaller
one. We then computed the difference in entropy for children
in the older group as compared to the younger group at both
the word and category level. For each dataset and for both
words and CDI categories, we used non-parametric bootstrap
resampling to identify whether the observed difference in entropy was significant at the p = .05 level. For all datasets
and measures, the 95% confidence interval for entropy differences included 0, indicating no significant difference in entropy across ages (Table2).
In our exploration of the data, we found one word that was
both highly frequent and potentially linked to conceptual development: “no.” Negation is a complex construct, and various functions of negation (denial, refusal, nonexistence) are
posited to emerge at different points in a child’s development
(Pea, 1982). We coded instances of “no” (in the MTurk data,
where the majority of instances were reported) based on parent descriptions of the situation surrounding the first word.
Of 108 children producing “no” as a first word, 40% did so
as a refusal; there were no instances of “no” being used as
denial, which is acquired later (Pea, 1982).
In sum, despite producing a first word during different
points in their conceptual development, both early and later
producers in our sample chose to talk about the same semantic categories, and in many cases, the same things (see Table 1), although we are not able to capture whether there are
changes across development in the meaning of these words in
our dataset (Bates et al., 1976). However, the similar distributions of semantic categories in early and later speakers suggests that first words tend to reflect concepts that are available
early. Why then do children consistently pick certain words
to talk about? In the next analysis, we examine the role of
input frequency and phonological complexity in determining
which words are predicted.

2113

Wordbank

Games and Routines
Food and Drink
Animals
People
Toys
Action
Sound Effects
Vehicles
Descriptive
Small Household Objects
Outside Things
Pronouns
Phrase
Clothing
Body Parts
Furniture and Rooms
Quantifiers
Prepositions and Locations
Time
Question Words

Games and Routines
Food and Drink
Animals
People
Toys
Action
Sound Effects
Vehicles
Descriptive
Small Household Objects
Outside Things
Pronouns
Phrase
Clothing
Body Parts
Furniture and Rooms
Quantifiers
Prepositions and Locations
Time
Question Words

Psycholinguists

Games and Routines
Food and Drink
Animals
People
Toys
Action
Sound Effects
Vehicles
Descriptive
Small Household Objects
Outside Things
Pronouns
Phrase
Clothing
Body Parts
Furniture and Rooms
Quantifiers
Prepositions and Locations
Time
Question Words

Museum

Games and Routines
Food and Drink
Animals
People
Toys
Action
Sound Effects
Vehicles
Descriptive
Small Household Objects
Outside Things
Pronouns
Phrase
Clothing
Body Parts
Furniture and Rooms
Quantifiers
Prepositions and Locations
Time
Question Words

Proportion of First Words

MTurk

<12 Months Old >12 Months Old

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

CDI Category

Figure 2: Proportion of children’s first words falling into each CDI category. The datasets showed a high degree of consistency, with most first
words referring to animals or games and routines. These distributions were highly consistent between older and younger children, suggesting
that first words are driven by linguistic rather than conceptual factors. The dashed line shows the baseline distribution of CDI categories.
Num. Phones

Analysis 3: Predicting First Words

Log Freq.
Count Estimate

0
-1
-2
1

Hurdle

0
-1
-2

k

k
an
db
ts
or
is
W
gu
lin
ho
yc
Ps
m
eu

us

r
Tu

M

M

k

k
an
db
ts
or
is
W
gu
lin
ho
yc
Ps
m
eu

us

M

r
Tu

M

The goal of our analysis is to determine both why some first
words were produced more frequently than others (e.g. “dog”
vs. “asleep”), and also why some words were never first
words at all (e.g. “animal”). Because the set of words that
were never produced is infinite, we needed to constrain our
set of candidate first words to a small, representative, finite
set. For this reason, and to ensure fair comparison across
datasets, we restricted our set of words to the 385 words that
appear on the CDI Words and Gestures form.
To estimate the approximate frequency with which children hear each of these words, we tabulated the number of
times each appears in CHILDES (a large corpus of parentchild interactions; MacWhinney, 2000). To ensure a representative sample, we counted the number of appearances
of each word in a child’s mother’s speech across all of the
corpora in the North American subset. These frequencies
were then log-transformed. To estimate phonetic complexity, we chose a simple, theory-independent measure: number of phonemes. For each of this same subset of words, we
queried the MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Wilson, 1988).
Number of phonemes is an imperfect measure of phonetic
complexity—it misses differences in articulatory complexity
that contribute to the relative difficulty of producing different
words (e.g. “truck” vs. “bunny”)—but it does capture some
of the variability among the CDI words.
To predict the number of observations of each of a set of
a categorical outcomes, the standard statistical model is Poisson regression, but this method behaves poorly when distributions violate its assumptions through high variance (overdispersion) and too many zeros. To adjust for these violations,
we used a hurdle model (Mullahy, 1986). This model predicts the number of observed counts through a combination
of two processes: a binomial threshold (hurdle) that first determines whether a count is zero or greater, and then a second
component which determines the size of the count if it is nonzero. Because the datasets were of such different sizes, we fit
a separate hurdle model to each and examined consistency in

Parameter Estimate (+/- 95% CI)

1

Dataset

Figure 3: Parameter estimates for hurdle models predicting children’s first words. Models showed a high degree of consistency
across datasets: first words tend to be higher frequency and have
fewer phonemes. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. Intercepts are omitted for clarity.

the estimated parameters across datasets.
Across datasets, input frequency and phonetic complexity
consistently predicted the number of children who produced
each word as their first word. As we hypothesized, in almost
all cases candidate words were more likely to be first words if
they were higher frequency in children’s input, and if they had
fewer phonemes (Figure 3). In conjunction with the analyses
above, these results suggest a high degree of consistency in
children’s first productions, independent of conceptual development, and dependent instead on linguistic input and speech
production fluency.

General Discussion
What can children’s first words reveal about their conceptual and linguistic development? Using parent report data,
we presented three analyses, touching on the timing of productive language emergence, the distribution of conceptual

2114

categories across developmentally early and late first words,
and factors that play a role in predicting which words are produced first. More than three quarters of children produced a
first word prior to their first birthday, but the particular concepts these words named did not vary across age. Instead,
two non-conceptual factors—input frequency and phonetic
complexity—predicted the number of children who produced
a particular word first.
A child’s first word is a highly salient moment whose memorability to caregivers also makes it ideally suited for use in
parent-report measures. Nonetheless, even when analyzed at
this scale, parent report is always limited by observer bias.
Although we found no evidence of retrospective biases in
parents of older children over-reporting early first words, we
must remain aware that there are potential issues with memory recall or other parental biases, as in any self-report measure. We dealt with these issues in several ways, including by
seeking converging evidence across multiple, distinct datasets
and by testing explicitly for retrospective biases. Nevertheless, the possibility of bias is present, and future studies
should consider the possibility of prospective report or dense
recording techniques to extend and validate our findings.
We began by asking about the lag between comprehension
and production in early language. One possible explanation
for this lag is that there is a period during early infancy in
which word knowledge consists of associations between auditory and visual stimuli and so there is no drive to communicate through production. In contrast to this hypothesis, our
data suggest that many children are striving to communicate
even quite early on. Consistent with other studies of early
vocabulary (Tardif, 2007), the productions that parents reported also included functional and communicative items—
“hi,” “more,” and “no”—as well as common nouns. In sum,
our work suggests that studying the very first emergence of
productive speech is a rich method for adding to our understanding of language development.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Ally Kraus for assistance with survey design and
Jenni Martin and Rick Berg for help with the Museum data, as
well as to the members of the Language and Cognition Lab.

References
Bates, E., et al. (1976). Language and context: The acquisition of pragmatics (Vol. 13). Academic Press New York.
Bergelson, E., & Swingley, D. (2012). At 6–9 months, human infants know the meanings of many common nouns.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(9),
3253–3258.
Cooper, R. P., & Aslin, R. N. (1990). Preference for infantdirected speech in the first month after birth. Child Development, 61(5), 1584–1595.
Feldman, H. M., Dollaghan, C. A., Campbell, T. F., KursLasky, M., Janosky, J. E., & Paradise, J. L. (2000). Measurement properties of the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories at ages one and two years. Child
Development, 71(2), 310–322.

Fenson, L., Bates, E., Dale, P. S., Marchman, V. A., Reznick,
J. S., & Thal, D. J. (2007). MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventories.
Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J., Bates, E., Thal, D., Pethick,
S., . . . Stiles, J. (1994). Variability in early communicative
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 59(5).
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb meanings.
Language Acquisition, 3–55.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1986, August). Relations
between semantic and cognitive development in the oneword stage: The specificity hypothesis. Child Development, 57(4), 1040-1053.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differences in the
everyday experience of young american children. Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing Company.
Kuhl, P. (2004). Early language acquisition: Cracking the
speech code. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5(11), 831–
843.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. third edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mullahy, J. (1986). Specification and testing of some modified count data models. Journal of Econometrics, 33(3),
341–365.
Pea, R. D. (1982). Origins of verbal logic: Spontaneous
denials by two-and three-year olds. Journal of Child Language, 9(03), 597–626.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical Journal, 27, 379–423.
Snedeker, J., Geren, J., & Shafto, C. (2007). Starting over:
international adoption as a natural experiment in language
development. Psychological Science, 18(1), 79.
Snedeker, J., Geren, J., & Shafto, C. L. (2012). Disentangling the effects of cognitive development and linguistic
expertise: A longitudinal study of the acquisition of english
in internationally-adopted children. Cognitive Psychology,
65(1), 39–76.
Tardif, C. (2007). Cross-linguistic differences in children’s
early word acquisition. Advances in Psychological Science,
3.
Tincoff, R., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2012). Six-month-olds comprehend words that refer to parts of the body. Infancy,
17(4), 432–444.
Werker, J. F., & Curtin, S. (2005). Primir: A developmental
framework of infant speech processing. Language Learning and Development, 1(2), 197–234.
Wilson, M. (1988). Mrc psycholinguistic database: Machineusable dictionary, version 2.00. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 20(1), 6–10.

2115

