Mediators or Alternative Explanations:
Transitivity in Human-Mediated Causal Chains
Jonas Nagel (jnagel1@uni-goettingen.de)
Simon Stephan (sstepha1@uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen,
Gosslerstr. 14, 37073 Göttingen, Germany
Abstract
We investigate how learning that an established type-level
causal relationship is implemented by human agency affects
people’s conceptualization of this relationship. In particular,
we ask under what conditions subjects continue to perceive the
original root cause as appropriate explanation for the resulting
effect, and under what conditions they perceive the mediating
intentional action as alternative explanation instead. Using a
new experimental paradigm, we demonstrate that mechanisms
involving intentional action lead to intuitions of causal intransitivity, but only when these actions are norm-violating. Potential generalizations and implications for scientific theory construction are discussed.
Keywords: explanation; causal mechanisms; causal chains;
transitivity; mediators

Suppose you make the observation that in a class of pupils,
all girls get high grades in a gym class, while all boys get low
grades. You get the impression that gender might be an important factor to explain the grades in this class: being a girl
seems to be causally relevant for a pupil to get high grades.
Suppose further investigations bring to light how this causal
relationship is brought about: being a girl causes you to have
more flexible joints, which in turn causes you to perform better in the gym class. Given this information, does being a
girl still explain why someone gets high grades? Intuitively,
it does: the causal relationship of gender on grades is implemented or mediated by a physiological mechanism involving
agility; the mechanism information just specifies how exactly
the causal influence of gender on grades is realized.
Contrast this to your intuitions towards the following alternative information about how exactly gender influences
grades in the observed class: the gym teacher likes girls better
than boys and gives high grades to everyone he likes. In other
words, being a girl causes you to be liked by the teacher, and
being liked by the teacher causes you to receive a high grade.
Intuitively, gender suddenly seems less relevant in explaining the high grades. The teacher’s judgments seem to be an
alternative explanation for the grades rather than a characterization of how exactly gender exerts its causal impact on the
grades.
This example illustrates that there are different possible
conceptualizations of causal mechanisms. Some intermediate
causes in chains are seen as mediators explaining how exactly
the root cause brings about its effect, while other intermediate causes are seen as alternative explanations for the effect in
question, replacing the root cause as appropriate explanation.
Furthermore, the example indicates that both intuitions can
be triggered for one and the same cause-effect relationship

(gender influencing grades) and with constant structural parameters (e.g., objective contingencies between the involved
variables), depending only on the content of the mechanism
that turns out to realize the relationship in question.
In the present paper, we will begin to investigate the psychological mechanisms that might bring about this switch in
intuitions. We will first conceptualize the issue as causal transitivity problem and relate it to previous work in the field.
We then turn to the question whether causal mechanisms involving intentional actions of human agents might lead to intuitions of causal intransitivity. The first experiment introduces a new paradigm designed to demonstrate the existence
of the different intuitions towards the introductory example in
laypeople. The second experiment tests two hypotheses as to
what aspects of intentional action lead to intuitions of causal
intransitivity using a different cover story. In the General Discussion, we point at implications that our results might have
for transitivity intuitions outside the narrow domain of mechanisms involving intentional agents.

Transitivity in Causal Chains
Normatively, this issue can be conceptualized as the question
of transitivity in causal chains. According to most classical
accounts of probabilistic causality (e.g., Eells, 1991) and to
the calculus of Bayesian networks (Pearl, 2000), principally,
if A causes B and B causes C, then it follows that A causes
C. Learning about the mechanism that implements a known
causal relationship between A and C should therefore not affect the assessment of this known relationship. Technically,
we can ask whether we should hold the value of B fixed when
assessing the causal impact of A on C. The answer is no because B is not causally independent of A (see Rehder, 2014).
For many examples, this is intuitively clear: if I want to assess
whether my drinking four pints in the evening (A) causes me
to have a headache on the next day (C), I should not hold fixed
the amount of toxins produced in my body in the meantime
(B). Causality is transitive: A per se is seen to be critical for C
even when it is established that its causal influence is entirely
mediated via B—as in the agility version of the introductory
example.
However, the intuition that causality is transitive in causal
chains is not always observed in the causal judgments of
laypeople. Recently, Johnson and Ahn (2015) presented
subjects with descriptions of numerous token causal chains
(e.g., “Allison exercised for 20 min [A], then Allison became
thirsty [B], then Allison drank a whole bottle of Water [C]”)

1691

and then asked them to what extent they would say that A
caused B, to what extent B caused C, and to what extent A
caused C. For some examples, like the one above, they found
high ratings for all three causal relationships, indicating transitivity. For other token chains, however, causality was not
seen as transitive. For example, in “Ned ate very spicy food
[A], then Ned drank a lot of water [B], then Ned had to urinate [C]”, people rendered high causality ratings for A → B
and for B → C, but much lower ratings for A → C. Thus, even
though both links of the chain were seen as highly causal, the
root cause was judged to have only a low causal impact on
the final effect. This is analogous to our intuitions towards
the teacher version of the introductory example: despite the
fact that the teacher’s sympathy (B) is causally dependent on
the pupil’s gender (A), it seems that B is seen as an alternative cause of the grades (C) rather than as a descendant of A
implementing the mechanism leading from A to C.
Note that in these cases it is not denied that A causes B.
The data by Johnson and Ahn (2015) indicate that people can
be fully aware of this relationship, yet see B in some sense as
an independent cause of C (as it can be causal for C where A
is not). Thus, the judgment that A per se is not causal for C
does not reflect a belief that there is no (indirect) causal connection between A and C. Rather, it seems to reflect the intuition that A’s causal impact on C is mediated via the “wrong”
kind of mechanism. In other words, there seem to be some
mechanisms which are compatible with the notion that the
root cause per se matters for the effect, while there are other
mechanisms which are incompatible with this notion.
Johnson and Ahn (2015) used token causal chains describing everyday actions of individuals and their effects. Causal
transitivity varied widely across their individual items (see
examples above). They showed that the extent to which such
chains are causally transitive is a function of the extent to
which the chains are represented in semantic memory as one
single chunk (rather than as two separate relationships that
are stored independently). However, the data do not allow
conclusions as to which item properties cause a chain to be
represented one way rather than the other. It thus seems unclear how their account could handle our intuitions towards
the introductory example, where new mechanism knowledge
is discovered for a constant unfamiliar type-level causal relationship which is unlikely to have a pre-established representation in semantic memory. Additional processes seem to be
at work here.

Intentional Agents Implementing Causal
Chains
Which features of a discovered mechanism determine the
resulting transitivity intuitions? A salient property of the
teacher mechanism in the introductory example is that it involves an intentional agent as realizer of the causal relationship in question, while the agility mechanism is part of a
blind biological process. Previous research suggests that intentional actions are particularly likely to be selected as the

principal cause of terminal effects in unfolding token causal
chains. Hilton, McClure, and Sutton (2009) have shown that
when asked to identify the actual cause of a token event, people trace back the antecedent causal chain until they reach an
intentional agent and designate his action to be the principal
cause of the effect—even if the downstream causal process
involves highly abnormal events that would be designated to
be the principal cause in the absence of upstream intentional
agency (see also Hilton & Slugoski, 1986). In other words,
intentional root causes seem to make chains transitive even
when they involve highly abnormal events. Accordingly, one
may suspect that the reverse might also hold: finding out that
a physical root cause influences its effects by affecting intentional agents’ decisions may make the chain intransitive.
Intentional agents may be generally seen as unmoved movers
that initiate causal processes rather than merely transfer external influences, producing intransitive chains and screening
off the influence of the root cause from the explanandum.
However, in the materials used by Hilton et al. (2009),
the intentional actions that were selected as explanations for
their distal effects were usually also morally wrong or at least
highly negligent. The same is true for the teacher’s grading practice in the introductory example which obviously involves morally dubious criteria. According to Hitchcock and
Knobe (2009), morally abnormal actions tend to be selected
as causes in common-effect structures. Rather than for their
status as intentional actions, the explanations in the causal
chains in Hilton et al. (2009) may have been selected for their
status as especially abnormal events. In this case, intentional
actions that are not norm-violating should not be seen as alternative explanations relative to the antecedent cues by which
they are triggered, but as proper mediators instead. Experiment 2 is designed to differentiate between the intentionality
and the abnormality hypotheses.
For our experiments, we did not employ a causal selection task for the explanation of a single mundane token event.
Rather, we wanted to explore whether the conceptualization
of one and the same type-level causal relationship can be
differentially affected by learning that it is implemented by
different kinds of causal mechanisms. In our experimental
paradigm, we first teach all subjects the existence of a typelevel causal relationship (A → C) and assess (i) how appropriate it would be to state that A is crucial for C. We then provide
different groups of subjects with different information about
the mechanism implementing this relationship (A → B → C,
where the content of B is varied between subjects). Afterwards we assess once again how appropriate it would now be
to state (ii) that A is crucial for C and (iii) that B is crucial
for C. If the second rating for A is as high as the first rating
for A, this will indicate that the mechanism elicited a transitivity intuition: the fact that A causes C via B is compatible
with the notion that A per se matters for C. By contrast, if
the rating for A is decreased in response to learning about a
specific mechanism while the rating for B is at least as high
as the first rating for A, this will indicate that the chain is seen

1692

to be intransitive: the intermediate cause is conceptualized as
an alternative explanation, replacing A as appropriate explanation for C.

Experiment 1
In the first experiment we sought to establish that the
paradigm outlined above is able to capture the intuitive differences displayed in the introductory example.

Participants
The experiment was conducted as an online study. A total
of 171 subjects from the UK completed the experiment, 32
of which were excluded from the statistical analyses because
they failed in a simple attention check question that we asked
at the end of the experiment. The average age of all included
subjects (N = 139, 93 women) was 38 years (SD = 8.62).

Design, Materials, and Procedure
We constructed a complete 2 (Mechanism: Physiology vs.
Teacher) × 2 (Contingency: Deterministic vs. Probabilistic) × 2 (Balance: Boys with high grades vs. Girls with
high grades) between-subjects design. Subjects in all conditions were asked to take the perspective of a scientist investigating the relationship between pupils’ gender (A) and
their grades in a physical education class (C). In a first learning phase they received data of a class of ten pupils (five boys
and five girls) in tabular form which showed each pupil’s gender (A vs. ¬A) and whether he or she got a high grade (C)
or a low grade (¬C). Whether being a boy or a girl was designated as A was counterbalanced with the Balance factor.
When boys had high grades, the grades in question were for
a course in athletics; when girls had high grades, they were
for a course in gymnastics. Half of the subjects learned that
there was a deterministic relationship between gender and
grades, for the other half this relationship was probabilistic
(one exception for each gender). This contingency manipulation was included to explore whether intransitivity intuitions can be elicited for both deterministic and probabilistic causal relationships. After having studied this table, participants were asked to indicate on an 11-point scale (ranging from 0 to 10) how appropriate they found the following
sentence to describe the concrete observations they have just
made: “The gender of a pupil is crucial for this pupil’s grade
in athletics/gymnastics” (we call this appropriateness rating
[A → C]pre because it is measured prior to the introduction
of mechanism information). At this point, we expected that
subjects would have formed the impression that, within the
observed sample, gender influences grades (A → C), leading
them to render unanimously high appropriateness ratings.
The crucial mechanism manipulation was introduced in a
second learning phase. Subjects were told that they would
have come up with a hypothesis about the underlying mechanism. Half of them (Mechanism: Physiology) were told that
they suspected boys to develop higher muscularity than girls
which in turn would lead them to receive higher grades in
athletics. (In the other Balance condition, girls were sus-

pected to develop higher agility than boys which in turn
would lead them to receive higher grades in gymnastics.)
The other half (Mechanism: Teacher) was told that they suspected the teacher to like boys better than girls (and vice versa
for the other Balance condition), leading boys (girls) to receive higher grades. In all conditions, subjects read that they
went back to collect additional data from the same class corresponding to their hypothesis. These data were then presented in a new version of the table which now included an
additional column representing each pupil’s value on the suspected mediating variable (B [high] vs. ¬B [low]; in both
Contingency conditions, this new variable deterministically
predicted the grades). After having studied this extended table, subjects were again asked to indicate how appropriate it
would be to state that A is crucial for C ([A → C]post ), and
also how appropriate it would be to state that B is crucial for
C ([B → C]post ) using the same question format (B being described as “the muscularity of a pupil/the agility of a pupil/the
teacher’s sympathy for a pupil”, depending on condition).
We expected continuously high ratings for (A → C)post in the
Physiology condition and a drop in ratings for (A → C)post in
the Teacher condition.
Afterwards, we assessed contingency estimates for all
three relationships from memory (i.e., P[C|A] vs. P[C|¬A],
P[B|A] vs. P[B|¬A], and P[C|B] vs. P[C|¬B]), assessed on
six separate 11-point scales ranging from 0 (impossible) to
100 (certain) to see if subjects in both Mechanism conditions
based their judgments on the same impression of the objective
probabilities. In the Probabilistic conditions, we furthermore
asked them to indicate the conditional dependence of C on A
given constant values of B (i.e., P[C|A∧B] vs. P[C|¬A∧B],
and P[C|A∧¬B] vs. P[C|¬A∧¬B]) to see if they understood
that, in the observed sample, C was independent of A when
B was held fixed (regardless of the Mechanism condition).
Finally, we wanted to know how plausible they found each
of the described causal relationships (A → C, A → B, and
B → C) according to their prior real world knowledge, regardless of the fictional data from the experiment.

Results
The descriptive results for the appropriateness ratings are displayed in Figure 1. We conducted a global 2 (Mechanism:
Physiology vs. Teacher) × 2 (Contingency: Deterministic vs.
Probabilistic) × 2 (Balance: Boys high vs. Girls high) × 3
(Rating: (A → C)pre vs. (A → C)post vs. (B → C)post , withinsubject) mixed ANOVA. Since there was neither a main effect
of Balance, F 1, 131 < 1, nor any significant interaction effect
including Balance, largest F 2, 262 = 2.19, data in Figure 1 are
averaged across this factor. There was a main effect of Rating, F 2, 262 = 22.00, p < .001, η2p = .14, and a significant interaction of Rating × Contingency, F 2, 262 = 5.99, p = .003,
η2p = .04. There was also a trend for an interaction of Rating
× Mechanism, F 2, 262 = 2.87, p = .06, η2p = .02.
The main prediction that we made was that we would see
a distinct drop of appropriateness ratings for (A → C)post relative to (A → C)pre selectively within the Teacher conditions.

1693

A planned contrast testing whether this difference was larger
in the Teacher compared to the Physiology condition confirmed this prediction, t131 = 2.97, p < .05, r = .25. Furthermore, the ratings for (B → C)post were at least as high as the
ratings for (A → C)pre in all conditions (see Figure 1). The increase in appropriateness ratings for (B → C)post in the Probabilistic conditions can be explained by the fact that B is a
deterministic predictor for C while A is not (i.e., the probabilistic element lies in A → B).

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we attempted to replicate the phenomenon
using a more artificial cover story. This story allowed us to
differentiate between the intentionality and the abnormality
hypotheses developed in the theory section: is the root cause
always screened off when the mechanism involves an intentional agent, or only when this agent’s intentions are morally
dubious?

Participants
10

Deterministic

The experiment was conducted as an online study. We recruited 232 subjects from the UK, 31 of which failed in the
attention test and were excluded from all analyses. The average age of all included subjects (N = 201, 118 women) was
36 years (SD = 8.14).

Probabilistic

9

Appropriateness

8
7

Rating

6

(A−>C) Pre

5

(A−>C) Post

4

(B−>C) Post

Design, Materials, and Procedure

3
2
1
0

Physiology

Teacher

Physiology
Mechanism

Teacher

Figure 1: Group means (Errorbars = 95% CI) of appropriateness ratings in Experiment 1.
An analysis of the subjects’ contingency estimates showed
that, globally, subjects represented the contingencies contained in the learning data quite adequately, apart from
generally underestimating the strength of the deterministic relationships. Crucially, this pattern was similar in
both the Physiology and the Teacher condition. Furthermore, participants in the Probabilistic conditions recognized that A and C were conditionally independent
given constant levels of B (P[C|A∧B] ≈ P[C|¬A∧B] and
P[C|A∧¬B] ≈ P[C|¬A∧¬B]). This pattern was also consistent in both Mechanism conditions. The pattern of contingency estimates therefore cannot account for the differences we observed for the appropriateness ratings between
the Mechanism conditions. The same holds for the plausibility ratings: the relationships A → B and B → C were rated to
be equally plausible for both mechanisms.

Discussion
The results of this experiment show that acquiring different
mechanism knowledge can differentially affect the conceptualization of a given type-level causal relationship. When
effects of gender on grades in a gym class were mediated via
a physiological process, this was seen as compatible with the
notion that gender per se matters for the grades. This was not
the case when the relationship was mediated via the teacher’s
personal preference for the pupil. In this case, subjects revised their earlier judgment that gender was critical for the
grade and attributed the grades to the teacher’s sympathy instead, even though they were aware that the teacher’s preference was causally affected by the pupils’ gender. This result
cannot be explained by differences in encoded contingencies
or prior plausibility intuitions for the different mechanisms.

We used the same experimental paradigm as in Experiment 1.
This time, we implemented four between-subjects conditions
describing different mechanisms underlying the same causal
relationship. Subjects in all conditions were asked to imagine they were at a funfair where they were observing a swing
tossing passengers around. They read that sometimes after
a passenger had entered the swing a red flashlight came on,
whereupon the passenger had to leave the swing without having taken a ride. Participants read that they would have gained
the impression that the flashlight (C) came on more frequently
for corpulent passengers (A). Upon studying the learning data
about a deterministic relationship between A and C across ten
observed passengers (the first five of them corpulent, the last
five not corpulent), they rendered their (A → C)pre appropriateness rating.
We then told subjects in the different conditions that they
would have come up with one of four hypotheses about the
underlying mechanism. In the first condition (Scale) they
were told that they suspected the flashlight to be part of a
safety mechanism. They believed a scale to be built into the
swing which causes the flashlight to come on whenever the
loading exceeds a critical threshold. This condition was intended to provide a baseline for unequivocal judgments of
transitivity, analogous to the Physiology condition in Experiment 1. In the second condition (Accurate Operator) the subjects’ hypothesis was that the operator intends to guarantee
the safety of his costumers, and that whenever he judges a
passenger to be too corpulent for his swing he activates the
flashlight. This condition was intended to provide a mechanism involving an intentional agent but otherwise being
closely matched to the Scale condition. According to the intentionality hypothesis, this chain should nonetheless be seen
as intransitive, while it should be seen as transitive according
to the abnormality hypothesis since the operator does not violate a norm. The mechanism hypothesis of the third condition
(Biased Operator) was that the operator does not like corpulent people and enjoys embarrassing them, and that whenever
he judges a passenger to be too corpulent for his taste, he activates the flashlight. This condition was intended as providing

1694

10

an intentional mechanism analogous to the Teacher condition
in Experiment 1 which should elicit judgments of intransitivity according to both the intentionality and the abnormality hypothesis. In the last condition (Central Computer), the
subjects’ hypothesis was that a central computer supervising
the electricity supply detects irregularities at unpredictable
times, and then generates an electronic signal that causes the
flashlight to come on. The co-occurrence of corpulence and
flashlight in the observed sample would have resulted from
mere coincidence. This condition was intended to create a
structure in which A turned out to be actually causally irrelevant for C. B (the central computer) caused the effect, and
the relationship between A and C in the sample was merely
due to a coincidental correlation between A and B in the observed sample. This condition thus provides a baseline for
an unequivocal alternative explanation. The crucial question
is where intuitions towards the mechanisms involving intentional operators fall within the space that is spanned between
Scale (a clear mediator) and Central Computer (a clear alternative explanation).
In all conditions, subjects read that they went over to the
operator and asked him for information concerning the mechanism. The operator confirmed their hypothesis in all conditions and told them for the last ten passengers whether or
not the scale had detected a threat to the passenger/he had
detected a threat to the passenger/he had not liked the passenger/the central computer had detected irregularities in the
electricity supply (depending on condition). After having
studied the corresponding extended table in which all three
relationships were deterministic, subjects again rendered
their appropriateness ratings for (A → C)post and (B → C)post .
Finally, subjects indicated their contingency estimates for all
three relationships from memory. Plausibility ratings were
not collected.

9

Appropriateness

8
7
Rating

6

(A−>C) Pre

5

(A−>C) Post

4

(B−>C) Post

3
2
1
0

Scale

Accurate Operator Biased Operator Central Computer
Condition

Figure 2: Group means (Errorbars = 95% CI) of appropriateness ratings in Experiment 2.

(A → B, B → C, A → C). The only exception was that ∆P for
A → B tended to be higher in the Scale condition than in the
other three conditions, a difference that was significant in the
comparison with Biased Operator, t197 = 2.28, p < .05. This
indicates that the contingency between corpulence and the biased operator’s judgment was perceived to be weaker than the
contingency between corpulence and threat detection by the
scale, despite identical learning data. While this difference
may add to the decrease in (A → C)post in the Biased Operator condition, the overall pattern of contingency estimates
cannot fully account for the overall pattern of appropriateness
ratings.

Discussion

Results
The descriptive results for the appropriateness ratings are displayed in Figure 2. We conducted a global 4 (Condition:
Scale vs. Accurate Operator vs. Biased Operator vs. Central
Computer) × 3 (Relationship: (A → C)pre vs. (A → C)post
vs. (B → C)post , within-subject) mixed ANOVA. There was
no main effect of Condition, F 3, 197 = 1.81, but a main effect
of Relationship, F 2, 394 = 7.48, p < .001, η2p = .04. The global
Relationship × Condition interaction was not significant,
F 6, 394 = 1.74, p = .11, η2p = .03. However, planned contrasts
revealed that the decrease in appropriateness ratings from
(A → C)pre to (A → C)post did not differ between Scale and
Accurate Operator, t197 < 1, but was larger compared to Scale
both in the Biased Operator condition, t197 = 2.41, p < .05,
r = .17, and in the Central Computer condition, t197 = 2.81,
p < .01, r = .20. Furthermore, the decrease was as large in Biased Operator as in Central Computer, t197 < 1. At the same
time, (B → C)post was not smaller than (A → C)pre in any of
the conditions, largest t197 = 1.48.
The contingency estimates were similar across all four
mechanism conditions for all three causal relationships

The results of Experiment 2 demonstrate that involving an intentional agent is not a sufficient property for a mechanism
to elicit judgments of intransitivity. Agents intending to accurately transfer an objective signal from A to C seem to be
conceptualized akin to a mechanical process serving the same
function. However, if the same relationship is dependent on
an agent’s highly idiosyncratic (and morally dubious) preference structure, the physical root cause is screened off from
the explanandum to the same extent as if it was merely a coincidental, causally irrelevant confound.

General Discussion
In two experiments, we have demonstrated that the conceptualization of one and the same established type-level causal
relationship can be differentially affected when knowledge
about different causal mechanisms is acquired. Some mechanisms (e.g., physiological processes) are compatible with the
notion that the root cause per se matters for the effect, while
others (e.g., biased judges) provide an alternative explanation, leading the root cause to be seen as a less appropriate
explanation for the effect. Our data indicate that these differences are not brought about by different causal strength
assessments, nor by different plausibility intuitions. Also, involving an intentional agent does not constitute a sufficient
condition for a mechanism to elicit intuitions of intransitivity.
In the contexts we investigated, this intuition seems to depend
crucially on the intentional agent being morally abnormal.

1695

This latter finding may indicate that a more general psychological mechanism may underlie our findings which might
make our framework applicable to intransitivity intuitions
outside the narrow scope of mechanism involving human
agents. Immoral human agents may merely be a very
salient instance of abnormal mechanisms more generally.
Recently, Kominsky, Phillips, Gerstenberg, Lagnado, and
Knobe (2015) have argued that moral and statistical abnormality of potential causes function similarly in eliciting
counterfactual possibilities that in turn have similar downstream effects of the assessment of other causes in the same
common-effect network. It is possible that similar generalizations hold in our case. In the Physiology condition from
Experiment 1, the mechanism is implemented in every single
pupil in a lawlike manner. Thus, it can be assumed that an
A → C relationship brought about by this mechanism will be
stable across most perturbations of the entity implementing
the mechanism in each token case, both within and beyond
the observed sample. Contrast this with the teacher example:
the observed type-level A → C relationship is entirely dependent on this particular teacher implementing the mechanism
in the observed sample. Replacing the teacher with pretty
much any colleague would presumably make the A → C relationship disappear. Even though A is doubtlessly an indirect
cause of C in the observed sample, explaining C in terms of
A might feel inadequate because the relationship can be expected to be highly sensitive to minor perturbations of the
boundary conditions provided by the particular teacher implementing the mechanism in the observed sample (see also
Garfinkel, 1981).
So far, these are only speculations as to how far our findings may generalize which still need to be empirically tested
with materials outside the domain of human agency. In case
of success, this account may be applicable not only to aspects of everyday causal cognition, but even to psychological
processes underlying scientific theory construction. Whenever a scientific theory is about a causal chain structure (e.g.,
process X influences process Y, which in turn leads to effect
Z), the issue discussed in this paper arises: if the researcher
wants to assess whether process X per se explains outcome
Z, should she hold process Y constant? If she conceives of
process Y as a mediator, the answer is definitely no. But
there might be cases in which, despite the underlying chain
structure, she conceives of process Y as an alternative explanation of effect Z. Sometimes, it does not seem clear which
of these conceptualizations is more adequate—yet, the decision for one of them will crucially shape the methodology
and conclusions of the subsequent research (e.g., decisions
about whether process Y is to be controlled or to be left free
to covary with X).

References
Eells, E. (1991). Probabilistic causality (Vol. 1). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Garfinkel, A. (1981). Forms of explanation: Rethinking the
questions in social theory. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Hilton, D. J., McClure, J., & Sutton, R. M. (2009). Selecting
explanations from causal chains: Do statistical principles
explain preferences for voluntary causes? European Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 383–400.
Hilton, D. J., & Slugoski, B. R. (1986). Knowledge-based
causal attribution: The abnormal conditions focus model.
Psychological Review, 93, 75.
Hitchcock, C., & Knobe, J. (2009). Cause and norm. The
Journal of Philosophy, 106, 587–612.
Johnson, S. G., & Ahn, W.-K. (2015). Causal networks or
causal islands? the representation of mechanisms and the
transitivity of causal judgment. Cognitive Science.
Kominsky, J. F., Phillips, J., Gerstenberg, T., Lagnado, D., &
Knobe, J. (2015). Causal superseding. Cognition, 137,
196–209.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning and inference.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rehder, B. (2014). Independence and dependence in human
causal reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 72, 54–107.

Acknowledgments
We thank Jana Samland, Jonathan Kominsky, Joshua Knobe,
and Michael Waldmann for helpful comments.

1696

