Mental states are more important in evaluating moral than conventional violations
Carly Giffin (carly.giffin@berkeley.edu)
Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-1650 USA
convention: there’s nothing inherently right or wrong about
going 50 miles per hour, unless you’re in a 35 mile per hour
zone. In light of the rule and its consequences for others,
however, the action becomes problematic.
The distinction between moral and conventional
violations is familiar from research in moral psychology as
well. In classic experiments, Turiel and colleagues presented
children with stories in which an actor violated a rule, and
were asked to judge how bad the actor’s behavior was, both
with the rule in place and in a situation in which it didn’t
apply (Turiel, 2008; Weston & Turiel, 1980). They found
that children as young as six judged conventional violations
(such as violating a dress code) but not moral violations
(such as hitting another child) in a way that was highly “rule
dependent”: in the absence of a dress code the child’s dress
was just fine, but in the absence of a rule about hitting,
hitting another child was still wrong.
These judgments concerning the wrongness of an action
presumably stem, in part, from participants’ assessments of
the “wrongness” of the perpetrator’s beliefs and intentions.
Knowingly hitting a child is wrong regardless of the rules;
one should never intend to hit a peer. Knowingly wearing a
t-shirt, however, is only wrong in certain conditions; the
intention to wear a t-shirt and the belief that one is doing so
are not, on their own, problematic. To the extent that
evaluations of wrongness and punishment stem from
evaluations of the underlying mental states, and not just
from the violation of a rule, one might expect moral
violations to be more knowledge dependent than
conventional violations. In two experiments, we test this
prediction.

Abstract
A perpetrator’s mental state – whether she had mens rea or a
“guilty mind” – typically plays an important role in evaluating
wrongness and assigning punishment. In two experiments, we
find that this role for mental states is weaker in evaluating
conventional violations relative to moral violations. We also
find that this diminished role for mental states may be
associated with the fact that conventional violations are
wrong by virtue of having violated a (potentially arbitrary)
rule, whereas moral violations are also wrong inherently.
Keywords: decision making, violations, mental states, moral
evaluation, punishment.

Introduction
Both folk intuitions and the law accord a prominent role
to mental states when it comes to assessing the severity of a
transgression and how it should be punished. For example,
serving someone a cup of coffee sprinkled with poison is
deemed quite a bit worse when it was done intentionally –
with full knowledge that the coffee contained poison – than
when it resulted from the false belief that the poison was
sugar (Young et al., 2007). To take a legal example,
determinations of whether a defendant should be sentenced
with murder versus manslaughter depend, in large part, on
whether the killing was intentional.
Nonetheless, recent findings point to the idea that mental
states are not equally important for all types of
transgressions. Young and Saxe (2011), for example, find
that an offender’s knowledge has a greater impact on how
people evaluate a harm violation as opposed to a purity
violation (see also Hawley-Dolan & Young, 2013; Russell
& Giner-Sorolla, 2011). In legal judgments, we have found
that mental states play a weaker role in judgments
concerning strict liability crimes, such as speeding or
statutory rape, relative to crimes that are not strict liability,
such as burglary or battery, for which the presence of mens
rea, a “guilty mind,” informs a defendant’s conviction and
sentence (Giffin & Lombrozo, in prep). In other words,
transgressions seem to differ in the extent to which they are
moderated by the perpetrator’s mental states, such as her
beliefs and intentions—a property which we refer to as
“knowledge dependence.”
Why might this be? Here, again, a legal distinction is
useful: that between transgressions that are malum in se, or
wrong in themselves, versus malum prohibitum, or wrong
because they are prohibited (US v. Morissette, 1952).
Consider, for example, a moral violation, such as murder.
Even in the absence of a rule prohibiting the action, we
would consider it morally wrong. Violations of convention,
in contrast, are problematic because they violate the

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we test the prediction that mental states
play a larger role in the evaluation of violations of moral
rules (hereafter referred to as “moral violations”) relative to
violations of conventional rules (hereafter referred to as
“conventional violations”). To do so, we compare
judgments of wrongness and punishment across stories
involving moral or conventional transgressions of a
stipulated rule, where the violation is committed knowingly
or unknowingly (i.e., due to an accident or false belief
concerning something other than the rule itself). In other
words, we test the prediction that the evaluation of moral
violations is more “knowledge dependent” than the
evaluation of conventional violations. We also replicate the
well-established finding that judgments concerning
conventional violations tend to be more “rule dependent”

800

than those concerning moral violations, and investigate the
relationship between knowledge dependence and rule
dependence by testing whether violations that generated
greater knowledge effects tended to generate weaker effects
of a rule change.

Censure: “How wrong was [Actor’s actions]?”
Participants indicated their answer on a scale from
0 (not at all wrong) to 6 (very wrong).
Detention: “How many hours of detention should
[Actor] get?” Participants indicated their answer on
a scale from 0 to 6 hours.

Methods
Participants. One-hundred-and-sixty adults (96 female, 64
male, mean age = 36, SD = 12) participated in the study
through Amazon Mechanical Turk in exchange for
monetary compensation. An additional 69 participants were
tested but excluded for failing catch questions (55) or to
ensure even numbers in all conditions (14). Participation
was restricted to workers with IP addresses in the United
States and a prior HIT approval rating of 95% or higher.

After answering these two questions, participants were
presented with another screen and asked to indicate the
censure and detention ratings the actor would deserve if the
school had never had a rule prohibiting the action. The
wording of these questions (again presented in random
order) was identical to those above, but preceded by the
following: “What if [Actor’s] school had no rule prohibiting
what [s]he did? Please answer the following questions
based on this rule change.”
Next, on a separate screen, participants were presented
with a true/false question relating to the vignette they had
just read. These questions were used to assess whether the
participants had read the vignette carefully; those who
answered any comprehension questions incorrectly were
excluded from further analyses.
After reading all six vignettes and answering their
associated questions, participants answered one additional
catch question designed to ensure that they were reading
instructions carefully, modeled after Oppenheimer, Meyvis,
and Davidenko (2009). Finally, participants answered
demographic questions about their age and gender.

Materials & Procedure. The experimental stimuli
consisted of 12 distinct stories, 6 of which involved
conventional violations and 6 of which involved moral
violations. There were two versions of each story: one
involved an agent who committed the violation knowingly,
and one an agent who knew the rule, but violated it
unknowingly.
Six of the stories (Teacher’s Title, Greeting, Baseball,
Dollar, Physician, and Embezzler) were based on vignettes
originally presented to children by Davidson, Turiel, and
Black (1983). These stories were modified to generate
matched knowing and unknowing conditions. The Physician
and Embezzler vignettes were additionally modified to take
place in a school setting.
Individual participants were randomly assigned to one of
four conditions, the result of crossing violation domain (2:
conventional, moral) with knowledge status (2: knowing,
unknowing). Each participant received the corresponding
six vignettes in a random order. Sample knowing and
unknowing vignettes for one story, Baseball, are excerpted
below. In this story, the rule was that students had to wear a
blue shirt with the school logo on the back to practice:

Results
Initial censure and detention ratings. To test the
prediction that judgments regarding conventional violations
are less “knowledge dependent” than those regarding moral
violations, we performed a 2 (knowledge status: knowing,
unknowing) x 2 (violation domain: conventional, moral)
ANOVA on initial censure ratings, and another on initial
detention ratings (see Figure 1). We expected to find an
interaction between knowledge status and violation domain,
with a larger effect of knowledge status for moral violations
than for conventional violations.
Both analyses revealed main effects of violation domain.
Moral crimes received significantly higher initial censure,
F(1,156) = 87.72, p<.000, ηp2 =.36, and detention ratings,
F(1,156) = 169.25, p<.000, ηp2 =.52. The analyses also
revealed main effects of knowledge status, with censure,
F(1,156) = 63.13, p<.000, ηp2 =.29, and detention, F(1,156)
= 40.5, p<.000, ηp2 =.21, ratings significantly higher for the
knowing condition than the unknowing condition.
Most critically, we found the predicted interaction for
both censure, F(1,156) = 19.02, p<.000, ηp2 =.11, and
detention, F(1,156) = 24.00, p<.000 ηp2 =.13. Independent
samples t-tests showed that censure ratings were
significantly higher for the knowing condition than for the
unknowing condition for both conventional violations, t(78)

Knowing: “One day, Jack was getting ready for a
baseball practice. He was tired of always wearing his
blue practice shirt; he thought it would be fun to wear
another shirt for a change. So Jack went to the practice
wearing a blue shirt that did not have the school logo on
the back.”
Unknowing: “One day, Jack was getting ready for a
baseball practice. He was in a hurry to get to the bus on
time, so he dressed quickly and left. Jack didn’t realize
he had grabbed the wrong blue shirt. So Jack went to
the practice wearing a blue shirt that did not have the
school logo on the back.”
The presentation of each vignette was first followed by
censure and detention questions, presented on one screen in
random order:

801

Difference Score

= 2.6 (p<.012), d = .57, and for moral violations, t(78) =
8.62 (p<.001), d = 1.95, but the effect was greater for moral
violations. Similarly, for detention ratings, responses were
higher for the knowing condition than for the unknowing
condition for both conventional violations, t(78) = 1.99
(p<.050), d = .45, and moral violations, t(78) = 6.06
(p<.001), d = .1.37, but the effect was greater for moral
violations.

1.5

1.1104

1.0
0.5

.5708
.4146

.3333

0.0

Censure

Detention

Conventional

Moral

Figure 2: Rule dependence for censure and detention ratings
(ratings after rule change subtracted from initial ratings).
Error bars correspond to one SEM in each direction.
To obtain a measure of knowledge dependence for each
story, the average censure ratings from participants in the
unknowing condition for that story were subtracted from the
average censure ratings from participants in the knowing
condition for that story. To obtain a measure of rule
dependence for each story, we averaged the censure
difference scores (initial censure ratings minus censure
ratings after rule change) for the knowledge and false belief
versions of that story. This resulted in twelve pairs of
numbers – one pair for each story – that revealed a
significant negative correlation, r = -.74, p < .006, as
predicted (see Figure 3): those stories for which wrongness
judgments were more knowledge dependent tended to
involve judgments that were less rule dependent.
Considering just conventional violations, the correlations
between rule dependence and knowledge dependence for
both censure and detention were positive, but they were

Figure 1: Interaction between knowledge condition and
violation type for initial censure and detention ratings. Error
bars correspond to one SEM in each direction.
Censure and detention ratings: effects of rule revocation.
To what extent are conventional and moral violations
condemned because they violate a rule – that is, to what
extent are judgments of wrongness and punishment “rule
dependent” in each domain? To address these questions,
censure and detention difference scores were created by
subtracting participants’ censure and detention ratings after
the rule change from their corresponding initial scores. We
performed 2 (knowledge status: knowing, unknowing) x 2
(violation domain: conventional, moral) ANOVAs on each
difference score, and predicted a greater drop in both ratings
for conventional violations relative to moral violations.
This prediction was confirmed for censure: we found a
significant main effect of violation domain, F(1,156) =
33.76, p<.000, ηp2 =.18, with a larger drop in the perceived
wrongness of conventional violations following the
revocation relative to moral violations (see Figure 2). The
ratings for detention, however, were unexpected: we found a
significant main effect of domain, but in the opposite
direction, F(1,156) = 5.37, p<.022, ηp2 =.03. This may be in
part because conventional violations were assigned very low
levels of punishment; the response distribution was skewed,
with little room for a drop in ratings.
We also found a significant main effect of knowledge for
censure ratings, with a larger drop in perceived wrongness
for the knowledge condition (M=.91, .STD=94) relative to
the false belief conditions (M=.61, STD=.72), F(1,156) =
6.45, p<.012, ηp2 =.04. There were no additional significant
effects.

Figure 3: Significant negative correlation, across stories,
between rule dependence and knowledge dependence.
Moral stories are indicated with black; conventional stories
with dark grey.

Analysis across violations: rule dependence and
knowledge dependence. To investigate the relationship
between knowledge dependence and rule dependence in a
more fine-grained way, we examined whether those stories
that were the most knowledge dependent were also the least
rule dependent.

802

not significant. For moral violations, both the censure, r = .86, p < .027, and detention, r = -.88, p < .019, correlations
were negative and significant. Comparable analyses with
detention ratings did not yield any significant effects.

that school service hours would be deemed a more
appropriate punishment for the violations considered,
thereby avoiding a floor effect on ratings. Finally,
Experiment 2 manipulated both knowledge status and rule
status within subjects, thus allowing us to evaluate the
relationship between knowledge dependence and rule
dependence across participants, not only across stories.

Discussion
Experiment 1 found a novel relationship between
violation type (moral versus conventional) and the extent to
which mental states – in this case, acting knowingly or
unknowingly – influence moral judgments. Specifically, we
found that participants judged actors more harshly (in terms
of both the wrongness of their action and the hours of
detention deserved) when they violated a rule knowingly as
opposed to unknowingly. However, the effect of knowledge
status was significantly greater for moral violations relative
to conventional violations.
It is worth emphasizing that the knowledge that was
varied across conditions was not knowledge of the rule (e.g.,
how one should dress for baseball practice). Instead, the
characters who committed violations unknowingly did so
because they had a false belief that affected whether an
action counted as a transgression with respect to the known
rule. For example, in the Baseball story, the character knew
that he was supposed to wear a blue shirt with the school
logo on the back to practice, but had a false belief that the
blue shirt he had put on in fact had the logo on the back.
Consistent with prior work by Turiel and colleagues,
Experiment 1 also found that when the operating rule was
revoked, judgments of wrongness were reduced to a greater
extent for conventional violations than for moral violations.
Puzzlingly, the same pattern did not emerge for judgments
concerning punishment (hours of detention). This may be
because detention ratings were generally low, especially for
conventional violations – participants may not have felt that
detention was an appropriate punishment to be considering,
and there was little room for a change in ratings across
conditions.
Finally, Experiment 1 provides hints that “knowledge
dependence” – which is stronger for moral than
conventional violations – is negatively associated with “rule
dependence” – which is stronger for conventional than
moral violations. In an analysis across stories, we found that
those stories associated with the greatest knowledge
dependence tended to show greater rule dependence.
However, this effect was driven entirely by the moral
stories.

Methods
Participants. Two-hundred-and-forty adults (114 female,
152 male, 2 other/prefer not to specify, mean age = 32, SD =
14) participated in the study through Amazon Mechanical
Turk in exchange for monetary compensation. An additional
28 participants were tested, but were excluded for failing
catch questions (27) or to ensure even numbers in all
conditions (1). Participation was restricted to workers with
IP addresses in the United States and with a prior HIT
approval rating of 95% or higher.
Materials & Procedure. As in Experiment 1, the
experimental stimuli consisted of 12 distinct stories, 6 of
which concerned conventional violations and 6 of which
concerned moral violations, leading to 12 conditions.
Eleven stories were similar to those from Experiment 1,
with the Physician Story replaced entirely by the Pushing
story, driven by concerns that the Physician story involved
both conventional and moral aspects that made it a poor
representative of a moral violation. In the Pushing story,
adapted from Davidson, Turiel, and Black (1983), an actor
either knowingly or unknowingly pushes another student
down. Several of the conventional stories from Experiment
1 were also modified in an attempt to increase their
perceived wrongness and therefore make them more
comparable in severity to their moral counterparts.
Each participant read only one story. Participants first
read the false belief version of their assigned story and
answered two evaluative questions. The censure question
was identical to that in Experiment 1; the punishment
question was changed to the following:
School Service. Students who break a rule at [Actor’s]
school are given school service hours during which they
clean classrooms, organize supplies, and pick up trash on
the grounds. How many hours of school improvement
service should [Actor] get?

Experiment 2

Participants were then asked to imagine that the actor had
instead violated the rule knowingly, and again rated
wrongness and punishment. Below is a sample from the
Baseball story:

Experiment 2 had three aims. First, we sought to replicate
the novel finding from Experiment 1 that knowledge status
has a larger impact in evaluations of moral violations
relative to conventional violations, and the more familiar
finding that rule revocation has a larger impact on the
perceived wrongness of a conventional violation than of a
moral violation. Second, we hoped to clarify the relationship
between rule revocation and punishment by considering an
alternative to detention: school service hours. We expected

Knowledge Change. “Suppose that Jack had actually
realized, while he was dressing, that the shirt he was
about to put on for practice violated the rule – that is,
that it didn’t have the logo on the back. And suppose that
he decided to wear it anyway. In this case, where Jack

803

knowingly violated the rule, how would you respond to
the following questions? (Your responses may be the
same as those you just provided, or they may differ.)”

across the knowing and unknowing conditions. Independent
t-tests were performed on these difference scores, and we
predicted a greater difference for conventional relative to
moral violations.
As predicted, these analysis found that rule dependence
was significantly greater for conventional than moral
violations for both censure, t(220)= 9.42, p < .001, d = 1.27
and service hours, t(181)= 5.00, p < .001, d= .74, (both
corrected for violating Levene’s). (See Figure 5).

Finally, as in Experiment 1, participants were told to
imagine that the rule had been revoked, and answered the
evaluative questions a final time. Below is a sample from
the Baseball story:

Difference Score

Rule Change. “Finally, suppose that Jack’s school had
no rule prohibiting wearing a shirt without the school
logo to practice, and Jack knowingly wore a shirt
without the school logo to practice. In this case, with no
rule about how to dress for practice in place, how would
you respond to the following questions? (Your responses
may be the same as those you’ve provided, or they may
differ.)”
After reading all versions of the story and answering their
associated questions, participants answered the same catch
and demographic questions as in Experiment 1.

1.7125
2.0

1.1833

1.0

.1042

.0
-1.0

-.5208

Censure
Conventional

Results
Effects of knowledge on censure and punishment. To
create a measure of knowledge dependence for each
dependent variable, we subtracted the first censure and
service hour ratings, taken after reading the unknowing
story, from the second set of ratings, corresponding to the
knowing violation. Independent t-tests were performed on
both difference scores, and we predicted a greater difference
for moral relative to conventional violations.
As predicted, these analyses found that the knowledge
effect was greater for moral than conventional violations for
both censure, t(238)= 4.12, p< .001, d = .53, and service
hours, t(221)= 5.97, p< .001, d = .80 (corrected for violating
Levene’s; See Figure 4).

Service Hours
Moral

Figure 5: Rule dependence of censure and service hours
(i.e., ratings after rule change subtracted from average of
initial ratings). Error bars correspond to one SEM in each
direction.
Relationship between rule dependence and knowledge
dependence. In Experiment 1, we investigated the
relationship between knowledge dependence and rule
dependence across stories, i.e., by analyzing whether those
stories that generated the most knowledge-dependent
judgments also generated the least rule-dependent
judgments. In the present case, methodological changes
allowed us to create a measure of rule dependence and
knowledge dependence for each participant, allowing us to
test for a relationship across participants rather than only
across stories. We predicted a negative correlation, with
participants who were more influenced by mental states
being less influenced by the rule change.
We ran bivariate correlations between the difference
scores reflecting knowledge dependence and those
reflecting rule dependence. Consistent with our prediction,
these scores were negatively correlated for censure, r = -.13,
p < .039; however, the correlation for service hours was not
significant, r = -.005. p < .94. Analyzing conventional
violations only, the correlation was positive and significant
for censure, r = .32, p < .001, and service hours, r = .70, p <
.001. Analyzing moral violations only, the correlations for
both censure, r = -.22, p <. 014, and service hours, r = -.11,
p < .241, were negative, but the latter was not significant.

Figure 4: Ratings for censure and service hours for both the
knowing and unknowing conditions as a function of
violation type. Error bars correspond to one SEM in each
direction.
Effect of rules on censure and punishment. The
contribution of the violation of a rule (“rule dependence”)
was measured by subtracting participants’ censure and
detention ratings after the rule change from their
corresponding scores from the initial vignettes, averaged

804

suggests that mental states may be more important when
evaluating moral wrongness than when ascribing
punishment (Cushman, 2008), which could help explain this
dissociation. Our finding of a negative association between
knowledge dependence and rule dependence was also
inconsistent across cases: while it held for moral violations
in both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2, conventional
violations not only failed to exhibit this relationship, but had
a positive relationship (not significantly in Experiment 1,
and significantly in Experiment 2). Why this is so is an
important question for future research.
In sum, our findings are consistent with prior work
demonstrating the importance of mental states in moral
judgment, and establish a previously-undocumented
relationship between knowledge dependence and rule
dependence. This raises important questions about precisely
which mental states matter in evaluating different
transgressions and why.

Discussion
Experiment 2 successfully replicated key findings from
Experiment 1. Specifically, we found (once again) that
relative to judgments concerning conventional violations,
those concerning moral violations were more sensitive to
whether the actor transgressed knowingly versus
unknowingly. We also found that relative to judgments
concerning moral violations, those concerning conventional
violations were more influenced by a rule revocation. This
was the case both for judgments of wrongness and for our
new measure of punishment, which involved service hours
as opposed to detention. Finally, we also found the
predicted negative relationship between rule dependence
and knowledge dependence, but with an analysis that
considered variation across participants rather than only
across stories. This relationship was significant for
judgments of wrongness. However, when each type of
violation was considered in isolation, it became clear that
the negative relationship was driven by moral violations, as
in Experiment 1. Conventional violations actually showed a
positive relationship between knowledge dependence and
rule dependence.

References
Cushman, F. (2008). Crime and Punishment: Distinguishing
the Roles of Causal and Intentional Analyses in Moral
Judgment. Cognition, 108, 353-380.
Davidson, P., Turiel, E., & Black, A. (1983). The Effect of
Stimulus Familiarity on the Use of Criteria and
Justifications in Children’s Social Reasoning. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 1, 49-65.
Giffin, C., & Lombrozo, T. (2014). Wrong or Merely
Prohibited: Special Treatment of Strict Liability Crimes in
Folk Judgment. Manuscript in preparation.
Russell, P., & Giner-Sorolla, R. (2011). Moral Anger, but
Not moral Disgust, Responds to Intentionality. Emotion,
11(2), 233-240.
Turiel, E. (2008). Thought About Actions in Social
Domains: Morality, Social Conventions, and Social
Interactions. (2008). Cognitive Development, 23, 136-154.
United States v. Morissette, 342 U.S. 246 (1952).
Weston, D. & Turiel, E. (1980). Act-Rule Relations:
Children's Concepts of Social Rules. Developmental
Psychology, 16(5), 417-424.
Young, L., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., Saxe, R. (2007). The
neural basis of the interaction between theory of mind and
moral
judgment.
PNAS,104
(20),
8235-8240.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0701408104
Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2011). When Ignorance is No
Excuse: Different Roles for Intent Across Moral
Domains. Cognition, 3, 202–214.

General Discussion
In two experiments we find evidence that the evaluation
of moral violations is more knowledge dependent than the
evaluation of conventional violations, while the evaluation
of conventional violations is more rule dependent than that
of moral violations. We also find evidence that these
properties are negatively associated for moral violations,
whether the analysis is across violations (Experiment 1) or
across participants (Experiment 2).
The finding that conventional violations are more rule
dependent is not new; however, to our knowledge, this is the
first demonstration that conventional violations are also less
sensitive to mental states. This relationship between
knowledge dependence and the conventionality of a rule is
consistent with prior work on the evaluation of strict
liability crimes (Giffin & Lombrozo, in prep), where we
argue that knowledge is less important in folk judgments
concerning strict liability crimes because such crimes tend
to involve the violation of a rule with somewhat arbitrary –
and therefore conventional – elements. For example,
speeding involves the violation of a somewhat arbitrary
speed limit. Driving 40 miles per hour is not inherently
wrong, but it is wrong when it occurs in a 35-mile zone, and
the designation of 35 miles (as opposed to 34 or 36.5) as the
limit is somewhat arbitrary. This feature of “arbitrariness”
could potentially help explain why strict liability crimes
behave more like conventional violations. This feature may
also relate to why mental states play a weaker role, since
knowing that one is engaging in a particular act (e.g.,
driving 40 miles per hour), even when doing so knowingly,
is not itself inherently wrong.
While our predictions held robustly for judgments of
“wrongness,” the findings concerning punishment
(detention and service hours) were more mixed. Prior work

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge Elliot Turiel for helpful
discussion and for sharing stimulus materials. This work
was partially supported by a McDonnell Foundation Scholar
Award to the second author.

805

