Consumer Mere Newness Bias
Yun Jie (yjie002@ucr.edu)
University of California, Riverside
900 University Avenue
Riverside, CA 92521 USA

Ye Li (ye.li@ucr.edu)
University of California, Riverside
900 University Avenue
Riverside, CA 92521 USA

We examine a “mere newness bias,” a preference for novelty
purely due to recentness of release. In a series of studies, we
show that, for newer and older products of identical quality,
people prefer newly released goods over older goods across a
range of domains. This bias translates to a higher willing to
pay, greater anticipated excitement, and higher likelihood of
purchase for products perceived to be newer. The mere
newness bias persists even for die rolls, where there cannot be
any difference in quality and where there is no social benefit to
newness.

such as when people face a choice between two novel stimuli.
In other words, when people have not been exposed to either
of two (or more) stimuli, could they still have a preference
for one due to a different form of novelty, mere newness?
In this paper, we provide evidence for a “mere newness
bias”: a novelty-related preference for newer stimuli due to
the recentness of their release. In a series of four studies, we
show that, for newer and older products of identical quality,
people prefer newly released goods over older goods across
a range of domains.

Keywords: novelty; decision making; bias

Theory

Abstract

A large body of research in consumer behavior has
explored novelty in the consumer products context.
Robertson (1971) offered four definitions of “new product”:
1) newness from existing products, 2) newness in time, 3)
newness in terms of sales penetration levels, and 4) consumer
newness to the product. Whereas the first definition is closest
to the concept of “novelty,” the current study focuses on
“newness in time.”
In this paper, we propose and show a “mere newness bias”.
We hypothesize that only mentioning the date of release can
bias people towards a recently released product over a
product released earlier, even while controlling for actual
quality. A major difference between the aforementioned
“novelty bonus” and our mere newness bias is that in the
previous novelty studies, participants were instructed to make
choices after being exposed to the novel or familiar stimuli
(Förster, 2009; Krebs et al., 2009; Wittmann et al., 2008),
whereas in our studies participants needed to make a choice
before they were exposed to any stimulus. We show that
people are novelty seeking not only after a subjective
exposure, but even before stimuli exposure, if they are
provided certain newness cues such as the information of
release date.
It is worth noting that we are not claiming to have
documented the effect of framing a product as new or old.
Förster, Liberman, and Shapira (2009) have shown that
framing a task as new versus familiar can shift people’s
global versus local processing styles. However, to the best of
our knowledge, there have been no studies on novelty that
could be caused by product release date, despite the extensive
literatures on new product development, consumer
innovativeness, and consumer novelty seeking We believe

Introduction
What does an organism do when all its needs are satisfied
and all its discomforts eliminated? Psychologists find that
answer is generally not “nothing” (Bianchi, 1998; Scitovsky,
1992). In fact, a situation of perfect rest and comfort is
unpleasant and boring, and the organism will try to break out
of it (Bianchi, 1998).
One outcome of this drive is that humans tend to explore
novel stimuli and environments (Berlyne, 1966). Marketers
have exploited this tendency when launching new consumer
packaged goods (Steenkamp & Gielens, 2003) and new
products (Richins & Bloch, 1986). Recently, neuroscientists
have proposed that novelty can act as a bonus for rewards
(Krebs, Schott, Schütze, & Düzel, 2009), even when such
novelty is not related to reward predictions (Wittmann, Daw,
Seymour, & Dolan, 2008). The “additive novelty bonus”
(Niv, 2009) has direct consequences on choice behavior, and
it is above and beyond any effect caused merely by
uncertainty (Dayan & Daw, 2008; Wittmann et al., 2008).
Redgrave and Gurney (2006) suggested dopamine cells play
a central role in encoding such novelty bonuses. In short, the
preference for novelty manifests even at the neural level
(Dayan & Daw, 2008).
But what is novelty? Cognitive psychology primarily
defines novelty as “anything that has not been experienced in
the past” (Förster, 2009). The aforementioned studies all
operationalized novelty this way; for example, people prefer
novel pictures to previously seen ones (Krebs et al., 2009;
Wittmann et al., 2008). However, in many choice contexts,
this definition of novelty does not make a unique prediction,

992

effect is not large enough to overcome actual quality
differences. However, it is also possible (although unlikely)
that the mere newness bias only exists for Dilbert comic strips
but not for jokes.
To rule out this possibility, we ran a follow-up Experiment
1b (n = 60) where we reversed the conditions between the
comic strip and joke tasks. That is, the comic task informed
participants that “the website’s ratings show that last week’s
strip is slightly funnier than the strip from this morning.”
Conversely, we deleted the sentence “The website's ratings
show that the joke for July is slightly funnier than the joke for
August” from the joke task. As expected, when last week’s
comic strip was slightly funnier, 76.7% chose to view last
week’s strip over this morning’s strip (p < .001 for both).
Also as expected, without a quality difference, 70% of
participants chose the newer joke (p < 0.01).
Although we deliberately chose domains where newer is
not always better in terms of absolute quality, more recently
released comics and jokes may nonetheless be viewed as
superior for other reasons. For example, another alternative
explanation for these results is that, for both comics and
jokes, there is a social aspect to consumption. A more recent
comic strip or joke is more likely to become a focal topic in
a water cooler conversation or reference more recent events.
In order to meet such social needs, people may be motivated
to choose more current comic strips and jokes. We therefore
designed Experiment 2 to rule out this alternative social
explanation.

that the mere newness bias complements the novelty
literature and has wide practical implications.

Experiments
Experiment 1a and 1b: Comics and jokes
Methods
In Experiment 1a, 156 Amazon Mechanical Turk
participants received a nominal fee to choose and rate one of
two Dilbert comic strips and one of two jokes.
In the comic strip task, participants were asked to choose
between comic strips “just released this morning” and
“released exactly one week ago.” Importantly, we told
participants that “both comics were carefully chosen by the
researcher for their high ratings,” suggesting that they should
be of similar quality.
Next, participants chose one of two jokes to read and rate,
the “Joke of the Month” for July or the “Joke of the
Month” for August (the surveys were conducted at the
beginning of September). In order to test whether mere
newness bias could be overridden by a minor quality
difference, participants learned that the website’s ratings for
the two jokes show that July’s joke is “slightly funnier” than
August’s joke.
The order of comic strip questions and the joke question
were randomized. After they made their choices, all
participants viewed and rated the same comic strips and joke
regardless of their choice, in order to control for actual
quality. We debriefed participants at the end of the study
about this deception.
Results
In the comic strip tasks, 72.9% of participants chose to
view today’s comic strip over the one from a week ago (twotailed binomial test, p < 0.001). On the other hand, 68.6% of
participants choose to read the “Joke of July” (p < .001),
suggesting that even a “slightly funnier” joke was enough to
overwhelm the mere newness bias.
Participants also rated “how much do you like or dislike”
each comic strip and joke on a 1 (Dislike Extremely) to 7
(Like Extremely) scale. There was no difference in ratings of
the comic strip between those who chose comic strip released
this morning (M = 4.68) versus released from one week ago
(M = 4.57; F = 0.294, ns). The same was true when they rated
“The Joke of Month of July” (M = 4.18) versus “The Joke of
Month of August” (M = 4.08; F(1,155) = 0.108, ns). All
results remain unchanged when we control for previous
experience with Dilbert comic strips or jokes.
Discussion
Experiment 1 found a strong mere newness bias for a comic
strip released this morning versus one released exactly one
week ago, despite there being no reason to believe that the
more recently release comic strip is any more entertaining.
On the other hand, when choosing between a slightly funnier
but older joke and a newer joke, the mere newness bias was
overcome by the “slight” qualitative difference we provided.
This suggests that mere newness can break a tie when there
is no other reason to choose between two options, but that the

Experiment 2: Die rolls
In Experiment 2, we chose a domain to rule out the social
need alternative explanation: rolling a fair die. Specifically,
107 Amazon Mechanical Turk participants read that a
“website has launched a dice game. The rule is: Every
morning one staff member from that website will roll a fair
die and record its result. The result is only known to the staff
member.” Participants could bet on either the result of die
rolled that morning or the result rolled the morning exactly
one week ago. They would win a bonus payment of 20 cents
if the die result they bet on was higher than the other, in
addition to the base pay of 10 cents. Participants then saw the
result of their chosen die roll and learned whether they won
the bonus payment. (The actual die rolls were 6 for last week
and 3 for this morning.) Finally, participants were instructed
not to talk with each other about the result of the study and
clicked to verify that “I know I am not supposed to talk with
other participants about the game.”
Even with a large percentage of their payment on the line,
participants again exhibited mere newness bias, with 74.8%
choosing to bet on the result from this morning (two-tailed
binomial test, p < 0.001). That is, even though there was no
rational reason to favor one day’s roll over the other, the
majority of the participants chose to bet on the newer die roll,
consistent with what we found in Experiment 1.
The expected value and degree of uncertainty for the die
roll from this morning and the roll from one week ago are
exactly the same. In addition, it is extremely unlikely for

993

preference” option, 48% chose the newer bottle, 9.1% chose
the older bottle, and 42.9% chose “no preference.” If we only
consider the participants who expressed a preference, 84%
chose the newly released bottle (p < .0001).
These results show that the mere newness bias persists
even in domains where there is a general preference for older
(although for wine, older vintage and not release date is what
matters). The fact that many participants actually choose “no
preference” also suggests that the effect may be
underestimated in the earlier experiments. Although we have
carefully chosen products and crafted scenarios that should
eliminate any possibility of quality difference, many people
nonetheless express a preference between the two bottles of
the same production date, but of different dates when taken
out of the cellar. The fact that we find mere newness bias in
scenarios designed to produce no preference is exactly what
makes this a bias.
Having shown the existence of mere newness bias, we next
seek to show its practical or managerial implications in terms
of willingness to pay for a “mere newness premium.” That is,
how much more would a consumer be willing to pay to
consume a more newly released product, all else being equal.

online participants to talk with each other, so there is no
difference in social need between the two dice rolls. We can
therefore conclude that the social need explanation cannot
(fully) explain mere newness bias. In addition, the
experiment was designed in a way that people who chose the
older roll would win. If there was any communication among
participants, the result would be biased toward the older die
roll instead of the newer one.
Experiments 1 and 2 have demonstrated the mere newness
bias for choices across multiple domains. However, this bias
seems to require that there be no other reason to choose one
option over the other, such as a quality difference. We
therefore next set out to test whether mere newness bias exists
in domains where there is traditionally appreciation for older
products, such as wine or antiques.

Experiment 3a and 3b: Wine
In Experiment 3a, 125 undergraduate business students at
a public western university participated in a larger survey for
course credit that embedded this study. Participants were
asked to choose between two bottles of wine released at
different dates. Importantly, we controlled for quality
differences by keeping the production date and origins
identical, as detailed below:
Lafite Bordeaux is one of the most expensive wines in the
world. Suppose you and your friends are going to celebrate a
very special occasion, and you are provided with a choice
between two bottles of Lafite Bordeaux. Both were produced
from grapes picked from the same vines and bottled from the
same barrels on the same day years ago. One bottle was taken
out of the cellar to the restaurant you’ve reserved one week
before your celebration dinner, while the other bottle was
taken out of the cellar to the restaurant you’ve reserved one
day before your celebration dinner. Both bottles have been
stored in a professional grade wine refrigerator. Which bottle
of wine would you choose?
In addition, we directly tested the degree to which mere
newness bias merely serves as a tiebreaker versus being a true
preference. To do so, we provided one-third of the
participants with a third “no preference” option.
Results and discussion
We again found strong support for mere newness bias. A
majority of the 80 participants who made a binary choice
between two bottles chose the more recently released bottle
(67.5%, p < 0.01), although wine is a domain in which older
is generally considered better.
For the 45 participants who had a “no preference” option,
40% chose the newer bottle, 4% chose the older bottle, and
56% chose “no preference.” Although more than half of the
participants expressed no preference, among those who did
state a preference, a vast majority chose the newer bottle
(90%, p < .001)
A second student sample from another class at the same
university (n = 149) replicated these findings with even
stronger results in Experiment 3b. Of the 72 participants who
made binary choices, 86.1% chose the newer bottle (p <
.0001), and of the 77 participants who had the “no

Experiments 4a and 4b: Downstream consequences
of mere newness bias for movies
In Experiments 4a (n = 301 Mechanical Turk participants)
and 4b (n = 140 student participants completing the study for
course credit), we asked participants about their willingness
to pay to watch a specific movie based on its teaser synopsis.
Specifically, Experiment 4a provided of the 2014 Chinese
mystery-thriller movie, The Great Hypnotist, and Experiment
4b used the 2010 South Korean action-thriller movie, The
Man From Nowhere. We chose foreign movies to reduce the
risk of participants having previous exposure.
We composed an 8 to 10 line teaser synopsis for each
movie from various descriptions on Wikipedia and iMDB in
order to increase interest in the movie and to provide
sufficient detail for participants to make an informed
decision. To manipulate release date, the last sentence in
Experiment 4a’s synopsis stated that the film was “newly
released,” “released in recent years,” or “released several
years ago” in a between-participants manipulation.
Experiment 4b instead included the release date in
parentheses immediately after the movie title, either
“(released in 2014),” “(released in 2010),” or no release date
provided. Participants were debriefed about this deception at
the end of the study.
After participants read the movie synopsis, they were asked
to state their maximum willingness to pay (WTP) to see the
movie. In addition, they reported, on 7-point Likert scales,
how interested they were in seeing the movie, how excited
they imagined they would be at the start of the movie, and
how likely they were to watch this movie in the future.
Finally, they reported whether they have heard of or watched
the movie before, and how many movies a year they watch in
total, and watch in theaters.

994

One alternative explanation for the Experiment 4a mere
newness premium is that a “new release” implies the movie
came out within the last couple weeks whereas “recent
release” could be anywhere from a couple weeks to many
months. Therefore, this premium could be due to a difference
in specificity of release date rather than mere newness.
However, Experiment 4b rules this out by providing explicit
release years.
Another alternative explanation is that people are used to
paying movie theater prices ($8.12 in 2014 according to
statista.com) for newly released movies versus movie rental
prices for older releases ($1.50 for a DVD or $2 for a BluRay at Redbox, as of November 2014). Supporting this
explanation, when we asked participants to guess the actual
release year in the no-info condition, they guessed an average
between 2007 to 2008, although year was not correlated with
WTP (r = .10, ns). To address this concern, we controlled for
the self-reported frequency of movie watching overall and of
watching movies in theaters (a proxy for willingness to pay
movie ticket prices), and found that the results hold.

We excluded from analysis 6 participants in Experiment 4a
and 32 in Experiment 4b who indicated that they had heard
of or may have heard of the movie presented. Analyses with
these participants included were essentially identical.
Table 1 summarizes the results for both experiments. In
Experiment 4a, an ANOVA found that participants were
willing to pay more to see The Great Hypnotist when they
were told that it is a newly released movie than when it was
a recently released movie or a movie released several years
ago, F(2, 292) = 10.19, p < 0.001, 2= 0.064. A planned linear
contrast with the contrast weights 1, 0, -1 showed that
participants were willing to pay more to see the movie the
more recently it was released, t(292) = 4.38, p < 0.001, rcontrast
=0.248. Planned linear contrasts were also marginally
significant for anticipated excitement (t(292) = 1.94, p =
0.053, rcontrast = 0.113) and significant for likelihood to watch
the movie (t(292)=2.28, p < 0.05, rcontrast = 0.132). There was
no effect of movie release date on interest in seeing it.
Table 1. Average WTP, interest, anticipated excitement,
and likelihood to watch for Experiments 4a and 4b, by
condition.

WTP
Interest
Anticipated
excitement
Likelihood to
watch

General Discussion

Experiment 4a:
Experiment 4b:
The Great Hypnotist The Man from Nowhere
Released
Years
New Recent
2014 2010 No info
Ago
$6.43 $5.81 $4.21 $8.56 $6.95 $6.42
4.34
4.35
4.07
4.35
4.20
3.61
4.34
4.06
3.96
4.41
4.29
3.69
4.05

3.84

3.51

3.68

3.54

In this paper, we have documented a mere newness bias: a
preference for novelty purely due to recentness of release. We
have shown that in a risk-free environment, people generally
prefer more recently released products, even controlling for
product quality (Experiments 1-3), and even in a domain
where older is generally related to higher quality (wine). We
also show that mere newness bias has meaningful
downstream consequences (Experiment 4). Finally, we show
that mere newness bias persists even for die rolls, where there
cannot be any difference in quality and where there is no
social benefit to newness (Experiment 2).
Although we found the mere newness effect across a
number of domains, we also found that the preference for
newness is not as strong as a preference for higher quality.
Interesting, the preference may also be unconscious, since
participants given the option to state “no preference” often
did so. The combination of these two caveats suggests that
the underlying reason people (somewhat) prefer newer items
is an overgeneralization of the oftentimes true real-world
association between novelty and higher quality. Newer
products often do incorporate more innovations than older
products, and many products do in fact get worse with age.
Going one step further, perhaps this bias could even be driven
by evolutionary goals of eating fresher, safer to consume
foods.
In the real world, there are many occasions where people
are exposed to the release date information before they made
their product choice. If people generally prefer the newly
released, we may have missed a lot of really good quality but
less recently released products. Newer products also tend to
be higher priced, and one of the soundest strategies for saving
money is to wait for prices to drop. A preference for new
products prevents people from doing that. Therefore, a good
strategy to counter this bias is that when facing unfamiliar
choices, remember that newer does not always equal better.

2.78

Experiment 4b found similar results. ANOVA results
showed that participants’ WTP for The Man from Nowhere
was marginally higher than when they thought it was released
in 2014 than when they thought it was released in 2010 or
when no release date information was provided, F(2,105) =
2.31, p = .10, 2 = 0.042, and a planned linear contrast was
significant, t(105) = 2.06, p < 0.05, rcontrast =0.197. Planned
linear contrasts for interest, anticipated excitement, and
likelihood of watching yielded similar results (ts = 2.07, 2.19,
and 3.69, respectively; rcontrast = 0.198, 0.209, 0.339; p < .05
for all). Unsurprisingly, both self-reported interest and
anticipated excitement mediated the relationship between
release date and WTP (Sobel’s Z = 2.15 and 2.21,
respectively; both p < .05).
Experiments 4a and 4b show that people are willing to pay
a premium for watching a newly released over an older
movie, despite the same movie descriptions. For The Great
Hypnotist, the average newness premium was 53% for newly
released versus released a few years ago, and 11% versus
recent release. In dollar amounts, people were willing to pay
$2.22 more for the new release, which is about one-third of
the average price participants were willing to pay to see the
new release.

995

References
Berlyne, D. E. (1966). Curiosity and Exploration. Science,
153(3731), 25-33. doi: 10.2307/1719694
Bianchi, M. (1998). The active consumer. Novelty and
surprise in consumer choice (M. Bianchi Ed.).
London and New York: Routledge.
Dayan, P., & Daw, N. (2008). Decision theory, reinforcement
learning, and the brain. Cognitive, Affective, &
Behavioral Neuroscience, 8(4), 429-453. doi:
10.3758/CABN.8.4.429
Förster, J. (2009). Cognitive consequences of novelty and
familiarity: How mere exposure influences level of
construal. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology,
45(2),
444-447.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2008.10.011
Förster, J., Liberman, N., & Shapira, O. (2009). Preparing for
novel versus familiar events: Shifts in global and
local processing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 138(3), 383-399. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015748
Krebs, R. M., Schott, B. H., Schütze, H., & Düzel, E. (2009).
The novelty exploration bonus and its attentional
modulation. Neuropsychologia, 47(11), 2272-2281.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.
01.015
Niv, Y. (2009). Reinforcement learning in the brain. Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 53(3), 139-154. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2008.12.005
Redgrave, P., & Gurney, K. (2006). The short-latency
dopamine signal: a role in discovering novel
actions? Nat Rev Neurosci, 7(12), 967-975.
Richins, M. L., & Bloch, P. H. (1986). After the New Wears
off: The Temporal Context of Product Involvement.
Journal of Consumer Research, 13(2), 280-285. doi:
10.2307/2489233
Robertson, T. S. (1971). Innovative behavior and
communication. New York [etc.]: [s.n.].
Scitovsky, T. (1992). The Joyless Economy: The Psychology
of Human Satisfaction. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Steenkamp, J.-B. E. M., & Gielens, K. (2003). Consumer and
Market Drivers of the Trial Probability of New
Consumer Packaged Goods. Journal of Consumer
Research, 30(3), 368-384. doi: 10.1086/378615
Wittmann, B. C., Daw, N. D., Seymour, B., & Dolan, R. J.
(2008). Striatal Activity Underlies Novelty-Based
Choice in Humans. Neuron, 58(6), 967-973. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.027

996

