Minimal Requirements for Productive Compositional Signaling
Thomas Brochhagen (t.s.brochhagen@uva.nl)
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation, Universiteit van Amsterdam
P.O. Box 94242, 1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Abstract
The ability to form complex linguistic units from simpler ones
lies at the center of many explanations of the communicative
success and robustness of natural language. A closely related
ability is that to generalize knowledge about such constructions to novel ones. The present investigation addresses the
question what the minimal conditions for the emergence of
such productive compositional communication are. Two features are argued to be required for this: relations between elements and classes over their relations. Using signaling games
with reinforcement learning we show that a learning bias involving both aspects can lead to the emergence of such generalizable structure.
Keywords: signaling games; generalization; compositionality; reinforcement learning

t1

m1

a1

t1

m1

a1

t2

m2

a2

t2

m2

a2

Figure 1: Perfect signaling conventions in a 2-state/signal/act
signaling game.
may involve selecting act a1 for state t1 and a2 for t2 . Since
the receiver has no access to the state and the players’ payoff
is determined jointly, players have an incentive to coordinate.
As illustrated in Figure 1, there are two strategies that ensure perfect signaling, i.e. flawless coordination, in such a
game. Crucially, a priori, signals are not associated with any
meaning; whether the sender picks m1 to signal one state or
the other does not matter as long as the receiver’s act matches
the state. Coordination establishes a conventional yet arbitrary mapping from states to acts over signals. In this way,
Lewis shows how signals can come to be endowed with conventional meaning.
This also highlights a crucial advantage of signaling
games: There is no need to stipulate a relation between states,
signals and acts (e.g. in terms of natural salience) nor are any
assumptions made about how sophisticated players are. In
other words, we can get away with the assumption of naı̈ve
players and a “worst-case scenario” where meaning emerges
from an arbitrary outset.
More formally, a signaling game consists of a set of states
T , signals M, and acts A. Assuming cost-free signaling, the
players’ utilities are given by U : T × M × A → R

1
if i = k
U(ti , m j , ak ) =
0
otherwise

Introduction
Compositionality is arguably one of the cornerstones of linguistic productivity, as it allows for the systematic formation of novel complex expressions based on conventionalized,
simpler, ones. Thereby, it chiefly contributes to the openendedness, flexibility and learnability of natural language.
Past investigations have shown that artificial agents
equipped with learning mechanisms can establish and effectively employ such structured communicative systems
[Brighton, 2002, Smith et al., 2013]. The assumed biases
furthermore match the linguistic learning behavior of human
subjects in comparable tasks [Kirby et al., to appear].
However, the question what the minimal conditions for the
emergence of productive compositionality are is still unresolved. The present investigation addresses this question in
the context of iterated signaling games with reinforcement
learning. Building on Franke [2014], we show that the minimal architecture necessary for productive composition can
lead to its emergence if players have a preference for actions that fit the linguistic structure they have previously established.

Reinforcement learning
If change is to be induced over repeated interactions, players need to keep track of their choices and whether these led
to communicative success. Here, we adopt Roth-Erev reinforcement learning (RL), which models Herrnstein’s (1970)
matching law: if a player’s selection yields a positive payoff given a state/act (for sender and receiver, respectively),
the player’s predisposition to select it in the future given the
same state/signal increases [Roth and Erev, 1995].
To illustrate this for the sender, imagine that for each state
there is an urn containing a number of differently colored
balls. Each color represents a different signal and the proportion of colors in a given urn represents the signals’ distribution for this state. Each round the sender draws a ball from
the urn of the state she is in, and selects a signal according

Signaling games, learning, and structure.
Lewisian signaling games coupled with adaptive dynamics
provide a rich yet simple framework to investigate the emergence of linguistic systems and their features. Following
Lewis [1969], a minimal setup of such a game involves two
players; a sender and a receiver, each with two signals or acts
to choose from, respectively. A game iteration begins with the
selection of one of two equiprobable states. The sender observes this state and selects a signal. The receiver, unknowing
of the state, receives the signal and selects an act. The outcome of the game is determined by whether or not the act
chosen by the receiver is the “correct” one for the state. For
example, in a 2-states/signals/acts game, a positive outcome

285

to the ball’s color. If the outcome of the round is positive, a
new ball of the same color is added to the urn together with
the one drawn. Otherwise only the ball that was drawn is
returned. Analogously, for the receiver signals are urns and
each act is associated with a different ball color.
Thereby a predisposition for particular combinations
emerges from repeated interaction, leading to a strong association between state-signal and signal-act pairs that were
successful in the past. This increases a player’s propensity
to select the same signal/act in subsequent rounds given the
same state/signal. To this end, RL is incorporated in the game
by associating each possible state-signal and signal-act pair,
ht, mi ∈ T × M and hm, ai ∈ M × A, with its accumulated
rewards, ar(x, y). After a round, U(ti , m j , ak ) is added to
ar(ti , m j ) and ar(m j , ak ), the accumulated rewards of sender
and receiver for their respective state-signal and signal-act
pair. A player’s subsequent choices are thusly informed by
P(m j |ti ) =

ar(ti , m j )
∑m∈M ar(ti , m)

P(ak |m j ) =

do if, for example, each possible adjective-noun composition
rule, or even more troublesomely each unique combination on
sentential level, had to be learned case by case and mentally
stored.
In short, there needs to be a systematic association between
simplex elements and the complex elements they are constituents of. Such relations, in turn, need to be generalizable
to obtain a productive compositional system akin to that of
natural languages. In the following we refer to the regular cooccurrence association condition and the generalization condition as condition I and II, respectively.

Previous approaches
To clarify the challenges faced by signaling systems that deal
with complex terms we begin by considering Barrett’s (2009)
syntactic games. Their defining characteristic is that there
are more states than signals and that more than one signal
per round is permitted. For example, a game may consist
of four states, two signals and four acts. Here, the key assumption is that of two senders and one receiver. The senders
independently observe the state and select one signal each.
The receiver observes both signals while registering which
sender sent what signal and selects an act based on this information. Crucially, discerning which signal corresponds to
what sender allows us to consider the two signals as a single complex one. That is, if two signals a and b are at the
senders’ disposal, the receiver will receive one of four possible signals, aa, ab, ba or bb, where the left constituent is sent
by the first sender and the right one by the second.
However, while exhibiting syntactic structure, these complex signals do not fulfill the above conditions. In particular,
condition I requires the meaning of complex expressions to
be dependent on that of its constituents (cf. Franke 2014).
The expressions that result from syntactic games do not promote such constituent-based associations. For example, the
instantiation of a as a first constituent in ab is not required to
be related to that in a different expression aa.
To address this issue Franke [2014] introduces a similarity
relation over the set of states, signals, and acts, defined only
within each set to avoid assuming similarity between, say, a
state and a signal. This relation is operationalized as constituent identity; two elements stand in a similarity relation
if they share constituents. Furthermore, similarity is associated with a parameter s, 0 ≤ s ≤ 1. This value represents
partial overlap of constituents, whereas fully dissimilar elements receive a value of 0 and identical ones a value of 1. For
example, a is similar to ab, dissimilar to b, and identical to a.
In order for this relation to stimulate compositional structure, RL is extended to not only reinforce the state-signal and
signal-act pairs selected in a given successful round. Instead,
rewards are also distributed amongst other pairs in proportion
to their similarity to the ones played – so-called spill-over reinforcement learning (SRL)1 . For example, suppose a sender

ar(m j , ak )
∑a∈A ar(m j , a)

The widespread adoption of RL for adaptive signaling
games is due to its good fit to the behavior of human subjects
in games [Bruner et al., 2014, Erev and Roth, 1998, Roth and
Erev, 1995], its simple and well-understood learning mechanism, as well as its convergence properties [Beggs, 2005,
Catteeuw and Manderick, 2014].

Compositional signaling: conditions to be met
In a compositional communicative system semantic cooccurrence coincides with form co-occurrence; if two expressions have something in common, e.g. shared constituents,
then the meanings associated with them should also have
something in common. As put by the principle of compositionality; the meaning of a complex expression is a function of the meaning of its parts and structure (see e.g. Kamp
and Partee 1995). In classic signaling games establishing
such a regular form-meaning association is purely a matter
of chance.
However, this condition is not sufficient for productivity,
as regular associations alone do not enable generalization.
This is unsatisfactory insofar as natural language composition
rules are acquired and applied not only to individual expressions, but to (syntactic and semantic) classes thereof [Taylor, 1974]. Strictly speaking, compositionality is given in a
system where for each possible combination there is a different composition function. That is, compositionality vacuously holds if each function is unique to a combination and its
structure. However, what we set out to investigate is compositionality as an integral aspect of and explanatory device for
linguistic creativity, productivity and as a solution to the acquisition bottleneck. Crucially, this requires rules to be generalizable (cf. Pagin 2013). That is, to account for productivity, structural commonalities between linguistic elements
need to be recognized so that learning how to compose two
elements can be generalized over their classes. It would not

1 As noted by Franke, SRL does not necessarily require more sophistication from players. Distributing rewards to similar elements

286

pair ht, mi, of state t and signal m, yields a positive outcome.
The payoff is then added to all accumulated rewards ht 0 , m0 i
in proportion to the product of their pair-wise similarity to
ht, mi. That is, the amount added to the accumulated rewards
of any pair is the product of their similarity to the pair in play
and the round’s outcome.
The idea behind these modifications is that iterated success
of, for example, signal ma in state t0 and signal mb in state t1
bootstraps and increases the probability of selecting complex
signal mab in complex state t01 . This is because 0 and 1 are
similar to 01, as well as a and b to ab. Thus, each positive outcome of the simplex pairs will also contribute to the rewards
of complex elements they are constituents of, increasing the
player’s propensity to associate mab with t01 .
Not all values of s achieve the desired increment in
constituent-based association. Instead, some lead to ambiguity and an association of simplex-complex pairs. To counterbalance this, Franke introduces a second parameter to reduce
rewards of synonymous and ambiguous pairs (a punishment
parameter akin to the discount factor of Roth-Erev RL).
Under these assumptions Franke [2014] shows how compositional associations can arise from a constituent-based
similarity relation coupled with SRL. Establishing such a
structured convention is upper-bounded at a probability of
50%, depending on the parameters chosen.
However, this model does not enable players to generalize the associations they establish, failing to fulfill condition II. Players are not sensitive to the overall architecture
of their communicative system. Thus, while their propensity for constituent-based associations increases, structurally
analogous elements are not taken into account.

t0

ma
rr
t10

mba

aβα

Acts :α, β, γ, βα, βγ

aβ
rl

t12

rl
mbc

rr

aβγ

rr
mc

Signals : a, b, c, ba, bc

rl

mb
rl

t2

rr

rl

rl
t1

States : 0, 1, 2, 10, 12

aα
rr

rr
aγ

Figure 2: Structure of a possible signaling system. Uninterrupted lines stand for conventions, dashed ones for relations
(identity is omitted), and dotted ones link elements with identical fabrics.
and complex elements, as well as a way to compare them in
terms of their relations are required to fulfill both conditions.
We focus on three symmetric relations for each of the sets
of states, signals, and acts:3 identity (rid ), left-constituency
(rl ), and right-constituency (rr ). Identity holds if two elements are identical, left-constituency if one element is the
leftmost constituent of the other and, analogously, rightconstituency holds if an element is the rightmost constituent
of the other. Except for rid , two elements are required to be
distinct if they stand in a relation.
To capture generalizable associations, we call the set of all
relations an element x stands in its fabric, Fx = {r|∃y.r(x, y)}.
This allows for the comparison of not only elements that stand
in one of the above relations but also of those that exhibit the
same composition pattern. The fabric of a pair is the union
of its elements’ fabrics. Figure 2 depicts the relations and
fabrics of an exemplary established signaling system.
In terms of learning, rewards are distributed by adding the
product of U(ti , m j , ak ) and a spill-over parameter to the accumulated rewards. This parameter π determines the proportion
of rewards that spill-over either to elements (i) that stand in a
relation to ti , m j and m j , ak , or (ii) have the same fabric as
these pairs. The former increases, amongst others, the desired
P(mxy |twz ) in successful plays with conventionalized htw , mx i
or htz , my i. The latter increases P(mxy |twz ) if some htuv , mrs i is
successful and Fwz ∪ Fxy = Fuv ∪ Frs . Thereby compositional
structure (condition I) and generalizations over structurally
identical elements (condition II) are reinforced.
The requirement for identical fabric unions ensures that
compared pairs do not only coincide in terms of their form
(e.g. two signals being, respectively, the right constituent
of another signal), but also on their state/act relations. In
these cases, right- and left-constituency are to be interpreted
as semantic commonalities. This assumption crucially presupposes a structured semantic space.
Additionally, to simulate gradual learning, reward increments are proportional to the “degree of conventionalization”

Model
We propose a variant of SRL that reinforces elements with
shared constituents, as well as clusters over elements that exhibit the same structure. Additionally, the relations considered here are more differentiated than Franke’s (2014) similarity relation, making learning sensitive to syntax. That is,
ab is not related in the same way to a as it is to b. While not
strictly required, this solves the need for a discount parameter.
To recapitulate, condition I requires a consistent association between elements: The semantic contribution of car
should be constant across complex instances (red car, blue
car, fast car, . . . ).2 In turn, condition II requires generalizability over associations: If the rule underlying the combination of red and car is the same as that to form orange bike,
then learning to compose the former should ease the formation of the latter. Minimally then, a relation between simplex
may be the result of not being able to differentiate between them. In
contrast, in classic RL players always fully distinguish them – even
if they closely resemble each other. In fact, Roth and Erev [1995]
qualify this kind of learning as both “generalization” and “error”.
2 Given that natural languages exhibit, amongst others, ambiguity and underspecification, this requirement does not hold in its
strongest form for them. Nevertheless, requiring a strict formmeaning homomorphism does not seem unreasonable for smallerscale systems such as the ones considered here.

3 Symmetry is assumed for convenience, as it allows for a reduction of relations introduced and has no impact on the sets considered.
A closer adherence to natural language would require asymmetry.

287

of a given successful pair, represented by its probability conditioned on the first pair element. The idea is that the confidence that an association is applicable to other cases increases
with its repeated success. At the beginning of the game players have a low confidence that their choices will succeed,
meaning that they will explore different potential pairings.
Over time, conventions are established and players lock in
on certain strategies. The more ingrained a convention is, the
more rewards will spill-over to pairs with either shared constituents or identical structure.
In short, for a sender/receiver pair hp, qi, the product of
its utility, P(q|p), and π is added to all ar(p0 , q0 ), where it
either holds that that there is an r and r0 such that r(p, p0 )
and r0 (q, q0 ), or Fp ∪ Fq = Fp0 ∪ Fq0 . This update function is
specified for the sender in Table 1.
While this kind of reinforcement targets the (compositional) associations we are after, players do not have a way
to distinguish between multiple pairings that fit these conditions. In turn, many of them lead to partial pooling equilibria, i.e. systems where multiple states/signals are associated
with a single signal/act. Or, simply and more generally, noncompositional systems.

Three scenarios with varied priors were tested, where priors take the form of higher starting values for the accumulated
rewards of certain pairs. Thus, players already had some (partial) conventions at hand. Each prior association had its accumulated rewards set to 100. The accumulated rewards of
all other pairs were set to 1. Scenario (i) involved three prior
conventions of the form hp1 , qa i, hp2 , qb i and hp3 , qc i. Scenarios (ii) and (iii) involved two priors of the form hp1 , qa i
and hp01 , qma i for scenario (ii), and hp1 , qa i and hp2 , qb i for
scenario (iii).
Scenario (i) targets the question whether and how well
players transition from a simplex 3-term convention to its
compositional extension. Scenarios (ii) and (iii) compare how
different conventions aid coordination and structural propagation. According to the preceding discussion having a convention for two related simplex-complex pairs should have
a greater effect on the structure of the signaling system than
the conventional association of two unrelated pairs. Thus,
it is expected that scenario (ii) will, in general, yield more
compositional signaling systems than scenario (iii). Put differently, success in (i) mainly involves players establishing a
convention for complex elements that fit condition I, while a
comparison between (ii) and (iii) targets condition II.
We focus on two outcomes: whether a convention is
reached and if it is compositional. As mentioned above, flawless coordination is impossible in this model. Therefore, a
weaker notion of convention than Lewis’ has to be adopted.
Sender and receiver are considered to reach a convention if
the resulting communicative system achieves successful coordination, on average, more than 56 of the time (> 83.3%).
This corresponds to higher communicative success than that
of the best suboptimal equilibrium for a signaling game with
six equiprobable states (a partial pooling equilibrium where
two states/signals are associated with the same signal/act).
The main result is given by a comparison between π = 0
and π ∈ {0.01, 0.02, 0.03} to test whether the proposed model
has an effect on the number of conventions and compositional conventions reached. A baseline comparison is given
by π = 0 as it corresponds to classic RL without the above
assumptions. Using Yates’ χ2 to test for homogeneity on the
results obtained after 106 iterations shows that both groups
are homogeneous in scenarios (i) and (ii) in terms of conventions ((i): χ2 = 0.333, p > 0.01 and (ii): χ2 = 4.633, p > 0.01)
but differ for compositionality ((i): χ2 = 26.705, p < 0.01 and
(ii): χ2 = 16.218, p < 0.01). In contrast, scenario (iii) yielded
the opposite (convention: χ2 = 35.495, p < 0.01, compositionality: χ2 = 5.108, p > 0.01). The specific outcomes of all
simulations are summarized in Table 2.

Analysis & simulations
In this model, a setup with related elements will invariably
spill over a fraction of the payoff to more than one pair.
As a consequence, even games with low π-values will never
reach perfect signaling. In principle, this could be counterbalanced by introducing a discount factor to deduce rewards
from residual, less frequent, pairs. However, just as with requiring a strict form-meaning homomorphism for compositionality, we focus on a less favorable setting as it decreases
the assumptions made on learning and the number of parameters involved.4
To test these assumptions, games of 103 to 106 iterations
with π-values of 0, 0.01, 0.02 and 0.03 were simulated. Pilot
runs with π ≥ 0.04 indicate that the amount of rewards distributed amongst pairs introduce too much noise to achieve
successful coordination in the analyzed scenarios. All scenarios involved a 6-states/signals/acts game with elements of
the form xa , xb , xc , xma , xmb and xmc . That is, players had three
simplex and three complex states, signals and acts to pick
from. We require from a compositional signaling system that,
if a conventional association of tx and my is established, then
a complex state with x as its constituent should be associated with a complex signal involving y as well. Analogous
requirements hold for the receiver. For condition II, we test
whether establishing such simplex-complex associations improves coordination and increases the proportion of compositional conventions players establish. Given the complexity
of the task, we chose a setup where all simplex and complex
elements share a respective fabric.

Discussion
On the one hand, the results show that a weak bias toward
structural analogy and related elements can lead to compositional signaling. A transition to compositional signaling is
not guaranteed, but a significant proportion of conventions
comply with condition I across scenarios even with this simple learning algorithm. However, this only holds for a limited

4 One

may argue that forgetting past actions, operationalized as
reward decrements, requires less sophistication and is thereby in line
with the goal of minimal requirements and simple learning. Thus, in
principle, we see no conflict with incorporating a discount factor.

288


ar(t 0 , m0 ) +U(ti , m j , ak )



ar(t 0 , m0 ) +U(ti , m j , ak ) · π · P(m j |ti )
UpdateS (ar(t 0 , m0 )) =
 ar(t 0 , m0 ) +U(ti , m j , ak ) · π · P(m j |ti )


ar(t 0 , m0 )

if rid (ti ,t 0 ) ∧ rid (m j , m0 )
if rn (ti ,t 0 ) ∧ ro (m j , m0 ) ∧ rn 6= rid ∧ ro 6= rid
if Ft 0 ∪ Fm0 = Fti ∪ Fm j
otherwise

Table 1: Update function for the sender. The cases correspond to, from top to bottom, Roth-Erev RL with no discount factor,
relation/similarity-based reinforcement, structure-based reinforcement, and no reinforcement.
103

π = 0.00

π = 0.01

π = 0.02

π = 0.03

Scenario i
Scenario ii
Scenario iii
Scenario i
Scenario ii
Scenario iii
Scenario i
Scenario ii
Scenario iii
Scenario i
Scenario ii
Scenario iii

(a)
33
12
16
41
1
3
34
0
0
16
0
0

104
(b)
4
1
1
16
1
0
21
0
0
14
0
0

(a)
75
71
67
90
69
55
79
52
25
66
23
1

105
(b)
13
3
3
34
13
8
44
25
20
55
20
1

(a)
91
78
77
95
79
73
93
73
46
73
43
1

106
(b)
11
11
3
30
15
10
44
28
22
50
35
1

(a)
92
81
86
100
83
89
95
81
64
73
51
2

(b)
16
9
4
31
19
10
48
31
26
58
39
2

Table 2: Results obtained for three scenarios per parameter showing the amount of (a) conventions, and (b) compositional
signaling systems obtained over 100 independent games for each scenario and number of iterations.

range of π-values. The maximum number of compositional
conventions reached was 58 for a π-value of 0.03 and 106
iterations (scenario i), corresponding to 79% of the conventions being compositional. Interestingly, a number of games
came close to this result in remarkably less iterations. For instance, 55 compositional conventions were established under
the same condition but in 104 rounds. In general, 104 iterations were indicative of a parameter’s influence in a scenario.

cision. The stronger the generalization bias, the faster structure is learned – but at the cost of less accuracy. Generalization is primarily advantageous in large environments where
agents have a high chance of encountering stimuli structurally
similar to the ones they have already categorized. Furthermore, we conjecture that less precision is not as disruptive
for more sophisticated signalers that are able to reason about
the input they receive, as human beings do.

Higher π-values did not significantly influence the amount
of conventions reached in scenarios (i) and (ii). However
they did increase the amount of compositional conventions
as predicted. Furthermore, a comparison between scenarios
(ii) and (iii) showcases that this kind of bias can be detrimental to coordination if there is no prior convention established
for (at least two) related simplex and complex pairs. As reported above, the latter resulted in significantly less conventions without an increase in compositional ones. This is to
be expected insofar as this kind of reinforcement presumes
that there is some structure in place, just as productive ruleapplication presupposes that there are multiple cases where it
could apply. If no structure is in place early exploration of
multiple potential rule applications comes at the cost of less
coordination.

On the other hand, a number of caveats apply. First, even
low π-values guarantee neither convention nor compositionality. This is a result of players not having a way to eliminate
associations made by chance in early stages or via SRL, meaning that exploration of alternatives to conventionalized best
responses never fully halts. As discussed by Franke [2014],
a margin of error and only a range of successful parameter
values is expected given the complexity of the learning task
with such simple adaptive dynamics.
Second, the present reward distribution does not differentiate between directly related elements and those linked
through fabric identity. In terms of natural language this
means that reinforcement treats the link between car and
red car on par with that between red car and orange bike.
However, one may argue that the former two should have
a stronger influence on each other than the latter two, just
as classic RL reinforces successful actions to a greater degree than SRL does related or similar actions. The differences
and commonalities of reinforcement through shared elements

Both findings align with those reported in O’Connor forthcoming, where generalization is analyzed in evolutionary
terms. O’Connor concludes that the advantage of generalization is found in a trade-off between acquisition speed and pre-

289

(here; relations) and a shared structure/class (here; fabrics)
leave open many issues to be addressed in the future.

Simon Kirby, Monica Tamariz, Hannah Cornish, and Kenny
Smith. Compression and communication in the cultural
evolution of linguistic structure. Cognition, to appear.
Michael Franke. Creative compositionality from reinforcement learning in signaling games. In Erica A. Cartmill
et al., editor, The Evolution of Language: Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference (Evolang 10), pages 82–
89, Singapore, 2014. World Scientific Press.
David Lewis. Convention: A Philosophical Study. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, 1969.
Richard J Herrnstein. On the law of effect. Journal of the
experimental analysis of behavior, 13(2):243–266, 1970.
Alvin E. Roth and Ido Erev. Learning in extensive-form
games: Experimental data and simple dynamic models in
the intermediate term. Games and Economic Behavior, 8
(1):164–212, 1995. 10.1016/s0899-8256(05)80020-x.
Justin Bruner, Cailin O’Connor, Hannah Rubin, and Simon M. Huttegger. David Lewis in the lab: experimental results on the emergence of meaning. Synthese, 2014.
10.1007/s11229-014-0535-x.
Ido Erev and Alvin E. Roth. Predicting how people play
games: Reinforcement learning in experimental games
with unique, mixed strategy equilibria. American economic
review, 88(4):848–881, 1998.
A.W. Beggs. On the convergence of reinforcement learning.
Journal of Economic Theory, 122(1):1–36, 2005. 10.1016/
j.jet.2004.03.008.
David Catteeuw and Bernard Manderick. The limits and
robustness of reinforcement learning in Lewis signaling
games. Connection Science, 26(2):161–177, 2014. 10
.1080/09540091.2014.885303.
Hans Kamp and Barbara Partee. Prototype theory and compositionality. Cognition, 57:129–191, 1995. 10.1016/
0010-0277(94)00659-9.
Barry P. Taylor. Toward a theory of language acquisition 1.
Language Learning, 24(1):23–35, 1974. 10.1111/j.1467
-1770.1974.tb00233.x.
Peter Pagin. Compositionality, complexity, and evolution. In
Francisco Lacerda, editor, Symposium on Language Acquisition and Language Evolution, pages 51–62, Stockholm,
2013.
Jeffrey A. Barrett. The evolution of coding in signaling
games. Theory and Decision, 67(2):223–237, 2009. 10
.1007/s11238-007-9064-0.
Cailin O’Connor. Evolving to generalize: Trading precision
for speed. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
forthcoming.

Conclusions
We have shown that even with little sophistication the propagation of rule-like associations between simplex and complex
elements can be achieved in signaling games. The assumed
architecture followed two conditions argued to be necessary
to establish a productive compositional communicative system: a systematic link between related elements and a way
to group related elements into classes with the same underlying structure. The former captures the bare requirements for
compositionality while the latter enables for a simple form of
productivity, where associations of structurally identical elements are reinforced throughout the system. Non-compliance
with the first condition means that compositionality cannot be
achieved and missing the second means that knowledge about
one formation cannot be applied to others. Both are key to the
robustness and flexibility of natural language.
An unresolved issue concerns optimal learning conditions
in this model. So far, we focused on the overall minimal architecture required for compositionality to emerge. However,
we have not explored all options; such as a discount factor,
different learning functions and mechanisms (e.g. players
with declarative memory following boost and decay activation patterns), more elements, or different structures.
To conclude, in a sense, little is needed for productive compositionality. However, whether or not an initial relationbased association is made is vital for the future development
of a communicative system. Without some inherent bias for
associations of one kind over the other no structure nor comparisons over it could arise. Determining the nature of this
bias is a major open issue to understand why languages are
structured the way they are. In turn, this may contribute to
our understanding of why non-human communicative systems lack the degree innovation and flexibility found in natural language.

Acknowledgments
I thank Robert van Rooij, Julian Schlöder, Philip Schulz,
and three anonymous reviewers for comments and discussion. This research has been funded by the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)
under grant agreement no. 567652 /ESSENCE: Evolution of
Shared Semantics in Computational Environments/.

References
Henry Brighton. Compositional syntax from cultural transmission. Artificial Life, 8(1):25–54, 2002.
Kenny Smith, Monica Tamariz, and Simon Kirby. Linguistic structure is an evolutionary trade-off between simplicity
and expressivity. In Proceedings of the 35th annual conference of the cognitive science society, pages 1348–1353,
2013.

290

