1

Modelling Political Source Credibility of Election Candidates in the USA
Jens Koed Madsen (j.madsen@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Malet Street, Bloomsbury
London, WC1E 7HX
Abstract
A study in political psychology identifies four item-based
factors of political trustworthiness in the USA: capability,
consistency and closeness, egotism and opportunism, and
communal commitment. Additionally, a list of items describe
epistemic expertise. Together, these elements make up a
description of political source credibility in the USA.
The current study examines the power of these
elements to predict source credibility. Eliciting estimations of
likelihood and importance of each item on a Likert-type scale
as well as overall estimations of trustworthiness and expertise,
the paper presents weighted as well as non-weighted models
that predict the likelihood that election candidates are
trustworthy, have expertise, and are credible sources for
individual respondents.
Multiple regression analyses show that non-weighted
scales have slightly better predictive power than weighted
scales. The findings further provide an example of a datadriven method for applying a general cognitive models of
source credibility to specific domains.
Keywords: Political source credibility, trustworthiness,
epistemic expertise

Introduction
Our perception of the credibility of a source can have
serious implications for our reaction to persuasive attempts.
For instance, if a person simply does not trust an election
candidate, it stands to reason that this person would not be
likely to vote for this particular candidate in an election.
Indeed, humans seem quick to make estimations as to
whether a person is warmth and competent (see e.g. Fiske,
Susan, Cuddy & Click, 2007; Cuddy, Click & Beninger,
2011). To conceptualise and model elements of source
credibility carries theoretical implications of how humans
psychologically approach source credibility, but also carries
practical implications, as it allows for a more in-depth and
accurate understanding of source credibility in real life
situations such as public health campaigns, negotiation
situations, or election campaigns. The current study does not
explore the trustworthiness of individual candidates, but
rather describes and predicts factors of trustworthiness that
are revealed to be predictive of whether or not election
candidates as a category are trustworthy.
Aside from intuitively being influential, several
studies have shown the importance of source credibility in
reasoning and persuasion. Firstly, studies in persuasion
theory have demonstrated the potential influence of source
credibility (Briñol & Petty, 2009; Chaiken, 1980; Petty &
Cacioppo, 1984; Pornpitakpan, 2004). These studies for
example point to the conclusion that humans are less
swayed by ad verecundiam fallacies if they are inclined to
consider the persuasive attempt more carefully. This

suggests that authority and source credibility interact with
coping mechanisms to avoid deception and misinformation.
Secondly, argumentation studies have indicated the potential
for analysing source credibility from a Bayesian perspective
(Hahn, Harris & Corner, 2009; Hahn, Oaksford, & Harris,
2012; Harris, Hahn, Madsen & Hsu, in press). These studies
conceptualise source credibility as a product of
trustworthiness and epistemic expertise. Further, they do not
necessarily consider appeals to expert opinion a logical
fallacy, but rather consider it a viable route through which
reliable information might be obtained. This perspective has
been debated as a formal model (Bovens & Hartmann,
2003), but has also been explored empirically (e.g. Harris et
al., in press).
Studies may disagree on the way by which source
credibility should be included in theories of reasoning and
persuasion. However, all point to the conclusion that source
credibility does matter and that it in some way influences
perception of information. Unsurprisingly, source credibility
has therefore been the focus of research in various
disciplines such as judgment and decision making (e.g.
Birnbaum & Stegner, 1976), advertising (e.g. Braunsberger
& Munch, 1998), developmental psychology (Harris &
Corriveau, 2011), the evaluation of legal testimony, both
from a normative perspective (e.g. Lagnado, Fenton & Neil,
2013; Schum, 1981, 1994) and from a descriptive
perspective (see Wells & Olson, 2003, for a review)1.
The current study tests the predictability of source
credibility in the political domain and represents a further
investigation in continuation of the development of
operational measures meant to capture political
trustworthiness and epistemic expertise in the USA (Madsen
& Clickard, in review). Departing from previous
conceptualisations in management studies (see Colquitt et
al., 2007 for a review), Madsen & Clickard find that
political trustworthiness in the USA can be conceptualised
as a product of four factors: capability, consistency &
closeness, egotism & opportunism, and communal
commitment. These four factors are measured by a battery
of 31 items. Epistemic expertise, on the other hand, remains
a single factor and is defined through 25 items2. The present
follow-up study suggest that the factors have predictive
potential of political source credibility, accounting for
roughly 56,9% of the total variance. Before presenting the
detailed results, however, the paper presents the theoretical
background in more detail.
1
See Harris et al. (in press) for a larger review of source
credibility and its conceptualisation
2
The collapsed item list is called the Political Inventory of
Credibility 56 (PIC56)

1470

2

Analysing source credibility
Walton (1997, p. 102) describes source credibility as an
entailment of six factors (see table 1). Harris et al (in press)
argue that this list can be reduced to three aspects:
trustworthiness, epistemic expertise, and consistency with
others (omitting the latter in cases where no other sources
are mentioned, see also Bovens & Hartmann, 2003; Harris
& Hahn, 2009; Hahn et al., 2012). Harris et al (in press)
provides strong empirical support for such a model3.
Trustworthiness and epistemic expertise are subjectively
estimated such that one source might seem highly credible
to one person and not at all to another. Mental estimates of
source credibility probably depend not only on subjective
experiences of the source in general but also on the specific
epistemic domain. So the specific aspects that determine
whether a source is seen as credible might differ from
domain to domain (e.g. source credibility may differ from
economic discussions to religious debates). If source
credibility is domain-specific (and, for that matter, culturespecific), we should expect different aspects to be important
in different domains4.
Table 1: Walton’s source credibility factors
Question type
Expertise
Field
Opinion
Trustworthiness
Consistency
Back-up
evidence

Definition
How credible is the source as an
expert source?
Is the source an expert in the field
that the issue concerns?
What did the source assert that
implies the conclusion?
Is the source a personally reliable
source?
Is the conclusion consistent with
what other expert sources assert?
Is the source’s assertion based on
evidence?

Domain-specific source credibility
Epistemic expertise can be understood as the perceived
know-how the source has for a certain domain. For example,
a medical doctor might be an expert in cancer treatment, but
3

The findings are in line with a Bayesian approach to
argumentation (e.g. Hahn & Oaksford, 2006; 2007, see also
Corner, Hahn, & Oaksford, 2011; Harris, Hsu & Madsen, 2012 for
studies on Bayesian approaches to logical fallacies) in which the
strength of the evidence (similar to credibility of the source) is
subjectively estimated by the recipient. Such accounts argue that
an individual’s degree of belief in a particular proposition, or
hypothesis, can be represented as a subjective probability between
0 and 1 (see e.g. Oaksford & Chater, 2007).
4
There is a difference between trustworthiness and being a
trusting person. The latter describes the likelihood that you trust
someone else whilst the former is a product of characteristics that a
person contains. As Flores and Solomon puts it: “In the ideal case,
one trusts someone because she is trustworthy, and one’s
trustworthiness inspires trust” (1998, p. 209).

know nothing of the workings of the stock market and vice
versa with a stock broker. In their study comprising 445
respondents, Madsen and Clickard (in review) conclude that
no distinct factors emerged from the anlaysis of 25 items
politicias’ formal education, informal experience, and local
knowledge. Respondents seem to judge whether or not an
election candidate seems expert, but appear less concerned
with the source of the expertise. In this follow-up study we
therefore aapply all 25 items as indicators for epistemic
expertise.
In the same study, items for exploring political
trustworthiness were compiled from aspects identifed in the
management literature where trustworthiness has been
described as the product of ability, benevolence, and
integrity (see Colquitt et al,. 2007 for review) Taking these
aspects as point of departure, Madsen and Clickard (in
review) conducted a factor analysis of 861 respondents,
which failed to replicate the original aspects from the
management literature. Instead, four novel and distinct
factors emerged through an inventory of 31 items:
capability, consistency and closeness, egotism and
opportunism (negative correlation), and communal
commitment. The aspects related to benevolence and
integrity came out in more nuanced form as three factors
related more distinctly to the trustworthiness of politicians.
This suggests that trustworthiness depends on the domain,
as political trustworthiness seems to rely on concrete
qualities.
Their findings suggest the use of data-driven, domaindependent conceptualisations of source credibility rather
than an abstract definition in which the same elements
permeate across domains (e.g., integrity). People seem to
draw on their knowledge of the domain when assessing
what makes a source credible rather than conceive of source
credibility in an abstract domain general manner. The
current study expands upon the exploratory findings of
Madsen & Clickard (in review) in three central ways.
First, it tests the predictive potential of the items for
trustworthiness, epistemic expertise, and source credibility.
The estimations of the items are collapsed onto each
separate factor as well as into overall trust, expertise, and
source credibility predictions. The predictions generated
from the factors are tested against estimations of trust,
expertise, and source credibility, as provided by the
respondents. Secondly, the study compares the contributions
of the models through a multiple-regression analysis. This
determines the appropriateness of the factors. Finally, it is
plausible that a factor is perceived as less important than
others (e.g. a voter might believe that an egotistic
disposition is unimportant as long as the election candidate
is capable). The individual weighting of the factors, allows
for analyses of each factor as a non-weighted and as a
weighted entity.
The study thus tests domain- and culture-specific items
(regarding election candidates in the USA) that have been
used to define key elements of a formal approach to source
credibility in reasoning studies (e.g. Bovens & Hartmann,

1471

3

2003, chapter 3). The predictions from each factor and from
the amalgamation of factors are compared with estimations
of general trustworthiness and expertise drawn from the
respondents. If the items are predictive, they should
correlate significantly with the observed ratings and account
for a reasonable amount of the variance.

Method, design, and respondents
Design and method
Trustworthiness factors identified by Madsen and Clickard
(in review) are capability (8 items), consistency and
closeness (8 items), egotism and opportunism (9 items), and
communal commitment (6 items). Epistemic expertise was
measured by 25 items (all items were taken from Madsen &
Clickard).
Respondents rated the likelihood of each item (e.g. ‘most
election candidates will go out of their way to help me’5) on
a five-point Likert-type scale (1 = disagree strongly, 5 =
agree strongly). This elicited measurements of their
subjective perception of each item. Their subjective
perception of each trustworthiness factor (capability,
consistency & closeness, egotism & opportunism, and
communal commitment) and epistemic expertise was
calculated by averaging the scores of each item related to
each factor (e.g. 8 capability items). Cronbach’s Alpha was
between 0.888 and 0.909 for all summated scales.
Respondents were further asked to rate the importance of
each item (‘this is very important to me’) on a five-point
Likert-type scale (1=disagree strongly, 5 = agree strongly).
Thus, for each item a propensity and importance score was
elicited.
Alongside estimations of each item, respondents also
were asked how likely they thought it was that most election
candidates were trustworthy and how important this was for
them in general. This provides the dependent variable of
overall likelihood of election candidate trustworthiness
(‘observed trust’ and ‘observed M’ below) against which the
predictive potential of the above mentioned scales are
measured. In a similar manner, respondents were asked
about political expertise, and finally the measurements of
perceived trustworthiness and expertise were combined to
estimate the respondents’ perception of the source
credibility of election candidates. The present study then
explores whether the items generated in Madsen and
Clickard (in review) are predictive of these overall
perceptions of political trustworthiness, expertise, and
source credibility.
Demographic information was collected, but as these did
not prove significantly related to any scales, they were not
included in the analyses reported here.

5

The term ’election candidate’ rather than, say ’politician’ was
chosen as this is the term used in Madsen and Clickard (in review).

Respondents
250 respondents were recruited from Mechanical Turk for a
short study on election candidates in the USA6. Respondents
were American citizens eligible to vote and represent a
similar pool as the original study in which the inventory of
items was generated. Of the 250 respondents, 7 either did
not complete the study or failed to provide the right
completion code at the end of the study. These were deleted,
leaving 243 respondents for the analyses.

Results
The following section presents three analyses of the data
collected from the respondents. First, we examine whether
the established scales can predict respondents’ overall
perception of political trustworthiness. Secondly we carry
out similar analyses for political epistemic expertise, and
finally also for source credibility.

Political trustworthiness
When examining political trustworthiness we use of the
propensity as well as importance scores for each factor
(capability, consistency and closeness, egotism and
opportunism, and communal commitment7). For each of the
four factors, a non-weighted score was calculated as the
average of the underlying items8. The importance of each
factor was calculated as the average importance of each
item. A weighted score was then calculated for each
respondent, allowing for subjective estimations to differ. A
paired-sample t-test show that respondents rated egotism
and opportunism as significantly less important than the
other three factors (egotism and opportunism (M: 3.51),
consistency and closeness (M: 3.79), capability (M: 3.89),
communal commitment (M: 3.89), ts between 5.809 and
6.959, dfs (242), all ps < 0.001).

Weighted and non-weighted scales: trustworthiness
Ten averages were produced from the trustworthiness items
(4 individual factors (weighted or non-weighted) and overall
prediction (weghted or non-weighted)). The predictions are
compared against observed estimations of trustworthiness.
Individual Pearson correlation analyses show that all
weighted scores (including the overall weighted trust
perception) are less correlated than the non-weighted scores
(weighted correlations between .396 and .698, non-weighted
6

For validating support of using MT respondents, see Paolacci
et al. (2010)
7
As egotism and opportunism is negatively correlated with
being a trustworthy election candidate, scores for this factors were
inversed such that a high likelihood of being egotistic would result
in a negative impact on overall trustworthiness.
8
A Bayesian predictive model would be intersting to test here,
as the formal model in Harris et al (in press) builds on a Bayesian
foundation. Such a model requires values for likelihood ratios of
facets and trustworthiness not elicited here. Consequently, the data
does not support such a model. This is a good suggestion for
further research, though, and I thank an anonymous reviewer for
the suggestion.

1472

4

correlations between .443 and .704). Overall trust
estimations (weighted and non-weighted) have the highest
correlation (.698 and .704 respectively), suggesting that the
amalgamation of factors outperforms individual factors
when accounting for the dependent variable (observed
trust).
To test the ability to predict observed trust, a stepwise
multiple regression analysis was conducted. The overall
(non-weighted) scales have the highest level of prediction
accounting for 49.5% of the variance in observed trust. The
model is highly significant as shown in Table 2.

Multiple stepwise regression analyses were conducted to
determine the model with the best overall ability to predict
political source credibility.

Weighted and non-weighted scales: source
credibility
In line with result for trustworthiness and expertise, multiple
regression analyses show that the non-weighted model is
best for predicting political source credibility (see table 3).
Including trustworthiness as well as expertise yields the
result that the model accounts for 56.9% of the variance in
observed source credibility (measured at the combination of
observed trustworthiness and expertise as mentioned
earlier).

As indicated by the correlation analyses, the weighted
averages turned out to have less predictive power in a
similar regression analysis.
Although the multiple regression analysis shows that the
overall, non-weighted scales represented the best model for
predicting political trustworthiness, the model yields a
significantly more optimistic prediction of trustworthiness
than the observed trust (predicted M=3.08, observed
M=2.94, t=2.213, df (242), p = 0.028). However, although
somewhat over-optimistic, the model enjoys a good fit with
the pattern of individual respones.

Political epistemic expertise
Following Madsen and Clickard (in review) only one model
(including all 25 items as reported above) was available for
the analysis of expertise. Analyses were carried out in the
same manner as shown above for trustworthiness.

Weighted and non-weighted scales: epistemic
expertise
As with political trustworthiness, the model for epistemic
expertise overestimates the likelihood of expertise of
election candidates (predicted M=3.45, observed M=3.13,
t=4.986, df(242), p < 0.001). A Pearson correlation shows
that the predicted expertise enjoys significant correlation
with the observed individual data (0.651, p < 0.001). A
multiple regression analysis shows that the items account
for a reasonable amount of the variance (adjusted R2=.422).
Although performing reasonably well, the epistemic
expertise items are less predictive of observed epistemic
expertise of election candidates than the four summated
scales in the case of trustworthiness.

Political source credibility
In the literature, source credibility was defined as an
amalgamation of trustworthiness and epistemic expertise. In
order to determine the predictive potential for politial source
credibility, the data from both elements need to be
considered in unison. In order to predict source credibility,
scales and estimations for trustworthiness as well as
expertise were incorporated.

The stepwise regression model takes in trustworthiness as
the first explanatory variable. Due to multicollinarity this
has the effect that the independent impact of expertise
becomes quite small. Nonetheless, expertise still contributes
significantly to the change of the variance explained (p =
.014).
The predicted mean of the overall trust model (nonweighted) does not differ significantly from the observed
mean for political source credibility (predicted M: 3.08,
observed M: 3.04, t = 0.725, df (242), p = .469). A Pearson
correlation shows a significant correlation between the
predicted value and the observation (.749, p < 0.001), This
shows a good fit with the observed pattern of individual
responses. Overall epistemic expertise also enjoys a good
correlation with the observed pattern (.668, p < 0.001).
Although not the best model, the weighted average
overall prediction represents the most ‘complete’ model, as
it takes into account all items and their relative weights. It is
worth briefly summarizing its relationship with the observed
data. The weighted model overestimates the credibility of
election candidates (predicted M=3.27, observed M=3.04,
t=4.227, df (242), p < 0.001). It enjoys a good, but less
strong correlation with individual responses (Pearson
correlation, .719, p < 0.001). Finally, it accounts for less of
the variance than the trust model (adjusted R2=.517).

General discussion
The study examines the predictive potential of the Political
Inventory of Credibility developed in Madsen and Clickard
(in review) that describes source credibility in the USA as a
product of trustworthiness (defined as capability,
consistency and closeness, egotism and opportunism, and
communal commitment) and epistemic expertise (defined as
a single factor). The 56 items from the inventory were
presented to respondents who provided subjective
estimations the likelihood of each item as well as how
important each item is to that particular indivdual. The
predictions from these items were compared with general

1473

5

estimations of how trustworthy and expert respondents felt
election candidates were.
Alternative models were developed to account for each
element (trustworthiness and epistemic expertise) as well as
an overall prediction of political source credibility. The
findings support the item inventory, as the models account
for a good amount of the variance (up to 56.9%). The
models have a significant fit with individual responses
(Pearson correlations between .651 and .749, all ps < 0.001).
The non-weighted models proved to be the strongest in
accounting for the variance in observed trustworthiness,
expertise, and source credibility. The analyses suggest that
the four trustworthiness factors identified in Madsen and
Clickard are apt in describing political source credibility for
election candidates in the USA. The items identified for
epistemic expertise are less apt (although the multiple
regression analysis of source credibility shows that these do
contribute to improve the model). The study points to the
need to develop a method to explore the relationship
between general cognitive models and culture- and domainspecific concepts.

example of a method for developing micro-descriptive
predictive models of complex phenomena that can be
applied to a variety of domains such as politics, public
health campaigns, and so forth. In other words, the study
suggests a method that might provide a clearer insight into
what may and may not be a persuasive messenger from
domain to domain, from culture to culture. On a larger note,
this suggests that humans’ perception of information and of
others are guided by the situation in which they manifest
themselves rather than by abstract philosophical principles.

Likert-type scale and probabilistic estimations
The elicitation of the likelihood and importance of each item
was obtained through a five-point Likert-type scale (1-5)
rather than a probabilistic scale (0-1)9. Given the fact that a
Bayesian model was developed to provide a normative
prediction of the likelihood of source credibility, this is a
potentially limiting element of the study, as the elicitation
was made in a less gradient manner. The models might have
enjoyed a better fit with the data if sliding, probabilistic
scales were used for item estimations instead of the LikertType scale employed here.

The general and the specific: Placing a model
In recent years, cognitive psychological models of reasoning
grounded in Bayesian rationality have been developed to
account for how humans make sense of argumentation,
information, and source credibility. For the latter, the model
set out in Bovens and Hartmann (2003) and further
developed by others (e.g. Hahn et al., 2012), defines source
credibility as an amalgamation of trustworthiness and
epistemic expertise. Although desirable and with a good fit
with the data, these models represent a general description
of a complex phenomenon. As shown in Madsen and
Clickard (in review), concepts such as trustworthiness are
influenced by the domain in which they manifest (and,
presumably, by the culture as well). That is, factors that
make a person trustworthy in one domain might well render
her untrustworthy in another depending on domain and
culture. Thus, although the models may be generalisable, the
elements and factors of the models need to be grounded
when applied to a specific situation. This calls for the
development of a methodology to apply general models to
specific situations driven by data of the particular domain in
a particular cultural context. In political campaigning, such
a requirement has already been acknowledged through the
advent of micro-targeted campaigning in which persuasion
and influence is directed specifically at individual targets
instead of large groups. For this, concrete conceptualisations
of general models are developed through data.
Trustworthiness as described in the aforementioned
managements and political literature (Colquitt et al., 2007)
provides an important step in this direction, as they show
the different instantiation of the same concepts in different
domains. The current study goes beyond these studies, as it
makes use of these descriptive factors to predict how
credible a political source normatively should be given the
items in the inventory. As such, the study functions as an

Future research
The theoretical foundation for the present study is drawn
from a formal and normative Bayesian model that has been
applied to source credibility in reasoning and argumentation
theory (e.g. Bovens & Hartmann, 2003; Harris et al., in
press). The current study tests aspects that have been
developed to describe source credibility in a specific domain
and culture (politics in the USA). It would be fascinating to
explore the predictive potential of the aspects of source
credibility and their argumentative convincingness in a
reasoning paradigm used in Bayesian argumentation studies.
That is, to test the persuasive potential of different election
candidates given differences in the above factors This would
provide a concrete reasoning task that would point to a
domain-dependent application of the formal model in which
the posterior degree of belief would depend on the source
credibility of the speaker (as defined by the concete factors).
This would be an interesting amendment to and application
of the paradigm explored in Harris et al. (in press).

Concluding remarks
The study suggests the predictive potential of domain-bound
aspects of political trustworthiness and epistemic expertise
in the USA to determine the source credibility of election
candidates. In the real world, source credibility is bound to
be more complex, but the findings suggest that the aspects
are indeed related to political source credibility in the USA.
In a larger psychological context, the study embodies a
method for applying a general Bayesian model of source
credibility to a specific domain and culture in order to
describe and predict key aspects of persuasion. Whether
9

The observed ratings of trustworthiness and expertise (against
which the models were measured) were elicited probabilistically.

1474

6

such domain-and data-driven methods can be employed in
other areas of persuasion remains to be explored in future
research.
In conclusion, the study strongly supports the factors
identified for political trustworthiness in the USA,
somewhat supports the items identified for political
epistemic expertise in the USA, and more generally points
the way for a data-driven approach to situate general
cognitive models of reasoning in specific domains in
specific cultures.

Acknowledgments
The research is supported by The Danish Council of
Independent Research, DFF – 1329-00021B. I am grateful
to professor Mike Oaksford for very useful comments on
earlier drafts.

References
Birnbaum, M. H., Wong, R., & Wong, L. K. (1976).
Combining information from sources
that vary in
credibility. Memory and Cognition, 4, 330-336.
Bovens, L. & Hartmann, S. (2003) Bayesian epistemology,
Oxford: Oxford University Press
Braunsberger, K., & Munch, J. M. (1998). Source expertise
versus experience effects in hospital advertising. Journal
of Services Marketing, 12, 23-38.
Brinol, P., & Petty, R. E. (2009). Source factors in
persuasion: A self-validation approach. European Review
of Social Psychology, 20, 49-96
Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information
processing and the use of source versus message cues in
persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
39, 752-766.
Colquitt, J. A., Scott, B. A. & LePine, J. A. (2007) Trust,
Trustworthiness, and Trust Propensity: A Meta-Analytic
Test of Their Unique Relationships With Risk Taking and
Job Performance, Journal of Applied Psychology 92 (4),
909-927
Corner, A., Hahn, U. & Oaksford, M. (2011) The
psychological mechanism of the slippery slope argument.
Journal of Memory & Language 64, 133-152
Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P. & Beninger, A. (2011) The
dynamics of warmth and competence judgments, and their
outcomes in organizations, Research in Organizational
Behavior 31, 73-98
Fiske, Susan T., Cuddy, A. J. C. & Click, P. (2007)
Universal dimensions of social cognition: warmth and
competence, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11 (2), 77-83
Flores, F. & Solomon, R. C. (1998) Creating trust, Business
Ethics Quarterly 8, 205–232
Hahn, U., Harris, A. J. L., & Corner, A. (2009) Argument
content and argument source: An exploration, Informal
Logic 29, 337-367
Hahn, U., Oaksford, M., & Harris, A. J. L. (2012)
Testimony and argument: A Bayesian perspective. In F.
Zenker (Ed.), Bayesian Argumentation (pp. 1538). Dordrecht: Springer.

Harris, P. L., & Corriveau, K. H. (2011). Young children’s
selective trust in informants. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B, 366, 1179-1187.
Harris, A. J. L., Hahn, U., Madsen, J. K. & Hsu, A. S. (in
press) The Appeal to Expert Opinion: Quantitative
support for a Bayesian Network Approach, Cognitive
Science
Harris, A., Hsu, A. & Madsen, J. K. (2012) Because Hitler
did it! Quantitative tests of Bayesian argumentation using
Ad Hominem, Thinking & Reasoning 18 (3), 311-343
Lagnado, D.A., Fenton, N., Neil, M. (2013). Legal idioms: a
framework for evidential reasoning. Argument and
Computation, 4, 46-63.
Madsen, J. K. & Clickard, B. (in review) Political source
credibility in the USA: Development of the Political
Inventory Credibility (PIC 56)
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (2007) Bayesian Rationality:
The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Paolacci, G., Chandler, J., & Ipeirotis, P. G. (2010) Running
experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk, Judgement
and Decision Making 5, 411–419
Petty, R. E. & Cacioppo, J. T. (1984) Source Factors and the
Elaboration Likelihood Model of Persuasion, Advances in
Consumer Research 11, 668-672
Pornpitakpan, C. (2004). The persuasiveness of source
credibility  : A critical review of five decades’ evidence.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34, 243-281.
Schum, D. A. (1981). Sorting out the effects of witness
sensitivity and response-criterion placement upon the
inferential value of testimonial evidence. Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance, 27, 153-196.
Schum, D. A. (1994). The evidential foundations of
probabilistic reasoning. New York: Wiley.
Walton, D. (1997). Appeal to Expert Opinion: Arguments
from Authority. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State
University Press.
Willis, J. and Todorov, A. (2006) First impressions: making
up your mind after a 100-ms exposure to a face,
Psychological Science 17 (7), 592–598
Wells, G. L., & Olson, E. A. (2003). Eyewitness testimony.
Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 277-295.

1475

