Moral Dynamics In Everyday Life: How Does Morality Evolve In Time?
Albert Barque-Duran, Emmanuel M. Pothos, James M. Yearsley & James A. Hampton
Department of Psychology, City University London
London, EC1V 0HB UK
albert.barque-duran@city.ac.uk

Abstract

but rather to a reasonable level of moral behavior for that
individual. Ethical and unethical acts respectively elevate
and depress the moral self-image. Moral balancing
researchers argue that when the moral self-image exceeds
the moral-aspiration level, the individual feels “licensed” to
engage in more self-interested, immoral, or antisocial
behavior (moral licensing). When the moral self-image is
below that level, people tend to experience emotional
distress (Higgins, 1987) and become motivated to enact
some corrective behavior (i.e., moral compensation). In
contrast to Moral Balancing, Moral Consistency (e.g.,
Thomas & Batson, 1981) suggests that after engaging in an
ethical or unethical act, individuals are more likely to
behave in the same fashion later on. This pattern is
explained in terms of a psychological need to maintain one’s
self-concept (Aronson & Carlsmith, 1962), self-perception
effects (Bem, 1972), or the use of behavioral consistency as
a decision heuristic (e.g., Cialdini et al., 1995).
Cornelissen et al. (2013) considered some conditions
under which each pattern of moral behavior can occur. An
individual’s ethical mind-set (Outcome-based vs. Rulebased) moderates the impact of an initial ethical or unethical
act on the likelihood of behaving ethically on a subsequent
occasion and, thus, affects the pattern of moral behavior.
The idea of ethical mind-sets comes from two frameworks
on moral philosophy: consequentialism and deontology
(Singer, 1991). Past work has demonstrated that this
distinction is not exclusively philosophical, but that
individuals consider it meaningful when reflecting on their
behavior (Uhlmann et al., 2009).
A consequentialist perspective (Outcome-based mind-set)
considers whether an act is or not morally right, depending
on the consequences of that act (“because it benefitted/hurt
other people”). By contrast, a deontological perspective
(Rule-based mind-set) implies that what justifies an act is its
conformity to a moral norm (“because an ethical norm or
principle was followed”), i.e., principles that impose duties
and obligations. An outcome-based mind-set is thought to
facilitate Moral Balancing; a rule-based mind-set facilitates
Moral Consistency (Cornelissen et al. 2013).
One consequence of considering the role of moral selfimage in moral behavior is that it forces one to think of
moral choices as a sequence, rather than in temporal
isolation. Moral and immoral actions occur in the context of
prior moral and immoral actions and the idea of moral selfimage provides a connecting thread across these instances.
All the relevant findings so far have been produced using an
experimental paradigm based on a 2-stage scenario: a

Recent research on moral dynamics (the processes and
phenomena –collective or individual– by which moral
behavior and moral attitudes emerge, evolve, spread, erode or
disappear) shows that an individual’s ethical mind-set (i.e.,
outcome-based vs. rule-based) moderates the impact of an
initial ethical or unethical act regarding the likelihood of
behaving ethically on a subsequent occasion. More
specifically, an outcome-based mind-set facilitates Moral
Balancing (behaving ethically or unethically decreases the
likelihood of engaging in the same type of behavior later),
whereas a rule-based mind-set facilitates Moral Consistency
(engaging in an ethical or unethical behavior increases the
likelihood of engaging in the same type of behavior later).
Our objective was to look at the evolution of moral choice
across a series of scenarios and so explore if these moral
patterns (Balancing vs. Consistency) are maintained over
time. The results of three studies showed that Moral
Balancing is not maintained over time. On the other hand,
Moral Consistency could be maintained over time, if the
mind-set was reinforced before making a new moral
judgment (but not otherwise).
Keywords: Prosocial Choices; Moral Behavior; Ethical
Mind-sets; Ethical Behavior; Decision Making.

Introduction
How do individuals deal with the ethical uncertainty in their
lives? People are confronted with a vast amount of moral
dilemmas to resolve, such as donating to charities,
volunteering, recycling, buying fair trade products, or
donating blood. People have to regulate their moral selfimage while pursuing self-interest. Studies on moral selfregulation have convincingly demonstrated that one’s recent
behavioral history is an important factor in shaping one’s
current moral conduct (Monin & Jordan, 2009) and two
different effects have been reported: Moral Balancing and
Moral Consistency.
Moral Balancing (Nisan, 1991) suggests that engaging in
an ethical or unethical behavior at one point in time reduces
the likelihood of engaging in that form of behavior again in
a subsequent situation (e.g., Merritt, Effron, & Monin,
2010). To explain this type of behavior, it has been argued
that individuals tune their actions in such a way that their
moral self-image (which represents individuals’ moment-tomoment perception of their degree of morality) fluctuates
around a moral-aspiration level or equilibrium (e.g., Jordan,
Mullen, & Murnighan, 2011). It is said that an individual’s
moral-aspiration level does not equate to moral perfection

154

manipulation part and a response part. As our aim was to
understand how the Moral Balancing and Moral
Consistency behaviors evolve in time (we call this moral
dynamics), we used a novel experimental paradigm,
involving 5 stages, based on previous successful techniques:
participants received two manipulations at the beginning of
the experiment: (a) one to induce them to adopt a specific
mind-set (outcome-based vs. rule-based) and (b) another to
recall an action of a particular morality (ethical vs.
unethical). Then, they were presented with a series of moral
scenarios (5 stages) that were used to measure the likelihood
of engaging in a prosocial behavior. This is the first study to
look at the evolution of moral choice across a series of
scenarios.
Our objective was to explore the hypothesis that mind-set,
Moral Balancing and Moral Consistency are maintained
over time (indeed, otherwise, it would be hard to appreciate
their psychological significance). We know from previous
research that mind-set can influence relatively immediate
moral behavior (Cornelissen et al. 2013), but it remains
unknown whether mind-sets can be sustained over time and
so have a persistent influence on moral behavior.
The conflicting hypotheses regarding how moral behavior
evolves in time can be visualized as a sequence of moral
stages. We called the ‘Zig-Zag pattern’ the idealized pattern
for a Moral Balancing behavior. By analogy, we called ‘Flat
pattern’ the idealized pattern for a Moral Consistency
behavior. We then used these idealized patterns to motivate
the analyses for the results obtained in Experiments 2 and 3.
For Moral Balancing, an initial ethical manipulation (such
as recall of an ethical action) at Stage 0 should be followed
at the next stage by an unethical choice. However at the
subsequent stage, the previous unethical choice will now
promote a more ethical one. The result is a predicted
oscillation between ethical and unethical choices, as the
participant tries to maintain a balance. Alternatively, Moral
Consistency should lead to the persistence of an initial
choice, as with each Stage the participant becomes more and
more entrenched in a consistent moral position, be it either
ethical or unethical.
In order to study the evolution of moral tendencies and the
perseverance of mind-sets we ran 2 experiments plus a pilot
study. In the pilot study (Experiment 1) we identified the
most suitable moral scenarios to use in the main
experiments. Experiment 2 was used to replicate the results
in the moral dynamics literature (Cornelissen et al., 2013;
Jordan, Mullen, Murningham, 2011) and to pursue the novel
question of how the tendency to behave morally evolves
over time. In Experiment 3, we explored how the two
possible patterns of moral dynamics evolve over time, with
a reinforcing manipulation before each new moral scenario,
to test if ethical mind-sets can be maintained, if reinforced.

perceived to have high levels of morality, (2) have a similar
frequency of engagement (prosocial behavior) and (3) be
perceived similarly in terms of emotionality, that is, they
would produce a similar affective reaction.

Participants
Twenty experimentally naïve students at City University
London received course credit for participating in the study.

Materials and Procedure
The experiment, designed in Qualtrics, lasted approximately
15 minutes. Eleven novel moral scenarios were initially
created. For each scenario, we tested the perceived morality
of the choice of actions using a 7-point scale: -3=very
immoral, 3=very moral (How moral do you think this
behavior is?), and the prosocial behavior measured as the
likelihood of engaging in an (un)ethical behavior on a 7point scale: 1=very unlikely, 7=very likely; (Jordan, Mullen,
et al., 2011). Participant responses on perceived morality
and likelihood of engagement were the main dependent
variables in our pilot. Also, we tested the perceived
emotionality of the scenarios presented, measured with the
(SAM) Self-Assessment Manikin (Bradley & Lang 1994).
We chose the five scenarios with the highest scores in
perceived morality and with similar (intermediate) scores in
likelihood of engagement and perceived emotionality.

Experiment 2
The objectives here were twofold. First, we wanted to
replicate the results in the moral dynamics literature, that an
Outcome-based mind-set leads to Moral Balancing, whereas
a Rule-based mind-set leads to Moral Consistency. The
motivation to do so was to validate the experimental
approach. Second, Experiment 2 employed a multi-stage
procedure, so allowing us to pursue the novel question of
how the tendency to behave morally evolves over time. The
experiment lasted approximately 35 minutes.

Participants
A total of 200 participants, all of them US residents, were
recruited on-line and received $0.90 for doing the task.

Design and Procedure
The experiment was designed in Qualtrics and run on
Amazon Mechanical Turk. Ethical mind-set (outcome-based
vs. rule-based) and the ethicality of an initial recalled act
(ethical vs. unethical) were both manipulated between
participants. The induction of ethical mind-sets was the
same as used in Cornelissen et al. (2013). To induce the
appropriate mind-set, we provided instructions that defined
ethicality as either a function of consequences or in terms of
rule compliance, and then provided three prototypical
examples. Subsequently, we asked participants to provide
an example of a behavior—not necessarily their own—that

Pilot Study – Experiment 1
The objective of the pilot study was to identify five suitable
moral scenarios for the main experiments. We were looking
for five moral scenarios such that they would (1) be

155

was ethical or unethical, because of either its consequences
or its rule compatibility (depending on condition). This
procedure aimed to induce the intended mind-set in
participants, before they finally reflected on their memory
of the last action with moral valence.
There were therefore four conditions: (1)OutcomeBased/Ethical recall, (2)Outcome-Based/Unethical recall,
(3)Rule-Based/Ethical recall and (4)Rule-Based/Unethical
recall. In the first one, our participants were instructed to
think about a behavior that was ethical (“because it
benefitted other people”). In the second condition,
participants were instructed to think about a behaviour that
was unethical (“because it hurt other people”). In the third
condition, participants thought about a behavior that was
ethical (“because you followed an ethical norm or
principle”) and in the fourth condition, participants were
instructed to think about a behavior that was unethical
(“because you did not follow an ethical norm or principle”).
We used Prosocial Behavior, as in previous related work,
as the dependent variable. After the manipulation (STAGE
0), participants completed a filler task (10 trivia questions ≈
1.6min per filler task) before rating their likelihood of
engaging in a prosocial behavior (STAGE 1) and then
repeated the same procedure until STAGE 5. The order of
presentation of the moral scenarios on each stage, as well as
the filler tasks, were randomized for each participant.

Figure 1: Mean Prosocial Behavior in STAGE 1. Error bars
represent SE.
Moral Dynamics: Evidence for Moral Balancing.
We ran a mixed two-way ANOVA with Type of Ethical
Recall and Stage (1-5) as independent variables. Minimally,
Moral Balancing would be evidenced by no main effect of
Recall, but a significant interaction between Recall and
Stage. There was a main effect of Type of Ethical Recall,
F(1,25) = 13.1, p < .001, no significant effect of stage, F <
1, and a significant interaction between the two factors,
F(4,100)=5.57, p < .01. Inspection of Figure 2 makes it clear
that the interaction is just a result of prosocial choice
converging towards an average level by Stage 2, after which
it flattens out across the two conditions of ethical recall.

Results and Discussion
Replication of Previous Studies.
As predicted, when given an Outcome-based mindset, the
recall of an unethical act led to Moral Balancing and an
increased intention to perform the moral action (Figure 1).
When given a Rule-based mindset, the reverse pattern was
observed. This result was confirmed in the ANOVA, which
showed a significant interaction between Type of Mind-set
and Type of Ethical Recall, F(1,44) = 7.12, p < 0.01, but no
main effect of Type of Mind-set, nor of Recall, (both F < 1).
Independent samples t-tests were employed to explore the
interaction. In the outcome-based mind-set condition,
participants who recalled an unethical act were more likely
to engage in a prosocial behavior (M = 4.54, SD = 1.66),
than those who recalled an ethical act (M = 3.82, SD =
1.69), t(91) = −2.06, p = .04. In other words, participants
with an Outcome-based mind-set showed a Moral Balancing
effect. By contrast, in the Rule-based mind-set condition,
participants who recalled an ethical act were more likely to
engage in a prosocial behavior (M = 4.36, SD = 1.68) than
those who recalled an unethical act (M = 3.6, SD = 1.74),
t(93) = 2.14, p = .03. In other words, these participants
showed a Moral Consistency effect.

2: Evolution of Prosocial Behavior (Outcome Based
Mind-set) in Experiment 2. Error bars represent SE.
We then analyzed the evolution of prosocial behavior
between STAGES [1-2] to see if, at least, the Moral
Balancing pattern was maintained for just one more stage,
apart from [0-1]. A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with Type of Ethical Recall and Stage as independent
variables indicated a main effect of Recall, F(1,25)=23.2, p
< .01, and no main effect of Stage, F(1,25) < 1. The results
also revealed a significant interaction between Type of
Ethical Recall and Stage, F(1,25) = 12.0, p = .002. So, as
above, there was little evidence for Moral Balancing.
Finally, we wanted to know whether the data at each stage
showed any evidence of a residual effect of Type of Ethical
Recall factor after STAGE 1. We ran an ANOVA with
STAGES [2-5] and Recall as independent variables. The
effect of Recall approached significance, F(1,25) = 3.41 p =
.077, but there was no main effect of stage, F < 1, and no

156

Experiment 3

significant interaction between the two factors, F(3,75) < 1.
Therefore, the interaction seen in the previous analysis,
STAGES [1-5], is explained by the change from STAGE 1
to STAGE 2 and disappears after that.
Overall, the results show that Moral Balancing was not
observed in this experiment, beyond the initial
manipulation. The conclusion is that the ‘Zig-Zag pattern’
was only observed in STAGES [0-1], but not maintained
over time, in contrast to the idealized prediction. Instead, it
appears that the evolution of prosocial behavior converged
to a neutral level of morality (Figure 2).

In Experiment 2, after an initial mind-set induction and
ethical recall, we found that the anticipated patterns of
moral dynamics were not maintained. There are two
possible explanations. First, the theory linking mind-set,
(un)ethical recall, and ethical choice is incorrect or
incomplete. Second, perhaps the mind-set induction
attenuates rapidly with time, so that, after the initial stages,
participants can no longer be assumed to be in a specific
mind-set. Experiment 3 examines this second possibility.
The experiment lasted approximately 40 minutes.

Moral Dynamics: Evidence for Moral Consistency.
In Figure 3, we can see how the ‘Flat pattern’ was broadly
evident between STAGES [0-1]; as noted above
(Replication of Previous Studies).

Participants
A total of 206 participants, all of them US residents, were
recruited and received $1 for doing the task.

Design and Procedure
The experiment was designed in Qualtrics and run on
Amazon Mechanical Turk. The same procedure was
followed as in Experiment 2, but we introduced a new
manipulation (the re-evaluation process), in which
participants were asked to reflect on their last moral choice,
in order to reinforce their mind-set. This reinforcing
manipulation was similar to the one at the beginning of the
experiment (manipulation of the mind-set + un(ethical)
recall). Participants followed the same steps as in
Experiment 2, but justifying their choices, after their
response, at each stage. The order of presentation of the
moral scenarios on each stage, as well as the filler tasks,
were randomized for each participant.

Figure 3: Evolution of Prosocial Behavior (Rule Based
Mind-set) in Experiment 2. Error bars represent SE.
Regarding the evolution between STAGES [1-5], we ran a
two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Type of
Ethical Recall and Stage on likelihood of Prosocial
Behavior. Minimally, Moral Consistency would be
evidenced by a main effect of Recall, no main effect of
Stage, and no interaction between Recall and Stage. There
was indeed a main effect of Recall in Prosocial Behavior,
F(1,28) = 7.02, p = .013, but also a significant interaction
between Recall and Stage, F(4,112) = 8.07, p < .01. Note,
there was no main effect of Stage, F(4,112) = 1.64, p = .170.
The pattern converged to a neutral point and did not remain
attached to the low or high levels of (un)ethicality.
Finally, we wanted to know whether the data across stages
showed any evidence of a residual effect of the Type of
Ethical Recall factor, after STAGE 1. We ran an ANOVA
with STAGES [2-5] and Recall. There was no main effect
of Recall, no significant effect of Stage, and no interaction
between the two factors, (all F < 1). Therefore, the main
effect seen in the previous analysis, STAGES [1-5], is
explained by the change from STAGE 1 to STAGE 2 and
subsequently disappears.
The conclusion is that the ‘Flat pattern’, as in the
idealized prediction, was maintained only for STAGES [01]. Prosocial behavior across the rest of stages converged to
a neutral level of morality; thus, Moral Consistency was not
maintained over time (Figure 3).

Results and Discussion
Moral Dynamics: Evidence for Moral Balancing.
We ran a two-way ANOVA, as in Experiment 2, with Type
of Ethical Recall and Stage on the dependent variable. As
before, Moral Balancing would be minimally evidenced by
no main effect of Recall, but a significant interaction.
Instead, there was a main effect of Recall, F(1,28) = 40.4,
p<.01, and no effect of Stage, F < 1. The results also
indicated a significant interaction between Recall and Stage,
F(4,112) = 7.54, p<.01.
We then analyzed the evolution between STAGES [1-2]
to see if, at least, the Moral Balancing pattern was
maintained for just one more stage. A two-way ANOVA
with two within participant factors, Type of Ethical Recall
and Stage, revealed a similar pattern of results: a main effect
of Recall, F(1,28) = 44.5, p<.01, no effect of Stage, F < 1,
and a significant interaction between Recall and Stage,
F(1,28) = 30.9, p<.01.

157

F(4,116) = 5.68, p<.01, which is not consistent with a ‘pure’
form of Moral Consistency.
Then, we ran an ANOVA with STAGES [2-5] and Type
of Ethical Recall to see if the Moral Consistency pattern was
maintained over time. There was a main effect of Recall,
F(1,29) = 18.88, p<.01, no significant effect of Stage, F < 1,
and a non significant interaction between the two, F < 1.
The conclusion is that the ‘Flat pattern’ was sustained to
the low or high levels of (un)ethicality throughout STAGES
[0-5], but not in the levels predicted in an idealized pattern.
Moral Consistency was a behavior broadly maintained over
time (with a tendency to converge to a neutral level of
morality), if a re-evaluation process (manipulation of the
mind-set + un(ethical) recall) was carried out before
confronting each new moral scenario (Figure 5).

Figure 4: Evolution of Prosocial Behavior (Outcome Based
Mind-set) in Experiment 3. Error bars represent SE.
Finally, we asked whether the data at each stage showed
any evidence of a residual effect of Type of Ethical Recall
factor after STAGE 1. We ran an ANOVA with STAGES
[2-5] and Recall. There was a main effect of Recall, F(1,28)
= 9.37, p<.01, no significant effect of stage, F < 1, and a non
significant interaction between the two factors, F < 1.
Therefore, the interaction seen in the previous analysis,
STAGES [1-5], is explained by the change from STAGE 1
to STAGE 2 and disappears after that.
The conclusion is that the ‘Zig-Zag pattern’ was only
approximately observed across STAGES [0-1]. Thus,
compared with an idealized pattern, Moral Balancing was
not a behavior maintained over time. Instead, as in
Experiment 2, the evolution of the behavior converged to a
neutral level of morality (Figure 4). In fact, as in
Experiment 2 there was a tendency (statistically significant)
for participants to settle into a Moral Consistency pattern
from Stage 1 onwards, regardless of the reminders that had
been introduced in the present experiment.

Discussion
This is the first study to look at the evolution of moral
choice across a series of scenarios. Five scenarios were
tested, embedded in a task with many fillers, to mask the
design of the experiment. In two experiments, we provided
new empirical support for the hypothesis that ethical mindsets moderate how an individual’s behavioral history shapes
his or her ethical behavior. An outcome-based mind-set is
meant to lead to moral-balancing effects, whereas a rulebased mind-set to moral consistency. Furthermore, the three
experiments shed some light on the persistence of these
ethical mind-sets and on the evolution of moral dynamics,
exploring whether moral patterns, such as Moral Balancing
and Moral Consistency, can be maintained over time. When
the manipulation of Mind-set and Recall was just made at
the start, there was a quick regression to neutral
performance. When the manipulation was reinforced before
each moral choice, then one pattern of behavior was
sustained, while the other was not.
Moral Balancing, or as we call it, the ‘Zig-Zag pattern’,
was only observed in the first stage of the experiments. This
type of behavior converged to a neutral level of morality
over time, even when the mind-set was reinforced at every
stage, before making a new moral judgment (Experiment 3).
We conclude that Moral Balancing is not a behavior
maintained over time. However, some would argue that
moral licensing effects should not persist in an oscillating
patter over time. Imagine a less ethical behavior at t0 that is
compensated by a more ethical one at t1, and vice versa, an
ethical behavior at t0 that gives the license to an individual
to behave less ethically at t1. At that point, balance is
‘restored’, and, the argument goes, it would be difficult to
make predictions regarding further effects on behavior at t2
and beyond.
On the other hand, participants in the Rule-based
condition, approximated an idealized pattern of Moral
Consistency behavior, when a re-evaluation process
(manipulation of the mind-set + (un)ethical recall) was
included, before confronting each new moral scenario. In
other words, there was some evidence that Moral
Consistency could be maintained over time, if the mind-set

Moral Dynamics: Evidence for Moral Consistency.
Regarding the evolution between STAGES [1-5] in the
Moral Consistency case, we ran a two-way ANOVA with
two within participant factors, Type of Ethical Recall and
Stage on the dependent variable.

Figure 5: Evolution of Prosocial Behaviors (Rule Based
Mind-set) in Experiment 3. Error bars represent SE.
Moral Consistency would be minimally evidenced by a
main effect of Recall, but not a significant interaction. There
was a main effect of Recall on Prosocial Behavior, F(1,29)
= 53.2, p<.01, but not stage, F(4,116) = 2.02, p=.096. Also,
the interaction between Recall and Stage was significant,

158

was reinforced before each moral judgment. Either way, we
overall conclude that ethical mind-sets (and their influence
on prosocial choice) decay, unless reinforced continuously.
Moral Consistency is perhaps a more stable pattern of
mind-set, since if a person is led into seeing himself/herself
as consistent, it is perhaps more natural to remain consistent
–that is the very nature of consistency. Conversely, Moral
Balancing would seem to require the keeping of a running
total of one’s positive and negative acts, and once the initial
stages are past, this tally-keeping may prove complex to
maintain. It is easier to recall that one has consistently
chosen the prosocial or anti-moral path and so keep that on,
than it is to recall that one’s last choice was pro, so the next
one should be anti. This difference in stability might also
account for the tendency in both Experiments 2 and 3 for
the Moral Balancing group to show a continuing Moral
Consistency after their initial response at Stage 1. Although
all the data tended towards the middle of the scale, there
was a residual difference between the Ethical Recall and
Unethical Recall groups that persisted to the end.
Our results question the importance of the concept of
mind-sets in understanding prosocial choice, since, if such
mind-sets cannot be maintained across more than a few
choices, what value could they have in understanding the
relevant behaviors? We see three directions for future
research in addressing this important question.
First, it is possible that an alternative mind-set induction
procedure will reveal more lasting influences of mind-sets
on prosocial choice.
Second, a related possibility is that the measurement of
prosocial choice was inadequate. Perhaps people’s prosocial
choices do reflect patterns of consistency or balancing,
across time, but such patters can be revealed in realistic time
scales of days or weeks, not within the limited duration of a
psychology experiment. Also, there are merits and demerits
of the different approaches regarding how we ask
participants to respond to scenarios. We used a 7-point scale
because it let us explore our hypotheses. Some would say
that individuals who want to establish a balance between
moral motives and selfish motives might achieve that by
staying safely in the midrange of the scale. So balance can
easily be achieved within each moral scenario, removing the
necessity to balance over time. It may be the case that more
interesting results would emerge with binary answering
options (an ethical vs. an unethical alternative). However,
the scale we opted to use did lead us to a particular
interesting conclusion, namely that participants do neither
Moral Balancing nor Moral Consistency, but rather achieve
a middle ground.
Third, it is possible that the idea of manipulating mindsets directly is flawed. In other words, perhaps there is a
reality to the proposal that there are different mind-sets and
these mind-sets can impact on prosocial choice, but perhaps
these are stable individual characteristics. That is, people
can have a particular mind-set, but the mind-set cannot be
easily altered experimentally (at least in an effective way).
All these issues reveal considerable challenges (and

corresponding exciting directions) for future work,
regarding our current understanding of moral judgments.

Ackowledgements
This work was supported by Leverhulme Trust grant RPG2013-004 and by Air Force Office of Scientific Research,
Air Force Material Command, grant FA8655-13-1-3044.
The U.S Government is authorized to reproduce reprints
notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon.

References
Aronson, E., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1962). Performance
expectancy as a determinant of actual performance. The
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 65, 178–182.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology. New
York, NY: Academic Press.
Bradley, M., & Lang, P. (1994). Measuring emotion: the
self-assessment manikin and the semantic differential.
Journal of behavior therapy and experimental psychiatry,
25(1), 49-59.
Cialdini, R. B., Trost, M. R., & Newsom, J. T. (1995).
Preference for consistency: The development of a valid
measure and the discovery of surprising behavioral
implications. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69.
Cornelissen, G., Bashshur, M., Rode, J., Le Menestrel, M.
(2013). Rules or Consequences? The Role of Ethical
Mind-Sets in Moral Dynamics. Psychological Science.
Higgins, E. T. (1987). Self-discrepancy: A theory relating
self and affect. Psychological Review, 94, 319–340.
Jordan, J., Mullen, E., Murninghan, J.K. (2011). Striving for
the Moral Self: The Effects of Recalling Past Moral
Actions on Future Moral Behavior. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin.
Merritt, A., Effron, D., Moning, B.(2010). Moral SelfLicensing: When Being Good Frees Us to Be Bad. Social
& Personality Psychology Compass. 344-357.
Monin, B., & Jordan, A. H. (2009). The dynamic moral self:
A social psychological perspective. In D. Narvaez & D.
K. Lapsley (Eds.), Personality, identity, and character:
Explorations in moral psychology (pp. 341–354). New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Nisan, M. (1991). The moral balance model: Theory and
research extending our understanding of moral choice
and deviation. In W. M. Kurtines & J. L. Gewirtz (Eds.),
Handbook of moral behavior and development. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Singer, P. (1991). A companion to ethics. Oxford, England:
Blackwell Reference.
Thomas, G., & Batson, C. D. (1981). Effect of helping
under normative pressure on self-perceived altruism.
Social Psychology Quarterly, 44, 127–131.
Uhlmann, E. L., Pizarro, D. A., Tannenbaum, D., & Ditto,
P. H. (2009). The motivated use of moral principles.
Judgment and Decision Making, 4, 476–491.

159

