Motion perception of biological swarms
Adriane E. Seiffert (a.seiffert@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology, Vanderbit University
111 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37240 USA

Sean. T. Hayes (sean.t.hayes@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Vanderbilt University
400 24th Ave South, Nashville, TN 37212 USA

Caroline E. Harriott (caroline.e.harriott@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Vanderbilt University
400 24th Ave South, Nashville, TN 37212 USA

Julie A. Adams (julie.a.adams@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Vanderbilt University
400 24th Ave South, Nashville, TN 37212 USA

Abstract
Biological swarms are collections of many independent
agents who are motivated to remain clustered in a large group.
The motion of swarms, then, is complex, with the influence if
independent members within a coherent structure of the
group.
We investigated whether human perception of
biological swarms was sensitive to this internal complexity of
the group motion, as has been observed for biological motion
of single objects, such as the limbs of a walking person. In
two experiments, we tested motion detection and
discrimination of biological swarm motion compared with
scrambled, unstructured spiral and rigidly-structured
rotational motion. The results showed that discrimination of
swarms was superior to perception of scrambled swarms that
contained no structure, but was worse than discrimination of
the motion of rigid structures. These results suggest that
perception of swarms does not engage a specialized
mechanism for detecting internal structure, as is found with
other types of biological motion, but instead reflects the
properties of perception of a coherent global motion. These
results have implications for the design of human-machine
interfaces. The majority of existing human-robot swarm
interaction visualizations presents the human user with each
individual swarm member. The presented results imply that
an abstract visualization representing the general swarm
structure will perform as well, or better than visualizations of
each individual.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Vision; Perception;
Experimental research with adult humans; motion perception;
biological motion; structure from motion; swarm

Introduction
Biological swarms are a distinctive phenomenon created
by the common needs and desires of a collection of
individuals who associate with one another. Be they flocks
of birds, schools of fish or herds of cattle, swarms have
characteristic motions based on each individual’s desire to
remain with the group combined with their basic needs,
such as finding food and avoiding predators (Attanasi et al.

2014; Couzin & Krause, 2003; Couzin, 2009; Sumpter,
2010). Self-organizing principles bring about the emergence
of global motions that have distinct patterns, even while
each individual member of the swarm retains independence
(Couzin et al, 2002; Wood & Ackland, 2007; Cavagna &
Giardina, 2010). The motion of swarms can be defined as a
type of biological motion, because swarms have
characteristic patterns of motion that are defined by living
organisms in locomotion (Johansson, 1973; Hiris, 2007).
Biological motion has been considered a special category
of motion in perception research. The motion of living
organisms, including people, animals, insects and even
novel creatures, is perceived readily, even with sparse cues
(Blake & Shiffrar, 2007; Mather & West, 1993; Pyles,
Garcia, Hoffman & Grossman, 2007; Gold et al., 2008).
Johansson (1973) discovered that a minimalist display
showing only moving white dots was able to convey to an
observer the accurate understanding of a person walking, as
long as the dots reflected the location of the person’s
primary joints, such as elbows, shoulders, knees, and hips.
Research has demonstrated that perception of human
walking is effortless and automatic (Thornton & Vuong,
2004; Thornton, Rensink & Shiffrar, 2002), is possible by
newborn babies (Simion, Regolin & Bulf, 2008) and
activates specialized brain areas that are responsible for
biological motion perception (Grossman et al, 2000;
Grossman et al., 2005). Specialized perception to the motion
of the human figure may reflect the fact that one of the most
prevalent moving objects in our natural environment is other
people.
The vast majority of research on biological motion has
used motion of subparts of a single object, such as limbs of
the body or features of the face (Blake & Shiffrar, 2007).
Given the constraints of bone and joints, motion of subparts
reflects a bounded set of possibilities that reliably reflect the
underlying form. As such, it is perhaps not surprising that
normal perception of biological motion seems to depend on

2128

both the motion detection system and the form recognition
system (Thurman, Giese & Grossman, 2010). In fact, the
superior recognition of biological motion over perception of
other categories of motion has been attributed to the
contribution of the form (Hiris, 2007; Gold et al., 2008).
The motion of swarms is a type of biological motion,
because it is defined and constrained by the structure of
biological entities. However, unlike biological motion of the
human body, swarm motion has no underlying form that
rigidly determines the relationship between parts.
Individuals in a swarm behave similarly, but retain their
independence creating a motion that is uniquely organized
and free. At the same time, swarm motion is biological,
based on the interactions between living organisms
following basic rules of association that produce a coherent
global motion that seems readily recognizable. This work
investigated whether perception of swarm motion showed
the sensitivity to the structure of moving swarms and
whether this sensitivity was similar to the specialized
system of biological motion perception of the walking
human form. Developing a clear understanding of how
humans perceive biological swarms directly impacts not
only our understanding of human motion perception, but
also can impact the design of swarm visualizations.

Experiment 1: Discrimination of Swarm
motion vs Scrambled Swarm motion
To start our investigation of the perception of swarm
motion, this experiment measured motion discriminability
thresholds. If there is a specialized mechanism for detecting
swarm motion, then observers should have lower threshold
for discriminating swarm motions from one another than
discriminating the same local motions with the global
pattern of motion destroyed. Swarm motions were short
movie clips (200 frames) of a school of 256 fish that were
randomly selected from an extensive recording (over 10,000
frames) of fish schooling behavior (Couzin and colleagues,
pers. comm). Scrambled control clips were made by
randomly displacing each fish slightly, enough to destroy
the global coherency of motion that is typical for biological
swarms. In each block of eight trials, participants were
asked to memorize one randomly-selected clip and
discriminate it from another random clip in the subsequent
trials across increases of motion noise. Swarm and
scrambled motion were tested in separate blocks. This
experiment tests the basic concept that organized motion of
swarming fish is easily remembered and recognized by
human observers.

Method
Following the traditional approach of cognitive science, this
experiment tested several individuals in a repeated measures
design testing the discrimination of swarm motion
compared to the discrimination of scrambled motion.
Participants: Seventeen volunteers were recruited from the
population of Vanderbilt University undergraduate students.

Each participated for one hour in exchange for partial course
credit or $12 payment. Data from one participant was
removed prior to analysis because the participant was
unable to complete the session due to a schedule conflict.
The protocol for this and all subsequently presented
experiments was approved by the Institutional Review
Board at Vanderbilt University and follows the Declaration
of Helsinki and APA Ethics Code standards for the
Protection of Human Participants in research.
Materials and Stimuli: Visual displays were constructed
with Matlab and the Psychophysics Toolbox library
(Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) on an Mac mini with OSX
10.7.2 driving a DELL 1704FPT 17” flat screen monitor at a
resolution of 1024X768 pixel and a refresh rate of 60 Hz.
Participants viewed the stimuli from a distance of
approximately 57 cm, such that stimuli subtending 1 cm on
the screen were approximately 1 degree of visual angle.
The visual displays provided movie clips (200 frames) of
white dots (0.25 cm diameter) inside a square white frame
(22 cm X 22 cm) moving on a black background. The dots
moved as a swarm in half of the clips. The motion of each
dot was determined from an extensive recording (10,296
frames) of a school of 256 fish performing schooling
behavior provided by Dr. Iain Couzin, Professor of Ecology
and Evolutionary Biology at Princeton University (Couzin,
2009). Positions of each fish were extracted from the video
recordings and rendered in the 2D visual displays as dots.
Short clips were randomly selected without replacement
from the recording. Scrambled control clips were generated
by randomly displacing each dot. Displacements in both
horizontal and vertical position were determined by adding
or subtracting a random value between zero and one-quarter
of the width of the display (5.5 cm). Displacements were
enough to destroy the global coherency of motion that is
typical for biological swarms, but maintained the motion
path and speed of each dot. The fish motion throughout the
school is variable, thus the speed of each dot varied widely
with a mean speed of approximately 18 degrees per second
(dps) (12.5 pixels per frame) and a standard deviation of 26
dps. Typically, dots near the center of the swarm, often near
the center of the screen, moved slowly (0-2 dps), while
those at the edges moved more quickly (30-50 dps). This
pattern was not preserved in the scrambled condition,
because each dot retained its trajectory, but was randomly
displaced.
The swarm and scrambled motions were tested in separate
blocks. At the beginning of each block of eight trials,
participants memorized one randomly-selected clip and
discriminated it from other random clips in each trial in a
two-alternative temporal forced choice procedure (2ATFC).
The trials varied by the number of randomly moving dots
that were also present in the display – the motion noise.
Noise dots replaced some subset of the moving dots at
different proportions across trials. Noise was either 100%,
87%, 74%, 61% 48%, 35% 23% or 10% of the dots. Signal
level was 100% minus noise level. Each noise dot moved in

2129

Procedure: After providing informed consent, participants
were shown a demonstration of the visual displays,
including two swarm motions and two scrambled motions
with no visual noise. After the task was explained,
participants completed eight practice trials with either the
swarm or the scrambled motion, counter-balanced across
participants. The main experimental trials consisted of 18
blocks of eight trials. The blocks alternated between swarm
motion and scrambled motion (counter-balanced across
participants), so participants were always comparing swarm
motion to swarm motion and scrambled motion to
scrambled motion. Each block started with the exposition of
one motion clip that was the standard motion to be
memorized for that block of trials. Participants could press a
key on the keyboard to repeat the video clip and see the
standard multiple times, if they chose to do so. The
subsequent eight trials each consisted of two motion clips,
one presentation of the standard and one comparison clip
with a 0.1 second blank screen between clips. Which clip
appeared first was randomly determined for each trial. The
comparison clip was chosen randomly on each trial. Both
clips were presented at the same level of noise. All eight
levels of noise were shown in a block of trials in random
order. At the end of each trial, participants pressed one of
two keys on the keyboard to indicate whether the standard
was first or second in the trial. Feedback was immediately
provided after the key press and the next trial advanced
automatically after 1 second. Feedback was also given at the
end of each block as a percentage of correct trials per block.

Results and Discussion
The percentage of correct responses across the motion types
(Swarm and Scrambled) and the eight levels of motion noise
for 16 participants were submitted to an ANOVA. Both
main effects were statistically significant, showing that
swarm motion was discriminated better than scrambled
motion on average (Swarm M=89.3%; Scrambled
M=80.5%, F(1,15) = 56.1, p<.001), and that higher noise
produced worse discrimination performance than lower
noise (F(7,105)=44.36, p<.001). The interaction was not
statistically significant. These analyses indicate that
participants were better able to discriminate swarm
biological motion than their scrambled counterparts overall,
but do not clearly indicate of how performance with the two
motion types varied across levels of noise. Results are
shown in Figure 1.
Discrimination thresholds for each participant were
estimated separately in order to describe discrimination
differences between motion types more clearly. The
thresholds were set at the 75% correct discrimination level
by fitting a 3rd-order polynomial to the accuracy data across

Mean	  	  Proportion	  
Correct	  

a random direction along a straight path at 1.5 dps, with a
limited lifetime of 10 frames (0.167 sec), after which each
was randomly displaced and moved in a new random
direction. As such, the noise was dissimilar in speed,
trajectory or lifetime to the moving dots.

1	  
0.9	  
0.8	  
0.7	  

Swarm	  

0.6	  

Scrambled	  

0.5	  

0	  

0.2	  

0.4	  

0.6	  

0.8	  

1	  

Signal	  Level	  
Figure 1: Proportion correct motion discrimination for
swarm and scrambled swarm displays across signal level,
averaged over participants.
noise levels for each motion type. The average threshold for
the swarm motion was significantly lower than for the
scrambled motion (t(15)= -3.465, p<.005). Interpolating
from the fit functions, the results show that the swarm
motion was discriminated at threshold with only 7% signal
dots (93% noise), while scrambled motion was
discriminated at threshold with 18% signal dots (82%
noise). These analyses indicate that participants were able to
discriminate swarm biological motion at higher levels of
noise than the scrambled counterparts.
The results support the conclusion that the perception of
motion of swarming biological agents is, as a whole, greater
than the sum of its parts. As with previous research on the
perception of biological motion of human figures (Thurman,
Giese & Grossman, 2010), perception of biological swarms
benefits from the coherent organization of the parts relative
to the whole. These results are consistent with the subjective
impression, expressed by the participants, that the swarm
motion is a coherent, global motion with some deviant
members, while the scrambled motion was much less
coherent. Even though this experiment does not indicate
whether or not perception of the swarm is achieved with a
privileged mechanism, it indicates that people easily
recognize swarm motion, even with substantial visual noise.

Experiment 2: Discrimination of Swarm
motion vs Rigid and non-rigid rotation
Experiment 1 demonstrated that perception of swarm
motion benefits from the presence of the spatial relationship
between swarm members. Experiment 2 was designed to
assess the extent of this benefit. Previous research has
shown that the discrimination of biological motion, of a
human walking figure, is better than discrimination of
random motion (Hiris, 2007). This benefit to perception
seems due, for the most part, to the internal structure of the
biological form (Beintema & Lappe, 2002) as evidenced by
the similar discrimination thresholds from walking figures
and rotating geometric shapes (Hiris, 2007). If perceiving
swarm motion is accomplished with a mechanism that
readily detects structure, then observers will perform better
when discriminating the direction of a swarm’s motion as
compared to a random arrangement of dots. Also, if swarm

2130

Method
Following the traditional approach of psychophysics, this
experiment tested a few experienced individuals in an
extensive measurement of motion discrimination thresholds.
Motion discrimination thresholds were estimated for swarm
motion, unstructured spiral motion and rigidly-structured
rotation of a square.
Participants: Four experienced psychophysical observers
were recruited from the Vanderbilt Vision Research Center.
Each participated in 3-6 one-hour sessions of testing over a
period of one week. Two observers (AES and MM) were
collaborators and/or authors of this work. The other two
observers (DM and YQ) were naïve participants who
received partial course credit or payment.
Materials and Stimuli: Visual displays were constructed
with the same materials as Experiment 1. There were three
types of displays in this experiment: swarms, spirals and
squares. Swarm displays were a subset of the same short
movie clips of white dots. The selected subset of movies
were based on the overall swarm’s motion in the clip. Clips
with distinct rotational or translational motion were selected
and those with mixed or shearing motion were discarded.
Spiral displays contained randomly-placed dots that moved
on a spiral path. The position, speed and direction of the
spiral was randomly varied across trials to span the same
range of positions, speeds and directions as the swarm
motions. Square displays contained dots that moved such
that the arrangement of dots created a square that rotated
about its center. The direction of the squares’ rotation was
randomly determined as clockwise or counter-clockwise for
each trial. The position and speed of the square was
randomly varied across trials to span the same range of
speeds and positions as the swarm motions. Each dot in all
displays has a limited lifetime (approx. 0.167 sec) before it
disappeared and was replaced by another dot in a different
location.
Procedure: After providing informed consent, participants
were shown a demonstration of the visual displays, with no
visual noise. Different display types were tested in separate
blocks. The participants were asked to discriminate the
direction of motion in each block of 24 trials. The
participants responded with a key press on the number pad
indicating counter-clockwise or leftward motion with the ‘1’
key and clockwise or rightward motion with the ‘2’ key.
The trials within a block varied by the number of randomly
moving dots that were also present in the display – the
motion noise. The noise dots replaced some subset of the
moving dots at different proportions across trials, which

differed by participant. Each noise dot moved in a random
direction along a straight path at 1.5 dps, with a limited
lifetime of 10 frames (0.167 sec), after which each was
randomly displaced and moved in a new random direction.
Each participant completed 18-36 blocks of trials, or 6-12
blocks of each display type. Participants completed different
numbers of trials, because the participants differed in the
variability of their discrimination. Feedback was
immediately provided after the key press and the next trial
advanced automatically after 1 second. Feedback was also
given at the end of each block as the percentage of correct
trials for that block.

Results and Discussion
Discrimination performance for each participant was
analyzed separately in order to describe discrimination
differences between motion types more clearly. Figure 2
shows the accuracy of three participants for each condition
across signal level. For every participant, swarm motion
(blue curve) was discriminated at a level that was similar to
discrimination of the spiraling random array of dots (red
curve) and was not discriminated as well as the structured
motion of dots moving as a square (green curve).

Proportion Correct

perception is similar to biological motion perception, then
observers will perform just as well with swarms as with
highly-structured figure motion. This experiment tests the
notion that organized motion of swarming fish has structure
that is readily perceived.

Figure 2: Proportion correct motion discrimination for
swarm, spiral and square displays across signal level, shown
separately for each participant (AES, DM, MM & YQ).
Discrimination thresholds were set at the 75% correct
discrimination level by fitting a 3rd-order polynomial to the
accuracy data across noise levels for each motion type and
for each observer. The threshold for the Square motion was
lower than for the Swarm motion for every participant.
Interpolating from the fit functions, the results show that the
rotating square motion was discriminated at threshold with
only 6% signal dots (94% noise), while biological swarm
was discriminated at threshold with 12% signal dots (88%
noise). Spiral motion was discriminated at 14% signal dots
(86% noise). These analyses indicate that participants were
able to discriminate highly structured motion of the square
at lower levels of noise than the unstructured spiral or the
biological swarm.
These results do not support the hypothesis that swarm
motion is perceived with support from an underlying form,

2131

similarly to the rotating square. Instead, these results
indicate that swarm perception is perceived similarly to
perceiving organized, but unstructured motion, such as
spiral motion. Mechanisms of motion perception sensitive
to complex global patterns (Freeman & Harris, 1992; Burr,
Morrone & Vania, 1998; Barraza & Grzywacz, 2005) seem
sufficient to explain the perception of biological swarms.

making a symmetrical pattern, as in optic flow (Koenderink,
1986; Freeman & Harris, 1992; Cavanagh, 1993). Future
research on this topic is warranted to determine whether
other types of swarms besides the fish used here, other types
of tasks besides motion discrimination, or other display
types might yield different results.

General Discussion

Perception of biological swarm motion has implications for
the design of human-machine interfaces (e.g. computer
displays), used when human operators are asked to direct
robotic swarms. Biological swarms (e.g., fish (Couzin,
2009) and starlings (Attanasi et al., 2014)) consist of very
large numbers of individual entities with limited intelligence
and capabilities, but the collective demonstrates intelligent,
complex behaviors. One promising direction in the design
of robotic swarms is to create collectively intelligent groups
by emulating their biological counterparts. Humans will be
required to supervise such a swarm of robots, even while it
is not within direct line of sight and while they are executing
tasks for long durations, 8+ hours or days. The human
supervisors (Scholtz, 2003) for these robotic swarm
missions will be unable to continuously monitor the swarm
and maintain vigilance levels. Additionally, it is highly
probable that these human supervisors will be tasked with
other duties, unrelated to their swarm supervision
responsibilities that will diminish their attentional focus on
the swarm. A known limitation of human-robotic interaction
is limited number of individual robots that a single human
can supervise, the human-robot ratio problem (Yanco &
Drury, 2004). These constraints complicate the development
of methods for human-swarm interaction.
Much of the current human-swarm interaction literature,
related to the human supervising the swarm from a different
location than the swarm’s environment, focuses on
providing a visualization of each individual robot. This
rather basic visualization typically presents the robots as
miniaturized robots (McLurken et al, 2006; Humphrey,
Gordon & Adams, 2006), arrows (Kolling, Nunnally, &
Lewis 2012), or circles (Nunnally et al. 2013). Though these
displays do usually show additional information, like
communication links (Kolling, Nunnally, & Lewis 2012) or
influence vectors (Pajorová, Hluchý, & Masár 2013), they
are relatively difficult to understand quickly. Occasionally,
other visualizations are used, such as groupings of a small
number of robots that do not show individual robots or show
linkages between robots (Humphrey, Gordon & Adams,
2006). Thus, alternative visualizations are necessary to
support the number of entities associated with swarms.
The presented research provides important insights in the
human perception of biological swarms, which directly
informs the design of robotic swarm visualizations. The
results indicate that humans perceive the global motion of
the swarm. If the movement of the individual swarm
members can be abstracted to a single global motion
visualization of the swarm, it may be easier for the human
supervisor to monitor the overall swarm. It will reduce the

We investigated motion perception of biological swarms
to determine whether the inherent structure of swarm
motion was perceptible and specialized. Previous research
has found that motion perception of biological agents, when
defined as subparts of a body, is buttressed by the
recognition of the underlying form. Having no rigid form,
yet still conforming to some global regularities, swarm
motion is a unique case of biological motion. Results of
two experiments demonstrated that the spatial relations
between members of the swarm are perceived in support of
motion recognition, and, swarm motion is perceived
similarly to unstructured global motions without the benefit
of the perception of an underlying structure. These results
suggest that motion perception of swarms is supported by a
global motion system that is not specialized for the
biological nature of the individual agents and their
interaction, but instead, capitalize on the motion redundancy
from multiple individuals to code the overall pattern.

Implications for Biological Motion Literature
This study has investigated the human perception of swarm
motion to measure human sensitivity to the organized
motion of a biological swarm. Although previous studies
have investigated motion perception of biological groups,
these have mainly focused on crowd perception in which the
observer’s viewpoint is from within the group, rather than as
a distant vantage point (Sweeney, Haroz & Whitney, 2013;
Gallup, et al., 2012). Here we investigated the perception of
swarm motion where the observer oversees a display in
which each individual is a single point moving amongst the
others. Similar rendering of biological motion of the parts of
a single human figure have been used to demonstrate that
people are surprisingly good at seeing biological motion,
likely because of the well-learned underlying form (Hiris,
2007; Gold et al., 2008; Thurman, Giese & Grossman,
2010). Swarm motion offers a unique opportunity to test
motion that is biological, yet completely non-rigid, with
freedom of each individual, and, at the same time, organized
based on principles of group dynamics. Our conclusion that
swarm motion is perceived similarly to other global motion
patterns, without the benefit of an underlying form,
indicates that biological motion as a category can be divided
into form-based and non-form based.
Form-based
biological motion reaps the benefits of form perception
supporting superior performance and surprisingly effortless
perception. Non-form based biological motion, however,
may be supported by mechanisms sensitive to complex
global motions created from redundant local motions

Implications for Human-Swarm Interaction

2132

complexity of the visualization, while allowing a single
human to supervise a significantly large number of
individual robots. Further, the results imply that such an
abstract visualization, which is less computationally
demanding than displaying individual robots, may be
sufficient because perception of swarms occurs primarily at
the level of global motion. This work is part of an ongoing
investigation of several different visualizations and tasks
which are being implemented and tested on observers to
develop optimal human-swarm interaction.

Acknowledgments
This research was
N000141210987.

supported

by

ONR

Award

References
Attanasi, A., Cavagna, A., Del Castello, L., Giardina, I.,
Grigera, T., Jelić, A., Melillo, S., Parisi, L., Pohl, O.,
Shen, E., & Massimilan, V. (2014) Information transfer
and behavioural inertia in starling flocks, Nature Physics,
10(9), 691-696.
Barraza, J. F., & Grzywacz, N. M. (2005). Parametric
decomposition of optic flow by humans. Vision Research,
45, 2481–2491.
Beintema, J.A., & Lappe, M. (2002). Perception of
biological motion without local image motion.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(8),
5661–5663.
Blake, R., & Shiffrar, M. (2007). Perception of human
motion. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 47–73.
Burr, D. C., Morrone, M. C., & Vaina, L. M. (1998). Large
receptive fields for optic flow detection in humans. Vision
Research, 38, 1731–1743.
Cavanagh P. (1993). The perception of form and motion.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 3(2), 177-82.
Couzin, I. (2009). Collective cognition in animal groups.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(1), 36-43.
Couzin, I. & Krause, J. (2003) Self-organization and
collective behavior in vertebrates. Advances in the Study
of Behavior 32: 1–75
Freeman, T., & Harris, M. (1992). Human sensitivity to
expanding and rotating motion: Effects of complementary
masking and directional structure. Vision Research, 32,
81–87.
Gallup, A. C., Hale, J. J., Sumpter, D. J. T., Garnier, S.,
Kacelnik, A., Krebs, J. R. & Couzin, I. D. (2012). Visual
attention and the acquisition of information in human
crowds. PNAS, 109(19), 7245-7250.
Gold, J. E., Tadin, D., Cook, S. C., & Blake, R. (2008). The
efficiency of biological motion perception. Perception &
Psychophysics, 70(1), 88-95.
Grossman, E., Donnelly, M., Price, R., Pickens, D., Morgan,
V., Neighbor, G., et al. (2000). Brain areas involved in
perception of biological motion. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12(5), 711–720.
Grossman, E., Battelli, L., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2005).
Repetitive TMS over posterior STS disrupts perception of

biological motion. Vision Research, 45(22), 2847-2853.
Humphrey, C.M., Gordon, S.M., & Adams, J.A. (2006)
Visualization of Multiple Robots During Team Activities,
Proceedings of the 2006 Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society Annual Meeting, 651-655
Johansson, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological
motion and a model for its analysis. Perception &
Psychophysics. 14, 201–211.
Koenderink J. J. (1986). Optic flow. Vision Research, 26(1),
161-79.
Kolling, A., Nunnally, S. & Lewis, M. (2012) Towards
Human Control of Robot Swarms, Proceedings of the
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction, 89-96.
Mather, G., & West, S. (1993). Recognition of animal
locomotion from dynamic point-light displays.
Perception, 22, 759–766.
McLurkin, J., Smith, J., Frankel, J., Sotkowitz, D., Blau, D.
& Schmidt, B. (2006) Speaking Swarmish: Human-Robot
Interface Design for Large Swarms of Autonomous
Mobile Robots, Proceedings of the AAAI Spring
Symposium, Technical Report SS-06-07.
Nunnally, S., Walker, P., Chakraborty, N., Lewis, M. &
Sycara, K. (2013) Feedback in Human Robotic Swarm
Interaction, Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 516-521.
Pajorová, E., Hluchý, L. & Masár, M. (2013) 3D
Visualization of the Simulation Research Results of New
Method for Cooperative of a Group of Mobile Agents for
swarm behavior simulation, Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in
Social Networks Analysis and Mining, 1275-1279.
Scholtz, J. (2003). Theory and evolution of human robot
interactions. In IEEE 36th International Conference on
System Sciences, 125–134.
Sumpter, D. J. T. (2010). Collective animal behavior.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sweeny, T. D., Haroz, S., & Whitney, D. (2013). Perceiving
group behavior: Sensitive ensemble coding mechanisms
for biological motion of human crowds. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 39, 329– 337. doi:10.1037/a0028712
Thornton, I.M., & Vuong, Q.C. (2004). Incidental
processing of biological motion. Current Biology, 14,
1084–1089.
Thornton, I. M., Rensink, R. A., & Shiffrar, M. (2002).
Active versus passive processing of biological motion.
Perception, 31, 837-853.
Thurman, S. M., Giese, M. A., & Grossman, E. D. (2010).
Perceptual and computational analysis of critical features
for biological motion. Journal of Vision, 10 (12):15, 1–
14.
Yanco, H. & Drury, J. (2004) Classifying human-robot
interaction: an updated taxonomy, Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, 2841-2846.

2133

