Music familiarity modulates mind wandering during lexical processing
Shi Feng (SFENG@Memphis.Edu)
Department of Psychology
Institute for Intelligent Systems, 400 Innovation Drive
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Gavin M. Bidelman (G.BIDELMAN@Memphis.Edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems
School of Communication Sciences & Disorders, 807 Jefferson Ave
Memphis, TN 38105 USA

listening to music, and how familiarity of the excerpts
influences mind wandering and linguistic processing.
Previous research on whether music-listening improves or
disrupts task performance has shown conflicting results.
Music-listening disrupts task performance if the musical clip
(e.g., lyrics) contains matching semantic information as the
task (Marsh, Hughes, & Jones, 2009). So if one listens to
music containing semantic information and he/she is also
performing a semantic task simultaneously, task
performance would be disrupted even if the musical sound
is irrelevant. Similarly, Perham and Currie (2014) showed
that listening to music with lyrics impairs reading
comprehension more than listening to music with no lyrics
or in silence, whether the participants liked the lyrics or not.
On the other hand, it has been found that self-selected
music-listening, relative to experimenter-selected, is not
detrimental to task performance if there is a mismatch in
information-processing pathway between the music and the
task. For example, driving while listening to music with
lyrics would not be as detrimental to the task of driving as
would listening to music with lyrics while reading (Cassidy
& McDonald, 2009). It is argued that self-selected music
tends to be more familiar to the listener, therefore it reduces
competition on attentional resources between musiclistening and task performance. At the same time, listening
to music, especially preferred or self-selected, can improve
enjoyment and reduce anxiety. For example, it has been
found that music-listening can reduce stress in workplace
and improve work engagement (Haake, 2011). Musiclistening has long been shown to increase arousal and may
even increase cognitive abilities (Moreno & Bidelman,
2014; Perham, Lewis, Turner, & Hodetts, 2013;
Schellenberg, 2012).
A growing body of evidence also supports the notion of a
relationship between music and language (Patel, 2008). For
example, musical harmonies seem to share cognitive
resources in terms of syntax processing, but separate
mechanisms are observed for the analysis of semantics
(Slevc, Rosenberg, & Patel, 2009). Music and speech also
seem to share similar brain mechanisms. For example,
Cantonese-speakers, who speak a tonal language that
closely mirror typical musical sequences, outperform their
English-speaking counterparts in musical perception and
pitch memory tasks (Bidelman, Hutka, & Moreno, 2013).

Abstract
Mind wandering has been investigated in a variety of
sustained attention tasks. In the present research, we
investigated the role of mind wandering while listening to
familiar or unfamiliar musical excerpts, and its effects on
linguistic processing. Participants performed a lexical
congruity task involving judging the semantic relatedness of a
list of word pairs while listening to familiar classical music,
unfamiliar classical music, or non-music environmental sound
clips. Mind wandering episodes were probed randomly and
intermittently for participants to self-report their mind
wandering episodes during the task. Results showed that
listening to familiar music is associated with faster response
times and lower frequency of mind wandering. Whereas mind
wandering episodes tend to be more frequent when
participants listened to unfamiliar music. Implications from
previous attention models and theories of music familiarity
suggest that familiar music might increase task enjoyment
without compromising behavioral performance.

Introduction
Mind wandering is an ubiquitous phenomenon that
dissociates processing of external stimuli in favor of
processing of internal task unrelated thoughts (Smallwood
& Schooler, 2006). Using probe-caught and self-caught
methods of sampling mind wandering, research has shown
that mind wandering predict errors on tasks that require
sustained attention such SART (Smallwood, Davis, Heim, et
al., 2004), word encoding (Smallwood, Baraciaia, Lowe, &
Obonsawin, 2003), and more recently, reading (Feng,
D’Mello, & Graesser, 2013). In Smallwood and colleagues’
model, tasks that require little attentional resource load
would give more leeway for the mind to wander
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2006). However, attentional
decoupling might also occur if the task is too demanding, as
in reading, when the reader fails to construct a situation
model (Feng et al., 2013). The nature of mind wandering in
disrupting task-performance has shown to be similar to
external distraction (Unworth & McMillian, 2014). One
question that arises is what external distractions can prompt
mind wandering during task performance, and which can
reduce mind wandering during sustained-attention tasks.
The currently research investigates the relationship between
mind wandering and lexical task performance while

680

Other studies using magnetoencephalography have found
that the perception of unexpected musical chords that
violate the syntax of harmonic progressions (e.g., out-of-key
notes), elicit a neurological response that is similar to
unexpected syntax in language processing (Maess, Gunter,
& Friederici, 2001). Yet at the same time, the response
differs from language processing in that it is elicited in the
right hemisphere instead of the left (Maess et al., 2001).
Collectively, these studies show that musical processing and
language processing share some common neural
mechanisms, and therefore, may compete for similar
cognitive resources.
While it can be suggested that both music and language
share cognitive resources, one open question is whether
non-lyrical music familiarity would increase or reduce
attentional load while performing a language task. One
hypothesis would be that since familiar music is generally
preferred among listeners, listening to familiar selections
might draw more attentional resources from executing a
language task and inhibit performance due to its engaging
nature. Previous research has found that increasing exposure
of novel music increases emotional arousal, as well as the
pleasure experienced during music listening (Bosch,
Salimpoor, & Zatorre, 2013; Pereira, Teixeira, Figueiredo,
et al., 2011). Consequently, an equally plausible hypothesis
predicts that listening to familiar music may be less
distracting than listening to unfamiliar music, and therefore
less detrimental to the language task. In both cases,
according to Smallwood and Schooler’s (2006) model on
mind wandering, mind wandering should occur less
frequently when attentional resources are utilized to the
extent to which the task can be still be performed, but little
resources are left to allow the mind to wander. Investigating
the frequency of mind wandering during music listening can
also shed further light on the current debate regarding
whether music can facilitate or disrupt language-related task
performance (e.g., Thompson, Schellenberg, & Letnic,
2011).
In the present study, we used a semantic-congruity task
paradigm paired with well-known and obscure non-lyric
classical music to investigate the relationship between music
familiarity, language processing, and attention. We reasoned
that if familiar music causes less distractibility, there should
be an increase in mind wandering frequency, which in turn
should predict a faster response time per Smallwood and
Schooler’s (2006) model, and an increase of errors on task.

Sound Excerpts. The experiment used a within-subject
design with three sound excerpt listening conditions:
control, familiar, and unfamiliar. The control condition
consisted of a single sound clip, called “environmental
soundtrack,” which consisted of ambient nature sounds
(e.g., birds chirping, trees rustling, water flowing). This
control condition was intended to mimic a non-musical
neutral background noise. The familiar and the unfamiliar
condition consisted of a total of 12 classical musical
excerpts by Bach, Mozart, and Beethoven evenly
distributed. Six musical excerpts were categorized as
familiar and the other six as unfamiliar. Familiar pieces
included Mozart’s Symphony # 40 in G minor, first
movement, Beethoven’s Symphony # 5 in C minor, and
Bach’s Cello Suite I in G major. Unfamiliar pieces include
Mozart’s Serenade in B minor, Beethoven’s Violin Sonata #
10 in G major, and Bach’s Partita I for Solo Violin in B
minor. The pieces were judged as familiar or unfamiliar
based on the frequency the popularity these pieces have
been played (Moles, 1968; Simonton, in press). In both the
familiar and unfamiliar conditions, there were two musical
excerpts per composer. Participants listened to one sound
excerpt per condition, played while performing the semantic
congruity task. The musical excerpt in the familiar and
unfamiliar conditions featured one piece that was randomly
selected from among the six possible choices in its category.
Semantic Congruity Task. The semantic congruity task
was a word-pair semantic relatedness judgment task. There
were a total of 180 word pairs from the appendix of
Relander, Rama, and Kujala (2008)—English-translated
version. For each of the three sound excerpt conditions,
participants were presented with 60 word pairs randomly
selected from the 180 without repeats. In total, every
participant completed the judgment of semantic relatedness
of 180 word pairs (i.e., 60 per sound condition).

Procedure
After obtaining informed consent, participants were asked to
fill out a demographic questionnaire regarding their
education level, language background, and musical
expertise.
Participants were then prompted to complete a computer
task, with experimental instructions presented on a PC
monitor. The task required the participants to listen to three
sound clips and complete the series of word-relatedness
judgments. Before the task started, participants also read a
definition of mind wandering that was largely taken from
Smallwood and Schooler (2006): “Mind wandering is a
term used to describe what occurs when your attention
wanders from a task. Sometimes when your mind wanders,
you begin thinking about personal events or concerns rather
than your task. At other times, your mind can wander
because you are bored or tired and you don’t really know
what you’re thinking about; all you know is that you are no
longer thinking about your task.” Participants were then told
that they would randomly see messages periodically asking

Method
Participants
Participants were 96 undergraduate students from the
University of Memphis subject pool who participated in this
study for course credit.

Experiment Design

681

them “Are you mind wandering right at this moment?" The
participants were to click either “Yes” or “No” via a button
press on the computer screen for their response to these
mind wandering probes. The three sound excerpt blocks
were counterbalanced by a 3x1 Graeco -Latin square.
After each block, participants were asked to rate the
sound excerpt on familiarity (“How familiar are you with
the clip that you’ve just heard?”), distractibility (“How
distracting did you find the sound clip you’ve just heard?”),
and enjoyment (“How much did you like listening to the
sound clip you’ve just heard?”). The ratings were on a 1 to
6 Likert Scale. Participants’ response times on the word-pair
judgments were also recorded using a custom program
coded in MATLAB 2013 (The MathWorks, Natick, MA).

3000). The control continue to serve as a neutral comparison
(N = 5760). In addition, in our original musical condition
(i.e., excluding the control), data points corresponded to
familiarity ratings of 1 and 2 outnumbered data points
corresponded to familiarity ratings of 5 and 6 by 2280 cases
after the exclusion of data points corresponded to familiarity
ratings of 3 and 4. To circumvent Type I error inflation in
our ANOVA due to differences in the number of
observations, we randomly sampled 3000 data points out of
5280 data points corresponding to familiarity ratings of 1
and 2. We also randomly sampled 3000 data points out of
5760 data points from our original non-musical control
condition as our new control condition. Bootstrapping was
conducted to ensure the reliability/robustness of this datareduction method.
A mixed-effects linear regression model using familiarity
conditions to predict reading times was significant (F(2,
8997) = 23.25, p < 0.001) (Figure 1). Tukey corrected post
hoc contrasts revealed that there was a reduction of 126-ms
(i.e., B = -126, SE = 23 ms, p < 0.001; Bootstrap bias =
0.052, SE = 15.64) in response time when participants
performed the semantic relatedness judgment task while
listening to music that they reported to be familiar (M =
1244, SD = 628ms), than while listening to music that they
reported to be unfamiliar (M = 1374, SD = 745 ms). There
was also reduction of 133-ms (i.e., B = -133, SE = 20 ms, p
< 0.001; Bootstrap bias = 0.06, SE = 16.21) in response
time when participants judged semantic relatedness while
listening to music that they reported to be familiar, than
while they listened to the neutral non-musical control sound
clip (M = 1362, SD = 753 ms). Response time between
making semantic judgments while listening to unfamiliar
music did not differ from that of the control condition
(Bootstrap bias = 0.11; SE = 15.30). These findings suggest
that participants were just as distracted while listening to our
control sound clip as they were listening to (self-reported)
unfamiliar music.

Statistical Analyses. Analyses focused on individual
response items, and items that corresponded to mind
wandering thought probes. A mixed-effect modeling
approach was adopted to analyze the data, because of the
repeated and nested nature of the design (Bates & Maechler,
2010). Linear or logistic models were constructed on the
basis of whether the dependent variable was continuous
(response times) or binary (mind wandering and accuracy of
lexical-semantic judgment), respectively. The random
effects were participants (96 levels), and order of conditions
(3 levels). Conditions functioned as a three-level (familiar,
unfamiliar, control) categorical fixed effect. An α-level of
p=0.05 was adopted for all statistical testing. Two-tailed
tests were used throughout.

Results
Response times
A mixed-effects linear regression model for response time
between the music conditions was not significant (F(2,
17277) = 2.28, p = 0.10).
It is possible that even though our manipulation showed
evidence of support based on participants’ self-reported
ratings on familiarity (familiar condition: M = 3.81, SD =
1.69; unfamiliar condition: M = 2.07, SD = 1.38; t(190) =
7.82, d = .49, p < .001), it was still not sensitive enough to
show an effect. For example, in the familiar condition, 23
participants out of 96 rated the pieces they received as a 1 or
2, meaning they perceived the pieces to be extremely to
moderately unfamiliar. Due to this consideration, we
decided to use participants’ self-ratings instead of our precategorized conditions for subsequent analysis. We
conducted a data-reduction technique and excluded
familiarity ratings of 3 or 4 given these were neutral ratings
without strong user preferences and to maximize the
possibility of observing an effect between salient ratings
(familiar, unfamiliar, control). Hence, a total of 4860 out of
17280 data points were excluded. We then combined data
points from the two musical conditions corresponding to
familiarity ratings of 1 and 2 as the unfamiliar condition (N
= 5280), and combined data points corresponding to
familiarity ratings of 5 and 6 as the familiar condition (N =

Mind Wandering Frequency
A mixed-effects logistical regression model for the presence
(coded as 1) or absence (coded as 0) of mind wandering,
using familiarity conditions as a fixed effect, yielded a
significantly better fit than did a model with only the
random effect but without the fixed effect (χ2(2) = 7.48, p <
0.05). The coefficient was 0.786 when comparing the mind
wandering frequency between familiar music listening to
unfamiliar music listening (SE = 0.33, p < 0.05). This
indicates that participants were 2.14 (e0.786) times more
likely to mind wander when performing the semantic
relatedness task while listening to self-reported unfamiliar
music than self-reported familiar music (Figure 2). The
coefficient was 0.731 when comparing the mind wandering
frequency between unfamiliar music listening to control (SE
= 0.26, p < 0.05). This indicates that participants were ~2
(e0.731) times more likely to mind wander when performing
the semantic relatedness task while listening to the nonmusical control sound clip than while listening to self-

682

reported unfamiliar music. There was no significant
difference between listening to familiar music and listening
to the control sound clip in terms of mind wandering
frequency during semantic relatedness judgments.
Bootstrapping results showed that bias on our resampling
techniques were effectively zero for all musical conditions
(SE = 0.01).

Semantic Relatedness Judgment Accuracy
On average, participants correctly judged 86% (SD = 0.34)
of the word pairs in semantic relatedness while listening to
familiar music, 86% (SD = 0.34) while listening to
unfamiliar music, and 87% (SD = 0.34) while listening to
the control excerpt. A mixed-effects logistical regression
model for correct (coded as 1) versus incorrect (coded as 0)
responses between the conditions was not significant (χ2(2)
= 0.89, p = 0.64). This suggests that participants performed
at near-ceiling levels regardless of the concurrent audio clip.
Figure 2: Proportion of mind wandering episodes per
sound excerpt conditions.

Mind wandering, response times, and accuracy
We investigated whether mind wandering predicted
listeners’ response times just prior to mind wandering
probes. The resultant mixed-effect linear regression was
marginally significant (F(1, 748) = 3.29, p = 0.07). There
was also no interaction between mind wandering and sound
excerpt in predicting response time (F(2,744) = 0.085, p =
0.43).

Familiarity, Distractibility, and Enjoyment
We investigated the relationship between the ratings of
familiarity, distractibility, and enjoyment. A Pearsoncorrelation analysis was conducted between the three
ratings. Results suggest that there was no relationship
between music familiarity and distractibility (r = 0.12, p =
0.095). On the other hand, how much participants enjoyed
the musical excerpts was strongly negatively correlated with
how distracting the musical excerpts were (r = -0.41, p <
0.001). Results also showed that, as with previous findings
(e.g., Bosch et al., 2013), participants found familiar music
to be more enjoyable (r = 0.294, p < 0.001).

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to examine the effects of
music familiarity and mind wandering during language task
performance. Our results indicate that listening to familiar
music seems to be less detrimental to linguistic processing
than listening to unfamiliar music as suggested by faster
lexical-semantic decisions. Additionally, we found that
mind wandering also occurred more frequently when
participants listened to unfamiliar music than either familiar
music or background noise (i.e., neutral environmental
sounds).
Our results seem to support previous findings that suggest
familiar music is less distracting than unfamiliar music (e.g.,
Cassidy & McDonald, 2009; Etaugh & Michals, 1975).
However, our correlational analysis also showed that
familiarity might not have a clear-cut relationship with
distractibility. Perhaps depending on the task or the type of
music one listens to, familiar music can vary in perceived
distractibility. On the other hand, as with previous studies
(e.g., Haake, 2011), participants did rate more familiar
music to be more enjoyable, and enjoyment has shown to be
strongly negatively correlated with distractibility. This
suggests that how much a listener likes the music outweighs

Figure 1: Mean response time per sound excerpt condition

683

how familiar the music is in terms of determining
distractibility of music-listening during task performance.
Our findings converge with those of previous studies that
suggest greater emotional arousal and pleasure in response
to familiar music can alleviate task performance stress
(Haake, 2011; Bosch et al., 2013; Pereira et al., 2011). In
our study, we found that listening to familiar music
facilitated semantic-decisions (i.e., faster response times)
above and beyond a neutral environmental sound track. Yet,
response times when participants’ listened to unfamiliar
music did not differ from listening to background noise.
Collectively, these results suggest that (i) concurrent audio
stimuli that are unfamiliar (whether music or ambient noise)
hinders language-related processing and (ii) familiar music
seems to promote more rapid lexical access.
While our results replicate previous findings that showed
that unfamiliar music is the most detrimental to task
performance, they counter the extreme notion that mind
wandering is characteristic of a reduction in response time
across the board (Smallwood and Schooler, 2006). In our
paradigm, participants’ listening to familiar music did not
seem to shift attentional resources allowing for the mind to
wander, even though there was a reduction in response
time—indicative of familiar music inducing task ease. This
seems to suggest that music familiarity and music
preference may increase task ease by inducing pleasure
while alleviating mind wandering. Previous research
suggests that mind wandering occurs during task
performance is predominantly associated with boredom and
negative moods (Kane, Brown, McVay, et al., 2007;
Eastwood, Frischen, Fenske, et al., 2012; Smallwood,
Fitzgerald, Miles, et al., 2009). We infer that listening to
preferred music may actually counteract boredom without
compromising task performance as an external distraction.
Of interest to further research is identifying the types of
tasks that benefit from listening to preferred music, and the
role of mind wandering in mediating task performance
during music listening. Music training has long been
associated with creativity (e.g. Coulson & Burke, 2014). It
would be interesting to investigate whether mind wandering
occurs with higher frequency while performing a creative
task during music listening relative to a low-level sustained
attention task. Another consideration is that music training
has been in the past used as an aid for language learning.
For example, music training has attempted to improve
literacy skills in dyslexic children (Overy, 2000) and
rhythmic musical interventions have been used to bolster
reading and spelling skills in children (Bhide, Power, &
Goswanmi, 2013). Music training has also been associated
with better second language learning (Swaminathan &
Gopinath, 2013). Futures studies are needed to further
investigate whether there are specific types of tasks that can
be aided by music listening or music training.

Acknowledgments
This study has been supported in part by a grant from the
GRAMMY Foundation awarded to G.M.B.

References
Bates, D. M., & Maechler, M. (2010). lme4: Linear Mixed-Effects
Models
Using
S4
Classes
Software,
http://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/lme4/index.html

Bhide, A., Power, A., & Goswami, U. (2013). A rhythmic
musical intervention for poor readers: A comparison of
efficacy with a letter-based intervention. Mind, Brain, and
Education, 7(2), 113-123.
Bidelman, G. M., Hutka, S., & Moreno, S. (2013). Tone
language speakers and musicians share enhanced
perceptual and cognitive abilities for musical pitch:
Evidence for bidirectionality between the domains of
language and music. PLoS ONE 8(4): e60676.
Bosch, I., Salimpoor, V. N., & Zatorre, R. (2013).
Familiarity mediates the relationship between emotional
arousal and pleasure during music listening. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 7(534), 1-10.
Cassidy, G., & MacDonald, R. (2009). The effects of music
choice on task performance: A study of the impact of selfselected and experimenter-selected music on driving
game performance and experience. Musicae Scientae,
13(2), 357-386.
Coulson, A. N., & Burke, B. M. (2013). Creativity in the
elementary music classroom: A study of students’
perceptions. International Journal of Music Education,
31(4), 428-441.
Eastwood, J. D., Frischen, A., Fenske, M. J., & Smilek, D.
(2012). The unengaged mind: Defining boredom in terms
of attention. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(5),
482-495.
Etaugh, C., & Michals, D. (1975). Effects on reading
comprehension of preferred music and frequency of
studying to music. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 41(2),
553-554.
Feng, S., D'Mello, S. K., & Graesser, A. (2013). Mind
wandering while reading easy and difficult texts,
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20(1), 586-592.
Haake, A. B. (2011). Individual music listening in
workplace settings: An exploratory survey of offices in
the UK. Musicae Scientiae, 15(1), 107-129.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J., MyinGermeys, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the mind
wanders, and when: An experience sampling study of
working memory and executive control in everyday life.
Psychological Science, 18, 614–621.
Maess, B., Koelsch, S., Gunter, T. C., & Friederici, A. D.
(2001). Musical syntax is processed in Broca's area: An
MEG study. Nature Neuroscience, 4(5), 540-545.
Marsh, J. E., Hughes, R.W., & Jones, D. M., (2009).
Interference by process, not content, determines semantic
auditory distraction. Cognition, 110, 23–28.

684

MATLAB version 2013a. Natick, Massachusetts: The
MathWorks Inc., 2013.
Moles, A. (1968). Information theory and esthetic
perception (J. E. Cohen, Trans.). Urbana: University of
Illinois Press.
Moreno, S., & Bidelman, G. M. (2014). Understanding
neural plasticity and cognitive benefit through the unique
lens of musical training. Hearing Research, 308, 84-97.
Overy, K. (2000). Dyslexia, temporal processing and music:
The potential of music as an early learning aid for
dyslexic children. Psychology of Music, 28(2), 218-229.
Patel, A. D. (2008). Music, language, and the brain. NY:
Oxford University Press.
Pereira, C. S., Teixeira, J., Figueiredo, P., Xavier, J., Castro,
S. L., & Brattico, E. (2011). PLoS ONE, 6(11): e27241.
Perham, N., & Currie, H. (2014). Does listening to preferred
music improve reading comprehension performance?
Applied Cognitive Psychology, Appl. Cognit. Psychol., 28,
279-284.
Perham, N., Lewis, A., Turner, J., Hodgetts, H. M. (2013).
The sound of silence: can imagining music elicit the
mood and arousal effect? Current Psychology, 33(4), 610629.
Relander, K., Rama,P., & Kujala, T. (2008). Word
semantics is processed even without attentional effort.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(8), 1511-1522.
Schellenberg, E.G., 2012. Cognitive performance after
music listening: a review of the Mozart effect. In:
MacDonald, R. A. R., Kreutz, G., Mitchel, L. (Eds.),
Music, Health and Wellbeing. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.

Simonton, D. K. (in press). Numerical odds and evens in
Beethoven’s nine symphonies: Can a computer really tell
the difference? Empirical Studies of the Arts.
Slevc, L. R., Rosenberg, J. C., & Patel, A. D. (2009).
Making psycholinguistics musical: Self-paced reading
time evidence for shared processing of linguistic and
musical syntax. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 374381.
Smallwood, J., Baraciaia, S. F., Lowe, M., & Obonsawin,
M. C. (2003a). Task unrelated thought whilst encoding
information. Consciousness and Cognition, 12, 452–484.
Smallwood, J., Davies, J. B., Heim, D., Finnigan, F., Sudberry, M.,
O’Connor, R., & Obonsawin, M. (2004). Subjective experience
and the attentional lapse: Task engagement and disengagement
during sustained attention. Consciousness and Cognition, 4,
657– 690.

Smallwood, J., Fitzgerald, A., Miles, L. K., Phillips, L. H.
(2009). Shifting moods, wandering minds: Negative
moods lead the mind to wander. Emotion, 9(2), 271-276.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J.W. (2006). The restless mind.
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 946–958.
Swaminathan, S., & Gopinath, J. K. (2013). Music training
and second-language English comprehension and
vocabulary skills in Indian children. Psychological
Studies, 58(2), 164-170.
Thompson, W. F., Schellenberg, E. G., & Letnic, A. K.
(2011). Fast and loud background music disrupts reading
comprehension. Psychology of Music, 40(6), 700-708.
Unworth, N., & McMillan, B. D. (2014). Similarities and
differences between mind-wandering and external
distraction: A latent variable analysis of lapses of
attention and their relation to cognitive abilities. Acta
Psychologica, 150, 14-25.

685

