	  

Musical improvisation:
Multi-scaled spatiotemporal patterns of coordination
Ashley Walton (waltonal@mail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4150 Edwards 1
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Michael J. Richardson (richamo@mail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4150B Edwards 1
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Peter Langland-Hassan (langlapr@ucmail.uc.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 206 McMicken Hall
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Anthony Chemero (chemeray@ucmail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4150B Edwards 1
Department of Philosophy, 206 McMicken Hall
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Auriel Washburn (washbual@mail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4150B Edwards 1
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Abstract
When jazz musicians perform an improvisational piece of
music their behaviors are not fully prescribed in advance.
Nonetheless their actions become so tightly coordinated and
their decisions so seamlessly intertwined that the musicians
behave as a single synergistic unit rather than a collection of
individuals. A fundamental aspect of such musical
improvisation is the bodily movement coordination that occurs
among the performing musicians, with the embodied
interaction of musicians both supporting and constraining
musical creativity. Here we consider the ability of pairs of
piano players to improvise, to spontaneously coordinate their
actions with co-performers. We demonstrate the ability of the
time-evolving
patterns of inter-musician movement
coordination as revealed by the mathematical tools of nonlinear time series analyses to provide a new understanding of
what potentiates the novelty of spontaneous musical action.
Cross wavelet spectral analysis is applied to the musical
movements of pairs of improvising pianists, a method that
isolates the strength and patterning of the behavioral
coordination across a range of nested time-scales. Additionally,
cross-recurrence quantification analysis is applied to the series
of notes produced by each musician to assess when and how
often they visit the same musical states throughout the
improvisation. Revealing the sophistication of the previously
unexplored dynamics of movement coordination between
improvising musicians is an important step towards
understanding how creative musical expressions emerge from
the spontaneous coordination of multiple musical bodies.
Key words: Music improvisation, self-organization, movement
coordination, complex dynamical systems, multi-scale analysis

Interpersonal coordination plays a key role in the
dynamics and effective outcome of musical performance.
This coordination requires that musicians demonstrate a kind
of “precise flexibility” with respect to both auditory structure
and the patterning of their body and limb movements. That
is, musical competence demands the collective
synchronization of both the auditory and kinesthetic
dimensions, whereby the “music-making body and the sonic
traces it leaves behind” are pivotal to this co-articulation
(Iyer, 2004). The dynamics of movement and force in
musical performance have been widely examined
experimentally, (e.g., Keller, 2012; Loehr et al., 2011;
Palmer, 2013), and are known to be a primary determinant of
everything from musical genres, to structures of instruments,
to the musician’s personal identities (Baily 1985, Dalla Bella
& Palmer, 2011). These coordinative patterns are not only
important with respect to musicians performing highly
practiced and structured musical scores (Keller & Appel,
2010; Loehr & Palmer, 2011; Ragert et al., 2013; Palmer &
Loehr, 2013), but also with regard to improvised musical
performance, despite the spontaneous, unplanned melodic
and temporal exploration that characterizes an improvised
exchange. Previous experimental investigations, however,
have only focused on individual improvisers (e.g. Norgaard,
2011; 2014; Keller et al., 2011). Yet the paradigmatic
example of improvisation is a duet or jazz trio, where
multiple musical bodies must spontaneously coordinate while
simultaneously engaging in both musical perception and

2595

action. In such situations, musicians are engaged in a
continuous negotiation–anticipating and coordinating their
playing behavior without the guide of musical notation. In
other words, the improvised musical performance emerges
within a context of social collaboration, where the ongoing
inter-musician interactions operate to construct and constrain
the flow of the performance from moment-to-moment
(Sawyer, 2003).
Unfortunately, the complex dynamics of improvised
musical coordination are not easily isolated into components,
nor can be strictly defined by content or by a particular frame
of time. Musician’s movements may at times involve explicit
communicative signals such as a touch to the head that
signals “back to the top”, or eye contact and nodding of the
head before or after solos. But these are just a small part of a
continuous flow of information about a co-performer that
supports adaptive coordination and communication across the
multiple time scales of an improvised musical performance.
It is for this reason that the behavioral coordination that
occurs between improvising musicians is best conceptualized
as emergent, involving the synergistic self-organization of
the reciprocally defined perception and action processes that
support musical play (Demos et al., 2014; Keller and Appel,
2010). The non-linear analysis time series methods of
complex dynamical systems provide powerful methods for
the investigation of both sonic and kinesthetic patterns at
multiple time scales, and the continuous flow of information
for musical perception and action. Recent applications of
these methods to examine musical movements and musical
structure include: fractal analysis (Demos et al., 2014;
Beauvois, 2007; Hennig, 2014; Rankin et al., 2009; Ruiz et
al., 2014) recurrence quantification analysis (Demos et al.,
2011; Serrà, et al., 2009) and sample or Shannon entropy
(Glowinski et al., 2013; Keller, et al., 2011).
Nonlinear analysis methods are ideally suited for
uncovering the dynamics of improvised musical performance
(Walton et al., 2015); it is expected that observing how and
when stable patterns in these dynamics emerge and evolve
can provide new possibilities for exploring the skill of
improvisation, as well what dynamics contribute to more
successful musical performance.

facing one another while their movements were recorded
using a Polhemus motion tracking system (at 96 samples per
second). Participants were equipped with motion sensors
attached to their forehead, and both their left and right
forearms (positioned directly below the point where their
wrist bends). Ableton Live 9.0.5 was used to record all of the
MIDI key press commands and the resulting audio signal
during the musical improvisation. Pairs were instructed to
develop 2-minute improvised duets under visual and nonvisual conditions, over different backing tracks. The visual
and non-visual manipulation simply involved placing a
curtain between musicians for half of the performances.
There were three different backing tracks: an ostinato, a
swing and a drone backing track. The ostinato backing track
was a short melodic phrase consisting of the four ascending
chords (Cm11; BbM7/D, EbM7#11, Fadd4) that is looped
every four seconds, in 7/8 time, as opposed to the more
common 4/4 time signature. The swing backing track is the
bass line of a jazz standard used by Keller, Weber and Engel
(2011), titled: “There’s No Greater Love”. This track has a
key and tempo, as well as a bass line (i.e., chord progression)
designed to support improvisation. Finally, the drone backing
track was a pair of pitches, D and A, that were played for the
entire duration of the two minutes. This track has no key or
tempo and requires the musicians negotiate these structural
elements with each other. At the beginning of the experiment,
the musicians first performed three warm-up trials, where
they individually improvised over each backing track while
the other sat outside the performance room. Then together
they performed two improvised duets for each visual
information by backing track condition (i.e., for a total of 12
performances).

Data Analysis
Cross-wavelet spectral analysis was used to assess levels
of coordination in the musician’s body movements. More
specifically, cross-wavelet analysis assesses coordination
between two time series through spectral decomposition, and
subsequent examination of the strength (coherence) and
patterning (relative phase) of the coordination that occurs
between participants across multiple time scales (see
Grinsted et al., 2004; Issartel et al., 2006, for a more detailed
introduction). The strength of coordination and the relative
phase angle between two time series is assessed for shorter,
½ second and second-to-second time-scales, as well as at
longer 4, 8, 12 and 16 second time-scales. For example, in
Figure 1 the level of coherence between the movements of
the performers’ right arms over time is denoted by color (red
for high coherence, dark blue for low to no coherence) and is
displayed as a function of period (in units of seconds) on the
y-axis. The arrows correspond to the relative phase of the
coordination. Right arrows equal in-phase coordination (the
two systems are visiting the same states in perfect synchrony)
and left arrows equal anti-phase coordination (the phases at
which the two system are visiting the same states are in

Method
Participants
3 pairs of musicians with 9 to 30 years of training in piano
performance (M = 14, SD = 6.9) and 4 to 17 years of
experience in jazz improvisation (M = 9, SD = 4.7) were
recruited from the local music community as well as the
University of Cincinnati’s College-Conservatory of Music
(CCM). Participants ranged in age from 18 to 26 years (M =
21, SD = 2.4).

Procedure and Design
Participants played standing with an Alesis Q88, 88-key
semi-weighted USB/MIDI keyboard controller, directly

	  
	  
2596

Figure 1. CRQA of the musician’s musical output (i.e., notes played). (A) Illustrates how the times series of the notes and
groups of notes (i.e. Chords) played by each musician are mapped onto one another to quantify when they are visiting the
same musical states (denoted by grey boxes) and the length of the trajectories of recurrent playing behavior (denoted by black
diagonal lines). The average (B) %REC and (C) MaxLine observed as a function of the three different backing tracks and
“No Vision” and “Vision” conditions.
perfect opposition). This analysis was used to capture how
the musician’s movement coordination relates to the shorterand longer-term temporal structure and phrasing of the
musical context, as well as how this coordination varies
across different parts of the musician’s bodies, and the
effects of the visual information manipulations.
Categorical cross recurrence quantification analysis
(CRQA) was used to examine when throughout the time
course of the improvised performances the musicians played
the same series of notes, or visited the same musical states.
CRQA is a non-linear analysis method that assesses whether
the points in behavioral series visit the same states over time
and then quantifies the dynamic patterns of these timeevolving recurrences using a range of different statistics
(Richardson, Dale & Marsh, 2014). Two common statistics
include: Percent Recurrence (%REC), which measures the
percentage of the plot covered by the instances (dot in the
recurrence plot) in which time-steps overlap and is an index
of the amount of coordination present between the two
instances; and Maxline, which extracts the longest diagonal
line in the recurrence plot. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the
time series containing the notes or groups of notes played by
each musician at each time point in the improvisation were

mapped onto one another in order to quantify how often
they visit the same musical states through %REC.

Results
The results of the CRQA performed on the MIDI data
recorded from the improvised duets are displayed in Figure
1. The note output from the MIDI controller provides the
numbers of the keys played (from 1-88) at a rate of 96
samples/second. First the unique keys or combinations of
keys played by each musician was identified, and then
assigned a random code number. This time series of code
numbers was then submitted to CRQA- thus the results
reflect when musicians are either playing the same key or
combination of keys. Differences between %REC were
observed for three different backing tracks, with the
musicians visiting the same musical states (notes/chords and
note/chord sequences) more often for the ostinato backing
track compared to the swing and drone backing tracks. For
all three backing tracks, %REC was also found to be greater
for the no-vision condition compared to the vision
condition.
The results from a cross-wavelet analysis of the
movement coordination that occurred between the lateral
movements of the right forearms of two piano players

	  
	  
2597

playing with the ostinato backing track is shown in Figure
2. For comparison purposes, Figure 2(A) shows the results
of the cross wavelet analysis when a pair was instructed to
perform in synchrony with the backing track. There is much
less coherence and stable in-phase behavior in Figure 2(B)
which is a cross wavelet plot of the same the musicians
improvising with one another over the ostinato track. Figure
3(A) shows the coordination of the musicians up-and-down
head-bobbing movements, while Figure 3(B) shows the
coordination of musicians upward and downward
movements of their right hands pressing keys while
improvising with the swing backing track. The musicians’
head movements are more coordinated at the faster time
scales between 0.25 and .5 seconds, where the right arm
movements display coordination at the longer time scales of
four seconds.
The results displayed here represent a small data set, thus
it does not allow for any test of statistical significance with
respective to the experimental manipulations. Future studies
will incorporate larger data sets in order to evaluate
hypotheses related to how movement coordination dynamics
chances with the structure of the musical context (backing
track) and informational coupling (vision/no vision).
Figure 3. Cross wavelet plots displaying the coordination
between two the musician’s upward and downward head
movements (A) and the coordination of the upward and
downward movements of the musicians’ right hands (B)
when improvising with the Swing backing track.

Discussion
Three pairs of professional piano players improvised over
three different backing tracks, half with visual information
about their co-performer, half without, while their body
movements and musical output was recorded.
For CRQA, differences between %REC and MaxLine
were observed for three different backing tracks, with the
musicians visiting the same musical states (notes/chords and
note/chord sequences) more often for ostinato backing track
compared to the swing and drone backing tracks. For all
three backing tracks, %REC and MaxLine were also found
to be greater for the no-vision condition compared to the
vision condition, indicating that the dynamical structure of
the playing behavior exhibited by musicians was less similar
when they can see each other. This suggests that the
improvised playing behavior of the musicians became less
complex and more tightly coupled without vision in ensure
a cohesive performance. In contrast, the behavioral “playing
space” explored by the improvising musicians in the vision
condition may have been much greater.
These results represent the power of cross-wavelet
analysis with regard to determining how movement
coordination relates to the shorter- and longer-term temporal
structure and phrasing of the musical context. This is
demonstrated through the comparison of cross-wavelet plots
of the coordination that occurred between the lateral

Figure 2. Cross wavelet plots of the lateral movements of
the musicians’ right forearms, displaying the coordination
while the musicians improvise over the ostinato backing
track (B) and when the two players played the exact same
part, in synchrony with the ostinato backing track (A).

	  
	  
2598

References

movements of pianists’ right forearms when instructed to
play along to the ostinato backing track together in
synchrony versus improvise over the ostinato (Figure 2).
Recall that the ostinato backing track contains a melodic
phrase consisting of four ascending chords (Cm11;
BbM7/D, EbM7#11, Fadd4) that is repeated every four
seconds. Accordingly, the cross-wavelet plot reveals a high
degree to coherence (i.e., red) and in-phase coordination
(right pointing arrows) at the four-second interval. One can
observe, however, that musicians still exhibit pockets of
coordinated behavior, particularly at the spectral scale (yaxis) of 8 to 16-second seconds. Because the 4-second
melodic phrase in the ostinato track repeats four times (a
total interval of sixteen seconds) this indicates that the
musicians treated this as a meaningful unit-interval and
transitioned to new musical phrases at divisions of this
temporal unit. That is, the musicians moved their hands so
they could play new keys currently out of reach at this timescale.
Uncovering the dynamics of these spontaneous
coordinative behaviors provides a way of better
understanding the exchanges between order and violations
of order that potentiate the novelty that characterizes
improvisatory expression. Without the guide of notation,
improvising musicians must be engaged in a continuous
negotiation, anticipating and coordinating with changes in
different aspects of each other’s musical expression. This
anticipatory coordination can result in dramatic transitions
towards unexpected trajectories when musicians act upon
information about their co-performer, as well as adapt their
playing in order to re-contextualize and even take advantage
of musical errors or “noise”. Movement coordination is an
important part of the information that can initiate these
transitions to novel modes of expression: saxophonist Evan
Parker claims “sometimes the body leads the imagination”
(Borgo, 2005). Quantifying these spatiotemporal patterns
can provide an understanding of what kinds of dynamics
make possible this spontaneous emergence of previously
unimagined forms of order. This not only has implications
for understanding musical improvisation, but also can
provide insight into the coordination dynamics at play in
other creative social interactions such as joke-telling
(Schmidt et al., 2014) and dancing (Washburn et al., 2014).

Baily, J. (1985). Music structure and human movement. In I.
C. P. Howell (Ed.), Musical Structure in Cognition (pp.
237-258). Orlando, FL: Academic Press, Inc.
Beauvois, M. (2007). Quantifying aesthetic preference and
perceived complexity for fractal melodies. Music
Perception , 24 (3), 247-264.
Borgo, D. (2005). Sync or swarm: improvising music in a
complex age. New York: The Continuum International
Publishing Group Inc.
Dalla Bella, S., Palmer, C. (2011). Rate effects on timing,
key velocity, and finger kinematics in piano performance.
PLoS ONE , 6.
Demos, A. P., Chaffin, R., Kant, V. (2014). Toward a
dynamics theory of body movement in musical
performance. Frontiers in Psychology, 5 (477), 1-6. doi:
0.3389/fpsyg.2014.00477
Demos, A. P., Frank, T. D., Chaffin, R. (2011).
"Understanding movement during performance: a
recurrence qualification approach," in Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Performance Science 2011,
eds A. Williamon, D. Edwards and Lee Bartel (Utrecht:
European Association of Conservatoires). ISBN
9789490306021
Grinsted, A., Moore, J. C., and Jevrejeva, S. (2004).
Application of the cross wavelet transform and wavelet
coherence to geophysical time series. Nonlinear Process.
Geophys. 11, 561–566. doi: 10.5194/npg-11-561-2004
Glowinski, D., Mancini, M., Cowie, R., Camurri, A.,
Chiorri, C., & Doherty, C. (2013). The movements made
by performers in a skilled quartet: a distinctive pattern,
and the function that it serves. Frontiers in psychology, 4.
Hennig, H. (2014). Synchronization in human musical
rhythms
and
mutually
interacting
complex
systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111(36), 12974-12979.
Issartel, J., Marin, L., Gaillot, P., Bardainne, T., and Cadopi,
M. (2006). A practical guide to time-frequency analysis in
the study of human motor behavior: the contribution of
wavelet transform. J. Mot. Behav. 38, 139–159. doi:
10.3200/JMBR.38.2.139-159
Iyer, V. (2004). Exploding the narrative in jazz
improvisation. In Uptown conversations: the new jazz
studies (pp. 393-403). New York: Columbia University
Press.
Iyer, V. (2002). Embodied Mind, Situated Cognition, and
Expressive Micro-timing in African-American Music.
Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 19, 387414.
Keller, P.E. (2012). What movement force reveals about
cognitive processes in music performance. In A. Mornell
(Ed.), Art in Motion II (pp. 115-153). Frankfurt: Peter
Lang.
Keller, P.E., Weber, A., Engel, A. (2011). Practice makes
too perfect: Fluctuations in loudness indicate spontaneity
in musical improvisation. Music Perception , 29, 107-112.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank musicians Adam Petersen and
Joshua Jessen, as well as sound engineer Ben Sloan.
Without their continued assistance and invaluable
contributions, none of the work presented here could have
been made possible. We would also like to thank Charles
Coey and Auriel Washburn for their guidance with data
collection and analysis. This research was supported in part
by funding from the National Institutes of Health
(R01GM105045) as well as the University of Cincinnati
Seeman-Frakes Fund.

	  
	  
2599

Keller, P.E., & Appel, M. (2010). Individual differences,
auditory imagery, and the coordination of body
movements and sounds in musical ensembles. Music
Perception, 28, 27-46.
Loehr, J., Large, E. W. & Palmer, C. (2011). Temporal
coordination in music performance: Adaptation to tempo
change. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 37 (4), 1292Ð1309.
Loehr, J., Palmer, C. (2011). Temporal coordination
between performing musicians. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology , 64, 2153-2167.
Norgaard, M. (2014). How Jazz Musicians Improvise: The
Central Role of Auditory and Motor Patterns. Music
Perception, 31 (3), 271-287.
Norgaard, M. (2011). Descriptions of Improvisational
Thinking by Artist-Level Jazz Musicians. Journal of
Research in Music Education, 59 (2), 109-127.
Palmer, C. (2013). Music performance: movement and
coordination. In D. Deutsch (Ed.), The Psychology of
Music (3 ed., pp. 405-422). Amsterdam: Elsevier Press.
Palmer, C. Loeher, J. (2013). Meeting of two minds in duet
piano performance. In A. R. L.F. Bernstein (Ed.), Musical
implications: Essays in honor of Eugence Narmour.
Hillsdale, NY: Pendragon Press.
Phillips-Silver, J., & Keller, P.E. (2012). Searching for roots
of entrainment and joint action in early musical
interactions. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6:26.
Ragert, M., Schroeder, T. Keller, P.E. (2013). Knowing too
little or too much: The effects of familiarity with a coperformer’s part on interpersonal coordination in musical
ensembles. Frontiers in Auditory Cognitive Neuroscience,
4 (368). doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00368
Rankin, S. K., Large, E. W., & Fink, P. W. (2009). Fractal
tempo fluctuation and pulse prediction. Music Perception,
26 (5), 401-413.
Riley, M. A., Richardson, M. J., Shockley, K., and
Ramenzoni, V. C. (2011). Interpersonal synergies.
Frontiers in Psychology. 2:38.
Richardson, M. J., Dale, R., & Marsh, K. L. (2014).
Complex Dynamical Systems in Social and Personality
Psychology. Handbook of research methods in social and
personality psychology, 253.
Ruiz, M., Hong, S. B., Hennig, H., Altenmüller, E., &
Kühn, A. A. (2014). Long-range correlation properties in
timing of skilled piano performance: the influence of
auditory feedback and deep brain stimulation. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 1030. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01030
Schmidt, R. C., Nie, L., Franco, A., & Richardson, M. J.,
(2014). Bodily synchronization underlying joke telling.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience.
Schmidt, R. C., & Richardson, M. J. (2008). Dynamics of
interpersonal coordination. In A. Fuchs & V. Jirsa (Eds.).
Coordination: neural, behavioral and social dynamics.
(pp. 281-308). Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.

Serrà, J., Serrà, X., & Andrzejak, R. G. (2009). Cross
recurrence
quantification
for
cover
song
identification. New Journal of Physics, 11(9), 093017.
Toiviainen, P., & Keller, P.E. (2010). Special Issue:
Spatiotemporal Music Cognition (editorial). Music
Perception, 28, 1-2.
Walton, A., Richardson, M.J., Langland-Hassan, P.,
Chemero, A. (2015). Improvisation and the selforganization of multiple musical bodies. Frontiers in
Psychology: Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.
Washburn, A., DeMarco, M., Simon de Vries, S.,
Ariyabuddhiphongs, K., Schmidt, R.C. Richardson, M. J.,
& Riley M. A. (2014). Dancers entrain more effectively
than non-dancers to another actor’s movements. Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience.

	  
	  
2600

