Naïve Beliefs About Intervening on Causes and Symptoms in the Health Domain
Jessecae K. Marsh (jem311@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Andrew Zeveney (asz214@lehigh.edu)
College of Education, 111 Research Drive
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA
Abstract

C

In two experiments we tested people’s naïve beliefs about
where interventions act in real-world causal systems. We
provided people with a description of a novel health condition
that could be treated by two different treatments, a medication
and a lifestyle modification. Participants judged a medication
as acting on the symptoms of a disorder instead of the cause
of the disorder, while a lifestyle modification was seen as
acting on both the cause and the symptoms of a health
condition (Experiment 1). These results held despite
participants rating both treatments as effective. Providing
information about the specific causal mechanism by which a
treatment could work did not increase beliefs about a
medication’s ability to target the cause of a disorder
(Experiment 2). Implications for understanding of everyday
causal interventions and health treatments is discussed.

C
Intervention

S

S

C

S
Intervention

Figure 1: Possible interventions on a causal system.

Keywords: causal reasoning; interventions; health care
reasoning.

Introduction
Understanding the causal systems of the world gives us the
ability to control our environment. For example,
understanding the causal link between a light switch and
illumination allows us to turn on said lights when desired. In
order to understand these causal systems, people represent
causal models of the world (Waldmann, Holyoak, &
Fratianne, 1995). Part of the power of a causal model is that
it suggests where in a system needs to be acted upon in
order to alter that system (e.g., Hagmayer, Sloman,
Lagnado, & Waldmann, 2007; Kushnir & Gopnik, 2005;
Park & Sloman, 2013; Schulz, Gopnik, & Glymour, 2007).
For example, imagine the nodes in the top of Figure 1
represent chest congestion (C) and sinus irritation (S). If a
learner understands that C causes S, then preventing C from
occurring, (i.e., performing an intervention on C), would
also prevent S from occurring, represented by the gray
shading in the bottom left of Figure 1. However, an
intervention on S would prevent only S from occurring
because it is only an effect of C (bottom right of Figure 1).
As such, understanding the relationship between congestion
and sinus irritation allows the person experiencing these
symptoms to intervene on the causal system to alleviate the
symptoms.
Previous research has suggested that when people are
interested in effecting change in a causal system, they focus
interventions on the root causes of their causal models
(Hagmayer & Sloman, 2009). For example, when
attempting to reduce an environmental risk, people endorsed

actions that targeted the cause of the risk (e.g., targeting a
company responsible for gas pollution in order to reduce it;
Böhm & Pfister, 2000). Similar results have been shown in
the health domain. Mental health clinicians rated
interventions that treated features that were more causal as
more effective (de Kwaadsteniet, Hagmayer, Krol, &
Witteman, 2010; see also Ahn, Proctor & Flanagan, 2009).
More generally, people have shown a preference for
treatments that work on causes (Yopchick & Kim, 2009). In
short, people seem to believe that the best intervention is
one that works on the root cause of the causal system.
Though people may hold that ideal interventions work on
root causes, they may believe that real-world interventions
often work on only the effects of an underlying cause. For
example, a number of interventions can be implemented to
address problems caused by cold weather (e.g., spraying
saline solution on roads, using antifreeze) but none are able
to actually act on cold weather, the root cause of the
problems. This sets up an interesting tension: while people
may prefer interventions that work on root causes they may
have a wealth of experience dealing with interventions that
only work on the effects of a causal system. Where does this
leave people in their thinking about causal interventions?
That is, when given limited information about a causal
intervention, do people believe it works on the root cause of
a system as an ideal intervention would, or only on the
effects of that underlying cause?
In this set of experiments, we explored people’s naïve
beliefs about causal interventions. To guide this exploration,
we chose to focus on beliefs within a domain where
intervening on a causal system would be extremely familiar
to participants: health. The treatment and management of

1529

health conditions is an exercise in causal interventions. We
can represent a health condition as the simple causal graph
in the top of Figure 1, where C represents the cause and S
the symptoms of the disorder. Importantly, we can easily
think of example health interventions that work on the root
cause or just the effects of those causes. Imagine that C
represents a bacterium that was causing the symptoms of an
infection. Taking an antibiotic would intervene on the root
cause C itself, killing the bacteria and thereby ending the
symptoms of the infection (bottom left of Figure 1).
Alternatively, imagine that C represents the cold virus and S
the symptoms of a cold. Taking over-the-counter cold
medicine works by intervening on S and has no effect on C
(bottom right of Figure 1). Given that we can think of both
types of interventions, we can then ask, do people assume
that interventions (i.e., treatments) tend to work on C or
work on S in the health domain?

Influences on Beliefs about Intervention Targets
We can make several predictions of where people may tend
to think interactions work in causal health systems. Given
that people prefer interventions that work on causes, people
may assume that for an intervention to be effective, it must
work on a cause. As such, we would predict that people
should think effective treatments are targeting root causes of
health conditions.
This basic prediction may be moderated by other factors.
For one, different types of treatments may intervene in
different places in a causal model. For example, a lifestyle
modification (e.g., reducing stress) may be thought to target
a different location in the causal structure than a medication.
Likewise, it is possible that where treatments are thought to
act may differ depending on the type of health condition in
question. Mental disorders have less well-established causal
etiologies compared to medical disorders (Marsh & Ahn,
2012). People may be less likely to believe that a treatment
can work on these unknown causes, resulting in treatments
for mental disorders being seen as less likely to target root
causes of the disorder. However, it is also possible that
people believe that a mental disorder treatment acts on some
root cause, even if it is unclear what that cause is. In this
case, we would expect similar targeting judgments for
mental and medical disorders. In short, it is not immediately
obvious exactly how people should inherently think about
how health care interventions work on a causal system.

Overview of Experiments
In the following set of experiments, we tested people’s
beliefs about where health treatments intervene. We
provided participants with a novel health condition
described as having two possible treatments. In this first
pass of examining beliefs about health interventions, we
described both as being effective treatments of the
condition. To measure the influence of treatment type, we
told people that the two effective treatments represented a
medication and a lifestyle modification. We also
manipulated whether the novel disorder was described as a

mental or a medical condition in order to determine the
influence of disorder type on intervention beliefs.
We asked participants to judge the extent to which each
treatment worked on the cause of the disorder and the
symptoms of the disorder. Our goal was to measure people’s
folk beliefs about where effective treatments intervene in a
causal system of disease. In Experiment 1, we provided a
first test of this question. In Experiment 2, we provided
causal pathways by which the treatments work to see if this
influenced judgments of where treatments intervene in
disorder causal systems.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants were asked to rate the extent
to which a medication and a lifestyle modification targeted
the root cause and the symptoms of a health condition. Both
treatments were described as effective. If people believe that
effective treatments work by intervening on the root causes
of health conditions, then we would expect high target
ratings for both the cause and the symptoms because of the
causal relationship between cause and symptoms of the
disorder. Alternatively, if participants believe that
treatments work by only addressing the symptoms of health
conditions, then we would expect targeting ratings to be
high for the symptoms judgment alone.

Methods
Participants Sixty participants recruited through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk participated for payment.
Materials and Procedure Participants were presented with
a scenario that described a novel health disorder called
sorpraxia. In the medical condition, participants (n=30) read
that sorpraxia was a medical disorder, characterized by
respiratory problems. In the mental condition, participants
read that sorpraxia was a mental disorder, characterized by
mood regulation problems. All participants then read that a
person had been diagnosed with the disorder and was told
that it could be treated with a medication or a lifestyle
modification, and that both of the treatments were effective.
After reading the disorder description, participants were
randomly presented with one of the treatments (e.g.,
lifestyle modification) and asked to rate “To what extent
does this [treatment] target changing the root cause of the
disorder?”, as well as, “To what extent does this [treatment]
target changing the symptoms of this disorder?”, on a
sliding scale of 0 (not at all) to 100 (completely).
Participants then rated how effective the treatment was on a
sliding scale of 0 (not at all effective) to 100 (completely
effective). After completing these three ratings, participants
then made these ratings for the other treatment. Finally,
participants answered a series of questions concerning their
beliefs about mental and medical disorders in general. They
were asked to rate for each disorder type in general how
effective they believed medication and lifestyle
modifications to be on a scale of 0 (not at all effective) to
100 (completely effective), as well as how curable and

1530

severe they generally believed mental and medical disorders
to be.
Participants were randomly assigned to the medical and
mental conditions. The order of which treatment a
participant rated first and the order of the two targeting
questions was randomized for each participant. The order of
the final set of global health disorders questions was
randomized for each participant. All participants completed
the experiment at their own pace through the Qualtrics
Survey Software environment.

of intervention, p = .46. The lack of a main effect of
intervention indicates that participants did not judge
medication or lifestyle changes as overall more effective.
The main effect of disorder type was significant, F(1, 58) =
5.51, p = .022, 𝜂!! = .087, in that when the disorder was
instantiated as a medical disorder it was seen as more likely
to receive an effective treatment (M=82.05) than when it
was described as a mental disorder (M=70.88). The
interaction was not significant, p =.74.

Results
Our analyses focused on determining whether our two
different interventions, medication or lifestyle changes,
target the root cause or just the symptoms of disorders. We
submitted participant ratings to a 2 (intervention: medication
vs. lifestyle change; within) x 2 (target: cause vs. symptoms;
within) x 2 (disorder type: medical vs. mental; between)
mixed ANOVA. There were no main effect or interactions
involving disorder type that reached significance, ps > .45,
indicating the ability of an intervention to work on different
targets did not differ depending on whether the disorder was
instantiated as a medical or mental disorder. We found a
main effect of intervention, F(1, 58) = 8.94, p = .004, 𝜂!! =
.13. This main effect reflected that participants rated
lifestyle changes (M=71.42) as overall more able to target
anything than medication (M=63.72). We also found a main
effect of target, F(1, 58) = 61.91, p < .001, 𝜂!! = .52,
representing that symptoms (M=77.36) were more likely to
be thought to be targeted than causes (M=57.78). These two
main effects should be interpreted in light of a significant
interaction, F(1, 58) = 21.68, p < .001, 𝜂!! = .27.
To explore the interaction of intervention and target, we
conducted simple effect analyses comparing the mean
targeting judgment averaged across disorder types for
causes versus symptoms within each of the intervention
types. Figure 2 shows the mean targeting judgments
averaged across the disorder type manipulation. Participants
rated medication as significantly less likely to target a cause
than the symptoms of a disorder, F(1, 58) = 60.25, p < .001,
𝜂!! = .51. However, lifestyle changes were rated as equally
likely to target the cause as the symptoms of a disorder, p =
.99. Splitting this data another way, a root cause was seen to
be much more likely to be targeted by a lifestyle change
than a medication, F(1, 58) = 22.96, p < .001, 𝜂!! = .28. In
reverse, symptoms were judged to be more likely to be
targeted by a medication than by a lifestyle change, F(1, 58)
= 8.68, p = .005, 𝜂!! = .13.
A remaining question from this data is whether the
believed effectiveness of these interventions depended on
what they were believed to target. To answer this question,
we first analyzed ratings for how effective medication and
lifestyle changes would be for treating the artificial disorder
(see Figure 3). We conducted a 2 (intervention: medication
vs. lifestyle change; within) x 2 (disorder type: medical vs.
mental; between) mixed ANOVA. There was no main effect

Figure 2: Mean targeting judgments for Experiment 1.

Figure 3: Mean effectiveness judgments for specific
disorder of Experiment 1.
Parallel to these judgments, participants showed domain
differences in estimating the effectiveness of treatments
when thinking about health conditions more generally. A 2
(intervention: medication vs. lifestyle change) x 2 (disorder
type: medical vs. mental) within-subjects ANOVA found a
main effect of disorder type, F(1, 59) = 11.92, p = .001, 𝜂!!

1531

= .17, reflecting that medical disorders (M=69.38) were
rated as more likely to be effectively treated than mental
disorders (M=62.05). The main effect of intervention and
the interaction were not significant, ps > .84.

Discussion
Our results suggest that people do not necessarily believe
that all effective treatments target the root cause of a
disorder. Specifically, we found that medications were
believed to be more likely to target the symptoms of a health
condition than the root cause. Lifestyle modifications, on
the other hand, were equally likely to target causes as
symptoms. In a causal model of causes and symptoms as see
in Figure 1, these findings suggest that people believe
medications work on symptoms alone (right side of Figure
1) and lifestyle modifications work on root causes, in turn
causing a reduction in symptoms as well (left side of Figure
1).
One possible explanation for our results is that people
could not think of a mechanism by which a medication
could work on the root cause of a health condition. That is,
when people think about the mechanism of medications,
they may think of examples like cold medicines instead of
examples like antibiotics that work on root causes. If
participants could have more easily thought of a way a
medicine could have worked on the root cause of the
condition, they may have increased their targeting
judgments for causes. In Experiment 2, we provide
participants with specific information about the causal
mechanism of action for each treatment to test whether this
modifies judgments related to target causes.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we added a description of the mechanism
by which a medication could act on the specific medical and
mental disorder described. If adding this additional
information allows participants to think of ways in which a
root cause could be targeted, then we would expect ratings
for the cause to increase to levels similar to the symptoms
ratings. In other words, we would expect the medication
ratings to look more like the lifestyle modification ratings in
Experiment 1. However, if the inability to think of a
plausible way in which medications target the root cause
was not a factor in the results of Experiment 1, then we
would not expect to see such a change. To provide a
comparison, we also provided specific mechanism
information for the lifestyle modifications. If participants
were already thinking of a mechanism by which the lifestyle
change acts comparable to what we provided, then this
addition should not make a difference in ratings.

Methods
Participants Sixty participants recruited through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk participated for payment.
Materials and Procedure Participants were randomly

assigned to the medical (n=30) or mental condition that
described the new disease sorpraxia as in Experiment 1.
However, we gave participants specific causal mechanisms
through which change was implemented by the medication
(e.g., “works by reducing airway inflammation” for the
medical version and “works by reducing brain chemistry
imbalance” for the mental version) and the lifestyle
modification (e.g., “works by reducing exposure to airborne
allergens” for the medical version and “works by reducing
exposure to stressful situations” for the mental version).
Participants then completed the same ratings as in Study 1.
In addition, at the end of the experiment participants rated
how plausible they believed the mechanisms we provided to
be on a scale of -3 (extremely implausible) to 3 (extremely
plausible). They were also presented with statements which
described the mechanisms as either causing the disorder
(e.g., exposure to stressful situations causes mood regulation
problems) or worsening the symptoms of the disorder (e.g.,
exposure to stressful situations worsens mood regulation
problems but does not cause them) and asked to rate their
agreement with these statements on a scale from -3 (strongly
disagree) to 3 (strongly agree). Finally, participants rated
how specific they believed medications and lifestyle
modifications to be as treatments of health issues (i.e.,
treatments can work by generally improving a person’s
health or by specifically targeting a certain disorder) on a
scale of 0 (extremely general) to 100 (extremely specific).
All participants completed the experiment at their own pace
through the Qualtrics Survey Software environment.

Results
Before exploring whether the cause ratings changed in this
experiment, we first examined whether participants thought
the mechanisms we described were plausible causes of the
described health conditions. We analyzed participants’
ratings for how plausible it was that our mechanism of
action was related to the described condition (e.g., airway
inflammation and respiratory problems). Using one-sample
t-tests comparing ratings to the mid-point of the scale (i.e.,
0) allowed us to test whether our mechanisms were
significantly plausibly related to the given conditions. All of
our mechanisms were rated as very plausible and
significantly above zero: airborne allergy exposure for
medical condition (M=2.17), t(59) = 13.00, p < .001; airway
inflammation for medical condition (M=2.33), t(59) =
16.43, p < .001; stress exposure reduction for mental
condition (M=2.07), t(59) = 13.28, p < .001; brain chemistry
imbalance for mental condition (M=2.23), t(59) = 14.98, p <
.001. We also checked to see if participants thought that the
thing each treatment was targeting (e.g., stress, airway
inflammation) was plausibly a cause of its corresponding
health condition (e.g., mood regulation issues, respiratory
problems). Again, one-sample t-tests comparing against 0
allowed us to assess whether people significantly agree that
this treatment targeted the cause. For all of our proposed
mechanisms, people significantly agreed that our
mechanism could be a cause of the given disorder: airborne

1532

allergy exposure for medical condition (M=1.52), t(59) =
10.56, p < .001; airway inflammation for medical condition
(M=1.17), t(59) = 6.18, p < .001; stress exposure reduction
for mental condition (M=1.12), t(59) = 6.22, p < .001; brain
chemistry imbalance for mental condition (M=1.62), t(59) =
11.17, p < .001. In short, these ratings support the idea that
our described treatment mechanisms could believably be
thought to target the cause of the type of health conditions
in question.
We next moved on to our main question of interest: does
providing a specific mechanism by which a treatment could
work increase belief in the treatment targeting the root cause
of the disorder? We submitted participants’ ratings to the
same 2 (intervention) x 2 (target) x 2 (disorder type) mixed
ANOVA as in Experiment 1. As found previously, there
was no main effect or interaction with disorder type, ps >
.31, indicating that the type of disorder did not differentially
influence treatment ratings. We found a main effect of
intervention, F(1, 58) = 9.88, p = .003, 𝜂!! = .15, reflecting
that participants rated lifestyle changes (M=67.63) as a more
potent intervention overall than medication (M=60.48). We
also found a main effect of target, F(1, 58) = 26.21, p <
.001, 𝜂!! = .31, representing that symptoms (M=71.75) were
more likely to be thought to be targeted than causes
(M=56.37). The interaction did not reach significance, F(1,
58) = 2.58, p = .11, 𝜂!! = .043. The three-way interaction
was also not significant, p = .57. Figure 4 depicts mean
target effectiveness ratings averaged across disorder type as
in Figure 2.

.20. However, unlike Experiment 1, lifestyle modifications
were rated as also significantly less likely to target the cause
than the symptoms of a disorder, F(1, 58) = 5.85, p = .019,
𝜂!! = .092. Splitting this data another way, a root cause was
seen to be more likely to be targeted by a lifestyle
modification than a medication, F(1, 58) = 6.10, p = .016,
𝜂!! = .095. Symptoms were judged to be equally likely to be
targeted by a medication and a lifestyle change, p = .73.
As in Experiment 1, we explored the ratings participants
provided for how effective the described medication and
lifestyle modifications would be for treating the artificial
disorder. Figure 5 shows this data split by the disorder type
dimension. We conducted a 2 (intervention) x 2 (disorder
type) mixed ANOVA. There was a main effect of
intervention, F(1, 58) = 4.47, p = .039, 𝜂!! = .072. This main
effect reflected that participants judged the lifestyle
modifications (M=69.77) as overall more effective than
medication (M=63.15). The main effect of domain was
marginal, F(1, 58) = 3.34, p = .073, 𝜂!! = .054, reflecting the
same trend as in Experiment 1 that when the disorder was
instantiated as a medical disorder it was seen as more likely
to receive an effective intervention (M=71.30) than when it
was described as a mental disorder (M=61.62). There was
not a significant interaction, p =.43.

Figure 5: Mean effectiveness judgments for
Experiment 2.

Figure 4: Mean targeting judgments for Experiment 2.
To mirror the data presentation of Experiment 1, we
conducted simple effect analyses that collapsed across the
disorder type variable to compare the mean targeting
judgment for causes versus symptoms within each of the
intervention types. As in Experiment 1, participants rated
medication as significantly less likely to target a cause than
the symptoms of a disorder, F(1, 58) = 14.59, p < .001, 𝜂!! =

As in Experiment 1, we had asked participants for their
more general estimates of the effectiveness of medication
and lifestyle modifications when thinking about health
conditions more generally. We analyzed these ratings with a
2 (intervention) x 2 (disorder type) within-subjects
ANOVA. There was a main effect of disorder type, F(1, 59)
= 11.92, p = .001, 𝜂!! = .17, reflecting higher effectiveness
ratings for medical disorders (M=69.38) than mental
disorders (M=62.05). The main effect of intervention and
the interaction were not significant, ps > .42, as in
Experiment 1.

1533

Discussion
In this experiment we added information about the causal
mechanism by which treatments work to determine if this
information increased ratings of how effective the
treatments were at treating the root cause of the disorder.
We did not find that targeting judgments for causes
increased for our two treatments. Rather, we found that the
same difference between cause and symptoms was found for
medications, and now lifestyle modifications were seen as
less likely to target causes than symptoms. These findings
were obtained despite the fact that treatments were
described as acting upon factors that participants rated as
likely causes of the health conditions in question.
Finding that our causal mechanism information did not
increase cause targeting ratings fits with previous findings
that suggest explaining causal mechanisms can interfere
with understanding. For example, Fernbach et al. (2013)
showed that explaining the causal mechanism of a political
issue decreased perceived understanding of the issue and
extremity of views held about the issue. More generally,
people believe they understand much more about causal
mechanisms in the world than they actually do (Rozenblit &
Keil, 2002). In our experiment, explaining how the lifestyle
modification could have worked may have suggested to
people how little they understood about how such
treatments work on root causes in the first place. As a result,
they rated the treatment as less likely to work through this
mechanism they did not understand. If this is the underlying
force in our effects, it is an interesting case of where outside
instruction on a causal mechanism dispels an illusion of
understanding.

General Discussion
In this set of two experiments we measured people’s beliefs
about where treatments intervene in a health causal system.
While theories of causal models and previous research
within health decision making has suggested the importance
people see in intervening on root causes (e.g., Yopchick &
Kim, 2009), our results suggest that people may hold
treatment-specific beliefs about where interventions actually
occurs. Within our disorder context people did not endorse
medications as intervening on causes but still endorsed them
as effective treatments. Highlighting causal mechanisms by
which treatments could work on a root cause did not
increase cause target judgments and instead reduced these
judgments for lifestyle modifications.
People believe that different types of treatments can work
on different parts of the causal system but still be equally
effective. This suggests that people are able to navigate the
tension between ideal causal interventions and real world
treatments: even “non-ideal” interventions can still be
effective. These results have important implications for
thinking about treatment decisions within the health care
setting. For instance, people may believe that a patient will
need to be on a medication for life because this medication
never actually removes the cause of the problem (e.g.,
someone taking an antidepressant can never stop taking it

without symptoms returning). In summary, we have
provided a first look into how people believe interventions
work in a real-world causal system. It is the avenue of future
research to explore how these naïve beliefs manifest in other
domains.

Acknowledgments
Funding was provided by Lehigh University research funds
given to the first author.

References
Ahn, W. K., Proctor, C. C., & Flanagan, E. H. (2009).
Mental health clinicians’ beliefs about the biological,
psychological, and environmental bases of mental
disorders. Cognitive Science, 33, 147-182.
Böhm, G., & Pfister, H. R. (2000). Action tendencies and
characteristics of environmental risks. Acta Psychologica,
104, 317-337.
de Kwaadsteniet, L., Hagmayer, Y., Krol, N. P., &
Witteman, C. L. (2010). Causal client models in selecting
effective interventions: A cognitive mapping study.
Psychological Assessment, 22, 581-592.
Fernbach, P. M., Rogers, T., Fox, C. R., & Sloman, S. A.
(2013). Political extremism is supported by an illusion of
understanding. Psychological Science, 24, 939-946.
Hagmayer, Y., & Sloman, S. A. (2009). Decision makers
conceive of their choices as interventions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138, 22-38.
Hagmayer, Y., Sloman, S. A., Lagnado, D. A., &
Waldmann, M. R. (2007). Causal reasoning through
intervention. In A. Gopnik & L. E. Schulz (Eds.), Causal
learning: Psychology, philosophy, and computation (pp.
86-100): Oxford University Press.
Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2005). Young children infer
causal strength from probabilities and interventions.
Psychological Science, 16, 678-683.
Marsh, J. K., & Ahn, W. K. (2012). Memory for patient
information as a function of experience in mental health.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 26, 462-474.
Park, J., & Sloman, S. A. (2013). Mechanistic beliefs
determine adherence to the Markov property in causal
reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 67, 186-216.
Rozenblit, L., & Keil, F. (2002). The misunderstood limits
of folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth.
Cognitive Science, 26, 521-562.
Sabaté, E. (Ed.). (2003). Adherence to long-term therapies:
Evidence for action. World Health Organization.
Schulz, L. E., Gopnik, A., & Glymour, C. (2007). Preschool
children learn about causal structure from conditional
interventions. Developmental Science, 10, 322-332.
Waldmann, M. R., Holyoak, K. J., & Fratianne, A. (1995).
Causal models and the acquisition of category structure.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 181206.
Yopchick, J. E., & Kim, N. S. (2009). The influence of
causal information on judgments of treatment efficacy.
Memory & Cognition, 37, 29-41.

1534

