No One Left Behind: How Social Distance Affects Life-Saving Decision Making
Yufeng Zhang (yufeng-zhang12@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Department of Psychology, Tsinghua University
Beijing, 100084 China

Haotian Zhou (haotian.zhou@chicagobooth.edu)
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Mo Luan (luanmo_emma@163.com)
Department of Psychology, Tsinghua University
Beijing, 100084 China

Hong Li*(corresponding author) (lhong@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Department of Psychology, Tsinghua University
Beijing, 100084 China

Abstract
This research explored how social distance affects risk
preference in the life-saving domain. We found that decisionmakers tend to be more risk-seeking when the lives of close
others versus distant others are at stake. By analyzing the
shape of value function, we showed that the underlying
mechanism for this difference in risk attitude might be that
decision-makers engage in feeling-based evaluation when
close others’ lives are at stake but calculation-based
evaluation when distant others’ lives are at stake.
Keywords: social distance; risk preference; decision making

Introduction
Social distance reflects relational closeness, of which the
reference point is the self (Trope & Liberman, 2010). Social
distance is a continuum, one end is the self and the other end
might be closest others, family members, relatives, friends,
acquaintances or strangers, people with different social
distances or relational closeness with the self.
Previous studies on how social distance affects decision
making mainly focused on self-other discrepancies (Polman,
2012). Some studies found that people are more risk-seeking
when making decision for others or predicting others’ risk
preference than for the self (Beisswanger, Stone, Hupp, &
Allgaier, 2003; Hsee & Weber, 1997), whereas others
studies reported that people are less risk-seeking when
choosing for others versus the self (Garcia-Retamero &
Galesic, 2012). Although the answer to the question
regarding the differences between deciding for others and
for the self is inconclusive, we believe that there is another
important question that has so far garnered scant attention.
Few studies have explored people’s risk attitude when
deciding for different others with different levels of social
distances. Specifically, in the present research we sought to
explore this question: Are people more risk-seeking when
different-social-distance others are in danger?
Give that people may experience different level of
emotional arousal depending on who is in danger (mom or

coworker), we aim to explore this question from the
perspective of affect and risk. Slovic, Finucane, Peters, &
MacGregor (2004) contended that there are two
fundamental ways to comprehend risk, i.e., risk as analysis
and risk as feelings. The most popular notions about the
relation between affect and risk are affect heuristics (Slovic,
Finucane, Peters, & MacGregor, 2007) and risk-as-feelings
(Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch, 2001). Previous
studies on affect and risk mainly investigate how affect
influences risk perception, judgments of risks and benefits
(Finucane, Alhakami, Slovic, & Johnson, 2000), judgments
of probability and frequency. For example, Baron (1997)
found that the proportion of lives saved is more dominant
than the actual number of lives saved, since a specified
number of lives carry less precise affective meaning than the
proportion. Some studies also found that specific emotion
(e.g. fear, anxiety) would lead to cautious, risk-averse
decision making (Lerner & Keltner, 2000). However, little
work has been done to understand how affect intensity
(affect-rich versus affect-poor) influences risky decision
making.
Hsee and Rottenstreich (2004) found that when faced with
affect-rich stimuli people rely on feelings, and they are
insensitive to the variation of scope and only sensitive to the
differences between zero and non-zero, and yet when faced
with affect-poor scenario people rely on calculation and are
relatively sensitive to change in quantity. It is not
unreasonable to argue that when close ones are at stake
people rely more on feelings, and yet when the ones to be
saved are distant ones, people rely more on calculation.
Therefore, in the former condition, people should be less
sensitive to how many persons to be saved. For example,
when the lives of four closest persons are at stake, one may
show little sensitivity to whether one or three persons are to
be saved, and both are equally unsatisfying rescue outcome.
However, when the lives of four distant others are at stake,
as the number of people to be saved increases, one might
experience more and more satisfaction. In this way, we infer

2799

that people would be more inclined to choose the risky
option and be more risk-seeking when saving close social
others than distant others. In other words, the present
research proposes that people are more risk-seeking when
the social distance between the ones to be saved and the
decision maker is closer. We conducted three studies to test
this hypothesis systematically and attempted to shed light on
the underlying mechanism in the last study.

questions, the RP Index was defined as 6 (most riskseeking). If a participant chose the risky option in Question
1 through Question i-1, and chose the sure option in
Question i through Question 5, the RP Index was defined as
i (1<i<6). Participants who showed inconsistent choice
pattern across the five questions were assigned a missing
value as their RP Index.

Results and discussion

Study 1

According to the calculation of RP Index, there are eight
participants whose choice pattern across the five questions
was inconsistent, and their RP Indices were assigned a
missing value. The results of the RP Index are reported in
Table 2, with separate entries for the different social
distance. We performed an independent-samples T-test on
these data.

The main purpose of this study is to see if the risk
preferences will be different between different social
distances, i.e., when the ones to be rescued are the decision
maker’s closest ones versus strangers .

Method
Ninety-seven Tsinghua University undergraduates (53 male,
44 female, mean age=19.7) were recruited in a public class
for course credit. All respondents were randomly assigned
to either of two conditions of social distance (close versus
distant).
Participants were asked to imagine that a fire accident
suddenly broke out and six persons were trapped and
waiting to be rescued, and the participants had to choose one
from the two alternative rescuing options in a series of
binary choice questions.
In the close condition the ones to be rescued were
described as the participant’s closest ones (e.g., closest
family members or friends), while in the distant condition
they were described as the strangers to participants.
In either condition, participants answered a set of five
binary-choice questions. The options for these questions are
reproduced in Table 1. Questions in both conditions were
presented in random order and only one question was visible
to participants at a time.
Table 1: Questions in Study 1.
Sure option
1

5 persons die for sure

2

4 persons die for sure

3

3 persons die for sure

4

2 persons die for sure

5

1 person dies for sure

Risky option
50% chance 6 persons die;
50% chance nobody dies.
50% chance 6 persons die;
50% chance nobody dies.
50% chance 6 persons die;
50% chance nobody dies.
50% chance 6 persons die;
50% chance nobody dies.
50% chance 6 persons die;
50% chance nobody dies.

Table 2: Risk Preferences in Study 1.
Social distance
close
distant

Mean(SD)

4.82(1.21)
4.29(1.06)

The analysis revealed a significant effect for social
distance, t(87)=2.20, p=0.030, and the respondents were
more risk-seeking in the close condition than in the distant
condition.
The results in this study support our proposition that
decision-makers tend to be more risk-seeking when the lives
of close others are at stake than distant others. In the next
study, we sought to rule out an alternative explanation.

Study 2
One possible alternative explanation for the main findings in
study 1 may be that in the close condition it is more difficult
for people to select which ones to save and thus they are less
willing to choose the sure options than in the distant
condition. The main purpose of this study was to examine
this explanation.

Method

Each participant was assigned a Risk Preference Index
(RP Index for short) based on his or her choices in the set of
questions. The RP Index, ranging from 1 (most risk-averse)
to 6 (most risk-seeking), was defined as follows (Hsee &
Weber, 1999). If a participant chose the sure option in all
the five questions, the RP Index was defined as 1 (most riskaverse). If a participant chose the risky option in all five

One hundred and six Tsinghua University undergraduates
(50 male, 56 female, mean age=19.6) were recruited in a
public class for course credit. All respondents were assigned
to a 2 (social distance: close versus distant)×2 (selection:
randomly-determined versus self-determined) mixed design,
with social distance as a between-subjects factor and
selection as a within-subjects factor.
The same scenario from Study 1 was used. Also the
manipulation for social distance was the same as in study 1.
In the randomly-determined condition, participants were
informed that which ones to be saved will be randomly
determined, while in the self-determined condition which
ones to be saved were determined by the decision maker.

2800

In addition, there were four persons to be saved instead of
six in this study. The questions are exhibited in Table 3. The
calculation of the RP Index was similar to that in study 1.
Table 3: Questions in Study 2.
No.

Sure option

1

3 persons die for sure

2

2 persons die for sure

3

1 person dies for sure

Risky option
50% chance 4 persons die ;
50% chance nobody dies.
50% chance 4 persons die ;
50% chance nobody dies.
50% chance 4 persons die ;
50% chance nobody dies.

Results and discussion
The results in terms of the RP Index are reported in Table 4,
with separate entries for the different social distances and
the different selections. There are six participants whose
choice patterns across the three questions were inconsistent,
so their RP indices were assigned as missing. We performed
a 2(social-distance: close versus distant) × 2 (selection:
randomly-determined versus self-determined) analysis of
variance for repeated measure on these data.

randomly-determined
self-determined

Social distance
close
distant
Mean(SD)

Mean(SD)

3.24(0.72)
3.26(0.96)

2.90(0.81)
3.54(0.61)

Study 3
The main purpose of this study is to manipulate social
distance as a within-subjects factor to test the robustness of
the effect. In addition, previous studies only adopted the
loss domain, however, in the life-saving decision making,
the gain framing is also very important (Kahnman &
Tversky, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). Therefore, in
this study we also introduce framing as another variable.

Table 4: Risk Preferences in Study 2.

Selection

were less risk-seeking than in the distant condition,
F(1,98)=3.00, p=0.086, η2=0.030.
The results in this study have several implications. Firstly,
for the selection manipulation, the results in the randomlydetermined condition replicated the findings in study 1, and
the results in the self-determined condition suggested a
boundary condition for the effect. Specifically, this effect
only occurs when the selection is randomly-determined
rather than self-determined.
Secondly, the results ruled out the explanation mentioned
at the beginning of this study, i.e., people are more riskseeking in the close condition because they are more
reluctant to select which ones to save. If this explanation
stands, for the close condition, people would be more riskseeking in the self-determined condition than in the
randomly-determined condition. However, there was no
difference between the two conditions. In addition, for the
distant condition, people would be more risk-seeking in the
self-determined condition than in the randomly-determined
condition. It may imply that people are more reluctant to
select which ones to save when the others are close rather
than distant.

Method
The analysis revealed that the main effect for selection
was significant, F(1,98)=11.29, p=0.001, η2=0.103, and
respondents in the self-determined condition were more
risk-seeking than in the randomly-determined condition.
The main effect for social distance was not significant,
F(1,98)=0.06, p=0.808, η2=0.001, and there was no
differences in risk preferences between the close and distant
conditions. More importantly, the social-distance × selection
interaction was significant, F(1,98)=9.97, p=0.002,
η2=0.092.
Simple effect analysis revealed that for the close
condition, respondents in the self-determined condition were
not more risk-seeking than in the randomly-determined
condition, F(1,98)=0.02, p=0.886, η2<0.001. However, for
the distant condition respondents in the self-determined
condition were significantly more risk-seeking than in the
randomly-determined condition, F(1,98)=21.24, p<0.001,
η2=0.178.
Simple effect analysis also revealed that for the randomlydetermined condition, respondents in the close condition are
significantly more risk-seeking than in the distant condition,
F(1,98)=4.92, p=0.029, η2=0.048. However, for the selfdetermined condition respondents in the close condition

Forty-eight Tsinghua University undergraduates (28 male,
20 female, mean age=19.2) were recruited in a public class
for course credit. All respondents were assigned to all four
conditions of a 2(social distance: close versus distant) ×
2(framing: gain versus loss) within-subjects design.
Table 5: Questions in the gain set in Study 3.

1
2
3
4
5

Sure option
1 person is saved
for sure
2 persons are saved
for sure
3 persons are saved
for sure
4 persons are saved
for sure
5 persons are saved
for sure

Risky option
50% chance 6 persons are saved;
50% chance nobody is saved.
50% chance 6 persons are saved;
50% chance nobody is saved.
50% chance 6 persons are saved;
50% chance nobody is saved.
50% chance 6 persons are saved;
50% chance nobody is saved.
50% chance 6 persons are saved;
50% chance nobody is saved.

Description of the scenario and manipulation for social
distance were the same as in the previous studies. The
options in the loss frame were the same as in Study 1. The
questions in the gain frame are exhibited in Table 5. Note

2801

that the options in the gain set were the same as in the loss
set, except that the word “dies/die” was replaced by “is/are
saved”. The order in which participants answered gain and
loss-frame sets were randomly determined, and so were the
order of binary-choice questions in either set. Only one
question was visible to participants at a time. The
calculation of the RP Index was similar to that in study 1.

Results and discussion
The results of the RP Index are reported in table 6, with
separate entries for the different social distances and the
different domains. There are ten participants whose choice
patterns across the five questions were inconsistent, so their
RP indices were assigned as missing. We performed a
2(social-distance: close versus distant) × 2 (framing: gain
versus loss) analysis of variance for repeated measure on the
non-missing data.
Table 6: Risk Preferences in Study 3.
Social distance
distant

Domain

close

Mean(SD)

Mean(SD)

gain
loss

3.74(1.06)
4.82(1.06)

3.29(1.21)
4.11(1.23)

people rely on feeling-based evaluation in the close
condition but calculation-based evaluation in the distant
condition. Specifically, the negative feeling people
experience when losing more close others is only a little
more significant than when losing only one close person,
and the feelings are both very negative. However, the
negative feeling people experience when losing more
strangers is more significant than losing only one stranger.
In other words, the value function would be more akin to a
step function in close condition but a linear function in the
distant condition.

Method
One hundred Tsinghua University undergraduates (53 male,
47 female, mean age=19.7) were recruited in a public class
for course credit. All respondents were randomly assigned
to two conditions of social distance (close versus distant).
Manipulation for social distance was the same as in study
2. There were six persons to be rescued, and participants
were asked to rate their feelings about losing 0 to 6 persons
on a 7-point scale, in which 1 means very unsatisfying and 7
means very satisfying.

Results and discussion

The analysis revealed a significant main effect for social
distance, F(1,37)=14.61, p<0.001, η2=0.283, and the
respondents were more risk-seeking in the close condition
than in the distant condition. It also yielded a significant
main effect for framing, F(1,37)=27.50, p<0.001, η2=0.426,
and the respondents were more risk-seeking in the loss
condition than in the gain condition. In addition, the socialdistance × frmae interaction was not significant,
F(1,37)=1.70, p=0.201, η2=0.044.
The results in this study replicate our proposition that
decision-makers tend to be more risk-seeking when the lives
of close others are at stake than distant others. It occurred
regardless of the valence of frame.
For the gain frame, there is a possible explanation that
when the close ones are at stake one would actually still
consider the outcome as loss even if it is framed as gain,
while when the distance ones are to be saved one would
consider the outcome as gain as framed. Since people are
more risk seeking in the loss frame than in the gain frame
(Kahnman & Tversky, 1979), this proposition could explain
the findings in the gain frame. However, for the loss frame,
we also found that people are more risk seeking in the close
condition than in the distant condition, which the previous
proposition could not explain. In the next study, we sought
to the potential underlying mechanism for our main effect.

Study 4
In this study we aimed to explore the underlying mechanism
of the previous findings. According to the affective
psychology of value (Hsee & Rottenstreich, 2004), we
proposed that the differences in risk preference was because

The value functions of feelings in two conditions of social
distance are displayed in Figure 1, where we plotted the
average feeling ratings against the number of lost lives for
the two distance conditions separately.

Figure 1: Value functions of feelings.
If participants indeed engaged in feeling-based evaluation
when the lives of close others were at stake but calculationbased evaluation when the lives of distant others were at
stake, then the value function would be more akin to a step
function in the case of close others but a linear function in
the case of distant others. To test this hypothesis, for each
participant, we attempted to model the seven feeling ratings
with a step function and linear function separately. In other
words, we assessed how well the actual feeling ratings of a
given participants could be predicted with a step function
versus a linear one. Through this operation, we obtained two
correlation coefficients for each participant, with one

2802

measuring the fitness of the step function model and the
other the fitness of the linear function model.
To analyze whether the relative superiority of the two
models was conditioned on social distance manipulation, we
first applied Fisher-transformation to convert the correlation
coefficients to z-scores and then conducted a 2 (model type:
step vs. linear) × 2 (social distance: close vs. distant) mixed
ANOVA on the resultant z-scores. A significant two-way
interaction between model type emerged, F(1,91)=25.00,
p<0.001, η2=0.22. Simple effect analysis revealed that the
step function fitted the ratings of participants in the close
condition (r = 0.98) better than those in the distant condition
(r=0.81), F(1,91)=25.59, p<0.001, η2=0.25. In contrast, the
linear function fitted the ratings of participants in the distant
condition better (r=0.93) than those in the close condition
(r=0.83), F(1,91)=12.24, p<0.001, η2=0.12. These results of
statistical analysis were corroborated by visual inspection of
the Figure 1.
The relative superiority of the step function over the
linear function in the case of close others is consistent with
the hypothesis that participants evaluated close others’ lives
via the feeling-based route. On the other hand, the relative
superiority of the linear function over the step function in
the case of distant others is consistent with the hypothesis
that participants evaluated distant others’ lives via the
calculation-based route.
The value function of feeling could explain the
differences in risk preference in different conditions of
social distance between the decision maker and the ones to
be saved. Since the value function resembled the step
function more in the close condition, people were equally
unsatisfied with the sure option even if the number of
persons saved increases, and thus they would consistently
prefer the risky option. On the contrary, since the value
function resembled the linear function in the distant
condition, people become more and more satisfied with the
sure option as the number increases, and thus they would
switch to the sure option from the risky option. Therefore,
people are more risk-seeking when close others are at stake
than distant others.

General discussion
The present research investigated the effect of social
distance on risk preference and explored the underlying
mechanism. We next discuss the relation of the present
research and the existing literature, future directions and
limitations of the present research.
In the present research we found that people are more risk
seeking when social distance between persons in danger and
the decision-maker is closer in the life-saving domain. It is
much more different from the previous studies about how
social distance affects risk preference, which mainly focus
on self-other discrepancies. Firstly, in the present research
we consider social distance as a variable between persons
implicated in the decision context (life-saving tasks) and the
decision-maker, while the previous studies consider social
distance from the perspective of the role of decision-maker

(deciding for others versus for the self). Secondly, here we
investigated different-other differences rather than self-other
discrepancies.
The findings of the present research suggest that people
are more risk-seeking when the social distance is closer in
the life-saving domain, which is consistent with Stone,
Yates, & Caruthers (2002), who find that people are more
risk-averse when deciding for others than for themselves in
situations where risk aversion is valued (physical safety
scenarios), but inconsistent with Beisswanger et al. (2003),
who find that people are more risk-seeking when deciding
for others than for themselves in the low-impact relationship
scenarios. At first glance, it may be contradictory, but the
difference can be reconciled after further analysis.
In different domains people reveal different risk
preferences (Weber, Blais, & Betz, 2002). Furthermore,
Stone, Choi, de Bruim, & Mandel (2013) find that people
made more risk-averse decisions for others than for
themselves in situations where risk aversion is valued
(physical safety scenarios) but more risk-taking decisions
for others than for themselves in situations where risk taking
is valued (relationship scenarios). Beisswanger et al. (2003)
report that the self-other difference occurs only for low lifeimpact decisions but does not occur when the decisions have
particularly serious potential consequences in the
relationship scenarios. Specifically, since the life-saving
scenario we adopt in the present research is very important
and of high-impact, and it may be another domain where the
risk aversion is valued, so people would be more riskseeking in the case of close social distance versus distant
social distance. We surmise that in some domains when
social distance is more distant people are more risk-seeking
while in other domains people are more risk-averse. We
may test this proposition in the future research.
More importantly, in the present research we provide one
reasonable explanation in terms of affect and risk,
specifically, feeling-based and calculation-based evaluation.
In the last study we examined the value function of feelings,
and found that the value function in the case of close others
resembled a step-function and the one in the distant case
resembled a linear function, which implies that people
incline to adopt feeling-based rather than calculation-based
evaluation when the social distance is closer. When the
social distance is closer, people are not so sensitive to the
number of persons to be saved as in the distant condition,
unless they could save all the people, thus they would prefer
the risky option to the sure option and reveal higher risk
preference.
Some previous studies have shown that affect impacts the
way we perceive and evaluate risk, for instance, when
people feel bad, they will perceive the risk to be higher and
might be more risk-averse (Finucane et al., 2000), and when
people feel fearful, they will perceive the risk to be higher
and be more risk-averse (Lerner & Keltner, 2000). In the
life-saving domain, when faced with others in danger people
may feel bad and fear. However, we found that when social
distance is closer, people may feel worse and more fearful,

2803

yet they are much more risk-seeking. Maybe the feelings
people experience when faced with the scenario are
complex, it is neither emotion with valence (i.e., goodness
or badness) nor specific emotion (e.g., fear or anxiety).
Further clarification requires future work. We could infer
from the present research that affect-rich rather than affectpoor people are more risk-seeking.
There are also some limitations in the current research.
One limitation is that we only studied decision-making in
the life-saving domain, in future research we need examine
whether our finding can be generalized to other domains,
e.g., monetary domain, relationship domain and so on.
Another limitation is that the nature of the choice scenarios
is hypothetical. In the future, we will also investigate
decision making in real context in different conditions of
social distance.

References
Baron, J. (1997). Confusion of relative and absolute risk in
valuation. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 14(3), 301309.
Beisswanger, A. H., Stone, E. R., Hupp, J. M., & Allgaier, L.
(2003). Risk taking in relationships: Differences in
deciding for oneself versus for a friend. Basic and Applied
Social Psychology, 25(2), 121-135.
Finucane, M. L., Alhakami, A., Slovic, P., & Johnson, S. M.
(2000). The affect heuristic in judgments of risks and
benefits. Journal of behavioral decision making, 13(1), 117.
Garcia-Retamero, R., & Galesic, M. (2012). Doc, what
would you do if you were me? On self-other
discrepencies in medical decision making. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 18, 38-51.
Hsee, C. K., & Rottenstreich, Y. (2004). Music, pandas, and
muggers: On the affective psychology of value. Journal
of Experimental Psychology-General, 133(1), 23-29.
Hsee, C. K., & Weber, E. U. (1997). A fundamental
prediction error: Self-others discrepancies in risk
preference. Journal of Experimental Psychology-General,
126(1), 45-52.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica: Journal of
the Econometric Society, 263-291.
Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2000). Beyond valence:
Toward a model of emotion-specific influences on
judgment and choice. Cognition and Emotion, 14, 473494.
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N.
(2001). Risk as feelings. Psychological bulletin, 127(2),
267-286.
Polman, E. (2012). Self–other decision making and loss
aversion. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 119(2), 141-150.
Slovic, P., Finucane, M. L., Peters, E., & MacGregor, D. G.
(2004). Risk as analysis and risk as feelings: Some
thoughts about affect, reason, risk, and rationality. Risk
analysis, 24(2), 311-322.

Slovic, P., Finucane, M. L., Peters, E., & MacGregor, D. G.
(2007).The affect heuristic. European Journal of
Operational Research, 177(3), 1333-1352
Stone, E. R., Choi, Y., de Bruin, W. B., & Mandel, D. R.
(2013). I can take the risk, but you should be safe: Selfother differences in situations involving physical
safety. Judgment and Decision Making, 8(3), 250-267.
Stone, E. R., Yates, A. J., & Caruthers, A. S. (2002). Risk
Taking in Decision Making for Others Versus the
Self. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32(9), 17971824.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory of
psychological distance. Psychological review, 117(2),
440-463.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 185,
1124-1130.
Weber, E. U., Blais, A. R., & Betz, N. E. (2002). A domainspecific risk-attitude scale: Measuring risk perceptions
and risk behaviors. Journal of behavioral decision making,
15(4), 263-290.

2804

