Partitioning the Firing Patterns of Spike Trains by
Community Modularity
Hu Lu(myluhu@126.com)a,b
a

School of computer science and communication engineering, 301 Xuefu Road
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212003 China
b
School of Computer Science, 825 Zhangheng Road
Fudan University, Shanghai 201203 China

Xing Hao Huang(m15251706875_1@163.com)
School of computer science and communication engineering, 301 Xuefu Road
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212003 China

Yu Qing Song(yqsong@ujs.edu.cn)
School of computer science and communication engineering, 301 Xuefu Road
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212003 China

Hui Wei(weihui@fudan.edu.cn)
School of Computer Science, 825 Zhangheng Road
Fudan University, Shanghai 201203 China

Abstract
The traditional clustering method utilized to partition
neuronal firing patterns, including K-means and FCM
algorithm, require specification of clusters numbers as priori
knowledge. A new approach to analyze groups of firing
patterns of neuronal spike trains based on community
structure partitioning analysis and modularity function Q is
examined in this study. This approach is able to automatically
identify the optimal number of groups in neuronal firing
patterns, realizing the true unsupervised analysis, and identify
groups of neurons with similar firing patterns. The method
was tested on a surrogate data set and a testing data set with
firing patterns known in advance. The method was also
applied to multi-electrode recording spike trains with
previously unknown patterns. Results indicate this method
can effectively self-determine number of pattern groups and
locate firing patterns of neuronal populations based on
community modularity Q.
Keywords: Community structure; Modularity; Clustering;
Neuronal firing pattern

Introduction
A pressing neuroscience question exists as brain neuron
encoding related to external information for learning,
memory and other cognitive tasks remains unknown (Brown
et al., 2004). Neurons transmit information through the form
of action potentials. The distributions of action potentials
firing at different times and spaces is referred to as spatialtemporal firing patterns. The study found when the same
stimulation currents were injected into the soma of a cortical
neuron in vitro the neuron may produce similar firing
patterns (Fellous et al., 2004.). These patterns are very likely
the neural basis of information representation and
processing (Pillow et al., 2008). Each cortical area is

composed of a large number of neurons, thus the study of
brain functions has transferred from a single neuron to a
large neuronal populations. The development of
extracellular recording techniques has allowed a number of
neurons to be recorded simultaneously by utilizing the
multi-electrode recording (Buzsáki, 2004). Analysis of the
intrinsic firing relationship between these neurons may
reveal an existing structural or functional connectivity
between the neurons (Jarrell et al., 2012). Studies have
revealed brain modularity when performing cognitive tasks
and that neural firing activities within the modules are
correlative with several neurons exhibiting some type of
similar firing patterns in a module (Schneidman et al., 2006).
Discovering and analyzing neural systems holds key
significance in revealing brain patterns (Lindsey et al.,
1997).
Many computational and methodological challenges exist
to study these firing patterns (Brown et al., 2004).
Clustering methods such as the K-means clustering
approach, FCM clustering algorithm and spectral clustering
method have also been proposed to analyze the firing
patterns (Toups & Tiesinga, 2006; Paiva et al., 2007).
Clustering methods must specify the number of pattern
groups in advance while the number of groups in real spike
trains is unknown, limiting the practical usefulness of these
methods. A new spike trains communities finding method
based on the principle of community structure detection has
been proposed; however, this method also utilized Kmeans++ clustering algorithm in resulting similarity matrix
eigenvectors (Humphries, 2011). Newman (2011) applied
the clustering algorithm described by Humphries (2011) to
identify neuron communities during a reach and grasp task
(Newman et al., 2011). Community structure detection

1434

algorithm is a graph partitioning method widely utilized in
social network analysis. The recognition of community
structure is a NP-hard problem with many new methods
proposed to solve the problem. A modularity function Q has
been proposed to optimize the community structure
partitioning problem without requiring knowledge of
community numbers in advance and to find the optimal
partitioning of community structure by maximizing the
modularity function Q (Le & Hankin, 2011).

Materials and Methods
Surrogate data set
Proposed methods in this study were tested utilizing spike
trains data sets with known neuronal firing patterns. A
spiking neuronal model was utilized to generate a data set
containing the three similar firing pattern groups (Izhikevich,
2003). The number of neurons was 30. The known neuronal
community structure model included 3 communities and
was constructed so neuronal firing patterns in each
community were similar. Each community structure
contained 10 neurons as presented in the neuronal raster plot
(Fig.1A). Although neuronal firing patterns in this data set
are simple, pattern clustering analysis methods are required
to accurately locate firing patterns.

Testing data set

Figure 1: Schematic overview of neuronal functional
network construction. (A) The original spike trains (line
represents neuronal spikes). (B) Spike vector groups by
binning the spike trains. (C) Correlation matrix by
calculating correlations between two neuronal spike trains.
(D) Retain all edges and construct a neuronal functional
network. Physical locations of neurons in this Figure are
random as study is limited to the functional connections
between neurons.
A new neuronal firing pattern finding method based on
optimization of modular function Q was proposed in this
study. Neuronal functional networks constructed from
neuronal spike trains can be divided into different modules
through the Ncut clustering algorithm. Optimal division of
spike trains was obtained by searching for the maximum
value of Q using this method. Number of pattern groups
was determined automatically by dividing the corresponding
neuronal spike trains into similar groups, realizing the true
unsupervised clustering of firing patterns. The K-means
clustering algorithm was not utilized as with other existing
firing pattern finding methods, thus this method not only
found the similar spatial-temporal firing groups, but also
divided neuronal functional networks into different
community structures (Gansel & Singer, 2012; Toups &
Tiesinga, 2006). Results revealed the technique was
effective when tested on a surrogate data set and a testing
data set with pattern structures known in advance. Finally,
application to in vivo multi-electrode recording neuronal
spike trains data set was performed with the firing patterns
hidden and undiscovered.

A testing data set, created by Fellous (2004), composed of
90 spike trains and containing 3 pattern groups, was also
utilized. A spike train simulates common patterns across
trials of a single neuron. The corresponding neuronal raster
plot is depicted in Fig.3A. Noise and jitter were added to the
spike trains causing the spike trains to exhibit irregular
firing. The data set can be obtained from sharing website
(available from
http://cnl.salk.edu/fellous/data/JN2004data/data.html) and
can be used to test various firing pattern finding algorithm.

In vivo recording data set
Data sets above were utilized to introduce a new
modularity-based method for finding firing patterns in multi
spike trains. This method was applied to real in vivo spike
trains data as neuronal spike trains were analyzed by
utilizing the multi-electrode arrays recorded from behavioral
rats performing the Y-maze working memory task. Male
Spraque-Dawley rats were used. Surgical procedures were
performed under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia.
Microelectrode array was made by 16 microelectrodes.
Microelectrode array was implanted in the left mPFC.
Recording signal acquisition system used the Plexon
multichannel acquisition processor system. Spike trains of
neurons were obtained by the Plexon Offline Sorter. All
experimental procedures were approved and monitored by
the Ethical Committee of Animal Experiments at the
Institute of Neurobiology, Fudan University (Shanghai,
China). Trial processes were selected randomly at a time
period. The time length was 42s, between 3082s and 3124 s
of the whole recording time. The data set included 82 task
trials with 20 neuronal spike trains analyzed.

Methods
Different types of neuronal spike trains data sets were
collected including multiple neuronal spike trains recorded
from a trial task and neuronal spike trains consisting of
several trials of single neurons.

1435

Figure 2: Utilizing the proposed method to locate firing patterns in the data set presented in Fig. 1A. (A) Represents raster
plot of 30 neuronal spike trains. (B) Represents correlation matrix between neurons. (C) Distribution of Q values utilizing the
Newman modularity is represented, deriving maximum value of Q when the number of communities equals 3. (D) According
to the Q, we divided 30 neurons into 3 communities only give out the connections between the inter-communities. (E)
Correlation matrix in Fig. 2B was sorted according to the communities, resulting in a new matrix, indicating obvious modular
structure compared to Fig. 2B. (F) Raster plot of spike trains with sorting according to similar firing patterns in Fig. 2A and
time window size set to 10s.
Construction of the functional connections between
neuronal spike trains based on the correlation of neuronal
firing were first required. Figure 1 depicts a raster plot of
multi-neuronal spike trains with each mark representing the
firing of a neuronal action potential. A line of marks
represents a neuronal action potential sequence. Calculating
correlations between pairs of neurons is the first step to
constructing functional connections of neurons. The
procedure was realized, in this study, by binning the spike
rastergram into non-overlapping, short time windows (also
refers to bins). Multiple neuronal spike trains were
converted to vector groups by sizing the bin utilizing
parameter  t and counting the number of spikes in each
bin. The element of vector represents the number of spikes
in each bin, as indicated in Fig. 1B. Pearson correlation
coefficient r was utilized to calculate the correlation
between the two spike trains:

r

  x  x  y  y 
i

i 1

i

  x  x  . ( y  y)
2

i 1

i

i 1

(1)
2

i

Where xi represents the value of the ith bin of the xth spike
trains. x represents the average values of all bins of the xth
spike trains. The value of r is between -1 and 1.
Pearson correlation has been widely utilized to calculate
correlations between brain signals in the study of brain
functional networks. Focus of this research includes
functional connectivity strength between neurons, regardless

of the direction of functional connections, so the
connectivity weights between neurons were defined as
absolute values of Pearson correlation coefficient,

Rij  r

(2)

The
undirected,
weighted
neuronal
functional
connectivity graph was built based on the weighted
correlation matrix R (Liang & Zhang, 2011). Weighted
network is converted into binary by thresholding to simplify
the analysis in some studies. Different group partitioning
methods, based on the correlation matrix R, may be utilized
to divide matrix into different clusters. Standard data
clustering techniques, such as K-means may be utilized to
find clusters within the comparison matrix; however, Kmeans requires specific clustering numbers and cluster
centers in advance. The Ncut spectral clustering algorithm
proposed by Shi and Malik(2000) and utilized in this study,
is a graph-based partitioning method (Shi & Malik, 2000).
Ncut algorithm produces a comparatively superior
performance and has been applied in the brain functional
networks of fMRI (Van et al., 2008; Shen et al., 2010).
Ncut algorithm application obtains a neuronal functional
network partition. Evaluation of the partition quality and
derivation of the number of groups hidden in spike trains
was achieved utilizing the modular function Q (Newman,
2004; Leicht & Newman, 2008). When value Q reached
maximum, a corresponding number of communities
reflected the number of neuronal firing pattern groups. A
weighted network modular function Q is defined as follows:

1436

Figure 3: (A) Original raster of spike trains. (B) Distribution of different modularity Q calculated from different number of
pattern groups. (C) Divide 90 trials into three firing pattern groups with time window size set to 0.2s.

Figure 4: The time window size is set to 4s. (A) original raster plot of spike trains (B) correlation matrix of spike trains (C)
distribution of different Q value (D) correlation matrix sorted according to two similar patterns (E) sorted spike trains with
two similar firing patterns.

Q

kk 

1
w  i j  mi ,m j

i , jN  ij
l
l 


Results

(3)

Surrogate data set

Where l is the sum of values in the weighted matrix.

ki and k j are the degree of node i and node j ,
respectively.

 ij

is the Kronecker delta function, which

equals 1 when node i and node j are in the same
community and 0 when elsewhere. The community
partitioning analysis process was realized by performing the
following two steps alternately. A single partitioning was
obtained in the first step utilizing Ncut algorithm when the
number of communities was assigned to 2. The value of Q
was calculated corresponding to this partitioning in the
second step. One was then added to the number of
communities and the above two steps repeated until the
number of communities equaled the number of nodes. A
distribution of Q values and corresponding partitioning was
obtained and maximum modularity Q and corresponding
partitioning then derived.

The study method automatically identified similar firing
patterns of neurons by utilizing the community partitioning
algorithm, including the number of pattern groups and
corresponding firing patterns, without prior knowledge of
patterns contained in the data sets. Effectiveness of this
method is illustrated as partitioning algorithm on a surrogate
data set is tested. Figure 2 presents a description of the
implementation procedure.
Prior knowledge of pattern groups does not exist in the
spike trains although there were obvious firing patterns
among 30 neuronal spike trains (Fig. 2). The initial
structures between neurons were in disorder (Fig. 2A), thus
the number of groups and the firing patterns contained in the
spike trains remained unknown without applying the
clustering analysis method. Using the proposed community
partitioning method, the number of pattern groups was
automatically identified and equaled 3 (Fig. 2C). Ncut

1437

Figure 5: Distribution of different Q with different bin size t parameter selected (A) Results of surrogate data set when bin
size equals 5s and 10s and optimal number of groups 3 are identified. Optimal number of pattern groups is 2, otherwise. (B)
Results of testing data set.
partitioning method was then utilized to divide the 30
neurons into 3 groups according to the pattern similarity
(Fig. 2D) while the original spike trains were sorted
resulting in a new raster plot (Fig. 2F). Compared to Fig. 2A,
Fig. 2F exhibits three obvious spatial-temporal firing
patterns and Fig. 2B and Fig. 2E represent the correlation
coefficient matrix of before sorting and after sorting,
respectively.

Testing data set
A different data sent created by Fellous (2004) and
containing a known number of groups equaling 3 was also
tested. Figure 3 presents experimental results with Fig. 3A
representing spike trains containing multiple trials of a
neuron. Neuroscientists utilize the clustering analysis
method to discover the firing pattern in the spike trains.
Spike trains were divided into different communities and
corresponding Q values calculated. Maximum modularity
value of Q was obtained when the number of communities
equaled 3. Ninety trials of spike trains were divided into 3
groups utilizing the Ncut algorithm as represented in
different colors (Fig. 3C). Number of groups known in
advance is not required with this method as opposed to the
K-means clustering method, thus pattern discovery occurs
unsupervised.

In vivo recording data set
The framework was applied to the recording spike trains in
vivo and a trial process of spike trains was selected with a
time period of 40 s and the number of neurons at 20.
The spike trains data set was recorded from the prefrontal
cortex of a rat chronically implanted with multi electrode
arrays (see methods). Structure of the data set, including the
number of pattern groups, was unknown in advance, thus
the proposed analysis method was applied to detect
assemblies. Community modularity Q was utilized for this
study as Q values were calculated when the number of
communities varied. The maximum Q was found when the
number of communities equaled 2 (Fig. 4C). The 20

neuronal spike trains were then divided into two groups and
two firing patterns identified. (Fig. 4E)

Parameters selection
Bin size t of spike trains is a parameter utilized in this study
as different t will affect the number of spikes in each bin.
The impact of bin size on experimental results was analyzed
as a series of different bin sizes was utilized to construct
neuronal functional networks. Framework proposed in this
study was then applied to detect the optimal number of
groups.
Results of the two data sets were compared with the
optimal number of groups known in advance. Different
parameter influence on identification of the optimal number
of groups was investigated revealing that different bin size
affected optimal number of groups. Research for parameter
selection is difficult. There is no more researches to show
how to select the parameters reasonably.

Conclusion
A new method to detect multi neuronal firing patterns has
been provided with the overall algorithm based on the
Pearson correlation coefficient matrix, Ncut partitioning
algorithm and modularity function Q. The algorithm
automatically determines the number of pattern groups
contained in spike trains by comparing the value of Q.
Based on the maximum value of Q corresponding to
potential optimal number of pattern groups, the firing of
multi spike trains can be divided into different firing
patterns without a priori knowledge about the number of
groups or structure of spike trains. However, modularity
function Q encounters the problem of resolution limit,
which cannot identify some modules smaller than a certain
scale. In future research, we will extend community
structure partitioning methods that do not depend on
modularity optimization (Lu & Wei, 2013).

1438

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dr. Shengtao Yang（Fudan University）
for providing us with multiple electrodes neural spike trains
data. This study was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Project No. 61375122), China
Postdoctoral
Science
Foundation
(Project
No.
2014M551324).Scientific
Research
Foundation
for
Advanced Talents of Jiangsu University (Project No.
14JDG040).

References
Brown, E. N., Kass, R. E., & Mitra, P. P. (2004). Multiple
neural spike train data analysis: state-of-the-art and future
challenges. Nature neuroscience, 7(5), 456-461.
Buzsáki, G. (2004). Large-scale recording of neuronal
ensembles. Nature neuroscience, 7(5), 446-451.
Fellous, J. M., Tiesinga, P. H., Thomas, P. J., & Sejnowski, T.
J. (2004). Discovering spike patterns in neuronal
responses. The Journal of Neuroscience, 24(12), 29893001.
Gansel, K. S., & Singer, W. (2012). Detecting multineuronal
temporal patterns in parallel spike trains. Frontiers in
neuroinformatics, 6.
Humphries, M. D. (2011). Spike-train communities: finding
groups of similar spike trains. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 31(6), 2321-2336.
Izhikevich, E. M. (2003). Simple model of spiking neurons.
IEEE Transactions on neural networks, 14(6), 1569-1572.
Jarrell, T. A., Wang, Y., Bloniarz, A. E., Brittin, C. A., Xu,
M., Thomson, J. N., ... & Emmons, S. W. (2012). The
connectome of a decision-making neural network. Science,
337(6093), 437-444.
Leicht, E. A., & Newman, M. E. (2008). Community
structure in directed networks. Physical review letters,
100(11), 118703.
Le Martelot, E., & Hankin, C. (2011, October). Multi-scale
Community Detection using Stability as Optimisation
Criterion in a Greedy Algorithm. In KDIR (pp. 216-225).
Liang, Z., King, J., & Zhang, N. (2011). Uncovering
intrinsic connectional architecture of functional networks
in awake rat brain. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31(10),
3776-3783.
Lindsey, B. G., Morris, K. F., Shannon, R., & Gerstein, G. L.
(1997). Repeated patterns of distributed synchrony in
neuronal assemblies. Journal of Neurophysiology, 78(3),
1714-1719.
Newman, M. E. (2004). Analysis of weighted networks.
Physical Review E, 70(5), 056131.
Newman, G. I., Aggarwal, V., Schieber, M. H., & Thakor, N.
V. (2011, August). Identifying neuron communities during
a reach and grasp task using an unsupervised clustering
analysis. In Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
EMBC, 2011 Annual International Conference of the
IEEE (pp. 6401-6404). IEEE.
Paiva, A. R., Rao, S., Park, I., & Principe, J. C. (2007,

August). Spectral clustering of synchronous spike trains.
In Neural Networks, 2007. IJCNN 2007. International
Joint Conference on (pp. 1831-1835). IEEE.
Pillow, J. W., Shlens, J., Paninski, L., Sher, A., Litke, A. M.,
Chichilnisky, E. J., & Simoncelli, E. P. (2008). Spatiotemporal correlations and visual signalling in a complete
neuronal population. Nature, 454(7207), 995-999.
Schneidman, E., Berry, M. J., Segev, R., & Bialek, W.
(2006). Weak pairwise correlations imply strongly
correlated network states in a neural population. Nature,
440(7087), 1007-1012.
Shen, X., Papademetris, X., & Constable, R. T. (2010).
Graph-theory based parcellation of functional subunits in
the brain from resting-state fMRI data. Neuroimage, 50(3),
1027-1035.
Shi, J., & Malik, J. (2000). Normalized cuts and image
segmentation. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
IEEE Transactions on, 22(8), 888-905.
Toups, J. V., & Tiesinga, P. H. (2006). Methods for finding
and validating neural spike patterns. Neurocomputing,
69(10), 1362-1365.
Van Den Heuvel, M., Mandl, R., & Pol, H. H. (2008).
Normalized cut group clustering of resting-state FMRI
data. PloS one, 3(4), e2001.
Hu, L., Hui, W., (2012). Detecting community structure in
networks based on community coefficients. Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 391, 61566164.

1439

