Preschoolers’ and Chimpanzees’ Use of Source Reliability on Action-Based Tasks
Melissa L. Hrabic1 (mhrabic1@student.gsu.edu)
Bethany J. MacDonald1 (bmacdonald2@student.gsu.edu)
Michael J. Beran2 (mjberan@yahoo.com)
Rebecca A. Williamson1 (rawillia@gsu.edu)
1

Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303 USA
2
Language Research Center, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30302

By age 4, children are also able to use more subtle cues
than mislabeling when making accuracy judgments.
Specifically, when there are differing degrees of inaccuracy,
4-year-olds trust information from the most accurate source
(e.g., trusting an accurate source over a neutral source, but a
neutral source over an inaccurate source), though 3-yearolds are less sensitive to these degrees of inaccuracy, and
only differentiate when an actor is entirely correct or
incorrect (Corriveau et al., 2008; Pasquini et al., 2007).
Children can also take behavioral subtleties into account;
trusting confident, rather than uncertain, sources (Birch,
Akmal, & Frampton, 2010; Sabbagh & Baldwin, 2001) or
sources of information that have been approved by
bystanders (Fusaro & Harris, 2008).
This monitoring of source reliability seems to have
meaningful effects on children’s acceptance of new
information. For one, children generalize a source’s
accuracy to a new, but similar task, but not to a different
type of task (e.g., labeling an object vs. knowing what is
inside of a closed box; Brosseau-Liard & Birch, 2011).
Also, children expect source accuracy to apply in the future;
after identifying actors as accurate or inaccurate labelers, 3and 4-year-olds reported that only the accurate actor would
be correct in the future (Koenig et al., 2004). Further,
Corriveau and Harris (2009) found that 3- and 4-year-olds
were significantly more likely to trust an accurate actor’s
information not only immediately, but also up to a week
later, even when they had not been explicitly asked at any
point to state which actor was accurate.
Although there is now a substantial literature
investigating human children’s reliability monitoring, little
research has investigated whether other species track and
use information about others’ accuracy. Tracking who
provides good information could also be useful for nonhuman animals. For example, chimpanzees, our closest
living relatives, demonstrate several kinds of social
learning, from low-level stimulus enhancement to relatively
sophisticated emulation and imitation (see Whiten, Horner,
Litchfield, & Marshall-Pescini, 2004, for a review). Recent
advances in social network analysis have indicated that tooluse behaviors are also sometimes socially transmitted in
chimpanzees (Hobaiter, Poisot, Zuberbühler, Hoppitt, &
Gruber, 2014) and regional differences in chimpanzee
behavior suggest social learning on a large scale (Whiten,
2000).

Abstract
One way to optimize social learning is to be selective when
choosing from what sources to accept information.
Preschoolers prefer to learn from previously accurate or
competent sources, rather than from unreliable ones (e.g.,
Koenig, Clément, & Harris, 2004). The current study extends
this work by comparing the ability to monitor an actor’s
success in two species: children and chimpanzees. Members
of both species saw two actors try to open containers, with
different outcomes. Then, a forced-choice response was used
to determine whether participants would pair the container
with the previously successful actor. While preschoolers
correctly elicited help from a previously successful actor,
chimpanzees did not reliably select the type of object the
actor could open. The current findings suggest a difference
between humans and chimpanzees’ use of past source
reliability, which may reflect or result from differences in
their use of social learning.
Keywords: source reliability; social learning; preschoolers;
chimpanzees

Introduction
Much of what humans learn comes from other people
(Bandura, 1977) including their own birthdates and the fact
that Mt. Everest is the highest mountain on the Earth.
Whenever an individual relies on others for information, he
or she becomes vulnerable to misinformation. Such
misinformation could be accidental, with the informant
being simply mistaken or not well informed. However,
misinformation could also be intentional, with the informant
intending to mislead in order to gain advantage. One way to
optimize social learning is to seek information selectively
from reliable sources (Laland, 2004).
There is evidence that even young children can track and
make use of source reliability. In a typical experimental
demonstration of this phenomenon, children are presented
with two sources of information: one reliable and one
unreliable. They are then asked to choose between these
sources for help. From age 3, children are shown to
selectively choose informants who have given accurate
versus inaccurate labels (e.g., Corriveau & Harris, 2009;
Koenig, Clément, & Harris, 2004). Indeed there is some
evidence that even 16-month-olds recognize when sources
provide inaccurate versus accurate information (Koenig &
Echols, 2003).

950

After witnessing each source’s success or failure,
participants were given a chance to match the container to a
person who could successfully open it. This forced-choice
response measure is similar to that of many past studies of
monitoring source reliability that use language. Choices
were recorded in order to determine whether members of
either species preferentially chose the previously successful
actor.
This procedure extends the existing literature in two
ways. First, we tested children on a novel action-based task.
In a procedure very similar to past source-monitoring tasks
using labeling, the children were given the opportunity to
endorse either a reliable or an unreliable actor when
presented with the same task. We also included a
comparison condition to determine whether children would
generalize past success to a different, but similar task. A
second study extended source reliability research to
nonhuman primates by using a variation of this new
procedure with chimpanzees that involved matching the
type of container with the actor who had previously opened
it. We predicted that participants of both species would
consider the actors’ past success and use this to guide their
future choices when seeking out help (i.e., showing above
chance-level performance on forced-choice trials).

Because chimpanzees use social learning to gain
information from those around them, it is likely that
misinformation—intentional or not—may be a challenge
that is not unique to human communication. Like people,
chimpanzees could provide misinformation mistakenly; for
example, they may forget the location of hidden food and
search in the wrong place. There is also evidence that nonhuman primates mislead or withhold information from
conspecifics (Byrne & Whiten, 1985; Hare, Call, &
Tomasello, 2006; Hirata, 2006; Mitchell & Anderson, 1997)
to obtain or maintain control of resources in both the wild
and in the laboratory. Considering the risk of both
intentionally- and unintentionally-provided misinformation,
differentiating between accurate and inaccurate sources of
information could have practical benefits for chimpanzees
as well as children.
However, it is likely that chimpanzees may be less
familiar with bad information. Although there is evidence
that chimpanzees are able to use deception (e.g., Byrne &
Whiten, 1985; Hare et al., 2006), they do so at rates much
lower than those seen in humans. Additionally, their forms
of deception differ from humans, primarily focusing on food
acquisition, rather than skillfulness. It is therefore possible
that chimpanzees will not show the same monitoring of
same reliability that has been evident in human children.
The present studies investigate the ability to monitor
sources of information in both 3-year-old human children
and chimpanzees. To do this, all participants were tested on
a similar action-based task. A task involving actions on
objects was chosen for three reasons. First, language was
not required, thereby making it a fairer task for comparing
the species. Second, little work has been done to explicitly
examine source reliability on an action-based task, and the
present method addressed this limit. One study that had
given cues to children about an actor’s competence on an
action-based task measured children’s rates of imitation of a
competent or incompetent actor’s (e.g., one putting shoes on
his feet versus hands) demonstration (Zmyj et al., 2010).
The authors found that infants’ action imitation, but not
their item preferences, were influenced by a model’s
previous competence. In the current study, we take a
slightly different approach by using success versus failure
on an action-based task to distinguish the sources. Past
research also shows that children consider such efficacy
when imitating (Want & Harris, 2001; Williamson &
Meltzoff, 2011). Both species were presented with a
successful actor (someone who could successfully open a
box) and an unsuccessful actor (someone who could not
successfully open the same box).
A third reason for choosing an action based task is that an
(in)ability to open containers may be ecologically relevant
for chimpanzees; that is, chimpanzees may be familiar with
trying to open different fruits in the wild. There has also
been evidence for their competence at opening boxes in the
laboratory (e.g., Whiten, Custance, Gomez, Teixidor, &
Bard, 1996).

Study 1: Children
Methods
Participants Thirty-six typically developing 3-year-old
children (35-42 months, M = 37.6 months, SD = 1.7; 16
males) were recruited through Georgia State University’s
Infant and Child Subject Database. According to parental
report, 44% self-identified as Black/African American, 39%
as Caucasian, and 8% as Asian (3 families did not specify).
Additionally, 81% self-identified as non-Hispanic/Latino
and 3% identified as Hispanic/Latino (6 families did not
specify). The highest level of education completed by the
children’s parents was reported to be an advanced degree
(e.g., M.A., PhD., MD) for 32%, a 4-year college degree
(e.g., B.A., B.S.) for 19%, some college education for 21%,
a high school diploma for 3% (education for 19 parents was
not specified).
Materials Four types of boxes were used. Each of the boxes
contained a small plastic toy inside (e.g., a sandwich).
Unknown to the children, a hidden locking mechanism was
inside the boxes, which made them impossible to open
without the use of a key. Thus, although the boxes looked
like they could be easily opened by lifting a hinged lid,
specific knowledge was needed to successfully open the
box.
Five small puppet animals were used as the actors. Two
of these (a horse and a rabbit) were always presented in trial
1, and two others (a mouse and an owl) were always
presented in trial 2. The final puppet (a bear) was used in
both test trials. All puppets were controlled by one
experimenter.

951

Finally, a curtained enclosure was used to conceal each
puppet while it attempted to open a box. This allowed the
experimenter to surreptitiously use the magnetic key to open
the box.

the data were non-normally distributed. Thus, a MannWhitney test was conducted to test for differences in
successful actor choice across the two groups; no significant
difference was found, U = 139.5, p = .46.
Children’s number of choices of the successful actor was
then compared to chance levels (1.0). Wilcoxon signed rank
tests were used to test for differences in performance
compared to chance levels. These tests revealed that 3-yearolds were able to choose the successful actor on levels
significantly above chance when the third party actor
needed help opening the same box, p = .002, one-tailed.
Additionally, they also chose the correct actor on the
generalization trials, p = .03, one-tailed; see Figure 1.

Procedure All children were tested individually in a small,
dedicated lab space with their parent and an experimenter
present. Children were randomly assigned to one of two
between-subjects conditions: same box (n = 16) or
generalization (n = 20).
Familiarization Children first saw a small, open box with
a toy inside. They were given the opportunity to play with
the toy, and then it was inserted into the box. The box was
then closed, and the experimenter demonstrated that the box
could not be reopened. Each puppet actor was then given the
opportunity to try to open the box. Each puppet was
individually put into the curtained enclosure with the locked
box, and described as trying to open the box. One actor was
successful, emerging from the curtained enclosure with the
box open. The experimenter briefly handed the child the
small toy from the box for the child to play with. The other
puppet was unsuccessful. It emerged from the curtained
enclosure with the box still closed, having failed to open the
box or produce the toy from inside. After the first puppet’s
turn, the toy was returned to the box (if necessary) and the
second actor then had the opportunity to attempt to open the
box.
Test A third actor appeared, and the experimenter stated
that the third actor wanted to get the box open. The
experimenter then asked the test question, “Who should he
ask for help?” Children’s responses were scored for which
of the two earlier actors (either the previously successful or
unsuccessful actor) was chosen. Children could either label
one of the actors or point to make their responses.
The procedure in the generalization condition was
identical to that used in the same box condition, except that
a new box was introduced with the third actor. That is,
children were asked which actor to ask for help with
opening a box that the successful and unsuccessful actors
had no prior experience with. This condition was used to
assess whether children would generalize an actor’s past
success with opening boxes beyond the specific box that
had previously been acted upon.
In both conditions, a second trial was then conducted with
2 different familiarization actors and a new box. For each
trial, which of the puppets was successful and the order in
which the puppets attempted to open the box was
counterbalanced between children.

Figure 1: Mean number of previously reliable actor
choices (+/- SE) for children as a function of test group.

chance

Discussion Taken together, these results indicate that on a
novel action-based task, 3-year-old children are capable of
tracking a source’s past performance and using this
information to make a decision regarding from whom to
seek help on both the same task, and a related, but slightly
different task (opening a new box). To assess the phylogeny
of this ability, a similar paradigm was used with
chimpanzees.

Study 2a: Chimpanzees—Two Actors
Manipulating Two Containers
Methods
Participants Two chimpanzees housed at the Language
Research Center at Georgia State University participated in
this study (Panzee—26 years, Sherman—38 years). These
chimpanzees were housed together, along with two other
chimpanzees that were not tested in this study, and spent
time together socially throughout the day. The subjects were
tested individually on all test sessions. Chimpanzees
participated for preferred food treats, but were not deprived
of food or water at any time.

Results
Preliminary analyses indicated that there was no effect of
gender or parental level of education on the children’s
performance, so all subsequent analyses were collapsed
across these variables.
The mean number of choices for the successful actor in
each pair was first calculated for each child (out of 2). A
Kolmogorov-Smirnov goodness-of-fit test first revealed that

Materials Four hinged boxes and four drawstring bags (all
of different colors and sizes) were used. Chimpanzees
received approximately 5 crackers on each training trial
when they correctly solved a test trial.

952

Procedure Both chimpanzees were tested in their home
cages. Although they were tested in individual cages, they
had visual and auditory access to other group members
throughout each session. Data was recorded by the first and
second authors using a paper and pen during the test trials (a
typical practice in chimpanzee testing). Each chimpanzee
was tested on three non-consecutive days.
Each session began with 8 to 12 training trials in which
the first two authors alternately approached the chimpanzees
and attempted to open two types of containers immediately
after one another (1 hinged box and 1 drawstring bag). One
model was always successful at opening the hinged box and
unsuccessful at opening the drawstring bag, while the
second model was always successful at opening the
drawstring bag and unsuccessful at opening the hinged box.
Chimpanzees were always promptly rewarded with crackers
after the model successfully opened a container.
Previous research with these animals revealed that the
chimpanzees would not reliably point to human actors.
Thus, a different response measure was chosen. Instead of
pointing to one of the actors, chimpanzees were instead
prompted to point at a container.
During test period, each model alternately approached the
chimpanzee’s cage. The third author, seated in front of the
cage with his back to the actors would ask the chimpanzee,
“Which one should I give to her?” while pushing a tray
holding both a hinged box and a bag toward the
chimpanzee. When the chimpanzee pointed to a container,
the experimenter would hand it to the actor. If it was the
type of container that she had previous success in opening,
she would open it and give the chimpanzee the cracker
reward inside. However, if it was the type of container that
she had not successfully opened, she struggled with the
container for approximately 5 seconds, handed it back to the
experimenter unopened, and the chimpanzee received no
reward. The order of the models and side of the hinged
versus drawstring containers were counterbalanced between
trials. Each chimpanzee was tested over 3 days. Panzee
received a total of 27 test trials, and Sherman received a
total of 28 test trials.

Table 1: The number of choices of each box made by the
chimpanzee participants.
Study 2a: 2 models, 2 containers
Incorrect
Correct
Panzee
15
10
Sherman
17
11
Study 2b: 2 models, 1 container
Incorrect
Correct
Panzee
14
8
Sherman
10
12

Study 2b: Chimpanzees—Two Actors
Manipulating One Container
Given the chimpanzees’ difficulties with the previous
task, an attempt was made to simplify the demands placed
on the chimpanzees. In a second phase, the use of a new
paradigm attempted to highlight for the chimpanzees each
actor’s success or failure at opening a given type of
container. This was also more consistent with the paradigm
used with the children, in which each child saw two actors
attempt to open the same box.

Methods
Participants The same two chimpanzees participated in
this task, under the same housing protocol.
Materials The same eight containers (i.e., four hinged
boxes and four drawstring bags) were used during testing.
Chimpanzees were again given approximately 5 crackers on
each correct trial as a reward.
Procedure Each session began with 12-15 training trials
that now consisted of both actors approaching the
chimpanzees simultaneously, and the actors taking turns to
manipulate only one container per trial, either a hinged box
or a drawstring bag. As before, the same actor was only
capable of opening hinged boxes, and could never open the
drawstring bags, while the other could only ever open
drawstring bags, and could never open the hinged boxes.
During this training period, chimpanzees were rewarded
with crackers when either actor successfully opened a
container.
Test trials were identical to those described in Study 2a,
where each model alternately approached the cage and the
experimenter asked the chimpanzees “Which one should I
give her?” while pushing forward one box and one bag.
Each chimpanzee participated in 22 trials over 2 nonconsecutive days.

Results
When the chimpanzees saw two actors alternately act on
two different types of containers, binomial tests revealed
that neither Sherman (p = .35) nor Panzee (p = .42) chose
the correct container to give to a specific actor at abovechance levels. See Table 1 for frequency counts of
performance.

Discussion
After watching multiple trials of two actors each
successfully opening one type of container, chimpanzees
showed no evidence of using this past information to guide
their choices. That is, their performance was at chance
levels for choosing which type of box to give to a specific
actor for her to open.

Results
The number of choices of the correct container again did
not differ from chance levels when presented with two
models manipulating one type of container during training
trials for either Sherman (p = .83) or Panzee, (p = .29,

953

binomial tests); see Table 1 for frequency counts of
performance.
Finally, we were interested in investigating any effects of
learning over the trials, as chimpanzees at this point had
seen over 50 trials in which the same actor could only open
one type of container. After these trials, chimpanzees were
no better at matching the actor and the container that she
was able to successfully manipulate (Sherman day 5: 7/12
correct, p = .77; Panzee day 5: 5/12 correct, p = .77).

only needed to keep in mind which actor was successful (or
not) at manipulating one type of container.
Further, neither the procedures used with the children nor
those used with the chimpanzees have high levels of
ecological validity; scenarios in which either children ask a
puppet for help or chimpanzees choose which container an
actor should open may be rare. However, the children may
have been better at understanding such a pretense context,
as they likely have experience with make-believe play
involving toys and animals. If this is the case, chimpanzees
may fare better if the procedure better reflected their
everyday experiences. The chimpanzees may also be
accustomed to people around them acting successfully (e.g.,
opening doors, producing food), and may not have believed
that either given actor could not successfully open a
particular type of container. Thus, future studies should vary
the nature of the sources (e.g., a person, a puppet, a
chimpanzee conspecific) providing information to
chimpanzees to provide a more complete understanding of
their ability to monitor source successfulness.
Despite these limitations, it is worth considering the
alternative possibility that chimpanzees may not be as
effective at monitoring and utilizing others’ past
performance as are human children. Chimpanzees may not
monitor others’ accuracy because they rely less on social
learning. They may not have the experience required with
learning from others in order to successfully complete a
source reliability task. Although there is some research
(Byrne & Whiten, 1988; Hare, Call, & Tomasello, 2006;
Hirata, 2006) that suggests that chimpanzees can deceive
others, they deceive at rates much lower than that of human
beings. Furthermore, the incidents of deception seen in
chimpanzees most often involve food acquisition, rather
than skills or tool-use; that is, a chimpanzee may deceive a
conspecific in order to avoid sharing food resources, but not
to misinform them about a particular behavior.
Consequently, if they are unfamiliar with the notion that a
conspecific may be intentionally giving them bad
information, then it is likely not as relevant for them to track
sources of information.
In addition to providing a comparative perspective to the
question of source reliability, the current results also add to
the developmental literature on this issue. That is, 3-yearold children were able to monitor source reliability on an
action-based task, gaining information about sources
through their ability to successfully manipulate an object.
Importantly, they were able to draw these conclusions when
the box that a third puppet needed to be opened was the
same as one that the successful puppet had opened before,
but also when a new box was presented, underlying
children’s ability to generalize this past source reliability.
These findings are consistent with past literature (e.g.,
Brosseau-Liard & Birch, 2011) that has found that children
expect accuracy to generalize across objects, suggesting a
parallel in the developmental trajectory in which children
encode information about an actor’s reliability on a labelversus action-based task.

Discussion
These findings suggest that, even when the relationship
between a given actor and a type of container was made
more salient, chimpanzees were still unable to successfully
pair together an actor with the container that she had
previously opened.

General Discussion
Overall, the current findings show a cross-species
difference in the use of information about an actors’ past
performance on an action-based task. After only a brief
experience (i.e., 1 familiarization trial) with an actor’s
success or failure, 3-year-old children tracked which of two
actors successfully opened a box, and chose to receive help
from the previously successful actor versus the unsuccessful
one on opening a new box. Notably, children were able to
make these distinctions not only when the box was the same
as the one that they had previously seen opened, but they
also generalized this success to a new box of the same type.
In contrast, we found no evidence that chimpanzees
associated an actor with the container type she was able to
successfully open. When presented in training with two
actors manipulating two different types of objects (study
2a), or two actors manipulating a single type of object in
turn (study 2b), chimpanzees did not use this information to
choose to give an actor a type of container that they had
previously opened. This lack of association is especially
striking, because even after 50 experiences with a model
opening the same type of container, the chimpanzees still
showed no better performance on matching the actor and an
object that she was successfully able to manipulate.
There are several possibilities accounting for the observed
difference between the species for tracking past source
success with different objects. The first of these possibilities
is methodological in nature. Although the procedures used
with the chimpanzees were matched as closely as possible
with those used with the children, there were some
necessary variations that may have influenced the
chimpanzees’ performance. Specifically, chimpanzees were
found unwilling to point to the human actors, so a
manipulation was used that allowed them to instead point to
the containers. Thus, the task used with the chimpanzees
may have been more challenging, as it required them to
keep in mind both the different actors and to generalize
across two types of containers. Conversely, the children

954

In conclusion, the findings of the present study suggest
that after only a single familiarization trial, 3-year-olds draw
conclusions about an actor’s success, and use this to inform
their future decisions. Specifically, they were more likely to
suggest to a third actor that help should be sought from a
previously successful actor, rather than a previously
unsuccessful actor. Chimpanzees, however, did not reliably
choose a previously successful actor. Their performance
may be due to methodological limitations or a difference in
social understanding. Taken together, these results suggest
that 3-year-olds are selective in their learning on actionbased tasks, considering past performance when seeking out
help, while chimpanzees may not monitor others’ accuracy.

Hirata, S. (2006). Tactical deception and understanding of
others in chimpanzees. In Cognitive development in
chimpanzees (pp. 265-276). Springer Tokyo.
Hobaiter, C., Poisot, T., Zuberbühler, K., Hoppitt, W., &
Gruber, T., (2014). Social network analysis shows direct
evidence for social transmission of tool use in wild
chimpanzees. PLoS Biology, 12(9), 1-12.
Koenig, M.A., Clément, F., & Harris, P.L. (2004). Trust in
testimony: Children’s use of true and false statements.
Psychological Science, 15(10), 694-698.
Koenig, M.A., & Echols, C.H. (2003). Infants’
understanding of false labeling events: the referential role
of words and the speakers who use them. Cognition,
87(3), 179-208.
Laland, K.N. (2004). Social learning strategies. Learning
and Behavior, 32(1), 4-14.
Mitchell, R.W., & Anderson, J.R. (1997). Pointing,
withholding information, and deception in capuchin
monkeys (Cebus apella). Journal of Comparative
Psychology, 111(4), 351-361.
Pasquini, E.S., Corriveau, K.H., Koenig, M.A., & Harris,
P.L. (2007). Preschoolers monitor the relative accuracy of
informants. Developmental Psychology, 43(5), 12161226.
Sabbagh, M.A., & Baldwin, D.A. (2001). Learning words
from knowledgeable versus ignorant speakers: Links
between preschoolers’ theory of mind and semantic
development. Child Development, 72(4), 1054-1070.
Want, S. C., & Harris, P. L. (2001). Learning from other
people's mistakes: Causal understanding in learning to use
a tool. Child Development, 72(2), 431-443.
Whiten, A., Custance, D.M., Gomez, J., Teixidor, P., &
Bard, K.A. (1996). Imitative learning of artificial fruit
processing in children (Homo sapiens) and chimpanzees
(Pan troglodytes). Journal of Comparative Psychology,
110(1), 3-14.
Whiten, A. (2000). Primate culture and social learning.
Cognitive Science, 24(3), 477-508.
Whiten, A., Horner, V., Litchfield, C. A., & MarshallPescini, S. (2004). How do apes ape? Learning &
Behavior, 32(1), 36-52.
Williamson, R.A., & Meltzoff, N.A. (2011). Own and
others’ prior experiences influence children’s imitation of
causual acts. Cognitive Development, 26(3), 260-268.
Zmyj, N., Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., & Daum, M.M.
(2010). The reliability of a model influences 14-monthsolds’ imitation. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 106(4), 208-220.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Georgia State
University Second-Century Initiative in Primate Social
Cognition, Evolution, and Behavior for this study. This
work was also supported by a grant from the National
Institutes of Health (P01HD060563) and a seed grant from
Georgia State University’s Language and Literacy
Initiative. We also thank John Kelley for his assistance with
data collection. Many thanks to the children and families
who participated.

References
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Birch, S.A.J., Akmal, N., & Frampton, K.L. (2010). Twoyear-olds are vigilant of others’ non-verbal cues to
credibility. Developmental Science, 13(2), 363-369.
Brosseau-Liard, P.E., & Birch, S.A.J. (2011). Epistemic
states and traits: Preschoolers appreciate the differential
informativeness of situation-specific and person-specific
cues to knowledge. Child Development, 82(6), 17881796.
Byrne, R.W., & Whiten, A. (1985). Tactical deception of
familiar individuals in bonobos (Papio ursinus). Animal
Behavior, 33(2), 669-673.
Byrne, R. W., and A. Whiten. (1988). Machiavellian
intelligence: Social expertise and the evolution of intellect
in monkeys, apes and humans. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Corriveau, K., & Harris, P.L. (2009). Preschoolers continue
to trust a more accurate informant 1 week after exposure
to accuracy information. Developmental Science, 12(1),
188-193.
Corriveau, K., Meints, K., & Harris, P.L. (2008). Early
tracking of informant accuracy and inaccuracy. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 27(2), 331-342.
Fusaro, M., & Harris, P.L. (2008). Children assess
informant reliability using bystanders’ non-verbal cues.
Developmental Science, 11(5), 771-777.
Hare, B., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Chimpanzees
deceive a human competitor by hiding. Cognition, 101(3),
495-514.

955

