Pronominal Reference and Pragmatic Enrichment: A Bayesian Account
Andrew Kehler (akehler@ucsd.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0108 USA

Hannah Rohde (hannah.rohde@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Linguistics and English Language, University of Edinburgh
3 Charles Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AD, UK
Abstract

toward entity next mention) are different. This entails the
counterintuitive conclusion that a set of factors that the addressee will use in resolving the referent will not be taken
into account by the speaker when deciding whether to use a
pronoun. We evaluate the causal structure that underlies the
proposal with a novel passage completion experiment which
confirms the predictions of the analysis. We further show
that the biases revealed by the experimental results are more
highly correlated with the predictions of the Bayesian analysis than those of two other prominent models.

A standard assumption in linguistic, psycholinguistic, and
computational research on pronoun use is that production and
interpretation are guided by the same set of contextual factors.
Kehler et al. (2008) and Kehler & Rohde (2013) have argued
instead for a Bayesian model, one in which pronoun production is insensitive to a class of semantically- and pragmaticallydriven contextual biases that have been shown to influence pronoun interpretation. Here we evaluate the model using a passage completion study that employs a subtle contextual manipulation to which traditional analyses are insensitive, specifically by varying whether or not a relative clause that modifies
the direct object in the context sentence invites the inference
of a cause of the event that the sentence denotes. The results
support the claim that pronoun interpretation biases, but not
production biases, are sensitive to this pragmatic enrichment,
revealing precisely the asymmetry predicted by the Bayesian
analysis. A correlation analysis further establishes that the
model provides better estimates of measured pronoun interpretation biases than two competing models from the literature.
Keywords: Pronoun interpretation, discourse coherence,
pragmatic enrichment, Bayesian models

Background

Introduction
A common wisdom, one assumed in the literature on pronominal reference for decades, is that there is a unified notion
of entity SALIENCE that underlies pronoun usage. This notion of salience (alternately referred to as PROMINENCE, being in PSYCHOLOGICAL FOCUS, being THE CENTER OF
ATTENTION , and so forth) will determine when a speaker
will choose to use a pronoun on the one hand, and hence
be used by the addressee to successfully interpret the reference on the other. On this model, the task for discourse
researchers is then clear: One merely needs to identify the
different factors that contribute to entity salience. Many
such factors have been posited, including grammatical role
(Crawley, Stevenson, & Kleinman, 1990), grammatical parallelism (Smyth, 1994), thematic role (Stevenson, Crawley,
& Kleinman, 1994; Arnold, 2001), information structure
(Grosz, Joshi, & Weinstein, 1995; Rohde & Kehler, 2014),
semantics (Koornneef & van Berkum, 2006), and world
knowledge (Hobbs, 1979), among others.
A central goal of this paper is to disabuse the reader of
this model. We do this by evaluating a proposal put forth by
Kehler, Kertz, Rohde, and Elman (2008) and Kehler and Rohde (2013) that states that the relationship between pronoun
interpretation and production is suitably cast in Bayesian
terms, and further that the types of factors that condition the
likelihood term (the production bias) and the prior (the bias

The experiment described in this paper utilizes so-called IM PLICIT CAUSALITY (IC) verbs, so let us start there. IC verbs
are undoubtedly the most well-studied verb class in the psycholinguistics of pronoun interpretation literature since the
seminal papers of Caramazza and colleagues in the 1970s
(Garvey & Caramazza, 1974; Caramazza, Grober, Garvey,
& Yates, 1977; Brown & Fish, 1983; Terry Kit-fong Au,
1986; McKoon, Greene, & Ratcliff, 1993; Koornneef & van
Berkum, 2006; Kehler et al., 2008, inter alia). Here we survey three facts that will be important for understanding the
experimental design we employ. First, IC verbs are characteristically known for their large and divergent biases toward
subsequent entity mention. If participants in a passage completion task are presented with a prompt like (1a),
(1) a. Amanda amazed Brittany because she
b. Amanda detested Brittany because she
the large majority of completions will point to Amanda as the
pronominal referent. After all, Amanda must be amazing, and
hence one expects to hear why. Because causality is imputed
to the subject, verbs like amaze are called SUBJECT- BIASED
IC VERBS. If participants are given a prompt like (1b), on
the other hand, the large majority of completions will point to
Brittany as the pronominal referent. After all, Brittany must
be detestable, and hence one expects to hear why. Because
causality is imputed to the object, verbs like detest are called
OBJECT- BIASED IC VERBS. The existence of IC biases has
been replicated repeatedly, and is hence one of the bedrock
results in the field.
The second fact of interest is that IC verbs are associated
with another type of strong bias, in that they give rise to
a greater expectation that the ensuing clause will provide a
cause or reason for the described eventuality as compared to

1063

typical non-IC verbs (Kehler et al., 2008). Whereas most previous IC studies examined pronoun biases using prompts with
because as in (1a-b) above, Kehler et al. used free prompts as
in (2) and had annotators categorize the COHERENCE RELA TIONS – that is, the relevancy relations that semantically bind
the clauses – in the completed passages.
(2) a. John amazed Mary.
b. John detested Mary.
c. John saw Mary.

Unlike for prompts like (3a), in the free prompt condition
(3b) participants picked their own referring expressions for
the first-mentioned entity. Stevenson et al. found two results
of interest. First, across all eight context types, there were
a greater number of references to the previous subject in the
pronoun prompt condition than in the free prompt condition.
Crucially, this did not always result in an overall pronoun bias
toward the subject in the pronoun prompt condition: For instance, for object-biased IC verbs as in (3a), the overall pronoun bias was still toward the object. Instead, the key finding
is that the occurrence of a pronoun always shifted the distribution of references toward the subject compared to when
no pronoun was provided – that is, for prompts like (3b), the
first-mention bias toward the object was even stronger.
Stevenson et al.’s second finding was that, in their free
prompt conditions across all stimulus types, participants’
choice of referential form for the first-mentioned entity was
heavily biased towards a pronoun when the referent was the
previous subject, and likewise towards a name when the referent was a non-subject. This result may at first seem contradictory: If participants have a clear preference to use pronouns
to refer to the previous subject and names to refer to nonsubjects, why would the pronoun interpretation bias ever be
toward a non-subject, as was the case for prompts like (3a)?

(4) P(referent | pronoun) =
P(pronoun | referent) P(referent)
∑ P(pronoun | referent) P(referent)
referent∈referents

The results showed that participants completed passages such
as (2a-b) using Explanation relations – i.e., in which an event
or state is followed by a cause or reason – approximately 60%
of the time, compared to 24% for a control group of nonIC contexts (2c). This result accords with intuitions: Upon
hearing John amazed Mary, it seems likely that the addressee
will wonder Why?, and thus expect to hear an answer. On the
other hand, upon hearing John saw Mary, it seems less likely
that the addressee will wonder Why?, and instead expect an
answer to the question What happened next?, for example.
The third and final fact to be highlighted is that the occurrence of a pronoun alters referential biases from what
they were before the pronoun, specifically toward the entity
mentioned from the subject position of the previous clause.
Stevenson et al. (1994) reported on a series of passage completion experiments that investigated pronoun biases across
eight distinct context types, comparing conditions in which a
pronoun was or was not included in the prompt:
(3) a. Amanda detested Brittany. She
b. Amanda detested Brittany.

Kehler et al. (2008) offered an explanation for the apparent
contradiction by modeling the relationship between production and interpretation in terms of Bayes’ Rule, as shown in
equation (4).

The term P(referent | pronoun) represents the interpretation
bias: the probability, given that a pronoun has occurred, of it
being used by the speaker to refer to a particular referent. On
the other hand, the term P(pronoun | referent) represents the
production bias: the probability, assuming that a particular
entity is being referred to, that the speaker would have used a
pronoun to refer to it. Bayes’ Rule says that these biases are
not mirror images of each other, but instead are related by the
prior P(referent), which represents the NEXT- MENTION bias:
the probability that a particular referent will get mentioned
next regardless of the referring expression used.1 Equation
(4) thus explains why there is nothing contradictory about
having both a strong production bias toward pronominalizing
the previous subject (and not pronominalizing non-subjects)
and yet a lack of a subject bias in interpretation, as long as
the prior P(referent) points strongly enough away from the
subject referent, as it does for object-biased IC verbs.
According to this model, a comprehender’s interpretation
bias thus relies jointly on his estimates of the likelihood that a
particular referent will be mentioned next (regardless of form
of reference) and of the likelihood that the speaker would
have chosen a pronoun (instead of another form of reference)
to refer to that referent. The predictions of the analysis can
be tested using passage completion experiments: The values
for the terms on the right-hand side of equation (4) can be
estimated from the data collected in free prompt conditions
(3b), which will yield a prediction for P(referent | pronoun).
If the Bayesian characterization is correct, this predicted bias
should be highly correlated with the actual interpretation biases estimated directly in pronoun-prompt conditions (3a) in
otherwise identical contexts.
Kehler et al.’s proposal went further than positing a
Bayesian characterization in an important respect, specifically by claiming that the two terms in the numerator of equation (4) are conditioned by different sets of contextual factors.
On the one hand, the data they surveyed suggested that the
factors that condition the next-mention bias P(referent) are
primarily semantic (e.g., verb type) and pragmatic (e.g., coherence relations). On the other hand, the factors that condition the production bias P(pronoun | referent) appear to
be grammatical and/or information structural (e.g., based on
grammatical role obliqueness or topichood, both of which
1 The denominator of equation (4) is simply the probability
that a pronoun is the form of reference chosen by the speaker
(P(pronoun)), which can be computed by summing the numerator
over all referents that are compatible with the pronoun. This term
has the effect of normalizing the probabilities so that they sum to 1.

1064

amount to a preference for sentential subjects). Considering this in light of the asymmetry between production and
interpretation captured by equation (4), this picture makes a
striking prediction: That the speaker’s decision about whether
or not to pronominalize a reference will be insensitive to
the semantically- and pragmatically-driven contextual factors
that in part determine the comprehender’s interpretation biases. This hypothesis is surprising because it violates the
intuition, represented in much previous work, that speakers
will pronominalize mentions of referents in just those cases
in which their comprehenders would be expected to interpret
the pronouns to those same referents.
As unintuitive as this may seem, the results of several recent passage completion studies have provided preliminary
support for this prediction (Rohde, 2008, Exps V–VII; Fukumura and van Gompel, 2010). We briefly describe one reported on by Rohde and Kehler (2014; see also Rohde,
2008, Experiment VI) which, unlike the other studies, examined pronoun usage in referentially-ambiguous contexts. Rohde and Kehler used the 3-way context manipulation in (2),
adapted so that the possible referents were of the same gender,
and a 2-way prompt manipulation (pronoun or free). As expected, the pronoun interpretation bias varied with the IC bias
across the context types, with subject mentions being most
frequent for (2a), least in (2b), and (2c) in between. However, this context difference did not affect rate of pronominalization in the free prompt condition. Instead, only grammatical role mattered, with participants pronominalizing subject
references far more often than non-subject ones.

embezzling. Crucially, this inference is not necessary to make
the sentence felicitous; (5b) is fine without inferring an analogous causal link between the firing and the hiring.
Accounts of pronoun interpretation that appeal primarily
to surface-level characteristics of the context (first-mention,
subject assignment, grammatical role parallelism, and so
forth) find little to distinguish (5a-b). The Bayesian analysis does predict a difference, however, based on an interconnected sequence of referential and coherence-driven interdependencies, as illustrated in Figure 1. First, we manipulate RC type because we expect that participants will write
fewer Explanation continuations in (5a) and (5c) than (5b)
and (5d) respectively, since the RCs in (5a) and (5c) already
provide a cause (Simner & Pickering, 2005; Kehler et al.,
2008; Bott & Solstad, 2012). Second, this difference is in
turn predicted to yield a difference in next-mention biases
(P(referent)): Since object-biased IC verbs impute causality to the object, a greater number of explanation continuations for (5b) and (5d) should lead to a greater number of
next-mentions of the object as well. Third, the analysis predicts that rates of pronoun production (P(referent|pronoun))
as measured in the free prompt condition (5c-d) should only
be affected by grammatical role (favoring pronominalizations
of the subject), but display no interaction with RC type (with
participants no less likely to pronominalize subject mentions,
and likewise no more likely to pronominalize object mentions, in 5d than 5c). Finally, RC type is expected to affect
interpretation biases as measured in the PronounPrompt condition, with a greater number of object interpretations in (5b)
than (5a), since P(referent|pronoun) is determined in part by
next-mention expectations (P(referent)). As such, we expect
the RC manipulation to have an effect on pronoun interpretation, but not production. Since interpretation biases are also
determined in part by production biases, an effect of grammatical role favoring subjects is also predicted in (5a-b) compared to their free prompt counterparts in (5c-d).

Study
In this study we aim to evaluate the model within a single experiment that brings all of the foregoing predictions together.
The design employs a novel manipulation that utilizes a potential source of pragmatic enrichment, particularly the fact
that relative clauses (RCs) attached to direct objects can be
inferred to provide explanations of the matrix event (Rohde,
Levy, & Kehler, 2011). Example stimuli are shown in (5):

Predictions

(5) a. The boss fired the employee who was embezzling
money. He
[ExplanationRC, PronounPrompt]

RC Type

[ExplRC] The boss fired the employee who was embezzling money.
[Control] The boss fired the employee who was hired in 2002.

Coherence !
Relations

b. The boss fired the employee who was hired in 2002.
He
[NoExplanationRC, PronounPrompt]
Production Bias!
P(pronoun|referent)

c. The boss fired the employee who was embezzling
money.
[ExplanationRC, FreePrompt]

Subjects: more pronouns
ExplRC: no effect

ExplRC: fewer Explanations

Next-Mention Biases!
P(referent)
ExplRC: fewer object next-mentions

d. The boss fired the employee who was hired in 2002.
[NoExplanationRC, FreePrompt]
On a typical interpretation, the relative clause in (5a) does
more than constrain the reference of the noun phrase to which
it attaches. That is, while not entailed, (5a) invites the pragmatic enrichment that the employee was fired because of the

1065

Interpretation Bias!
P(referent|pronoun)

ExplRC: fewer object references
Pronoun prompt: more subject references

Figure 1: Predictions as a Graphical Model

Design

Results
All of the hypotheses were confirmed. Recall that the first
prediction is that we would see a greater percentage of Explanation relations in the NoExplanationRC condition than in
the ExplanationRC condition. The results, shown in Figure 2,
confirm the hypothesis (β=2.06; p<.001).

100

80

% Object

A 2x2 design was employed using stimuli like (5a-d), which
varied RC type (ExplanationRC or NoExplanationRC) and
prompt type (PronounPrompt or FreePrompt). The experiment utilized 24 target items and 36 fillers. Context sentences for the stimuli always used object-biased IC verbs in
the matrix clause. Two pieces of clip art were also displayed
that indicated the gender of each event participant (always
the same for both event participants for stimuli, so that reference in the PronounPrompt condition would be ambiguous).
Participants (n=40) completed passages on Mechanical Turk,
seeing each stimulus in a single condition in a fully balanced
design. Two judges who were blind to the hypothesis annotated the data for coherence relations (Explanation or Other),
first-mentioned referent (Subject, Object, or Other), and form
of reference in the FreePrompt condition (Pronoun or Other).
Outcomes were modeled using mixed-effects logistic regression with maximal random effects structure when supported
by the data.

60

40

20

0

Exp

NoExp

Figure 3: Percentage of Next-Mentions of Direct Object in
each RC condition in FreePrompt Condition

the subject referent. The results, shown in Figure 4, confirm
the effect of grammatical role (β=4.11; p<.001) and lack of
interaction with RC condition (β=0.12; p=.92).2
Object
Subject

100

80

% Pronouns

100

% Explanations

80

60

40

60

20
40

0

Exp

20

0

Exp

NoExp

Figure 2: Percentage of Explanation Continuations in each
RC condition (Standard Errors over Participant Means)
This leads to the second hypothesis, which is that for the
FreePrompt condition, a greater percentage of next mentions
of the object referent is predicted in the NoExplanationRC
condition than in the ExplanationRC condition. The results,
shown in Figure 3, confirmed this as well (β=.720; p<.05).
Our third hypothesis is that the rate of pronominalization
during production in the FreePrompt condition will not be
similarly affected by RC condition; instead, it should only be
affected by grammatical role, favoring pronominalization of

NoExp

Figure 4: Rate of Pronominalization of Next-Mentioned Entity in FreePrompt Condition, by Grammatical Role and RC
Condition
Lastly, we have two predictions for pronoun interpretation
biases P(referent | pronoun) as measured by the PronounPrompt condition. The results are shown in Figure 5. (Note
that the bars for the FreePrompt condition, which represent
the prior P(referent), are those shown in Figure 3.) First, we
2 There was also a marginal main effect of RC condition (β=0.94;

p=.078), whereby there were numerically more pronominalizations
in the NoExplanationRC condition than the ExplanationRC condition. Whereas the reason for this is not clear, what is important for
the hypothesis is the lack of interaction between grammatical role
and RC type, i.e. that there was no pattern by which participants
pronominalized subject referents less and object referents more in
the NoExplanationRC condition.

1066

predict a greater percentage of object mentions in the NoExplanationRC condition than in the ExplanationRC condition.
This was confirmed (β=1.17; p<.005). Second, we predict
a greater percentage of object mentions in the FreePrompt
condition than the PronounPrompt condition. This was also
borne out (β=-1.27; p<.001).3 The results therefore confirm
that a subtle pragmatic manipulation of the context – whether
or not an RC invites the inference of a cause of the matrix
event – influences pronoun interpretation biases, but not production biases. The effect on interpretation is a surprise for
theories based on surface-level characteristics of the context,
which find little to distinguish contexts like (5a-b).

(6) P(referent | pronoun) =

referent∈referents

The second competing model is what we call the E X according to which the interpretation
bias toward a referent equals the probability that the referent gets re-mentioned (Arnold, 2001). The predicted interpretation bias for this model is thus estimated to be the nextmention bias P(referent) measured in the FreePrompt condition. Interestingly, this equation is equation (4) without the
likelihood terms:
PECTANCY MODEL ,

(7) P(referent | pronoun) =

Finally, per equation (4), the predicted interpretation bias
for the Bayesian analysis results from combining the probabilities utilized by each of these other models. We then
compare the predicted interpretation values for all three
models against the observed pronoun interpretation biases
P(referent | pronoun), as measured by the data collected in
the PronounPrompt conditions.

% Object

80

60

40

ExplRC
NoExplRC
R2

20

0

Exp

Actual
.215
.410

Bayesian
.229
.373
.48/.49

Mirror
.321
.334
.34/.42

Expectancy
.385
.542
.14/.12

NoExp

Table 1: Actual and Predicted Rates of Pronominal Reference
to Object

Figure 5: Percentage of Next-Mentions of the Direct Object
by Prompt Condition and RC Condition
Finally, we can use the data collected here to test our
Bayesian Hypothesis, i.e., that equation (4) captures the relationship between pronoun production and interpretation biases. We compare the predictions of the Bayesian model
against two competing models. For each model, the predicted
interpretation bias is estimated using biases measured in the
FreePrompt condition. These predicted biases are then compared against the actual interpretation biases measured in the
PronounPrompt condition.
The first competing model is what we call the M IRROR
MODEL , according to which the interpretation bias toward a
referent is proportional to the likelihood that a speaker would
produce a pronoun to refer to that referent. Capturing the
intuition that speakers will choose a pronoun in those cases
in which hearers will be biased toward the intended referent,
the predicted interpretation bias for this model is estimated
using the pronominalization rate P(pronoun | referent) measured in the FreePrompt condition, normalized by the sum of
the pronominalization rate for all referents. Interestingly, this
equation is equation (4) without the prior terms:
3 There

P(referent)
∑ P(referent)

referent∈referents

FreePrompt
PronounPrompt

100

P(pronoun | referent)
∑ P(pronoun | referent)

was also a marginal interaction (β=0.85; p=.078),
whereby there was a larger numerical difference between the prompt
conditions in the ExplanationRC condition than in the NoExplanationRC condition.

Table 1 shows the observed and model-predicted rates at
which a pronoun prompt was interpreted to refer to the object
across the two RC conditions. As can be seen, the observed
values are most closely matched by the Bayes-derived values.
We also test the degree of correlation between the values observed in the pronoun-prompt condition and those generated
by the three different analyses using linear models. The correlation is performed over participant and item means; each
participant (or item) contributes a value for the four pronoun
interpretation estimates in each of the verb bias × referent
combinations.4 We expect that the predictions of all models will reveal some degree of correlation with the observed
data: The Mirror model should capture the differences in biases between subject and non-subject referents, whereas the
Expectancy model should capture differences across context
type. Crucially, however, in combining the biases captured by
both models, we expect the Bayesian model to be more highly
correlated than either of the other models alone. And this is
in fact the case, as can be seen in the last row of Table 1.
4 We excluded data from participants (or items) for which the
Mirror-model value and the Bayes-derived value could not be
estimated—specifically if a participant’s FreePrompt responses for
a particular verb type contained no mentions of a particular referent or no pronouns for either referent; in both cases computing the
predicted probabilities of the Mirror and Bayesian models would involve division by zero.

1067

Conclusion
To sum, the experiment reported here demonstrates that biases towards referents of pronouns are sensitive to a subtle
manipulation of context – whether or not an RC invites the
inference of a cause – whereas production biases are not.
Whereas this mismatch may seem unintuitive, it reflects precisely the dissociation between production and interpretation
predicted by the Bayesian analysis.
A corollary to the analysis is that there is no unified notion
of entity salience that mediates pronoun behavior. Truth be
told, the notion of salience has always been somewhat problematic in the pronoun literature. Whereas it is often claimed
that pronouns refer to salient entities, the factors that contribute to salience are usually determined by examining the
properties of pronominal referents in data: A circular enterprise. Perhaps the most appropriate measure of entity salience
is the next-mention bias as estimated in free prompt passage
completions, as this metric is independent of the particular
linguistic forms that speakers choose (Miltsakaki, 2007). As
we have seen, however, these biases are not the same as those
we witness for pronoun interpretation (pace Arnold (2001)).
Finally, the experimental results demonstrate the hierarchical causal structure among the factors that contribute to pronoun interpretation. Whereas canonical ‘bag-of-cues’ analyses typically model the different factors that affect interpretation as an undifferentiated set, the factors on the right-hand
side of Figure 1 are modeled independently of pronouns. The
analysis and experiment presented here therefore capture the
idea that interpretation is not merely a bottom-up process that
occurs when a pronoun is encountered, but is instead what
happens when top-down expectations about entity mention
come into contact with the bottom-up linguistic evidence that
a pronoun provides (Kehler & Rohde, 2013).

Acknowledgments
We thank research assistants Melodie Yen and Ksenia
Kozhukhovskaya for their help in annotating data.

References
Arnold, J. (2001). The effect of thematic roles on pronoun
use and frequency of reference continuation. Discourse
Processes, 21(2), 137-162.
Bott, O., & Solstad, T. (2012). The mechanics of causal
interpretation: Explaining the implicit causality bias.
New York, March. (Poster presented at the 25th Annual
CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing)
Brown, R., & Fish, D. (1983). The psychological causality
implicit in language. Cognition, 14, 237-273.
Caramazza, A., Grober, E., Garvey, C., & Yates, J. (1977).
Comprehension of anaphoric pronouns. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 16, 601-609.
Crawley, R. A., Stevenson, R. J., & Kleinman, D. (1990).
The use of heuristic strategies in the interpretation of
pronouns. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 19,
245-264.

Fukumura, K., & van Gompel, R. P. G. (2010). Choosing anaphoric expressions: Do people take into account likelihood of reference? Journal of Memory and
Language, 62, 52-66.
Garvey, C., & Caramazza, A. (1974). Implicit causality in
verbs. Linguistic Inquiry, 5, 459-464.
Grosz, B. J., Joshi, A. K., & Weinstein, S. (1995). Centering:
A framework for modelling the local coherence of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 21(2), 203–225.
Hobbs, J. R. (1979). Coherence and coreference. Cognitive
Science, 3, 67-90.
Kehler, A., Kertz, L., Rohde, H., & Elman, J. L. (2008).
Journal of
Coherence and coreference revisited.
Semantics, 25, 1-44.
Kehler, A., & Rohde, H. (2013). A probabilistic reconciliation of coherence-driven and centering-driven theories of pronoun interpretation. Theoretical Linguistics,
39(1-2), 1–37.
Koornneef, A. W., & van Berkum, J. J. A. (2006). On the
use of verb-based implicit causality in sentence comprehension: Evidence from self-paced reading and eyetracking. Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 445465.
Terry Kit-fong Au. (1986). A verb is worth a thousand
words: The causes and consequences of interpersonal
events implicit in language. Journal of Memory and
Language, 25, 104-122.
McKoon, G., Greene, S. B., & Ratcliff, R. (1993). Discourse
models, pronoun resolution, and the implicit causality of verbs. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 19,
1040-1052.
Miltsakaki, E. (2007). A rethink of the relationship between
salience and anaphora resolution. In A. Branco (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 6th discourse anaphora and anaphor
resolution colloquium (p. 91-96). Lago, Portugal.
Rohde, H. (2008). Coherence-driven effects in sentence and
discourse processing. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, UC San Diego.
Rohde, H., & Kehler, A. (2014). Grammatical and
information-structural influences on pronoun production. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 29(8),
912-927.
Rohde, H., Levy, R., & Kehler, A. (2011). Anticipating explanations in relative clause processing. Cognition, 118,
339–358.
Simner, J., & Pickering, M. J. (2005). Planning causes and
consequences in discourse. Journal of Memory and
Language, 52, 226-239.
Smyth, R. J. (1994). Grammatical determinants of ambiguous pronoun resolution. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 23, 197-229.
Stevenson, R., Crawley, R., & Kleinman, D. (1994). Thematic roles, focusing and the representation of events.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 519-548.

1068

