Prospective uncertainty: The range of possible futures in physical predictions
Kevin A Smith (k2smith@ucsd.edu) and Edward Vul (evul@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
Recent research has suggested that people make physical
predictions based on extrapolation from a noisy representation
of the world, which gives rise to a probabilistic distribution
over possible future worlds. But can people use the
uncertainty of their predictions to inform their decisions, or
can people access only a single possible future? Here we
demonstrate that confidence-sensitive decisions about the
future track the amount of uncertainty expected from
probabilistic forward extrapolations. Participants were asked
to make predictions about where a ball would go and indicate
an expected range around that prediction. This range was well
correlated with two measures of uncertainty: variability in
predictions across participants and the amount of uncertainty
expected by a model of physical prediction. This suggests that
people form a probabilistic distribution over possible futures
in the course of physical prediction and base their decisions
about the future on this range.
Keywords: prediction; uncertainty; physical reasoning; noisy
Newton physics

Introduction
Imagine you are playing pool, and the game is coming to the
end. You have a straight shot to win the game: the most
likely outcome of the shot you are planning is for the cue
ball to hit the 8-ball and knock it into the pocket, winning
the game. But what if you are wrong? If you accidentally hit
the cue ball differently (e.g., too hard or with too little
English), it may also go into the pocket and you will instead
lose. Thus if you consider alternative possibilities, you
might think that your planned shot is too risky. For many
real-world situations, it is imperative to not only consider
the most likely outcome of a physical event, but also less
likely possibilities (Kording, 2007). But do we actually take
the range of possible futures into account when we make
such predictions?
Recent research has suggested that people accomplish
physical prediction tasks by extrapolating the future state of
the world using accurate laws of Newtonian mechanics, but
also incorporate uncertainty about the current state of the
world – termed the “noisy Newton” theory of physical
reasoning (Battaglia, Hamrick, & Tenenbaum, 2013;
Sanborn, Mansinghka, & Griffiths, 2013; Smith & Vul,
2013). In this framework, it is assumed that people start
with a model of the current state of the world that includes
uncertainty about the locations, attributes, and motions of
objects due to unobservable properties (e.g., friction
coefficients) and noisy perceptual estimates. People then use

an “intuitive physics engine” to propagate the world forward
given this uncertainty and obtain probabilistic estimates
about the objects’ future locations and motions, drawing on
these probabilistic predictions to make relevant decisions
(Battaglia et al., 2013; Smith, Dechter, Tenenbaum, & Vul,
2013; Smith & Vul, 2013).
However, while prior work has assumed that that people
develop a probability distribution over possible future
physical states, this theory has not been directly tested.
Although prior physical models explain behavior across
people and scenarios, it is possible that aggregate
probabilistic behavior can arise from individuals who each
only consider a single future outcome (Daw & Courville,
2008) and who would thus be incapable of considering the
dispersion of possible outcomes. In this case, prior models
would not describe how individuals behave, but would only
constrain behavior averaged over large numbers of people
or scenarios. Therefore, we aim to investigate the richness
of individuals’ representations about the future: do we
consider a distribution of possible physical outcomes, or just
a single sampled outcome?
Prior studies of decisions under uncertainty in sensorymotor tasks have shown that people behave as if they have
access to a full probability distribution, or at least the first
few moments (e.g., mean and variance). For instance, we
can integrate haptic and visual information in a way that is
sensitive to the variance of the noise in each of the
modalities (Ernst & Banks, 2002), we behave as if we are
inferring the expected value over a probabilistic distribution
of outcomes in visual (Whiteley & Sahani, 2008) and motor
(Trommershäuser, Landy, & Maloney, 2006) gambles, and
we can make rational tradeoffs between our visual and
motor uncertainty (Battaglia & Schrater, 2007). Similarly,
we are sensitive to probability distributions over more
abstract outcomes; our conditional predictions about
quantities like the total baking time of a cake reflect an
appreciation of not only the mean and variance, but also the
shape of the distribution of cake baking times (Griffiths &
Tenenbaum, 2006). Yet most of these tasks require
reasoning about a probability distribution over the current
state of the world, or internal noise that might be learned
from experience (e.g., motor uncertainty). Thus it is not
clear whether this knowledge of uncertainty would extend to
tasks in which the uncertainty arises from stochastic
extrapolation of the physical world.

2230

Figure 1: Diagram of a trial. Left: Participants observe a ball in motion for 500ms (dotted line is not shown). Center: The path
of the ball becomes occluded and participants must move the paddle and change its size to catch the ball when it would cross
the plane of the paddle. A ‘Wager’ is shown that grows larger with smaller paddles, and vice versa. Right: After a response is
registered, the continued path of the ball is shown and participants earn points if the ball is caught.
Here we first present an experiment in which participants
made predictions about a range of outcomes where an object
would end up after moving under occlusion, and find that
participants’ predicted range widths are correlated with the
amount of variability across participants, suggesting people
know when their predictions will be more variable. We then
show the breadths of these predictions are consistent with
the uncertainty arising from forward predictions in a prior
noisy Newton model of human physical extrapolation
(Smith & Vul, 2013). Together, these results suggest that
people can, and do, use the prospective uncertainty of their
physical predictions to inform their judgments.

Experiment
To measure subjective uncertainty in human physical
predictions, we showed participants a ball bouncing around
a rectangular table on a computer screen and asked them to
predict where the ball would end up after a period of
occlusion by adjusting the vertical position and size of a
paddle.

Methods
Fifty UCSD undergraduate students participated in this
experiment for course credit. All participants had normal or
corrected to normal vision. Of these participants, seven were
excluded from analysis because we did not capture a full set
of data (either due to participants leaving early or data
recording errors), leaving 43 participants’ data for review.
Participants viewed a 40cm x 32cm computer monitor
from a distance of 60cm. The screen depicted a “table”
(31.25cm x 28.125cm) that a computerized ball would move
around, bouncing off of the table walls according to
idealized Newtonian physics, implemented in the Chipmunk
2D physics engine (Lembcke, 2011). The ball always
moved at a constant velocity of 15.625cm/s. Participants
controlled a paddle at one end of the table: they could move
the paddle vertically (but not horizontally) with the mouse,
and could change the size of the paddle with the mouse

scroll wheel. Paddle size was constrained such that the
smallest size was 0.78cm, and the largest was 7.8cm. The
paddle size always started at 3.1cm, but participants were
required to adjust the size at least once to discourage them
from simply using the default setting.
Participants observed the motion of the ball for 500ms
(Figure 1, left), and then a portion of the screen would be
occluded. Participants were then asked to position the
paddle so that it would catch the ball if the ball continued on
its trajectory (Figure 1, center). Time was not limited, so
participants could spend as long as they liked positioning
and resizing the paddle before clicking the mouse to register
their response. Participants earned points if they caught the
ball. Feedback was provided by showing the path of the
ball, starting from the point where it was occluded and
traveling until it reached the plane of the paddle. Finally, a
notification appeared if the participants had caught the ball
and earned points (Figure 1, right).
To motivate participants to use paddle sizes other than the
largest, the number of points earned for a catch was
inversely proportional to the size of the paddle. Thus we
expected that when participants were more certain, they
would confidently choose a smaller paddle size to earn more
points (and vice versa when they were less certain). Points
were used as an intrinsic motivation but did not otherwise
affect credit or compensation for participants.
Each participant was provided with the same 450 trials
(differing in the observed motion of the ball and horizontal
location of the paddle) in a randomized order. There were
50 trials in each of nine conditions that varied how the ball
would move while occluded: the distance the ball travelled
(short: 18.75cm, medium: 25cm, long: 31.25cm) crossed
with the number of times the ball bounced off of the sides of
the table (0, 1, or 2) before it reached the plane of the
paddle.1 To ensure the ball would travel a fixed distance, the
1

Two of the trials from the short, 2 bounce condition were
excluded from analysis due to an error that led to different
observations across participants.

2231

horizontal position of the paddle varied across trials.
For each trial, we obtained two measurements from each
participant: the center point of the paddle to indicate their
best guess about where the ball would go, and the size of the
paddle to indicate their confidence in that prediction. On
each trial, we also determined where the ball actually
crossed the plane of the paddle according to computerized
Newtonian mechanics, and we will call this location
“ground truth.”
Participants were given five practice trials with no
occlusion to ensure that they understood the ball would
move with Newtonian mechanics and then eight further
practice trials with occluded movement to ensure they were
comfortable with the task and controls.

Results
Because idealized Newtonian mechanics is deterministic,
the ground truth outcomes from the computer physics
engine have no variability, and thus we cannot compare
participants’ internal measures of uncertainty against
“ground truth variability” in the trial outcomes based on
computer physics. Instead, we measured whether people
have an internal measure of variability that accurately
reflects the variability in behavior across people, which can
be used as a proxy for the amount of variability in any
individual’s predictions. We aggregated across people
within each trial to calculate two measures of uncertainty:
(1) across-subject variability in behavior was measured as
the standard deviation of participants’ predictions for each
trial, and (2) within-subject uncertainty was measured as the
average paddle length used for each trial. Because these
measures were determined from separate response
dimensions, any relationships between the two measures
must be modulated solely by participants’ own conception
of their prediction uncertainty.
Uncertainty across conditions We initially tested whether
our measures of across-subject variability and withinsubject uncertainty followed our qualitative predictions
across conditions: as the difficulty increased with greater
distance or more bounces, would both variability and
uncertainty increase? Prior work suggests that variability
across participants should increase as both distance and
number of bounces increase (Smith & Vul, 2013), so if
people have an accurate representation of their own
uncertainty, they should make the paddle larger in the more
difficult conditions as well.
Consistent with prior work, we find that the standard
deviation of predictions across participants increases with
distance (F(2,439)=51, p<0.001) and number of bounces
(F(2,439)=77, p<0.001), and is somewhat modulated by the
interaction of the two (F(4,439)=2.7, p=0.030; see Figure 2,
top), which suggests that the difference between distances
becomes smaller with more bounces. Post-hoc analyses
using a Tukey Range Test suggest that both the short and
medium no-bounce conditions are significantly less variable
than all other groups, and the long and medium one and two

Figure 2: Top: Across-subject variation (standard deviation
of paddle center across participants [cm]). Bottom: Withinsubject uncertainty (average paddle size across participants
[cm]). Each point represents a single trial, grouped by
condition, with a boxplot representing the interquartile
range across trials for that condition. Uncertainty,
represented by greater variability and paddle lengths,
increased with more bounces and greater distance.
bounce groups are significantly more variable than all other
groups.
A similar pattern is seen in the average length of the
paddles: participants use larger paddles as the distance
(F(2,439)=30, p<0.001) and number of bounces
(F(2,439)=19, p<0.001) increase, though again there is an
interaction (F(4,439)=7.0, p<0.001; see Figure 2, bottom),
again due to smaller differences between distance conditions
with 1 or 2 bounces. Post-hoc analysis suggests that this was
more driven by the short, no bounce condition, for which
people used significantly shorter paddles than all other
conditions, and the medium, no-bounce condition, which
had significantly smaller paddles than any of the long
conditions. All analysis was performed on aggregate trial
data, so each trial contributed a single data point to the
analysis.
While it is encouraging that both across-subject
variability
and
within-subject
uncertainty
varied
systematically across conditions, there is considerable
variation in both measures across trials within each
condition; for instance, some trials in the easiest (short, no
bounce) condition yielded greater uncertainty than some
trials in the hardest (long, two bounce) condition.
Furthermore, participants cannot know the distance the ball
will travel or the number of bounces it will take without first
extrapolating the motion of the ball, so the trial condition is
only meaningful to subjects insofar as it maps onto their

2232

own extrapolation. We therefore next ask whether
variability and uncertainty differ systematically across trials
regardless of condition.

across two sets of trials, within participants) was extremely
high: (r=0.998, 95% CI: [0.996, 0.999]), suggesting that
some participants in general are simply more or less risk
averse. However, this risk aversion was not driven by some
participants knowing they are more accurate – there was no
appreciable correlation between average paddle sizing and
individual average prediction errors (r=0.04, 95% CI:
[-0.26, 0.34]).
Despite the range in riskiness, we can ask whether there is
evidence that individual participants had access to internal
measures of uncertainty. Though the standard deviation of
predictions for a given trial is necessarily an acrossparticipant measure, we treat this as an approximate
measure of each individual participant’s internal
uncertainty. We therefore tested whether an individual’s
paddle sizing correlated with the across-participant
variability across all trials.
Because there is more noise in individual paddle sizes
than average paddle sizes, the individual correlations are
lower and extremely variable (mean r: 0.10, sd: 0.11, see
Figure 4). Nonetheless, there is evidence that participants on
average modulate their paddle sizes by how variable acrossparticipant predictions are (t(42)=6.1, p<0.001), and we
found positive correlations for 74% of participants (32 of
43). This suggests that most individuals informed their
paddle sizes by an assessment of prospective uncertainty.

Meta-knowledge of uncertainty by trial In order to test
whether people have accurate access to prediction
uncertainty beyond gross trial categories, we can ask
whether the measures of within-subject uncertainty (paddle
sizing) correlate with across-subject variability across trials.
The standard deviation of predictions across participants
correlated significantly with the average paddle length for
each trial (r=0.45, 95% CI: [0.37, 0.51], see Figure 3). This
correlation remains significant even when variability due to
trial condition (number of bounces and distance) is factored
out (rpartial=0.23, 95% CI: [0.14, 0.31]), indicating that
people discern their uncertainty for specific trials based on
subtle differences in observations.

Figure 3: Within-subject uncertainty (average paddle
length) is well explained by across-subject variability
(standard deviation of paddle center; r=0.45). Each
point represents a separate trial.
Individual differences in certainty While we demonstrated
that there is an aggregate relationship between withinsubject uncertainty as measured by mean paddle size and
across-subject variability of paddle placement, there was
also a large amount of individual variability in the risk
participants were willing to take – some generally used
smaller paddles, and some were more risk averse and almost
always used as large a paddle as possible. The average
paddle size used varied across participants from 1.9cm (25%
of the maximum paddle size) to 7.6cm (98% of the
maximum size).
Furthermore, participants were remarkably consistent in
their relative paddle sizing. We calculated how each
participant’s paddle size differed from the average for each
trial. The split-half correlation of this difference (averaged

Figure 4: Histogram of correlations between standard
deviation of predictions across participants and individual
paddle sizes across trials. Most participants had a positive
correlation, suggesting individual access to probabilistic
distributions over potential future states of the world.
Learning over time Participants received feedback after
each trial, which could allow for learning non-physical
contingencies between the initial ball motion and where the
ball crossed the plane of the paddle. If participants were
learning in this way, it is possible that the relationship
between variability and paddle size might have arisen from
mechanisms other than physical extrapolation.
However, there was evidence of only small improvement
in prediction over time. Controlling for subject and trial
effects, we find that prediction error (average paddle

2233

distance from the ground truth) only decreased by 6.4*10-4
cm/trial (95% CI: [3.1*10-4, 9.8*10-4]), which would
suggest an improvement of 0.29 cm over the experiment, or
about 6.8% of the average error.
In addition, there was no evidence that participants
changed their paddle sizing strategy over the experiment:
controlling for subject and trial effects, there was only a size
increase of 8.0*10-5 cm/trial (95% CI: [-4.7*10-5, 20.6*105
]), which would be equivalent to an increase of 0.04 cm, or
0.8% of the average paddle length over the entire
experiment. Nor was there evidence that the average
participant’s scores improved over the experiment: there
was only an estimated score improvement of 0.0036 points
per trial (95% CI: [-0.0006, 0.0078]), which would be an
average improvement of only 1.6 points from the initial to
final trials.
Because there was little change in participants’
performance on the task over the course of the experiment,
we can be confident that we are not studying strategies
learned during the experiment, but rather physical intuitions
that were formed previously.

predictions expected by the model and the individual
uncertainty expressed by participants via paddle sizing.

Accuracy of physical model
As observed in similar work (Hamrick, Smith, Griffiths, &
Vul, 2015; Smith, Dechter, Tenenbaum, & Vul, 2014; Smith
& Vul, 2013), participants’ predictions are well explained
by the physical model. Participants’ average predictions for
each trial were correlated with the ground truth position
where the ball crossed the plane of the paddle (r=0.87, 95%
CI: [0.85, 0.89]), but participants were systematically
biased to predict the ball would cross closer to the middle of
the screen. Nonetheless, the physical prediction model could
account for these systematic biases; this model made similar
errors (deviations from ground truth) to participants on each
trial (r=0.80, 95% CI: [0.77,0.83]). This suggests that we
are capturing the process participants are using to make
physical predictions.

Forming a representation of uncertainty
Although an individual’s uncertainty tracks with the amount
of variability across people, we might wonder how that
representation of uncertainty is formed. For this we turn to a
prior model of physical prediction from Smith and Vul
(2013). We show that the amount of uncertainty expected by
this physical prediction process explains participants’
individual uncertainty, even above and beyond the
expectations from across-participant variability in
predictions.

Physical prediction model
Smith and Vul (2013) used a task similar to the current
experiment to elicit physical predictions.2 In this study we
found that predictions of ball motions were well captured by
assuming that people used a noisy Newton model with two
general sources of uncertainty: perceptual uncertainty about
the initial location and trajectory of the ball at the moment
its motion was occluded, and dynamic uncertainty
accounting for accumulated noise as the ball traveled along
its path (e.g., it might not travel in a perfectly straight line
due to a rough floor or imperfections in the ball). We also
found that people had a prior belief that the ball would
travel towards the center of the screen, and that their
predictions were a combination of motion extrapolation with
this prior belief.
The uncertainty and prior parameters for this model were
fit based on aggregate participants’ predictions, as described
in Smith and Vul (2013). Crucially, no information about
paddle size was used to parameterize the model, which
allows for a clean comparison between the uncertainty in
2

The main differences in that study were that participants used a
paddle with a fixed length and had a limited time to “catch” the
ball.

Figure 3: Within-participant average paddle length
is well explained by the uncertainty in the noisy
Newton model (r=0.45). Each point represents a
separate trial.

Measures of uncertainty
Because this physical model produces probabilistic
predictions for each trial, we can treat the variability in these
predictions as a representation of the uncertainty that
participants’ would be expected to hold for each trial. We
can therefore investigate whether participants adjust paddle
size based on this prospective uncertainty about possible
futures.
The average paddle size for each trial was well correlated
with the uncertainty expected under the noisy Newton
model (r=0.45, 95% CI: [0.37, 0.52], see Figure 5), which
provides evidence that participants were drawing on
information from a probability distribution over possible
outcomes to decide how confident they are.

2234

However, the uncertainty expected by the noisy Newton
model also correlated well with the standard deviation of
participants’ predictions (r=0.51, 95% CI = [0.43, 0.57]).
Thus we must ask whether the uncertainty in the model is
capturing any internal psychological mechanisms, or simply
correlating with paddle sizing because it is explaining the
variability in participants’ predictions. To test this we can
ask whether the model uncertainty has any explanatory
power beyond the measure of across-participant standard
deviation. We find that with across-participant variability
partialed out, there is still a relationship between noisy
Newton uncertainty and paddle length (rpartial=0.28, 95%
CI: [0.20,0.37]). Conversely, we find that across-participant
standard deviation can explain the uncertainty produced
with paddle sizing, even above and beyond the uncertainty
from the noisy Newton model (rpartial=0.29, 95% CI:
[0.20,0.37]). This pattern of partial correlations indicates
that both across-subject variability and noisy forward
physical simulations are capturing partially independent
aspects of the uncertainty that individuals use when
determining their confidence to adjust the size of a paddle.

make efficient predictions (Vul, Goodman, Griffiths, &
Tenenbaum, 2014). While it is possible to get some sense of
the spread of predictions based on just a few samples, it
remains an open question how people exploit a sampling
process to estimate their prospective uncertainty and inform
their judgments.

Acknowledgments
Kevin A Smith was supported by a UCSD Chancellor’s
Interdisciplinary Collaboratories grant. Edward Vul was
supported by NSF CPS grant: 1239323.

References

Discussion
In this paper we show that people have access to an internal
representation of uncertainty over potential future world
states, which can be used in decisions of how much risk to
take on in a particular situation. Across trials, participants
shrank their paddle to catch the ball when there was less
variability in possible futures and used larger paddles when
there was more variability.
Uncertainty in the future was measured in two ways: as
the variability of point predictions across participants and as
the uncertainty estimated with a probabilistic model of
physical reasoning. Both estimates of uncertainty were
related, but each separately explained how people use
uncertainty to set the size of the paddle. This may be
because both are noisy estimates of the same mechanism:
across-subject variability in paddle placement will reflect
more than the average participant uncertainty, while the
average participant uncertainty may not be perfectly
captured by our simple physical model. Nonetheless, each
measure seems to capture part of the internal representation
of uncertainty that people hold.
These results provide further insight into the mechanisms
underlying physical prediction, demonstrating that people
do hold a probabilistic representation of future physical
outcomes, as suggested by the noisy Newton theory. This
leads to the question of how this sort of uncertainty arises in
the brain. Determining the posterior predictive distribution
of where the ball will cross the plane of the paddle is a
computationally taxing task, and similar distributions can
only be achieved in noisy Newton models through sampling
a number of possible futures. Concurrent research suggests
that this method might be shared by the mind – we appear to
make judgments about physical events based on a limited
number of samples of future world states (Hamrick et al.,
2015), since a limited number of samples may be enough to

Battaglia, P., Hamrick, J., & Tenenbaum, J. (2013). Simulation as
an engine of physical scene understanding. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 110(45), 18327-18332.
Battaglia, P., & Schrater, P. R. (2007). Humans trade off viewing
time and movement duration to improve visuomotor accuracy in
a fast reaching task. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27(26), 69846994.
Daw, N., & Courville, A. (2008). The pigeon as particle filter.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 20.
Ernst, M. O., & Banks, M. S. (2002). Humans integrate visual and
haptic information in a statistically optimal fashion. Nature, 415,
429-433.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2006). Optimal prediction in
everyday cognition. Psychological Science, 17(9), 767-773.
Hamrick, J., Smith, K. A., Griffiths, T. L., & Vul, E. (2015). Think
again? Optimal mental simulation tracks problem difficulty.
Paper presented at the 37th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, Pasadena, CA.
Kording, K. (2007). Decision theory: What "should" the nervous
system do? Science, 318, 606-610.
Lembcke, S. (2011). Chipmunk 2D (Version 6.2.0): Howling
Moon Software. Retrieved from http://chipmunk-physics.net/
Sanborn, A. N., Mansinghka, V. K., & Griffiths, T. L. (2013).
Reconciling intuitive physics and Newtonian mechanics for
colliding objects. Psychological Review, 120(2), 411-437.
Smith, K. A., Dechter, E., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Vul, E. (2013).
Physical predictions over time. Paper presented at the 35th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Berlin,
Germany.
Smith, K. A., Dechter, E., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Vul, E. (2014).
Tracking hidden objects with efficient physical prediction.
Journal of Vision, 14(10), 846.
Smith, K. A., & Vul, E. (2013). Sources of uncertainty in intuitive
physics. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5(1), 185-199.
Trommershäuser, J., Landy, M. S., & Maloney, L. T. (2006).
Humans rapidly estimate expected gain in movement planning.
Psychological Science, 17(11), 981-988.
Vul, E., Goodman, N., Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. (2014).
One and done? Optimal decisions from very few samples.
Cognitive Science, 38(4), 599-637.
Whiteley, L., & Sahani, M. (2008). Implicit knowledge of visual
uncertainty guides decisions with asymmetric outcomes. Journal
of Vision, 8(3). doi: 10.1167/8.3.2

2235

