Quit while you’re ahead: Preschoolers’ persistence and willingness to accept
challenges are affected by social comparison
Rachel W. Magid (rwmagid@mit.edu) & Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract
Many beliefs about oneself are constructed through
experience, but the kinds of evidence that inform these
beliefs in early childhood are not well understood. One
source of information that affects adults and older children’s
appraisals of themselves is social comparison. We found that
even preschoolers (mean=57 months) spontaneously use
social comparisons to guide their behavior. In Experiment 1,
children who saw they out-performed peers on a task
subsequently persisted less than children in other conditions.
Children who saw evidence suggesting they performed
either better or worse than peers on the task were more
likely to choose an easy (versus difficult) novel task relative
to those who saw neutral or no evidence. In Experiment 2
children who saw peers perform better were inclined to
persist more than children in other conditions. This suggests
preschoolers use social comparison to draw inferences about
themselves without explicit cues, and this affects their
motivation.
Keywords: social comparison; persistence; learning.

Introduction
Adults have rich representations of their abilities,
weaknesses, and traits, which form a “personal
epistemology” (Brim, 1976, p. 242). An accurate theory of
the self may allow people to predict outcomes of future
activities, maximizing the possibility of positive experiences
and minimizing the likelihood of negative ones (Epstein,
1973). However, while we know young children have
intuitive theories about the physical and psychological
worlds (Carey, 2000; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Wellman &
Gelman, 1992), much less known is about the development
of children’s beliefs about themselves. Do young children
have an intuitive theory of the self that is affected by
evidence they observe, which in turn affects their behavior?
Some understanding of the self as an enduring and unique
entity emerges early in life. Toddlers recognize themselves
in mirrors by 20 months (Amsterdam, 1972). By three-anda-half, children compare themselves to others in
spontaneous speech, suggesting they understand they have
qualities and attributes that make them different from others
(Mostache & Bragonier, 1981). By four and five, children
have a preference for “learning” over “performance” goals
(Smiley & Dweck, 1994), but unlike older children, younger
children associate high and low achievement with “being
good” or “bad” rather than “smart” or “dumb” (Dweck,
1999; Herbert & Dweck, 1995). It is less clear how children
develop beliefs about themselves. Evidence suggests a role

for parental behavior. Praise and other extrinsic rewards
affect children’s intrinsic motivation (e.g., Lepper &
Greene, 1975; Mueller & Dweck, 1998) and parental praise
for ability or effort has an enduring effect on children’s
mindsets (Gunderson, Gripshover, Romero, Dweck, GoldinMeadow, & Levine, 2013). However adults often give no or
uninformative feedback about ability, and other clear
metrics for self-evaluation, such as objective success, may
be unavailable.
When people cannot estimate their own abilities using an
external benchmark (i.e., success), they may instead
evaluate themselves with respect to others (Festinger, 1954).
For older children and adults, evaluations derived from
social comparison have consequences for beliefs about the
self: performing less well than peers results in lower selfevaluations, and vice versa (Mussweiler, 2003; Ruble,
Eisenberg, & Higgins, 1994).
Whether preschoolers use social comparison to learn
about themselves remains an open question. Children
younger than six may not update their beliefs based on what
they observe about their peers’ relative performance (Butler,
1989a; Ruble, 1983; Ruble et al., 1994). Preschoolers
appear unaffected by finding out they performed worse than
their peers in that they do not evaluate themselves
negatively, nor show subsequent impairments in task
performance (Boggiano & Ruble, 1979; Ruble et al., 1994;
Ruble, Feldman, & Boggiano, 1976). Researchers have
suggested preschoolers are less likely than older children to
attribute failure to enduring traits (Lockhart, Chang, &
Story, 2002; Rholes & Ruble, 1984). Instead they may see
their performance as something that they can improve upon
in subsequent attempts (Butler, 1989). However, when
adults make a comparison very explicit by commenting on
the child’s performance relative to a peer’s performance is
impaired when children think they did worse (rather than
better) than a peer (Butler, 1998). In addition, when the peer
is introduced as a member of an out-group (i.e., when girls
are told they did worse than a boy or vice versa), children’s
performance and self-evaluations suffer (Rhodes &
Brickman, 2008). Thus the findings on children’s sensitivity
to social comparisons are mixed.
The idea that four- and five-year-olds might be largely
insensitive to social comparison is surprising from the
perspective of evidence-based learning. If children’s
intuitive theory of the self resembles theory formation in
other domains (see Gopnik & Wellman, 2012; Schulz, 2012;
and Tenenbaum, Kemp, Griffiths, & Goodman, 2011 for
reviews), we might expect children to spontaneously
integrate their prior beliefs about themselves with new data

1482

(including data about peers’ achievement) to draw
inferences about their own abilities. Insofar as children’s
beliefs are jointly influenced by the strength of the data and
the strength of their initial beliefs about themselves,
evidence should be more influential to the degree that
children’s prior beliefs are less certain.
Because we were interested in whether preschoolers
spontaneously use data from social comparison to evaluate
their own abilities, we chose a task that did not require
children to respond to explicit questions, and one that
preschoolers would find challenging. Children who perceive
themselves as relatively skilled are likely have high
confidence in their abilities, and those who are incapable of
performing a task are likely to have high confidence in their
inability. Children at an intermediate level of performance
may have real uncertainty about how good they are.

Experiment 1
To see whether children are sensitive to social comparison
when their estimate of their own abilities is noisy, we asked
preschoolers to trace three letters of the alphabet. We had
blind coders assess their performance, and focused the
analysis on children who achieved intermediate ratings on
this task. (Children found the task doable but challenging
and most children performed in the intermediate range.) We
then provided children with evidence relevant, or irrelevant,
to social comparison. Specifically, children saw one of four
types of evidence: 1) tracings from four children who traced
the letters poorly (Peers Worse condition), 2) tracings from
four children who traced elaborate cursive letters (Peers
Better condition) 3) tracings from four children who traced
abstract designs (Peers Irrelevant condition), or 4) four
drawings of cartoon animals (No Peers condition). The
Peers Irrelevant condition was included to ensure that any
behavioral effects of social comparison were specifically
due to evidence relevant to social comparison, and not
merely due to the distraction of looking at peers’
performance generally. In contrast to previous work, we did
not explicitly draw children’s attention to the comparison or
their own relative performance. This means that if children
are affected by social comparison, it is because they
spontaneously recognize and incorporate the evidence.
We assessed children’s sensitivity to the evidence by
evaluating both their subsequent persistence at the target
task and their willingness to choose either an easy or
difficult novel task. For the Persistence Task, children were
given a sheet with all 26 letters of the alphabet and a novel
toy (a push button water toy with floating rings). Children
were told to trace as many letters as they liked with the
understanding that they could play with the toy whenever
they decided to stop. After the Persistence Task, children
were given a choice of an easy (six-piece) puzzle or a hard
(30-piece) puzzle (borrowing from Smiley & Dweck, 1994).
In previous work (Smiley & Dweck, 1994), approximately
half the preschoolers chose each type of puzzle, suggesting
that children differ with respect to performance goals

(manifest by choosing the easy puzzle) or learning goals
(manifest as choosing the hard puzzle). Any significant
deviations from this distribution would suggest a
generalizable effect of social comparison on children’s
willingness to take on challenging tasks.
If preschoolers are insensitive to social comparison then
their behavior in the social comparison conditions (Peers
Worse and Peers Better) should not differ from their
performance in the control conditions (Peers Irrelevant and
No Peers). We predicted instead that children would
integrate the evidence, and perform differently in the social
comparison conditions relative to both control conditions.
However, given the exploratory nature of this study (seeing
if preschoolers would spontaneously react to social
comparison information at all), we were agnostic about the
direction of the effect. One possibility is that children who
saw that their peers performed worse than they did (Peers
Worse condition) might find the target task relatively more
enjoyable, and thus be more motivated on both the target
and the generalization task. However, given that we
intentionally chose a challenging task for this age, children
who believe they already established relative competence
might persist less and opt to spend more time on a novel,
enjoyable, activity. The reverse predictions apply to the
Peers Better condition. If children believe they have done
worse than their peers they might be less motivated given
their failure or more motivated to demonstrate mastery.
Method
Seventy-eight children (mean: 56 months; range: 48-66
months) participated in the study. All of the children were
recruited from an urban children’s museum. In the first part
of the study, the experimenter handed children a sheet with
dashed outlines of the letters A, B, and C and asked the
children to trace the letters. This was designed to 1) provide
children with information about their own letter tracing
ability and 2) allow a coder blind to condition to rate the
quality of the letter tracings to determine how much children
struggled with tracing letters. All children were thanked for
completing the tracing, but the experimenter did not
comment on their performance. Next, the experimenter
showed children four pieces of evidence. In the Peers
Worse, Peers Better, and Peers Irrelevant conditions,
children were told, “Do you know that other kids your age
come and do these activities with me? Let’s look at what
they did when they came to play.” The experimenter then
said, “This is a child named Tony, and these are his letters.”
This was repeated three times, for a total of two girl and two
boy confederate children. In the Peers Worse condition, the
confederate children’s letters were messily traced. The
evidence from in the Peers Better condition were neat
tracings of cursive letters. In the Peers Irrelevant condition,
the tracings were made over random line drawings, in two
different patterns, labeled as designs. Pilot testing suggested
that relative to a sample of participants’ letter tracings, same
age children rated cursive letters as better and the messy

1483

tracings as worse. The experimenter did not mention other
children in the No Peers condition.
The experimenter then introduced the Persistence Task
saying, “Here I have a sheet with the alphabet on it. You can
trace all of the letters, none of the letters, or some of the
letters. It’s totally up to you how many you want to trace.
And whenever you’re done tracing, you can take a turn with
this toy.” The experimenter placed the alphabet sheet in
front of the child and the water ring toy behind the sheet of
paper. To dispel any sense of being evaluated during the
free choice task, the experimenter told the child she had
some reading to do while they “looked at those things.” The
experimenter did not look at the child again during the
Persistence Task. The Persistence Task ended when the
child stopped writing for approximately 20 consecutive
seconds (either because they started to play with the water
toy or because they simply quit). If the child had not already
started playing with the toy, the experimenter said, “If
you’re all done, you can take a turn with the toy.” Next the
experimenter presented children with two unassembled
puzzles, in counterbalanced order. The easy and difficult
puzzles were made from the same picture, and cut from the
same size board. The easy puzzle had been cut into 6 large,
interlocking pieces; the difficult puzzle had been cut into 30
small, interlocking pieces. The experimenter said, “Now
you can choose which puzzle to do. They both make the
same picture of a playground. This puzzle has a few big
pieces, and this puzzle has a bunch of small pieces.” After
children chose a puzzle, the experimenter helped them
assemble it. Finally, children were praised for completing
the puzzle and thanked for participating. See Figure 1.

Figure 1. Schematic of Experiment 1. Children traced three letters
and then saw evidence from other children (Peers Worse, Peers
Irrelevant, or Peers Better, conditions) or pictures of animals (No
Peers condition). The Persistence Task measured children’s
subsequent willingness to continue tracing letters instead of
playing with a distractor toy. The Puzzle Task assessed children’s
preference for completing a difficult (L) or easy (R) puzzle.

Results
Children’s initial tracings of the three letters were rated by
a blind coder with a whole number rating on a scale of 1 (no
semblance of letters) to 10 (perfect letters). The coder also
rated the evidence in the Peers Worse condition, which had

an average rating of 4. Because the Peers Worse
manipulation would not be effective if children did not
actually perform better than their peers, we excluded
children who had a rating at or below 4 (n=2). In addition,
we excluded children whose letters were rated a 9 or a 10 on
the grounds that children who were confident in their ability
to write letters would likely be insensitive to the evidence
(n=16). Children included in the analysis (n=60) had scores
between 5 and 8 with a mean score of 6.82 (SD=1.05).1 The
average age and letter rating did not differ by condition
(Age: β=.05, 95% CI [-0.14, 0.05], Letter Rating: β=.02,
95% CI [-0.09, 0.13]; Peers Worse: n=16, mage=57 mo.,
mletter rating=6.87; Peers Better: n=16, mage=55 mo., mletter
rating=6.50; Peers Irrelevant: n=16, mage=55 mo., mletter
rating=6.92; No Peers: n=15, mage=55 mo., mletter rating=6.87).
For the Persistence Task, we counted the number of
complete letters children traced before quitting and used the
same bootstrapping method to estimate the 95% confidence
interval for the mean number of letters traced and assessed
overlap between the means of each condition and the
confidence intervals of the other conditions. Children in the
Peers Worse condition traced fewer letters than children in
the other three conditions, which did not differ statistically
from one another (Mean Peers Worse: 8.94 letters, 95% CI
[3.50, 13.63]; Mean Peers Better: 20.44 letters, 95% CI
[16.44, 25.38]; Mean Peers Irrelevant: 22.47 letters, 95%
CI [19.67, 26.00]; Mean No Peers: 22.44 letters, 95% CI
[19.62, 26.00]). See Figure 2. In addition, a linear regression
with condition as the predictor revealed that the evidence
children saw affected their tracing in the Persistence Task,
β=4.24, 95% CI [2.38, 6.34].2 The results of the Persistence
Task provide some support for our hypothesis, where
children who believed they had already established their
superiority to their peers were less likely to persist on the
target task. However, against our prediction, but consistent
with previous research suggesting children’s relative
resilience in the face of upward comparison, children who
did worse than their peers performed comparably to children
in the control conditions.
Next, we considered whether any effect of social
comparison generalized to a novel domain in which children
did not have information about their own abilities relative to
others. A logistic regression, with choice of easy puzzle
coded as 0 and hard puzzle coded as 1, revealed that
condition did indeed have an effect on children’s puzzle
choice, β=.93, 95% CI [.22, 1.29]. The mean proportions of
children who chose the difficult puzzle were similar in the
relevant social comparison conditions (Peers Worse: 0%,
95% CI [0, 0]; Peers Better, 19%, 95% CI [0, 38]), but
differed from the proportions of children in the two control
conditions, (Peers Irrelevant: 40%, 95% CI [13, 67]); No
Peers: 44%, 95% CI [19, 69). The results of the Puzzle Task

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

Results are still significant when no data points are excluded.
We report 95% confidence intervals of means, bootstrapped with
10,000 samples (see Cumming, 2008 for discussion of confidence
intervals). For consistency with previous literature, we also note
that all the regression analyses reported are significant, ps<.05.
2

1484

suggest that children are in fact sensitive to downward and
upward social comparisons. In particular, contra findings
that children are simply insensitive to evidence showing
they under-perform compared to their peers, social
comparison appears to make preschoolers less inclined to
attempt novel difficult tasks, whether they compare
favorably to their peers or not.

Figure 2. Mean number of letters completed in the Persistence
Task in Experiment 1 by condition with 95% confidence intervals.

Experiment 2
We observed an effect of social comparison on children’s
task persistence only in the Peers Worse condition, but not
(as we had predicted) in the Peers Better condition in
Experiment 1. This finding is consistent with previous
research suggesting young children’s relative resilience to
negative information (e.g., Flavell, Friedrichs, & Hoyt,
1970). In this case however, it is possible that the absence of
any effect on children’s persistence may have been due to a
limitation of the task. Children had a sheet of 26 letters and
the prevalence of children performing at ceiling may have
limited our design’s sensitivity to condition differences. To
address this, we designed a task that was similar to
Experiment 1, but where children might show varying
degrees of persistence at baseline (in the No Peers
condition), as well as where all children in the sample would
be uncertain about their abilities. In Experiment 2 children
counted small sets of fish on a piece of paper and saw
evidence in three conditions: Peers Worse, where the other
children counted some of the sets incorrectly, Peers Better,
where the other children counted larger sets of fish, or No
Peers, where children saw line drawings. Then using a
child-operated card dispenser in the Persistence Task
children counted as many pairs of cards with different set
sizes as they wished before playing with the water toy.
Method
Fifty children (mean: 59 months; range: 48-66 months)
participated in the study. Ten additional children were
excluded because of parent or sibling interference (n=5),
machine malfunction (n=2), experimenter error (n=1) and
inability to complete the initial counting sheet (n=2). In the
first part of the study, children counted three sets of fish,
numbering 4, 2 and 7. All children were told that they
counted each of the sets correctly, and received a star on

their paper for each set as a visual marker of their
performance. The experimenter then showed children
evidence from other children in the social comparison
conditions. In the Peers Worse condition, the confederates
counted only one or two sets correctly, receiving only one or
two stars on their papers. The evidence from in the Peers
Better condition showed children who counted sets of 16,
13, and 22 fish perfectly. In these evidence conditions,
children often spontaneously commented on the peers’
counting or their own counting, saying “I got them all right”
in the Peers Worse condition and, “Wow, that’s a lot of
fish” in the Peers Better condition, suggesting they
interpreted the evidence as it was intended although they
were not prompted. In the No Peers condition, children were
showed line drawings of animals.
The experimenter introduced the Persistence Task saying,
“Here I have a machine with a lot of cards inside. Let me
show you how it works.” The experimenter demonstrated
how the machine, from the children’s game Zingo,
dispensed two cards, each of which had a set of between 611 shapes; sets differed by 1 or 2 shapes. She showed how
to place the card with more shapes in the larger of two cups
set up on the table, and the card with fewer shapes in the
smaller cup. As in Experiment 1, children were told they
could count as many cards as they wanted and to take a turn
with the water toy whenever they were done counting.
Again, the experimenter read while children did they
activities. After the Persistence Task, which ended after a
maximum of 27 trials, children were told they did an
excellent job counting. Children in the Peers Better
condition were told that the experimenter had mistakenly
shown them the counting of children who were older to
dispel any negative emotions they may have felt. Finally,
children were given a timed number identification task
adapted from the Test For Early Mathematics-3 (TEMA-3)
to assess their general ability to recognize cardinal values.3
Results
Age and average symbolic number ability, as measured by
the TEMA-3 task, did not differ by condition (Age: β=.14,
95% CI [-0.01, 0.28], Letter Rating: β=-3.25, 95% CI [8.73, 2.63]; Peers Worse: n=17, mage=57 mo., mtime=27.00s;
No Peers: n=16, mage=60 mo., mtime =29.27s, Peers Better:
n=17, mage=60 mo., mtime=20.81s).
For the Persistence Task, we counted the number of pairs
of cards children counted and assessed overlap between the
means of each condition and the confidence intervals of the
other conditions (Mean Peers Worse: 6.06 trials, 95% CI
[2.12, 9.18]; Mean No Peers: 9.19 letters, 95% CI [4.94,
12.94]; Mean Peers Better: 13.59 trials, 95% CI [9.71,
17.29]). See Figure 3. Children who saw that their peers did
better persisted more than those who saw their peers do

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

We administered the Puzzle Task after the Persistence Task.
However, only 6 of 50 children chose the hard puzzle. We believe
children were somewhat depleted from counting leading children
to choose the easy puzzle much more often than in Experiment 1.

1485

worse, while children who saw no social comparison
evidence persisted at an intermediate level. In addition, a
linear regression with condition as the predictor suggests
that seeing how well other children counted affected
children’s own motivation to count as predicted, β=3.77,
95% CI [2.12, 9.24]. These results indicate that, in addition
to persisting less when they can infer they are better than
their peers, preschoolers seem to also persist more when
they observe peers who performed superiorly.

Figure 3. Mean number of pairs of cards counted in the Persistence
Task of Experiment 2 by condition with 95% confidence
intervals.

Discussion
In the current study, we asked whether preschoolers
spontaneously use evidence from social comparison to
inform their beliefs about themselves, as measured by their
persistence on a target task, as well as their motivation to do
a challenging task in a different domain. Despite having
equivalent actual abilities, when children could infer they
were relatively more successful than their peers, they
demonstrated less persistence on the target task than
children who believed they were relatively worse than their
peers, or children who had no relevant information.
Furthermore, children in Experiment 1 were disinclined to
attempt a challenging novel task if they saw any relevant
social comparison, regardless of whether the social
comparison reflected positively or negatively on their
abilities. Results from Experiment 2 suggest that
preschoolers who saw they performed worse than peers
demonstrate more persistence relative to baseline and
children who saw they when they performed better than
peers. These results suggest that social comparison
influences preschoolers’ motivation even though
information about peers’ performance was presented
without any explicit reference about a comparison to the
child’s performance. At least in cases where children start
with potential uncertainty about their abilities, preschoolers,
like older children and adults, spontaneously use evidence
about others to inform how they think about themselves, and
that comparison with others can impact both children’s
immediate task persistence and their motivation to take on
difficult tasks more globally.

Future work might consider how social factors relating to
the experimenter’s presence and potential implicit
evaluation of the child might have contributed to the pattern
of results. When for instance, children persisted less given
evidence that they had out-performed their peers (in the
Peers Worse condition), we cannot know if this was because
children had already satisfied themselves of their ability and
therefore lost interest in continuing the task, or whether they
believed that they had already secured the experimenter’s
good opinion and thus had no motivation to continue.
Similarly, in Experiment 1 when children opted for the
easier puzzle in both social comparison conditions, it is not
clear whether the chance to perform well was attractive
because it helped children to maintain a good opinion of
themselves, or because it helped them maintain their
reputation with the experimenter.
Collectively these results suggest that preschoolers are not
indifferent to social comparison. Although the results
contrast with some previous studies where children were
asked to explicitly evaluate their own abilities (e.g., Ruble,
et al., 1980), the results are consistent with some more
recent work (Butler, 1998; Rhodes & Brickman, 2008).
They also support previous research suggesting that an
understanding of the self emerges over the preschool years
(Bélanger et al., 2014, Heyman & Dweck, 1998; Heyman, et
al., 1992). Finally, these results align with the broader
perspective that children construct intuitive theories,
integrating data and prior knowledge (Gopnik & Wellman,
2013; Schulz 2012). In this case, we propose that children
do use evidence from social comparison to inform their
beliefs about themselves and that these beliefs in turn affect
children’s subsequent behavior and learning.
Finally, the current work suggests that information from
social comparison can have a negative impact on
preschoolers’ motivation, in that doing well relative to
others decreases children’s persistence and willingness to
accept challenges. This is consistent with the detrimental
effect of performance goals relative to learning goals more
broadly (Dweck, 2000). However, peers play a large role in
children’s lives and in many contexts, these roles are
positive. The presence of peers allows children to learn
through observation (Butler, 1989a), and both competition
and cooperation benefit children’s learning under different
circumstances (Butler, 1989b; Slavin, 1983). Thus, many
questions remain regarding children’s sensitivity to social
comparison and its role in shaping children’s beliefs about
the self. Given that children’s beliefs about their own
learning abilities have ramifications for educational
outcomes, a better understanding of how these theories
develop in early childhood may enable us to support
children’s persistence, increase motivation, and foster
positive expectations for children as learners.

Acknowledgements
We thank the Boston Children’s Museum and the families
who participated in this research. We also thank Priyanka

1486

Gaur and Sophie Geoghan for help with data collection and
coding the data and members of the Early Childhood
Cognition Lab for helpful comments and discussion. This
work was funded by a National Science Foundation Career
Award (#0744213) to L.S and by the Center for Brains,
Minds, and Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF STC award
CCF-1231216.

References
Amsterdam, B. (1972). Mirror self-­‐‑image reactions before
age two. Developmental Psychobiology, 5, 297-305.
Bélanger, M. J., Atance, C. M., Varghese, A. L., Nguyen,
V., & Vendetti, C. (2014). What Will I Like Best When
I'm All Grown Up? Preschoolers' Understanding of Future
Preferences. Child Development, 85, 2419-2431.
Boggiano, A. K., & Ruble, D. N. (1979). Competence and
the overjustification effect: A developmental study.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1462.
Butler, R. (1989a). Mastery versus ability appraisal: A
developmental study of children's observations of peers'
work. Child Development, 60, 1350-1361.
Butler, R. (1989b). Interest in the task and interest in peers'
work in competitive and noncompetitive conditions: A
developmental study. Child Development, 60, 562-570.
Butler, R. (1998). Age trends in the use of social and
temporal comparison for self-evaluation: Examination of
a novel developmental hypothesis. Child Development,
69, 1054-1073
Brim, O. G. (1976). Life-span development of the theory of
oneself: implications for child development. Advances in
Child Development and Behavior, 11, 241-251.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press
Cummings, G. (2008). Replication and p intervals: p values
predict the future only vaguely, but confidence intervals
do much better. Psychological Science, 3, 286 -300.
Dweck, C. S. (2000). Self-theories: Their role in motivation,
personality, and development. Philadelphia, PA:
Psychology Press.
Epstein, S. (1973). The self-concept revisited: Or a theory of
a theory. American Psychologist, 28, 404-416.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison
processes. Human Relations, 7, 117-140.
Flavell, J. H., Friedrichs, A. G., & Hoyt, J. D. (1970).
Developmental changes in memorization processes.
Cognitive Psychology, 1, 324-340.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1997). Words, thoughts and
theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (2012). Reconstructing
constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning
mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 138, 1085-1108.
Gunderson, E. A., Gripshover, S. J., Romero, C., Dweck, C.
S., Goldin-­‐‑Meadow, S., & Levine, S. C. (2013). Parent
Praise to 1-­‐‑to 3-­‐‑Year-­‐‑Olds Predicts Children's
Motivational Frameworks 5 Years Later. Child
Development, 84, 1526-1541.

Heyman, G. D., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Children's thinking
about traits: Implications for judgments of the self and
others. Child Development, 69, 391-403.
Lepper, M. R., & Greene, D. (1975). Turning play into
work: Effects of adult surveillance and extrinsic rewards
on children's intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 31, 479-486.
Lockhart, K. L., Chang, B., & Story, T. (2002). Young
children’s beliefs about the stability of traits: Protective
optimism? Child Development, 73, 1408-1430.
Mostache, H.S. & Bragonier, P. (1981). An observational
study of social comparison in preschoolers. Child
Development, 52, 376-378.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for
intelligence can undermine children's motivation and
performance. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 75, 33-52.
Mussweiler, T. (2003). Comparison processes in social
judgment: mechanisms and consequences. Psychological
Review, 110, 472-489
Rhodes, M., & Brickman, D. (2008). Preschoolers'
responses to social comparisons involving relative failure.
Psychological Science, 19, 968-972.
Rholes, W. S., & Ruble, D. N. (1984). Children's
understanding of dispositional characteristics of others.
Child Development, 55, 550-560.
Ruble, D.N. (1983). The development of social comparison
processes and their role in achievement-related selfsocialization. In E.T. Higgins, D.N. Ruble, & W.W.
Hartup (Eds.), Social cognition and social development: A
socio-cultural perspective (pp. 134- 157). New York:
Cambridge University Press
Ruble, D. N., Feldman, N. S., & Boggiano, A. K. (1976).
Social comparison between young children in
achievement situations. Developmental Psychology, 12,
192-197.
Ruble, D. N., Eisenberg, R., & Higgins, E. T. (1994).
Developmental Changes in Achievement Evaluation:
Motivational Implications of Self-­‐‑Other Differences.
Child Development, 65, 1095-1110
Ruble, D.N., Feldman, N.S., & Boggiano, A.K. (1976).
Social comparison between young children in
achievement settings. Developmental Psychology, 12,
192-197.
Schulz, L. (2012). The origins of inquiry: Inductive
inference and exploration in early childhood. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 16, 382-389.
Slavin, R. E. (1983). When does cooperative learning
increase student achievement? Psychological Bulletin, 94,
429-445.
Smiley, P. A., & Dweck, C. S. (1994). Individual
differences in achievement goals among young children.
Child Development, 65, 1723-1743.
Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, S. A. (1992). Cognitive
development: Foundational theories of core domains.
Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 337-375.

1487

