Reading and writing direction effects on the aesthetic perception of photographs
Sobh Chahboun (sobh.chahboun@ntnu.no)
Dept. of Language and Literature, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norwey

Andrea Flumini (flumini@ugr.es)
Mind, Brain, and Behavior Research Center, University of Granada, Spain

Carmen Pérez González (perezgonzalez@uni-wuppertal.de)
Interdisciplinary Centre for Science and Technology Studies, Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Germany

I. Chris McManus (i.mcmanus@ucl.ac.uk)
Dept. of Clinical, Educational, and Health Psychology, University College London, UK

Julio Santiago (santiago@ugr.es)
Mind, Brain, and Behavior Research Center, University of Granada, Spain
Abstract
Does the habitual reading and writing direction (RWD) affect
the aesthetic appreciation of visual art? Pérez González
(2012) showed that 19th century Iranian and Spanish
professional photographers manifest lateral biases linked to
RWD in their compositions. The present study aimed to test
whether the general public shows similar biases, and under
what conditions. Photographies with left-to-right (L-R) and
right-to-left (R-L) directionality were selected from Pérez
González's collections and presented in both the original and
mirror reversed forms to Spanish (L-R readers) and Moroccan
(R-L readers) participants. In Experiment 1, participants rated
each picture as to how aesthetically pleasing it was. The
results showed no interactions with RWD. In Experiment 2,
we presented each picture and its mirror version and asked the
participants to choose which one they liked better. Now, clear
biases linked to RWD arose. RWD does affect aesthetic
impressions of photography in the general public, but only
when people are paying attention to the lateral spatial
dimension of the pictures.
Keywords: aesthetics, reading and writing direction, spatial
biases, left-right, photography, fluency.

Introduction
Can the aesthetic appreciation of a piece of visual art be
affected by reading and writing directional habits? Many
spatial dimensions are relevant to aesthetics in visual art
(Gaffron, 1956), and people show clear biases on some
spatial choices. A dimension which has received much
empirical attention is the lateral organization of an image:
its left-to-right (L-R) or (R-L) directionality. In a seminal
paper, McManus and Humphrey (1973) showed that
European portrait painters have more often preferred to
paint the left cheek (the person turns slightly toward the left
side of the viewer, what we will here call a “leftward pose”)
than the right cheek. Since then, it has been shown that
artists, posers, and the public assign different emotional
value to a leftward than a rightward pose (see McManus

(2005), Suitner and McManus (2012), and Lindell, 2013, for
reviews and discussions of possible mechanisms).
Different factors have been suggested as causes of lateral
biases, including brain lateralization and handedness (see,
e.g., Levy, 1976). One of them is reading and writing
direction (RWD). As reading and writing are highly
practiced skills with a very systematic directionality, it
makes intuitive sense that the direction of the script should
bias aesthetic lateral preferences. RWD has indeed been
shown to induce lateral spatial biases that affect how people
draw (Vaid, Singh, Sakhuja, & Gupta, 2002), visually
explore (Abed, 1991), pay attention (Pérez, García, ValdésSosa, & Jaśkowski, 2011) comprehend descriptions of
events (Maass & Russo, 2003) and static scenes (Román, El
Fathi, & Santiago, 2013), and how they mentally represent
time (Ouellet, Santiago, Israeli, & Gabay, 2010) and number
(Zebian, 2005). Some studies (reviewed below) have
explored RWD effects on aesthetic preferences for simple
drawings and motion clips, but its effect on art creation and
contemplation has not received much attention in the
literature.
Most studies using simple line drawings have adopted
similar strategies: one image and its mirror version are
presented (either side by side or one of top of the other) and
participants are asked to indicate which one they prefer.
These images are presented to users of a L-R or a R-L
script. Chokron and De Agostini (2000) compared drawings
of objects which can move (e.g., a truck or a fish facing
toward one side), static objects (e.g., a statue with an arm
extended to one side), and landscapes (e.g., a beach with a
salient object located on one side). They observed clear
lateral preferences congruent with script direction in French
and Hebrew participants, for both moving and stationary
objects, but not for landscapes (see also De Agostini,
Kazandjian, Cavezian, Lellouch, & Chokron, 2010, for
mediating factors such as sex and handedness; Ishii, Okubo,
Nicholls, & Imai, 2011, for a replication with Japanese
readers; and Heath, Mahmasanni, Rouhana, & Nassif, 2005,
for an exploration of spatial dimensions specific to

2242

landscapes). Nachshon, Argaman, and Luria (1999) used
only profile drawings of people (which correspond to the
category of objects with potential motion) and found similar
results: L-R readers preferred profiles oriented to the right,
and R-L readers preferred profiles oriented leftwards.
Friedrich, Harms, and Elias (2014) used drawings of objects
that can move and actual clips with moving objects, and
observed an overall preference for L-R directionality, which
was much reduced or even null in users of R-L scripts.
Movies showed stronger biases than drawings. Only one
study, to our knowledge, has presented materials
individually, one by one. Maass, Pagani, and Berta (2007)
showed movie clips of lateral actions, and asked their
participants to rate each one on three Likert scales: strength,
speed, and beauty. L-R readers rated L-R actions as
stronger, faster, and more beautiful than R-L actions. R-L
readers showed a perfect reversal in their ratings. All in all,
this literature suggests that readers of L-R and R-L scripts
differ in their directional preferences when judging how
aesthetically pleasing is a simple line drawing, with L-R
readers showing a clear preference for drawings oriented
rightwards, and R-L readers showing either a much reduced
rightward bias, no bias, or the opposite leftward bias.
Only one study so far has assessed the influence of RWD
on visual art. Pérez González (2012) analyzed two corpora
of 19th-century studio photographs, one from Spain (where
the language is written L-R) and another from Iran (where
the writing is R-L). She analyzed five kinds of compositions
which directionality can be ascertained: Linear orderings (a
group of more than two people, often siblings, arranged by
their height), Couples (one person standing and one sitting),
Chairs (a single person standing and resting an arm on a
chair), Tables (a single person sitting and resting one arm on
a table), and Portraits (a single person portraited with no
props). Her results showed clear effects of RWD on the
number of photographs with a L-R and R-L directionality in
each condition. The proportions of L-R and R-L Linear
orderings and Couples was perfectly predicted by RWD.
Chairs, Tables, and Portraits showed clear modulation by
RWD together with an overall bias toward the left. These
data support that professional photographers, when
designing their compositions, are sensitive to the lateral
spatial dimension and are affected by biases that arise in
their habitual RWD.
Photography, both professional and amateur, poses many
problems for the understanding of aesthetics (McManus and
Stöver, 2014), but also allows opportunities for testing
hypotheses (e.g., McManus, Stöver & Kim, 2011). In this
study we asked whether members of the general public
show similar RWD-linked lateral biases when appreciating
professionally produced photographs from different cultural
backgrounds? In order to answer this question, we selected
an equal number of L-R and R-L Spanish and Iranian
photographs from Pérez González's digitalized collections
and presented them both in their original and mirrorreversed forms to young adults from Spain (users of a L-R
script) and Morocco (R-L script). Participants, who were not

expert photographers, were asked to report their aesthetic
impressions.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, the photographs were presented one by
one, and the participants were asked to rate them in a Likert
scale as to how aesthetically pleasing the photograph was.
We expected to find opposite effects in the groups: the
Spanish group should prefer photographs with L-R
directionality, whereas the Moroccan group should prefer RL directionality. In order to assure a perfect match between
L-R and R-L photographs in all variables that may affect
their aesthetic appreciation (beauty of the characters, image
quality, and so on), we did not include in the design whether
the picture was original or mirror-reversed (half L-R
pictures were originals and half were mirror-reversed R-L
pictures). Thus, our prediction of an interaction between the
habitual RWD of the participant and the directionality of the
photograph in their aesthetic rating could not be attributed to
factors other than the theoretically relevant ones. Trying to
avoid participants to focus only on salient aspects of the
pictures, such as the physical beauty of the characters, the
instructions framed the study as selecting items for an
exhibition of antique photographs.

Methods
Participants. Eighty university students, 40 from Spain (16
males, 3 left-handers, mean age 23.8 years) and 40 (20
males, 2 left-handed, mean age 21.6 years) from Morocco.
The Spanish participants were psychology students from the
University of Granada who received course credit in return
for their collaboration. The Moroccan participants
volunteered to participate without compensation. Most of
them were university students from the National School of
Business and Management or the Abdelmalek Esaadi
University, both at Tangier.
Materials. Pérez González's personal collection of
digitalized 19th-century Iranian and Spanish photography
was used to select the materials for this study. A total of 167
pictures were selected, belonging to different types of
compositions, as described below. In each type half the
stimuli had L-R and the other half had R-L directionality;
half were of Iranian origin, half of Spanish origin. Some
composition types were further subdivided in subgroups. We
aimed to have the same number of items in each cell,
although this was not always possible. Because men and
women differ strongly in their stereotypical agency, and
Maass and Russo (2003) reported that agency interacts with
RWD, we included pictures that varied in the arrangement
of the sexes in those categories where it was possible.
Photographs with four different compositions were
selected (see examples in Figure 1) because a) we were able
to find enough examples with L-R and R-L directionality of
each origin (Spanish vs. Iranian); and b) their directionality
could be clearly ascertained:

2243

1. Linear orderings: A group of more than two people
(most often siblings) arranged by their height.
2. Couples: A couple, either of the same or different sex.
3. Sittings: Couples where one person is sitting and the
other standing, also of the same or different sex. In different
sex couples, either the man or the woman could be standing.
4. Portraits: A single person is portrayed, either a man or
a woman.
The directionality of Linear orderings was established as
flowing from the location of the more active component of
the scene (the tallest person in Linear orderings and
Couples, the standing person in Sittings), and the direction
of the face in Portraits.
From the original 167 photographs, a second set was
derived by mirror reversing them horizontally. Two lists
were created containing only one version of each picture,
such that one half of the list was in original form and the
other half was mirror-reversed. Half the participants saw
one list and half saw the other. All pictures were adjusted to
have the same vertical size (500 pixels), while the horizontal
size varied freely. They were presented centered on a 16
inches computer monitor with a grey background.
Procedure. Each group was tested in their own country by
the same experimenter (S.Ch.) and using the same laptop
computer. All interactions with the experimenter took place
in the local native language (Spanish in Spain, and Darija,
the local Arabic dialect, in Morocco).

The experiment was programmed and run using E-prime.
In each session, the participant received the following oral
instructions in their native language:
“Thank you for taking part in this study. Next, we will
show you a series of antique photographs of people. We are
preparing an exhibition about 19th-century Spanish and
Iranian photographers, and we want to ask your help to
select the most attractive works. There are many factors that
make a photograph to be beautiful as a photograph, and
while the person in the picture is part of them, the
composition, organization, context, and technical aspects,
all help to give some pictures a special quality that makes
them particularly attractive. Remember that they are all
antique pictures so please do not take too much into account
the quality of the image. Follow your intuition and evaluate
each picture in a scale that goes from 1 (horrible picture, I
would never select it) until 9 (very beautiful, I would select
it for sure). Try to use all values in the scale”.
After clarifying any questions, the 167 pictures were
presented, one by one in random order. In each trial, a
fixation point was presented first during 500 ms, followed
by the picture, and then the participant gave his or her
aesthetic judgement by pronouncing aloud a number from 1
to 9. The experimenter sat behind the participant out of sight
and entered the responses by means of the computer
keyboard. Both the use of oral instructions as well as the
response collection procedure were meant to avoid the
presentation of any visual stimulus with left-right directional
characteristics (such as text or numbers).
After the experimental block was finished, participants
answered the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory and a final
debriefing sheet which included questions about the
hypotheses of the study as well as an evaluation of how
much they liked and practiced photography in a 4 points
scale (from 1, not aficionado at all, to 4, expert).
Design. Photograph ratings were analyzed by means of a
factorial ANOVA with Country of the picture (Spain, Iran),
Type of composition (Linear ordering, Couple, Sitting,
Portraits), and Directionality (L-R, R-L) as withinparticipant factors, and RWD of the participant (L-R
Spanish, R-L Arabic) as between-participant factor.

Results
Figure 1: Examples of photographs used in the
experiments. All of them are in their original version. Upper
row: Iranian pictures. Lower row: Spanish pictures.
Columns from left to right: Linear orderings, Couples,
Sittings, and Portraits. Specific coding of each example
(from left to right and top to bottom): 1) Iran, Linear
ordering, L-R; 2) Iran, Couple, R-L, Different sex; 3) Iran,
Sitting, R-L, Different sex, Woman standing; 4) Iran,
Portrait, L-R, Man; 5) Spain, Linear ordering, R-L; 6)
Spain, Couple, L-R, Same sex, 7) Spain, Sitting, R-L, Same
sex, Women; 8) Spain, Portrait, R-L, Woman.

As handedness may affect lateral biases in aesthetic
experience (De Agostini et al., 2010), only data from righthanded participants were analyzed (which left 37 Spaniards
and 38 Moroccans). Their self-rated level of expertise in
photography was 1.13 (SD = 0.79, range 0-3, with only 6
participants rating themselves with a 3, and 11 with a 2).
Spaniards and Moroccans did not differ on this variable
(F<1).
The analysis revealed differences in the aesthetic ratings
given to different kinds of compositions (F(3,219)=79.78,
p<.001): photographs of Linear orderings were the most
appreciated, followed in descending order by Couples,
Sittings, and Profiles. Additionally, Spanish photographs

2244

were preferred over Iranian photographs (F(1,73)=149.12,
p<.001). There were no other main effects nor interactions
(all p>.24). Therefore, the directionality of the photograph,
the habitual RWD of the participant, and their interaction,
all failed to have any influence on aesthetic ratings.

Discussion
Experiment 1 showed very clear results: RWD did not
interact with photograph directionality on the aesthetic
appreciation of photographs. This occurred even when the
instructions emphasized that participants should pay
attention to all aspects of the photograph which make it
aesthetically pleasing, including its composition.
However, before concluding that RWD affects only the
decisions made by professional photographers but it fails to
be appreciated by the general public, we decided to test our
hypothesis under conditions that facilitate paying attention
to the spatial aspects of the composition, while matching the
influence of any other factors: in Experiment 2 participants
were asked to directly compare each photograph and its
mirror-reversed version and choose which one they liked
better.

Experiment 2
In this study, the same set of materials was presented, but
each participant saw both the original and the mirrorreversed version of each photograph and chose the one that
he or she preferred. However, we wanted to avoid
presenting both pictures side by side or on top of each other.
Firstly, because this may bring about rather artificial
viewing conditions; and secondly, because it may induce
configurational effects (such as a preference for pictures
which are inward-looking versus outward-looking, pictures
on upper versus lower locations, and so on) that may
increase noise in the data. Therefore, we opted for
presenting individually each version of each photograph, but
letting the participant to switch between them at will (a
technique used in a previous study of photography;
McManus et al, 2012). After viewing each one of them as
many times as desired, the participant would press a key to
indicate his or her preference for the currently displayed
picture and move on to the next pair.
If RWD interacts with the directionality of the
photograph, we expected that Spanish participants would
prefer the original version of L-R pictures, and the mirrorreversed version of R-L pictures, whereas Moroccan
participants would show the opposite preferences.

Methods
Participants. Two new groups were drawn from the same
populations as in Experiment 1: there were 40 Spanish
participants (10 males, 6 left-handed, mean age 20.0 years)
and 39 Moroccan participants (21 males, 5 left-handed,
mean age 24.9 years). Spaniards were compensated with
credit course, and Moroccans participated without
compensation.

Materials. The same set of materials as in Experiment 1
was used. Each participant saw all photographs, both
original and mirror-reversed.
Procedure. As in Experiment 1, Spanish participants were
tested in Spain in Spanish, and Moroccan participants were
tested in Morocco in Darija, using the same laptop computer
(but not the same experimenter: A.F. tested Spaniards and
S.Ch. tested Moroccans).
The pictures were presented in pairs formed by the
original and the mirror-reversed version. Each trial started
with the presentation of a single picture on the screen. The
participant could then press the down-arrow key to move to
the next member of the pair, and then she could press the
up-arrow to return to the prior member. There were no
restrictions on the number of times that the participant could
switch between pictures nor any time pressure to decide.
Once she felt that she knew which one was the preferred
picture, and having that picture on the screen, she pressed a
key (the “l” key) that was covered with a yellow sticker. The
program then started the next trial.
Half the participants saw first the original version of half
of the pictures and the mirror-reversed version of the other
half. The remaining participants saw first the mirrorreversed version of the former set of pictures, and the
original version of the latter set of pictures. The order of
presentation of the pairs was randomized for each
participant.
The instructions were given orally in the participant's
native and local language. They informed the participant
that two mirror versions of each picture would be presented,
and that her task was just to choose the one she liked best.
They also explained how to switch between pictures and
make her choice, and remarked that there was no time
pressure at all.
Design. The proportion of choice of the L-R version of each
photograph (be it either original or mirror-reversed) was
computed and averaged over the items in each composition
category. Those proportions were submitted to an ANOVA
including Country of the picture (Spain, Iran), Type of
composition (Linear ordering, Couple, Sitting, Portraits),
and Picture Directionality (L-R, R-L) as within-participant
factors, and RWD of the participant (L-R Spanish, R-L
Arabic) as between-participant factor.

Results
As in the previous study, data were only analysed from
right-handed participants, of whom 34 were Spanish and 34
Moroccan. s. The main result of the ANOVA was a main
effect of RWD: there was a clear difference in the
proportion of L-R choices between Spaniards and
Moroccans (F(1,66)=9.61, p<.01; see fig. 2). Spaniards
chose the L-R version of the experimental photographs in
58.4% of cases, which was significantly above the 50%
chance level (t(33)=2.81, p<.01). Moroccans chose the L-R

2245

version on 44.1% of cases, which was not significantly
below chance (t(33)=-1.67, p=.10).
RWD only interacted with Picture Directionality
(F(1,66)=4.08, p<.05): Spaniards chose the L-R version of
the originally L-R photographs in 3.4% more cases than the
originally R-L photographs, whereas Moroccans chose the
former in 3% less cases than the latter. In other words, the
original directionality of the pictures modulated, slightly but
significantly, the opposite directional preferences of
Spaniards and Moroccans. RWD-induced lateral biases did
not interact with Type of composition or Country of the
picture (all p>.11).
The only other significant result was the interaction
between Country of the picture, Picture Directionality, and
Type of composition (F(3,198)=3.19, p<.05). This
interaction was due to a clearer preference for the original
version of L-R Iranian Linear orderings and Couples over
their mirror-reversed R-L versions. Some additional effects
and interactions approached reliability: the main effect of
picture Directionality (F(1,66)=2.96, p=.09), and the
interaction between Country and Picture Directionality
(F(1,66)=3.05, p=.09). All of them were independent from
the RWD of the participants, and therefore, are of no
relevance to the present hypotheses.

Figure 2: Average proportion of choice of the L-R version
of the photographs in the groups of Spaniards (L-R readers)
and Moroccans (R-L readers). Chance level (50%) is
indicated by the dotted line. Error bars show Standard Error
of the Mean.

Discussion
Experiment 2 asked participants to directly compare the
original and mirror-reversed versions of the same
photograph, and thereby forced them to pay attention to the
only difference between them: their composition along the
left-right axis. Under these conditions, clear directional
preferences linked to RWD arose: Spaniards chose more LR versions of the photographs than Moroccans. The L-R
preference of Spaniards was significantly above the chance
level, showing a proper L-R bias, whereas the Moroccans
numerical preference for R-L photographs was not
significantly different from 50% and should be
characterized as the absence of a directional bias.

General Discussion
Do members of the general public have lateral biases in
their appreciation of photography which are linked to their
habitual RWD? The present study provides a positive, but
qualified, answer to this question. Spanish readers do show
an aesthetic preference for studio photographs which flow
from left to right over those that flow from right to left.
Arabic readers differ from Spanish readers in showing a
statistically null lateral bias. This pattern of findings was the
same for different types of compositions. The finding of L-R
biases in L-R readers and null or smaller R-L biases in R-L
readers is consistent with some prior studies (Friedrich et
al., 2014).
However, these RWD-linked lateral biases only occurred
when participants directly compared the original and mirrorreversed version of each photograph, thereby focusing their
attention on this particular aspect of the composition. When
they were assessing how aesthetically pleasing a single
photograph is, the lateral dimension was shadowed by the
many other dimensions which are relevant to the aesthetic
appreciation of a piece of visual art. It is also important that
although the effect was statistically significant it was also
not particularly large. That suggests that participants had not
merely guessed at the purposes of the experiment and thence
merely choosing a particular directionality on an automatic
basis. The judgements were indeed aesthetic, and depended
on the individual photographs.
This null finding when photographs were individually
rated contrasts with prior results by Maass et al. (2007) for
movies with lateral motion, which also were individually
rated and still showed effects of RWD. A possible way to
reconcile them is suggested by Friedrich et al.'s (2014)
study. They compared drawings of objects with potential
motion and movie clips that actually showed motion, and
observed that movies generated stronger effects. As motion
automatically captures attention (Jonides, 1981), it makes
sense that clips with sideways motion are very effective
stimuli at attracting attention to the directionality of that
motion, and thereby, opening the door to influences of
habitual RWD on the appreciation of the stimulus. In
contrast, the lateral directionality of the static compositions
studied here must be much less salient. This account also
explains why the professional photographers that generated
the materials of Pérez González (2012) were biased by their
RWD: both their expertise and the fact that they had to take
decisions about what would be the most beautiful
arrangement of the elements in the composition made them
to pay close attention to the lateral dimension.
Why should RWD affect aesthetic preferences? A possible
mechanism is fluency (Reber, Schwarz, & Winkielman,
2004). Several studies have shown that the feeling of
cognitive fluency (the easiness at performing a cognitive
task) is associated with an enhanced preference for the
materials and contents of the task (see review in Reber et al.,
2004; see also Forster, Leder, & Ansorge, 2013, for recent
evidence). When attention is paid to the lateral dimension of
space, this dimension is more fluently processed when it

2246

affords actions, scanning patterns, and configurations which
are congruent with highly practiced habits arising from the
experience of reading and writing.
To conclude, members of the general public show an
influence of their habitual RWD when aesthetically
appreciating visual art. However, this effect depends on the
deployment of attention to the lateral spatial dimension. The
present study thus emphasizes the importance of studying
how attention modulates the influence of factors that affect
the aesthetic experience.

Acknowlegments
This research was supported by grants P09-SEJ-4772 from
Junta de Andalucía and ERDF, and PSI2012-32464 from the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitivity, both to JS.

References
Abed, F. (1991). Cultural influences on visual scanning
patterns. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 22(4),
525–534.
Chokron, S., & De Agostini, M. (2000). Reading habits
influence aesthetic preference. Cognitive Brain Research,
10(1-2), 45–49.
De Agostini, M., Kazandjian, S., Cavezian, C., Lellouch, J.,
& Chokron, S. (2010). Visual aesthetic preference: Effects
of handedness, sex, and age-related reading/writing
directional scanning experience. Writing Systems
Research, 2(2), 77–85.
Forster, M., Leder, H., & Ansorge, U. (2013). It felt fluent,
and I liked it: Subjective feeling of fluency rather than
objective fluency determines liking. Emotion, 13(2), 280–
289.
Friedrich, T. E., Harms, V. L., & Elias, L. J. (2014).
Dynamic stimuli: Accentuating aesthetic preference
biases. Laterality, 19(5), 549–59.
Gaffron, M. (1956). Some new dimensions in the
phenomenal analysis of visual experience. Journal of
Personality, 24, 285–307.
Heath, R., Mahmasanni, O., Rouhana, A., & Nassif, N.
(2005). Comparison of aesthetic preferences among
Roman and Arabic script readers. Laterality, 10(5), 399–
411.
Ishii, Y., Okubo, M., Nicholls, M. E. R., & Imai, H. (2011).
Lateral biases and reading direction: A dissociation
between aesthetic preference and line bisection. Brain
and Cognition, 75(3), 242–247.
Jonides, J. (1981). Voluntary versus automatic control over
the mind’s eye. In J. Long & A. Baddeley (Eds.),
Attention and Performance IX (pp. 187–203). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Levy, J. (1976). Lateral dominance and aesthetic preference.
Neuropsychologia, 14(4), 431–445.
Lindell, A. K. (2013). The silent social/emotional signals in
left and right cheek poses: A literature review. Laterality,
18(5), 612–24.
Maass, A., Pagani, D., & Berta, E. (2007). How beautiful is
the goal and how violent is the fistfight? Spatial bias in

the interpretation of human behavior. Social Cognition,
25(6), 833–852.
Maass, A., & Russo, A. (2003). Directional bias in the
mental representation of spatial events: Nature or culture?
Psychological Science, 14(4), 296–301.
McManus, I. C., & Humphrey, N. K. (1973). Turning the
left cheek. Nature, 243, 271–272.
McManus, I. C., & Stöver, K. (2014). 'Mute, motionless,
variegated rectangles': aesthetics and photography. In: P.
P. L. Tinio and J. K. Smith (Eds.). The Cambridge
Handbook of the Psychology of Aesthetics and the Arts.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 243-276.
McManus, I. C., Stöver, K., & Kim, D. (2011). Arnheim's
Gestalt theory of visual balance: Examining the
compositional structure of art photographs and abstract
images. i-Perception, 2(6), 615-647.
Suitner, C., & McManus, I. C.. (2012). Aesthetic
asymmetries, spatial agency, and art history: A social
psychological perspective. In: T. W. Schubert and A.
Maass (Eds.). Spatial dimensions of social thought.
Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 277-301.
McManus, I. C.. (2005). Symmetry and asymmetry in
aesthetics and the arts. European Review, 13 (Supp 2),
157-180.
Nachshon, I., Argaman, E., & Luria, A. (1999). Effects of
directional habits and handedness on aesthetic preference
for left and right profiles. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 30(1), 106–114.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2010). Is
the future the right time? Experimental Psychology, 57(4),
308–14.
Pérez, A., García, L., Valdés-Sosa, M., & Jaśkowski, P.
(2011). Influence of the learnt direction of reading on
temporal order judgments. Psychology, 02(02), 103–108.
Pérez González, C. (2012). Lateral organisation in
nineteenth-century studio photographs is influenced by
the direction of writing: A comparison of Iranian and
Spanish photographs. Laterality, 17((5), 515-532.
Reber, R., Schwarz, N., & Winkielman, P. (2004).
Processing fluency and aesthetic pleasure: Is beauty in the
perceiver’s processing experience? Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 8(4), 364–82.
Román, A., El Fathi, A., & Santiago, J. (2013). Spatial
biases in understanding descriptions of static scenes: The
role of reading and writing direction. Memory &
Cognition, 41, 588–599.
Vaid, J., Singh, M., Sakhuja, T., & Gupta, G. (2002). Stroke
direction asymmetry in figure drawing: Influence of
handedness and reading/writing habits. Brain and
Cognition, 48, 597–602.
Zebian, S. (2005). Linkages between number concepts,
spatial thinking, and directionality of writing: The
SNARC effect and the reverse SNARC effect in English
and Arabic monoliterates, biliterates, and illiterate Arabic
speakers. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 1(2), 165–
190.

2247

