Rethinking the Conceptual History of the Term ‘Cognitive’
Nicholas Zautra (NZAUTRA@Indiana.Edu)
Department of History and Philosophy of Science, 1011 E. Third Street
Bloomington, IN 47401 USA
Abstract
Psychologist-historian Christopher D. Green posits that the
word “cognitive" was never intended by its philosophical
advocates to be synonymous with "mental" and,
consequently, much of what now goes by the name of
"cognition" in cognitive science is not really "cognitive" in
the strict sense at all (Green in Canadian Psychology 37: 3139). After a brief presentation of his position, I argue that
Green does not provide sufficient reason or evidence for us to
accept his claim and his proposal ought to be disregarded
unless further evidence can be put forth in its defense. In
doing so, I clear the ground for a constructive engagement
with the conceptual history of the term “cognitive” and its
relevance to present-day concerns.
Keywords: history; philosophy; mark of the cognitive

Introduction
For cognitive scientists, “it is easy to give a list of cognitive
processes” (Adams & Garrison 2013). When we use the
word “cognitive,” we may be referring to thinking, learning,
memory, concept formation, reasoning, or emotion—to
name a few: All “stuff” that relates to the “mental.” It is not
so easy to say, of these things that are called cognitive,
where they came from. Where they came from, known as
“the origin of the cognitive,” is a central area of debate in
the history and philosophy of cognitive science. If we can
specify the origins of cognition, we can better understand
how philosophers and scientists have determined what
cognition is (i.e. the mark of the cognitive). Insofar as we
better understand the mark of the cognitive, we can
“explicate what makes cognitive processes, states, or
organisms cognitive,” “settle the bounds of cognition”
(Elpidorou 2014), and clear up the overuse and/or misuse
(Cromwell, H. C. & Panksepp, J. 2011) as well as the
“inherently ambiguous” meaning of the term (Baars 1986).
But is the meaning of the term “cognitive” really
ambiguous? Was the term intended by its initial supporters
to refer to “the mental”? Psychologist-historian Christopher
D. Green responded to these questions almost twenty years
ago. He did so by tracing the origins of the term “cognitive”
in the ethical theories of the early 20th century, through the
logical positivistic philosophy of science in this century’s
middle part, and into the philosophical psychology of the
1950s and 1960s. Green distinguishes between what he
claims was the intended “strict sense” of the term
“cognitive,” being truth-evaluable1 and the unintended
“loose sense,” being anything regarded as “mental.”
1

That which is truth-evaluable is a statement that something is
or is not the case. Examples of truth-evaluable assertions include:

For Green, “the application of the term ‘cognitive’ to
problems of mind by philosophers was intended specifically
to divide the mental into two categories—one to which the
methods of logic and computer science could be
successfully applied—the ‘cognitive’—and one to which
they could not” (Green 1997). According to Green, the term
cognitive “was never intended by its philosophical
advocates to be synonymous with ‘mental’ and,
consequently, much of what now goes by the name of
‘cognition’ in [cognitive science] is not really cognitive in
the strict sense at all” (Green, 32). Although cognitive
science “[has] since grown to include the study of some of
these phenomena…one of the original aims of the
cognitivist movement,” asserts Green, “was to re-introduce
belief and desire into psychology, while still protecting it
from the kinds of criticism that behaviorists had used to
bring down full-blown mentalism2” (Green).
In what follows, I examine Green’s account concerning
how the term “cognitive” became associated with aspects of
the mental. After a brief presentation of his position, I argue
that Green does not provide sufficient reason or evidence for
acceptance of his claims and thus his proposal ought to be
disregarded unless further evidence can be put forth in its
defense. This paper is thus a preliminary effort to recapture
the multiple meaning of the term “cognitive” in order to
shed light on current conceptual work in cognitive science.

An Overview of Green’s Argument
Green first traces the origins of the word “cognitive” back to
the ethical theories of the 20th century. By doing so, he
introduces what he claims was the intended strict sense of
the term “cognitive”: designating that which is “truthevaluable.” Utilizing Green’s own words, we can construct
the reasoning used to support his first premise:
• “Until the 20th century, ethicists…assumed that moral
claims are truth-evaluable; i.e., that they express
propositions that are either true or false” (32).
• “By the 1930s, however, even the modest assumption
that moral claims are true or false came under attack by a
group of philosophers…known as "noncognitivists" (32).
“It is raining outside in London”; “I am feeling sad”; “3 + 3 = 6”.
Examples of non-truth-evaluable assertions include: “Why is it
raining in London?”; “Why are you feeling sad?”; “Good God!”
2
“Mentalism” refers to the scientific practice that focused on
mental perception and thought processes as causes of behavior.
Behaviorist such as B.F. Skinner argued that mentalistic
explanations, i.e. those that appeal to mental objects and events,
couldn’t suffice for a science of behavior (Baum & Heath 1992).

2781

• “Noncognitive ethicists believed that moral claims are
not about matters of fact…there is nothing—natural or
otherwise—of them to be true or false of” (32).
• “Thus, by contrast, the term "cognitive" denotes
statements that are either true or false” (33).
• “‘Cognitive’ [here] is not in any way synonymous with
‘psychological’ or ‘mental’” (33).
• “The non-psychological usage [of the ‘cognitive’] is in
line…with Gottlob Frege's use of the term "thought” (33).
Green’s first premise, is fairly straightforward:
Premise 1: “Cognitive” in 20th century ethics designated
that which is “truth-evaluable”; the term is
devoid of any reference to the “mental.”
Next, Green demonstrates how the term “cognitive” in the
strict sense—designating that which is truth-evaluable—was
passed along from ethics to philosophy of science, and
ultimately to the cognitive revolution rising in philosophical
psychology, computer science, and linguistics:
• “Members of both the Vienna Circle…and the Berlin
Society for Empirical Philosophy…talked of meaningful
claims as having "cognitive significance…” (33).
• “Hempel (1951) put the matter most succinctly:
‘It is a basic principle of contemporary empiricism that a
sentence makes a cognitively significant assertion, and thus
can be said to be either true or false…(p. 61)’” (33).
• “‘Cognitive’ in this context carries with it no particularly
psychological connotations; it is...a way of folding both
logical and empirical significance into a single term” (33).
• “When [the philosophical psychologists of the 1950s and
1960s] first began to talk of the ‘cognitive’ there can be
little doubt that they meant to separate those aspects of the
‘mental’ that are truth-evaluable-viz., the ‘propositional
attitudes’ (e.g., beliefs, desires, etc.)—from those that are
not (e.g., emotion, consciousness, qualia, imagery)” (34).
• “To avoid a repeat of the debacles [concerning mentalist
psychologies of the late 19th and early 20th centuries (viz.,
structuralism and some forms of phenomenology], when the
term
“cognitive"
started
being
(re)introduced
into…philosophical psychology in the 1960s, only those
parts of the mental that could be subjected to rigorous
(logical, scientific) analysis [i.e. those which are
cognitive]…were welcomed back…” (34).
The above statements support Green’s second and third
premises:
Premise 2: The strict sense of the term “cognitive”—
designating that which is truth-evaluable—was
passed along from ethics to philosophy of
science.
Premise 3:

The strict sense of the term “cognitive” made
its way via the logical positivistic philosophy

of science of the 1930s and 1940s, into the
philosophical psychology of the 1950s and
1960s in order to “disown scientifically
troublesome aspects of the ‘mental’” (34).
Green then tells an intricate story of the experimental
psychologists of the mid-20th century. Their adoption of the
loose sense of the term cognitive, Green claims, was
independent from that of the philosophical psychologists of
the 1950s and the 1960s who were associated with the
cognitive revolution/the rise of cognitivism:
• “Cognition simply was not much of a going concern in
psychology before the 1950s…‘thinking’ was the preferred
term during the first half of the 20th century” (35).
• “Cognition was becoming an important topic in Festinger's
(1957) theory of cognitive dissonance and Heider's (1958)
theory of cognitive balance, as well as in Asch's (1952)
social psychology text…the exact meaning of cognitive
varied somewhat among these theorists” (35).
• “About the same time [the information processing
approach advanced by people like George Miller] was
forming in psychology that would gravitate around the term
‘cognitive’…it seems, that ‘cognitive’ was adopted
primarily as a trendy new way of saying ‘mental’” (37).
• “Whereas the strict use of "cognitive" was intended to
keep the behaviorist criticisms of early-century mentalism,
its loose use in psychology returned us to precisely these”
(37).
The above list support’s Green’s fourth and fifth premises,
as well as his conclusion:
Premise

4:

Premise 5:

As experimental psychologists became
increasingly interested in thinking, language,
and memory, the strict sense of the term
“cognitive” began to merge with its loose
sense being anything broadly regarded as
“mental” employed by social psychologists.
The strict sense of the “cognitive” never took
hold in psychology, and, consequently,
psychologists now refer to the cognitive in the
loose sense.

Conclusion: The rise of cognitivism has not been, nor was it
ever intended to be, a wholesale return to the
mentalism of the past and, consequently, much
of what now goes by the name of "cognition"
in cognitive science is not really "cognitive" in
the strict sense at all.

Problems with Green’s Argument
Having provided a matter-of-fact reading of Green’s
argument, I now systematically evaluate his argument based
on the premises, reasons, and evidence he has selected, and
how effectively he has used them.

2782

Premise 1

Premise 2

Let us begin with the first part of Premise 1, viz.
“‘Cognitive’ in 20th Century ethical literature designated
that which is truth-evaluable.” Green supports this claim by
providing several examples of emerging groups of ethicists
known as “noncognitivists” whose ethical theories “were all
premised on the belief that moral claims are neither true nor
false. Thus, buy contrast, the term “cognitive” denotes
statements that are either true or false” (Green 1997).
It is uncontroversial that noncognitivism as correctly
described by Green was an important wing in 20th century
ethics. One issue, however, is with Green’s inference of the
meaning of the term “cognitive” by contrast with the term
“noncognitive.” While the term cognitive, by logical
contrast from the definition of “noncognitive” would be
“statements that are either true or false,” it does not follow
that “cognitive” in 20th century ethical literature did in fact
designate that which is truth-evaluable. It is entirely possible
that while “noncognitive” held this particular meaning, the
word cognitive meant something entirely different (perhaps
related to the mental), or that it wasn’t in fact used at all. An
inference by contrast simply isn’t sufficient to demonstrate
that the term “cognitive” in fact derived from the ethical
theories of the 20th century. Primary or secondary source
material would help buttress the claim that the “cognitive”
was alive and well during this time beyond just inferring its
place in history by contrast with a similar-seeming word.
The second half of Premise 1, viz., “the term is devoid of
any reference to the “mental” is equally troubling. Given
that we don’t have compelling evidence to conclude that
“cognitive” in the 20th century ethics did in fact mean “that
which is truth evaluable” (via Green’s inference by
contrast), it is difficult to get behind the claim that the term
is in fact devoid of any reference to the mental. Green’s
interpretation of “cognitive” in the ethical theories does not
include anything related to the mental. But the fact that
one’s own definition meets one’s own criteria is circular.
Nevertheless, Green posits that such a non-psychological
usage is reasonable as it aligns with one prominent
philosopher Gottlob Frege’s use of the term “thought.”
Utilizing a secondary source, Green suggests, “the goal of
philosophy, for Frege, was the analysis of the structure of
thought, and few thinkers have been more influential on
20th century Anglo-American philosophy than Frege. The
study of thought, however, was to be sharply distinguished
from the psychological process of thinking” (Green). In
other words, Green is essentially arguing that insofar as one
influential philosopher distinguishes between the study of
mental-seeming concepts (e.g. “thought) and the study of
the enaction of those concepts (e.g. thinking), that this
supports the notion that the term “cognitive” is in fact
devoid of any reference to the mental. While it is certainly
plausible that the term “cognitive” was used in a nonpsychological fashion, Green’s Frege example hardly counts
as sufficient evidence that supports this connection.

Green’s second premise, that the term “cognitive” was
passed from ethics to philosophy of science, is supported by
a correlation. Prior to his second premise, Green attempts to
establish that the term “cognitive” emerged in 20th century
ethics to designate “that which is truth-evaluable.” Green
then provides primary source evidence that the term
“cognitive” was utilized by logical positivists such as
Rudolph Carnap, Herbert, Feigl, Carl Hempel, and Hans
Reichenbach to also mean “that which is truth-evaluable.”
Insofar as 20th century ethics and logical positivistic
philosophy of science utilized the term “cognitive” in the
same way, this correlation suggests that “cognitive”
transferred from ethics to philosophy of science.
Clearly, indirect evidence will not suffice. In order to
support Premise 2, Green needs to provide direct primary
source evidence that indicates the logical positivists indeed
adopted the term from the ethical theorists of the early 20th
century. Did Carnap or Hempel cite the works of 20th
century ethicists? Were any logical positivists also active in
the area of ethics? Were the logical positivists reacting in
any way to the ethical literature of the time? These are
important questions to ask.
Additionally, it is apparent that Green’s arbitrary starting
point of “20th century ethics” as a place to look for the
origin of the word “cognitive” requires an explanation. Why
this particular time? What is so significant about the ethical
theories of the 20th century’s usage that one would not be
inclined to look further back? A recent article by library
scientist Daniel W. Chaney titled “An Overview of the First
Use of the Terms Cognition and Behavior” traced the use of
both “cognition” and “behavior” and their variants back to
the middle-ages, and considered how the terms were first
used in the literature (Chaney 2013). A straightforward
search of the Oxford English Dictionary yielded 79 terms
identified as a part of the cognition family. More important,
the term “cognitive” was traced back to 1586, with an initial
definition, “of, or pertaining to cognition, or the action or
process of knowing; having the attribute of cognizing.”
“Cognition” was traced back to 1447, with an initial
definition “the action or faculty of knowing; knowledge,
consciousness; acquaintance with a subject” (Chaney 2013).
Chaney’s article was published well after Green’s paper,
and thus was not available to Green at the time.
Nevertheless, it seems reasonable that Green should explain:
“why 20th century ethics?” and “why not look farther back
when you clearly can?” Additionally, these initial
definitions of “cognitive” and “cognition” most certainly do
not exclude any particular reference to the mental (and in
the case of “cognition,” may imply one with the reference to
consciousness). Thus, a vital question for Green is, “if
cognitive came from ‘noncognitive,’ where did the word
‘noncognitive’ come from, anyway?”

Premise 3
As with Premise 1, we may take Premise 3 piecemeal. First
is the notion that “cognitive” made its way via the logical

2783

positivistic philosophy of science of the 1930s and 1940s,
into the philosophical psychology of the 1950s and 1960s.
Below is the sole evidence Green provides for this claim:
“In this stew of logical positivism and its descendent philosophies of
science were steeped the philosophical psychologists of the 1950s and
1960s who would play crucial roles in the development of contemporary
cognitive science: U. T. Place (1956), R. M. Chisholm (1963), Wilfred
Sellars (& Chisholm, 1958), D. M. Armstrong (1968), Hillary Putnam
(1960/1975), Jerry Fodor (1968, 1975, 1980), etc. When they first began
to talk of the "cognitive" there can be little doubt that they meant to
separate those aspects of the "mental" that are truth-evaluable-viz., the
"propositional attitudes" (e.g., beliefs, desires, etc.)-from those that are
not (e.g., emotion, consciousness, qualia, imagery).” (Green, p. 34)

We may grant that the philosophical psychologists of whom
Green cites have no doubt played pivotal roles in the
materialization of cognitive science proper. The claim
regarding their particular intentions and use of the term
“cognitive,” however, it not so well founded. One would
expect Green to provide at minimum some primary or even
secondary source evidence that Armstrong, Putnam, Fodor,
et al. utilized and intended to utilize the term “cognitive” in
the strict sense. Unfortunately, Green provides no such
historical evidence, and instead offers several paragraphs
explaining why the distinction between the study of “truthevaluable” mental aspects and non-truth-evaluable mental
aspects is so important. But whether such a distinction is
important is an entirely different question than whether it
was important to the philosophical psychologists at the time.
The latter is the question Green claims yet ultimately fails to
answer. Green needs to go beyond reassuring us that “there
can be little doubt…” and actually provide evidence that
philosophical psychologists did in fact adopt the term
“cognitive” in the strict sense from the logical positivists.
To support the second part of his third premise “…in
order to disown scientifically troublesome aspects of the
“mental” during the rise of cognitivism,” Green once again
relies on indirect evidence to substantiate his claim. Green
suggests that those aspects of mental life that are not truthevaluable were key elements in the mentalist psychologies
of the late 19th and 20th centuries (e.g. structuralism, some
forms of phenomenology) (Green). Green points out that
such approaches had difficulty in gaining acceptance and
ultimately lead to behaviorists rejecting the study of the
mental in favor of that which could be observed. Green then
claims that in order to avoid a similar scenario during the
rise of cognitivism, when the term “cognitive” started being
reintroduced into philosophical psychology in the 1960’s,
only those “truth-evaluable” parts of the mental were
welcomed back, while other aspects of the mental (i.e.
noncognitive, mentalism-stuff) were excluded (Green). His
reasoning is that since philosophical psychologists were
interested in belief-desire psychology (i.e. that which is
truth-evaluable) and behaviorists rejected all that was not
truth-evaluable (i.e. anything mental), then the philosophical
psychologists must have also intended to safeguard
cognitivism from the problems of mentalism’s past by
asserting “cognitive” to mean “truth-evaluable.” Once

again, Green leaves us only with indirect evidence and
without substantial direct evidence to entertain this claim.
Green attempts to salvage some credence that
philosophical psychologists preferred the term “cognitive”
in the strict sense by offering some Fodorian viewpoints.
Green quotes Fodor about his thoughts on consciousness
(i.e. his thoughts on noncognitive mental stuff), referring to
when Fodor says, “Nobody has the slightest idea how
anything material could be conscious. Nobody ever knows
what it would be like to have the slightest idea about how
anything material could be conscious. So much for the
philosophy of consciousness” (Fodor 1992). Green also
notes that Fodor’s primary research interests were in the
study of the mental instantiation of proposition attitudes (i.e.
the aspect of the mental that is most susceptible to logical
analyses). Thus, Green argues that “we see the explicit
separation, in the mind of at least one prominent
philosophical psychologists, between what is to count as a
topic of a cognitive science (viz., propositional attitudes),
and what, for all its historical importance, is to count as a
topic in the philosophy of mind that is outside of cognitive
science proper (viz., consciousness)” (Green 1997).
But is such an explicit separation truly apparent? Fodor is
a prominent philosophical psychologist. He is not interested
in consciousness. His research interests are in belief-desire
psychology. Knowing all of this, however, does not entail us
to conclude that there was a specific intention on behalf of
Fodor, let alone on behalf of all prominent philosophical
psychologists of disowning troubling aspects of the
“mental.” In order to demonstrate such an intention, Green
needs to actually connect the dots in his story. To do so,
Green needs to show how Fodor’s research interest and
distaste for consciousness studies were in some capacity
guided or representative of the particular value of the strict
sense of the “cognitive,” which he (as well as others)
intended upon cognitive science proper.

Premise 4
Let us take Green’s fourth premise step-by-step. In order to
assert that, “…experimental psychologists became
increasingly interested in thinking, language, and memory,”
Green attempts to show that cognition simply was not much
of a going concern in psychology before the 1950s. In other
words, Green sets the stage for psychologists to become
interested in cognition. He does so by citing subject heading
data from the Cumulative Subject Index of Psychological
Abstracts from 1927-1960, where the term “cognition” is
ultimately cited substantially less than such terms as
“behavior” or “thinking.” He thus uses this particular data to
support his claim that “cognition” was not a going term or
interest in psychology during that time.
Unfortunately, Green’s use of the data leaves us
wondering: how in fact do his quantitative tidbits really
connect us to the actual history? Just citing the data doesn’t
really make his point clear. Green instead needs to make the
connections explicit through further analyses. Given that
there is a negative correlation with the use of the term

2784

“cognition” during that time period, Green needs to explain
those connections. Of which journals are the abstracts
published? How did the authors in those journals actually
use the term “cognition”? Green also needs to look at the
actual experiments being conducted in those articles, and
trace those connections from experiment to experiment.
Better yet, why not run the data analyses on abstracts
published in the journals of philosophical psychology?
Where is that data set and subsequent analyses?
For the second part of the premise (viz., “the strict sense
of the term ‘cognitive’ began to merge with its loose sense,
being ‘anything broadly regarded as ‘mental’ employed by
social psychologists), Green provides several examples of
social psychologists as well as those researchers from the
“information processing approach” (e.g. Newell & Simon)
who began to use the term “cognitive.” Such individuals,
Green claims, “adopt[ed] a general view of cognition as
pertaining to knowledge, without recognizing either the
crucial distinction between knowledge and belief, or the
theoretically important criterion of truth-evaluability”
(Green). For example, on Solomon Asch’s writings on
“cognitive basis,” Green explains, “the issue of truthevaluability, although perhaps implicit in Asch’s thought
about cognition, was never thought by him to be a strict
criterion of the cognitive” (Green).
Green does an adequate job of attempting to evaluate
what these particular researchers could mean by the term
“cognitive” (since, according to Green, they fail to ever say
so explicitly). He even manages to find a quote from George
Miller on the adoption of the term cognition, in which
Miller states, “In using the word ‘cognition’ we were setting
ourselves off from behaviorism. We wanted something
mental—but “mental psychology” seemed terribly
redundant…we chose ‘cognitive’” (Baars 1986).
The problem, however, is Green’s use of the absence of
the issue of “truth evaluability” in these particular instances
of the term “cognitive” to support the claim that “the strict
sense of the term cognitive began to merge with its loose
sense…”. Asch, Festinger, and Newell & Simon do not
mention anything about truth-evaluability in their
descriptions of the cognitive. But they also fail to mention
anything about pink elephants in their descriptions as well.
On this reasoning, can we claim that “the wacky sense of
the term ‘cognitive,’ being ‘that which relates to a pink
elephants’ began to merge with its loose sense, being
‘anything broadly regarded as mental…”? Of course not. All
we can claim is something like “particular conceptions of
the ‘cognitive’ among social psychologists were mute on the
issue of truth-evaluability.” In order to make the stronger
claim that the strict sense merged with the loose sense,
Green needs to do a better job explaining: 1) the clear
disconnect and/or disregard social psychologists had toward
philosophical psychologist’s conception of the cognitive, 2)
why “the strict sense” of the cognitive did not carry over,
and 3) whether there was any discussion between social
psychologists and philosophical psychologists on the use
and/or misuse of the term “cognitive” at the time.

Premise 5
Green’s fifth premise is a consequence of the 4th, viz., “the
strict sense of the ‘cognitive’ never took hold in psychology,
and, consequently, psychologists now refer to the cognitive
in the loose sense.” The issue with this premise is the way it
is worded. The premise begs the question, i.e. it assumes
that 1) there was in fact a strict sense of the “cognitive,” and
2) there was or should have been some maintenance of the
strict sense of the term “cognitive” among experimental
psychologists. Given that the bulk of these premises are of
my own interpretation, one might think it just an issue with
the paraphrasing. Green, however, directly states, “the strict
sense never took hold in psychology,” which gives us
reason to take issue with Green’s own wording.
Green would also do well to provide us an explanation as
to why the strict sense of the term “cognitive” is in fact so
significant. Green implicitly assumes that the term
‘cognitive’ in the strict sense is the “correct” way, and the
fact that social psychologists opted for the loose sense of the
term was an error. For example, Green claims, “the term
‘cognitive’ is not really ambiguous; that it has, in fact, a
quite rigorous definition.” Well, yes, it does have a
“rigorous” definition via the strict sense (or so Green
claims)—but is that the only definition we should care
about? And even if the strict sense of the cognitive came
prior to the loose sense, why does Green present his claims
as if the strict sense was intended for psychology?

Green’s Conclusion
Green concludes that “contrary to the supposition of many
who have opposed it, the rise of cognitivism has not been,
nor was it ever intended to be, a wholesale return to the
mentalism of the past…” This assumes that cognitivism was
thought to be a full-blown return to mentalism. But when
have people thought this? Where is the evidence that people
thought this? To support this conclusion, Green needs to
provide primary as well as secondary-source evidence.
Lastly, what is considerably lacking is an answer to the
all-important question: why do we care? Green claims, “[it]
is important to understand what the motivations for the
cognitive revolution, as it developed outside the bounds of
university psychology departments, were—exactly which
problems it was thought to solve and which problems it was
thought to simply leave behind—especially since we seem,
once again, to be running into difficulties on the very issues
that led us to abandon mentalism in favor of behaviorism,
now almost a century ago” (Green 38). But what are these
difficulties? Why are they important? These questions are
unfortunately left unanswered.

Conclusion
In this paper, I have critically examined Green’s proposed
philosophical history concerning how the term “cognitive”
became associated with aspects of the mental. I have shown
that Green has not provided sufficient reasons or evidence in
support of his proposal. By evaluating Green's claims, I

2785

have sought to determine what future research is necessary
to gain a better understanding of the conceptual history
surrounding the original aims, intentions, and concerns of
the so-called “cognitive revolution,” the origin and mark of
the “cognitive,” as well as how the term “cognitive” has
become polysemic in present-day discourse.
Where should we look for a more accurate account of the
term “cognitive”? As one reviewer helpfully pointed out,
there is plenty of historical material in which to engage. One
could begin by reading any decent historical text featuring a
history of cognitive science (e.g. Hearst’s The First Century
of Experimental Psychology (1979), Gardner’s The Mind’s
New Science: A History of the Cognitive Revolution (1987),
Boden’s Mind as Machine: A History of Cognitive Science
(2008). These and other such texts reference several of the
original sources in an accessible context.
From the standpoint of psychology, a deeper search could
begin with the seminal works of William James and John
Dewey. Moving through the 20th century, important work
can be found in developmental psychology (e.g. Piaget),
intelligence testing (e.g. Binet, Yerkes, and Terman), and
even the “behaviorists” (e.g. Pavlov, Skinner, Thorndike,
Watson, and Guthrie). Of particular interest to cognitive
scientists, behaviorist Clark Hull developed rigorous models
of learning behaviors that dealt with “cognitive” processes
that posited mental representations. And of course, one
cannot discount Edward Tolman, the behavioral
experimentalist and theorist who re(introduced) the key term
in the Psychological Review (1948) with the paper titled,
“Cognitive maps in rats and men.”
But the history of a term “is never solely a matter of
etymology: the need for a new word is socially determined,
right at the start, and any subsequent changes of denotation,
as well as the cluster of connotations surrounding it, are also
in response to demands from society. The word cannot be
isolated from its historical background….” (Ross 1962).
Thus, to gain a deeper understanding of the term
“cognitive,” a constructive program should go beyond
rereading primary sources and launch an historiographical
investigation. Such an analysis should not take terms like
“cognitive” to be an expression of some timeless defining
feature of human nature, but instead should begin with the
assumption that such terms are historically constructed
objects (Danziger 1997). By appreciating that at different
times and in different places the term “cognitive” and its
derivations have been constructed and reconstructed in
attempts to deal with different problems and to answer a
variety of questions, such an analysis may avoid the “gross
parochialism that elevates local and ephemeral concerns to
the status of eternal verities” (Danziger 1997).
When psychologists-historians such as Green turn to the
history of their subject, they often do so with a
psychologist’s bias in favor of accounts centered on
individuals. Such bias “is likely to exaggerate an already
strong cultural tendency to interpret social and historical
events in terms of actions, thoughts, and personalities of
individuals” (Danziger 1997). But the term “cognitive” has

its own multifaceted history; it is the work of many thinkers
and it informs the practice of large interdisciplinary
communities. Therefore, an additional constraint on a
constructive program is that it should not be written in terms
of the history of individuals.
One final recommendation includes an analysis of the
discourse from which the term “cognitive” derives its sense.
This kind of analysis, utilized by historian of psychology
Kurt Danziger, acknowledges that “single terms are always
embedded in a network of semantic relationships from
which they derive their meaning and significance.”
According to Danziger (1997), “changes in the meaning of
one term are not independent of changes in the meaning of
others, and the significance of each term depends on the
position it occupies in a larger whole that is best thought of
as a discursive formation.” Thus, in a successful history of
the “cognitive,” one must study the term as an element in
these discursive formations.
Hopefully I have demonstrated that the story of the term
“cognitive” still requires broader and vigorous discussion of
both its historical background and current meanings. This is
a challenging project that many might prefer to avoid. Much
like the word “intelligence,” cognitive is a term that is
widely and conveniently used to mean all sorts of things—
from creative ideation to any computational or multisynaptic brain process. There is still much to learn about the
term “cognitive,” however, and, more generally, the serious
efforts to develop a coherent science of what it means.

References
Adams, F., & Garrison, R. (2013). The mark of the
cognitive. Minds and Machines, 23(3), 339-352.
Baars, B. J. (1986). The cognitive revolution in psychology.
New York: Guilford.
Baum, W. M., & Heath, J. L. (1992). Behavioral
explanations and intentional explanations in psychology.
American Psychologist, 47(11), 1312.
Cromwell, H. C., & Panksepp, J. (2011). Rethinking the
cognitive revolution from a neural perspective: how
overuse/misuse of the term ‘cognition’ and the neglect of
affective controls in behavioral neuroscience could be
delaying progress in understanding the BrainMind.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(9), 20262035.
Danziger, K. (1997). Naming the Mind: How psychology
found its language. Sage.
Elpidorou, A. (2014). Reasoning about the Mark of the
Cognitive: A response to Adams and Garrison. Minds and
Machines, 24(2), 201-211.
Fodor, J. A. (1992, July 3). The big idea. Can there be a
science of mind? Times Literary Supplement. pp. 5-7.
Green, C. D. (1996). Where did the word" cognitive" come
from anyway?. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie
canadienne, 37(1), 31.
Ross, S. (1962). Scientist: The story of a word. Annals of
Science 18(2), 65-85.

2786

