Robustness of semantic encoding effects in a transfer task for multiple-strategy
arithmetic problems
Hippolyte Gros (hippolyte.gros@ens.fr)
Paragraphe Lab, EA 349, University Paris 8, Department of Psychology, 2 Rue de la Liberté,
93526 Saint-Denis Cedex 02, France

Jean-Pierre Thibaut (jean-pierre.thibaut@u-bourgogne.fr)
LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, University of Burgundy, Pôle AAFE – Esplanade Erasme,
21065 Dijon. France

Emmanuel Sander (emmanuel.sander@univ-paris8.fr)
Paragraphe Lab, EA 349, University Paris 8, Department of Psychology, 2 Rue de la Liberté,
93526 Saint-Denis Cedex 02, France
Abstract

Change in encoding and choice of strategy

The nature of the quantities involved in arithmetic problems
promotes semantic encodings that affect the strategy chosen
to solve them (Gamo, Sander, & Richard, 2010). Such
encoding effects might prevent positive transfer to problems
sharing the same formal mathematical structure (Bassok, Wu,
& Olseth, 1995). In this study with 5th and 6th graders, we
investigated the conditions promoting positive and negative
transfer in arithmetic problems that could be solved with two
distinct strategies. We showed that basic training do not
overcome the initial impact of semantic encodings, and we
provided evidence that a poor semantic encoding of the
training problems leads to transfer errors. This suggests the
existence of ontological restrictions on the representation
mechanisms involved in word arithmetic problem solving.
Keywords: arithmetic problem solving; analogical transfer;
semantic structures; semantic alignment; semantic encoding;
strategy choice

Any problem can be described in terms of its semantic
dimensions (for example, a problem can describe static
versus dynamic situations; it can involve entities changing
in a discrete versus a continuous way); those, in turn,
influence the representation of the problem as well as the
solution strategies (De Corte et al., 1985; Bassok & Olseth,
1995). Indeed, encoding can influence not only the
difficulty of a problem but also the strategy employed to
solve it (Brissiaud & Sander, 2010; Sander& Richard,
2005). Interestingly, some particular encodings of a problem
might be more efficient than others, in terms of number of
steps necessary to reach the solution. This is the case for
distributive word problems (Coquin-Viennot & Moreau,
2003) or multiple-step arithmetic word problems (Thevenot
& Oakhill, 2005). For example, Coquin-Viennot and
Moreau (2003), gave elementary school children (grades 3
and 5) problems that could be solved either by a distributed
strategy (e.g., k × a + k × b), or by a factorized strategy
(e.g., k × (a + b)); the presence of a word cueing for element
grouping increased the frequency of the factorized strategy.
Gamo, Sander & Richard (2010) showed that the type of
quantities used in arithmetic problems can determine which
of the following two relationships will be emphasized: (1)
the complementation relation, priming the computation of
the difference between a whole and one of its component
parts, or (2) a matching relation, leading to the computation
of the difference between homologous quantities. Consider,
in this respect, the following two problems: (a) “In the
Richard family, there are 5 persons. When the Richards go
on vacation with the Roberts, they are 9 at the hotel. In the
Dumas family, there are 3 fewer persons than in the Richard
family. The Roberts go on vacation with the Dumas. How
many will they be at the hotel?” and (b) “Antoine took
painting courses at the art school for 8 years and stopped
when he was 17 years old. Jean began at the same age as
Antoine and took the course for two years less. At what age
did Jean stop?” Both can be solved by the same two
strategies. However, most participants would solve (a) with
a complementation strategy (9 - 5 = 4; 5 - 3 = 2; 4 + 2 = 6)

Introduction
Semantic content in arithmetic problem solving
It is well established that the semantic content of arithmetic
word problems can influence their difficulty. For example,
in one-step subtraction problems, when the question bears
on the final result, change problems (e.g., “John had 8
marbles, he loses 5 marbles during recess. How many
marbles does John have now?”) are easier to solve than
combine problems (e.g., “John and Tom have 8 marbles
altogether, Tom has 5 marbles. How many marbles does
John have?”) (Riley et al., 1983). In the case of conceptual
rewording, providing semantic cues relevant to the solution
facilitates the construction of an appropriate mental
representation and makes the problem easier to solve
(Vicente, Orrantia, & Verschaffel, 2007). Success depends
on how the semantic relations evoked by the entities of the
problem situation are aligned with the mathematical
relations of the problem (Bassok, Chase, & Martin, 1998).

818

and almost never use the matching strategy (9 - 3 = 6)
whereas for (b) the majority of participant tend to use the
matching
strategy
(17-2=15)
rather
than
the
complementation strategy (17-8= 9; 8-2= 6; 9+6=15) (Gamo
et al., 2010).
An important difference in the semantic content of the
problems that could potentially account for this influence in
strategy, is that (a) promotes cardinal encoding (number of
elements of sets), which would imply that to reach the total
number of persons, the number of people in each of the
component families should be known, and so these
quantities are calculated first. By contrast, (b) promotes
ordinal encoding (ordered units on a one-dimensional line),
which implies equivalence of course duration difference and
age difference. Therefore the matching strategy is already
implied in the encoding step in (b); this is not the case in (a),
where using the matching strategy would require an extra
recoding step (Gamo et al., 2010).
Overall, (a) and (b) can be said to parallel two kinds of
semantic alignment as the semantic relations evoked by the
entities of the problem situation are aligned with two
different kinds of mathematical relations (complementation
or matching relations). Cardinal encoding emphasizes the
complementation relations while ordinal encoding
emphasizes the matching relations, and these are associated
with different solving strategies: complementation strategy
or matching strategy.

is no way to dissociate between the two, which may have
different causes. Failure to solve the problem might result
from a poor representation of the problem whereas failure to
transfer might result from failure to match the source and
the target appropriately despite the existence of an adequate
representation of the problem. In order to allow us to
distinguish between representational aspects and strategic
ones, in the current study, we used arithmetic problems that
could be correctly solved with the two distinct strategies
presented above: the complementation strategy (3 steps) or
the matching strategy (1 step). This allows us to dissociate
positive transfer of the taught strategy from a successful
resolution based on the other available strategy which also
leads to a correct solution. The latter relies on another
representation of the problem than the one that would lead
to transfer of the strategy.
In the present study, participants knew the elementary
arithmetic operations and their mathematical meaning (i.e.,
they knew how to add or to subtract, and what it meant to
look for the value of a part or a whole, or to compare
quantities). The main goal was to study their ability to
transfer a new solving strategy in various contexts.
In contrast, most studies in the literature use quite
complex problems (for example, permutation problems
(Ross, 1989; Bassok & Olseth, 1995)). This renders the
origin of transfer failures unclear. Did participants
understand the meaning of the algorithms they were
provided with? Is it possible that they “blindly” applied the
algorithms from the source problem with very poor
understanding of the underlying mathematical features? If
they failed to understand the meaning of the algorithms,
could they have mapped the training problem on the transfer
items on the basis of perceived equivalence of roles (the
reasoning 'This entity in the training problem has the same
role as that entity in a transfer problem, so I should give
them the same role in the algorithm')? Would they have
behaved the same if their understanding of mathematic
conceptual structure (Richland, Stigler & Holyoak, 2012) of
the source was more elaborated? Such questions should be
answered to exclude inappropriate encoding of the training
situation as the main source of failure (Hofstader & Sander,
2013, chapter 6 for an extensive discussion of this issue).
We hypothesized that the transfer of the matching strategy
to novel problems sharing the same formal mathematical
structure should be influenced by the type of representation
induced by the problems. We trained pupils on examples of
the matching (1 step) strategy, and then asked them to use it
in several types of problems, which varied with respect to
their similarity to the example problems.
We designed our experiment to study the transfer of the
matching strategy to ordinal problems, where it is
spontaneously used, and to cardinal problems, where the
complementation strategy is spontaneously used. We chose
to teach the matching strategy rather than the
complementation strategy, because it is more efficient as it
involves a single step.

The semantic determinants of transfer
Transfer from source problems to target problems has been
shown to be more effective when surface features – those
that can be manipulated without modifying the solution or
the solving procedures –, remain unchanged (e.g. Novick &
Holyoak, 1991). Bassok and Olseth (1995) showed that
surface features not only interfere with structural ones in
transfer processes, but may also induce a semantic structure
that could be congruent or incongruent with the
mathematical one. Surface features appear to be
instantiations of abstract semantic dimensions such as
symmetry-asymmetry. Analogical transfer was shown to be
influenced by these dimensions. For instance, permutation
problems with symmetric sets of elements (e.g., doctors
from Chicago and doctors from Minnesota are symmetric
because they have equivalent semantic roles in the world)
were not considered to be of the same type as permutation
problems with asymmetric sets (e.g., prizes and students are
asymmetric, because prizes may be given to students but not
vice versa). As a consequence, performance on the test
problems is influenced by the specific surface features
encountered in the training set (Bassok, Wu, & Olseth,
1995).

Goal of the present study
Most of the studies on transfer use problems in which only
one strategy is successful. Unfortunately, failure to transfer
is expressed only as failure to solve the problem, and there

819

Table 1: Presentation of the versions of the problems.

Common to all
problems

V0: identical to the
source
V1: inverted operands
(question bearing on a
whole instead of a part)
V2: inverted operator
(addition instead of
subtraction)
V3: inverted operator
and inverted operands

Cardinal quantities

Ordinal quantities

A bag of potatoes weighs 5 kilograms. It is weighed
with a pumpkin. The weighing scale indicates a total
of 11 kilograms. The same pumpkin is weighed with
a bag of carrots.

Sophie’s travel lasts for 5 hours.
Her trip happens during the day.
When she arrives, the clock indicates it’s 11a.m.
Fred leaves at the same time as Sophie did.

The weighing scale indicates 2 kilograms less than
before. How much does the bag of carrots weigh?

He arrives 2 hours earlier than she does. How
long does Fred’s travel last?

The bag of carrots weighs 2 kilograms less than the
bag of potatoes. What is the weight indicated by the
weighing scale?
The weighing scale previously indicated 2 kilograms
less than it does now. How much does the bag of
carrots weigh?
The bag of potatoes weighs 2 kilograms less than the
bag of carrots. What is the weight indicated by the
weighing scale?

His is 2 hours shorter than Sophie’s. At what
time does Fred arrive?
Sophie arrives 2 hours earlier than Fred does.
How long does Fred’s travel last?
Sophie’s travel is 2 hours shorter than Fred’s.
At what time does Fred arrive?

- (H2): When the problem test varies with respect to the
target of the question (H2a), or the sign of the difference
(H2b) or both (H2c), participants should show more
aptitude to use the matching strategy in the case of
congruent (ordinal) encoding than incongruent one
(cardinal encoding).
Secondly, we investigated the possible causes of negative
transfer. We hypothesized that failure to solve the modified
problems could mainly be explained by poor semantic
encoding of the examples, manifested in a non-semantic use
of the taught algorithm; namely, a literal transposition of
this algorithm, such as the smaller value being subtracted
from the lower one. We thus expected that when the test
problems differed from the training problems regarding the
target of the question (H3a), the sign of the difference (H3b)
or both (H3c), we would observe some errors of participants
failing to adjust the algorithm accordingly, indicating that
these participants did not properly encode the situation, and
were not able to extract the conceptual structures from the
training problems.

Presentation of the problems
All of the problems had the same formal mathematical
structure as the ones used in Gamo et al. (2010), presented
in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Formal mathematical structure of the problems.
In the previously mentioned examples (a) and (b), Part 1
corresponded to the Richards (a) and the duration of
Antoine's course (b), Part 2 corresponded to the Roberts (a)
and the age of the two children starting the course (b), Part 3
corresponded to the Dumas (a) and the duration of Jean's
course (b), Whole 1 corresponded to the Richards and the
Roberts (a) and the age of Antoine after the course (b), and
Whole 2 corresponded to the Roberts and the Dumas (a) and
the age of Jean after the course (b), .
We introduced variations between problems to slightly
modify the solving algorithm (through changing the
operator, the operands, or both) without changing the
mathematical structure of the problems (see Table 1).

Methods
Participants
Participants were 110 children (M=11.1 years, SD=7.8
months, from 9.5 to 13.3 years, 5 th and 6th grades) attending
school in the Paris area. They were recruited from 7
different classes in 6 different schools, and came from
various socioeconomic backgrounds. They participated
voluntarily and were not aware of the hypotheses being
tested.

Hypotheses
Firstly, we hypothesized robustness of encoding effects: it
should be more difficult to transfer the matching strategy to
cardinal problems than to ordinal problems. With respect to
the variations of the required algorithm (Table 1), our
hypotheses were:
- (H1): Even if a literal application of the example
algorithm leads to success, robust encoding effects should
be observed and thus the matching strategy should be
transferred less often when the quantities promote cardinal
encoding than when they promote ordinal encoding.

Design
Each child was presented with a set of problems consisting
of 2 training problems and 8 test problems. All of the
training problems involved an ordinal quantity; they were
duration problems emphasizing the ordinal coding as
described by Gamo et al. (2010). Three bimodal factors
varied across problems: First, the nature of the quantity

820

(cardinal versus ordinal). There were 4 types of quantity:
two cardinal (price and weight); and two ordinal (distance
and temperature) quantities. Second, the target of the
question (part versus whole): there were four problems in
which the difference between the two wholes was provided
and participants had to find the unknown part; in the other
four problems the difference between the two parts was
given, and subjects had to find the unknown whole. Third,
the sign of the difference (+/-): the second of the two
elements could either be larger or smaller than the first one,
this requiring subjects to perform a subtraction or an
addition when using a matching strategy.

For the successes, we used a success score designed to
measure the distribution of matching strategies among the
correct strategies: each problem successfully solved was
given a score of 1 if solved using the matching strategy and
0 otherwise.
For the errors, we designed 3 error scores: a 'matching
with inverted operator' score, a 'matching with inverted
operands' score, and a 'matching with inverted operator and
inverted operands' score. For each of these scores, we
attributed 1 for every congruent error and 0 otherwise.

Materials
The problems were printed in booklets. The front page
displayed the two training problems and provided the
matching strategy solution for each of them. The following
instructions were given on the upper-side of the page: “You
will find an arithmetic problem on every page of this
booklet. We ask you to take the time to thoroughly read the
problems: there is no time constraint. Please write down
every operation you do in order to reach a solution. Just
below, you will find two training problems, followed by
their respective solutions. Every other problem in this
booklet can be solved using the same principle, with only
one operation.”
Each test problem page was divided in three parts: the
problem itself was presented on the upper-left side of the
page, the response area was on the upper-right side of the
page, and an area that could be used as a draft was on the
bottom of every test page. These test pages were always
presented on the right side of the booklets, while the two
training problems with their solution with the matching
strategy were displayed on each left page, in sight during
the test phase as a reminder.

Procedure

Figure 2: Proportions of correct solutions by matching
strategy and complementation strategy, as a function of the
similarity between the training problems and the testproblems; p-values refer to comparisons between cardinal
and ordinal problems in terms of the proportion of correct
matching strategies.

The children were given the booklets and asked to read
carefully the front page before starting to solve the
problems. After they had answered each of the 8 problems 1,
their booklets were collected. They were told to take all the
time they needed; no participant exceeded 1 hour.

Coding and scoring

Results

A problem was considered as correctly solved when the
exact result was found and accompanied by the appropriate
calculations. The successful strategies were categorized
(correct matching, correct complementation) and so were
the incorrect ones (matching with inverted operator,
matching with inverted operands, matching with inverted
operator and inverted operands, complementation with
error, irrelevant, skipped).

Conditions of positive transfer
We first analyzed, for each problem, the proportion of
matching strategies among all the correct trials (see fig. 2).
In order to test our first hypothesis (H1), we examined the
frequency of use of the matching strategy on test problems
identical to the training problems with respect to their
mathematical form (same operator, same operands).
Consistent with H1, participants successfully applied the
matching strategy in problems eliciting an ordinal
representation (success score M=0.893, SD=0.793) more

1 Due to a reprography issue, some booklets contained only 7
problems instead of 8, and thus some data were missing for the ttest. This is the reason why the number of degrees of freedom isn’t
always the same between our different analyses.

821

We first analyzed how “inverted operands only” errors
were distributed across the different types of problems
(Figure 3, left). We compared test problems which were
identical to the training problems (same sign of the operator
and same operands) with problems in which only the choice
of the operands differed from the training problem; the error
scores for problems with inverted operands (M=0.629,
SD=0.959) was significantly higher (t(45)=2.669, p<0.05,
paired t-test) than the error scores for problems identical to
the training problems (M=0.229, SD=0.605), consistent with
H3a.
Regarding ‘inverted operator’ errors (Figure 3, middle),
we compared the test trials which were identical to the
training examples with the test problems which differed in
terms of the operator (i.e., requiring addition rather than
subtraction). Problems with an inverted operator (M=0.777,
SD=1.174) had a significantly higher ‘inverted operator
only’ error' rate (t(45)=3.439, p<0.01, paired t-test) than
problems with no such change from the training ones
(M=0.112, SD=0.540), consistent with H3b.

often than in problems eliciting a cardinal representation
(success score M=0.500, SD=0.805); this difference was
significant (t(88)=3.667, p<0.001, paired t-test).
Similarly, we studied the results obtained for problems
using the same operands as the training problems, but
requiring a different operator (the sign of the difference
having been changed). Consistent with H2b, success scores
for cardinal trials (M=0.389, SD=0.905) were significantly
lower (t(88)=2.673, p<0.01, paired t-test) than those for
ordinal trials (M=0.852, SD=1.451).
Finally, we studied the use of the matching strategy when
both the operands and the operator of the problems differed
from those of the training problems. Again we found a
significant difference (t(66)=2.453, p<0.05, paired t-test)
between the success scores of ordinal problems (M=0.625,
SD=1.503) and those of cardinal problems (M=0.118,
SD=0.676). Problems inducing an ordinal representation
therefore seemed to facilitate the use of the strategy learnt,
even when it required adapting two different factors in order
to be used, in conformity with H2c.
Overall, semantic encoding of the problems had a strong
impact on transfer. Indeed, it is so robust that even with the
example problem repeatedly shown to the participants with
a solving strategy in one operation that leads to the solution,
and even when the instructions explicitly state that the same
solution in one operation applied to all the problems,
participants tended to use the longer three-step strategy
when the quantities involved promoted a cardinal encoding.
In contrast, more of them used the one-step strategy when
the quantities involved promoted an ordinal encoding. This
holds true both when a literal application of the taught
algorithm is sufficient (H1) and when this taught algorithm
has to be adapted (H2).

Analysis of negative transfer
The second part of our analysis involved the distribution of
errors across the experimental conditions. We created the
following typology for the strategies used by participants:
- (i) correct operator with the wrong operands (calculating
the whole when the question is about the part, or vice
versa), classified as “inverted operands only”;
- (ii) correct operands with the wrong operator (addition
instead of subtraction or vice versa), classified as “inverted
operator only”;
- (iii) wrong operator and wrong operands, classified as
“inverted operator and inverted operands”.
- (iv) any other errors (use of multiplication or division,
use of more than one operation leading to an incorrect
result, absence of use of the difference value, use of a
complementation strategy leading to a failure), classified as
“other errors”.
Our hypotheses did not predict a difference in the specific
type of errors occurring in ordinal and cardinal problems.
Indeed, there was no difference between these two groups.
In the following analyses, problems were only divided
according to problem type (V0, V1, V2 and V3) rather than
cardinal and ordinal quantities.

Figure 3: Distribution of the different type of errors across
the problems.
Finally, we compared the proportion of ‘inverted
operands and inverted operator’ errors (Figure 3, right) in
problems homologous to the training problem and in
problems with inverted operands and inverted operator. The
no-change condition showed significantly less errors of this
category (M=0.107, SD=0.724) than for problems with both
an inverted operator and inverted operands (M=0.760,
SD=1.274), (t(45)=2.911, p<0.001, paired t-test), supporting
H3c.
Overall, these results suggest that participants who failed
to encode the problems in an appropriate manner (either
through a cardinal or an ordinal encoding) and failed to
solve the problem were influenced by the algorithm shown,

822

but applied it in a literal way. Indeed, these errors appear to
have resulted from a literal transposition of the calculations
provided in the example problem.

Bassok, M., Wu, L., & Olseth, L. K. (1995). Judging a book
by its cover: interpretative effects of content on problemsolving transfer. Memory and Cognition, 23, 354 e 367.
Brissiaud, R., & Sander, E. (2010). Arithmetic word
problem solving: a Situation Strategy First Framework.
Developmental Science, 13, 92-107.
Coquin-Viennot, D., & Moreau, S. (2003). Highlighting the
role of episodic model in the solving of arithmetical
problems. European Journal of Psychology and
Education, 18, 267-279.
DeCorte, E., Verschaffel, L., & De Win, L. (1985).
Inﬂuence of rewording verbal problems on children’s
problem representations and solution. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 77, 460-470.
DeWolf, M., Bassok, M. & Holyoak, K. J. (2015).
Conceptual structure and the procedural affordances of
rational numbers: Relational reasoning with fractions and
decimals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
144(1), 127-150.
Gamo, S., Sander, E., & Richard, J.-F. (2010). Transfer of
strategy use by semantic recoding in arithmetic problem
solving. Learning and Instruction, 20, 400-410.
Hofstadter, D., & Sander, E. (2013). Surfaces and Essences:
Analogy as the fuel and fire of thinking. New York, Basic
Books.
Novick, L. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical
problem solving by analogy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 398 e
415.
Rapp, M., Bassok, M., DeWolf, M., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2015). Modeling discrete and continuous entities with
fractions and decimals. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 21(1), 47 - 56.
Richland, L. E., Stigler, J. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (2012).
Teaching the conceptual structure of mathematics.
Educational Psychologist, 47, 189-203.
Riley, M.S., Greeno, J.G., & Heller, J.I. (1983).
Development of children’s problem solving ability in
arithmetic. In H.P. Ginsburg (Ed.), The development of
mathematical thinking. New York: Academic Press.
Ross, B.H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Sander, E., & Richard, J-F. (2005). Analogy and transfer:
encoding the problem at the right level of abstraction.
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Stresa, Italy, pp. 1925-1930.
Thevenot, C., & Oakhill, J. (2006). Representations and
strategies for solving dynamic and static arithmetic word
problem: The role of working memory capacities.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology-A, 58,
1311-1323.
Vicente, S., Orrantia, J., & Verschaffel,L. (2007). Inﬂuence
of situational and conceptual rewording on word problem
solving. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 77,
829-848.

Discussion
In agreement with our hypotheses, when the quantities in
the problems promoted cardinal encoding, a large
proportion of participants failed to apply the algorithm they
were taught to novel examples. This was true when they
were sharing all the characteristics of the training problems
and also when they differed in terms of the operands and/or
the operator. This suggests that the representations induced
by “what we know about the world” were not abolished by
the explicit teaching of the matching strategy and the
explicit instruction to use it. The fact that this effect
persisted even when the use of the matching strategy was
made less obvious by the modifications introduced between
the training and the test highlights the importance of this
effect.
Recent work (e.g. DeWolf, Bassok, & Holyoak, 2015;
Rapp, Bassok, DeWolf, & Holyoak, 2015) emphasizes the
generality of the phenomenon of semantic alignment and the
underlying educational perspectives.
In this work we have expanded the findings of Gamo et
al. (2010) that the initial spontaneous encoding constrains
the spontaneous strategy. We have shown that encoding
influences transfer even in situations in which the solution
requires low technical knowledge (additions and
subtractions) and relies conceptually on simple
mathematical relations (comparison or looking for a part or
a whole).
This phenomenon highlights the importance of
overcoming the initial encoding in some cases, even when
this initial encoding is relevant from a mathematical point of
view:
cardinal
encoding
and
the
associated
complementation strategy were relevant for solving the
problems in this study as they allowed participants to reach
for the right solution. However, these have to be overcome
in order to successfully apply the matching strategy. A
general encoding such as the one symbolized in Figure 1 is
far from spontaneous. This is a promising and challenging
route towards the development of more general methods for
semantic recoding which would remain compatible with the
initial encoding but embrace a larger number of situations
and be more mathematically apt.

References
Bassok, M, Chase, V. M, & Martin, S. A. (1998). Adding
apples and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99-134
Bassok, M., & Olseth, K., (1995). Object-based
representations: Transfer between cases of continuous and
discrete models of change. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 15221538.

823

