Schematic Processing in Working Memory Tasks
Relies on Learning and Long-Term Memory Resources
Nader Noori (nnoori@usc.edu)
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles , CA 90089 USA
Abstract
This paper presents an evidence for involvement of long-term
memory (LTM) resources along volatile memory (VM) resources in active management of information in a working
memory (WM) task that features schematic processing of WM
content. It was observed that in rehearsing frequently changing WM items in a self-paced concurrent-counting task when
subjects learn and use a fixed rehearsing order across different
episodes of the task they make significantly less error compared to when they adopt different rehearsing order for different episodes. This finding suggests that while retaining information in this task practically draws on volatile resources
such as the phonological loop (PL), access to the corresponding item in WM relies on learning and retaining data structures in LTM. It is discussed that in this role learning and LTM
resources help render schematic access to episodic information stored in less structured storage units such as PL. In this
role LTM and learning plays a crucial role in execution of WM
tasks that employ complex process schemas.
Keywords: Working Memory; Symbolic Working Memory;
Volatile Memory; Long-term Memory; Concurrent-counting;
Schematic Access

Introduction
The concept of working memory (WM) originally started
as an offshoot of the concept of short-term storage (STS)
(Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968), a concept which in dual-store
views of memory is in contrast with the long-term store. As
a result, for more than two decades WM discourse was dominated by those models which assume that retention of information in WM is entirely separated from long-term memory
(Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; Baddeley, 1992, 2000). A key supporting evidence for this view came from neuropsychological
reports of bilateral hippocampal lesion that had left subjects
with a dense impairment in their ability of forming episodic
memories yet, without a notable deficit in temporary information retention for regulating daily tasks (Scoville & Milner,
1957). Reports of a reverse effect and spared long-term memory in the face of sever deficit in short-term information retention (Shallice & Warrington, 1970) established the idea of a
double dissociation between STM and LTM.
However, from the turn of the century a growing body of
experimental evidence as well as theoretical interests have
started casting doubt on the idea of a complete dissociation between LTM and temporary retention of information in
WM. Apart from those theoretical efforts which seek to explain WM as an entirely LTM-embedded construct (Cowan,
1999; Ruchkin, Grafman, Cameron, & Berndt, 2003; Oberauer, 2009) some evidences have emerged that suggest a role
for LTM resources along volatile and short-term memory resources in supporting WM tasks (Jonides et al., 2008).
Apparently, some researchers have been able to isolate
WM task conditions under which the dependency of WM on

hippocampal region of the brain becomes markedly evident.
Neuroimaging studies consistent with study of patients with
hippocampal damage (Ranganath & Blumenfeld, 2005; Olson, Page, Moore, Chatterjee, & Verfaellie, 2006) have revealed that in the case of engaging in novel working memory tasks or when tasks involve creating association between
task-relevant information the medial temporal lobe (MTL) and
Hippocampus become inevitably implicated. Conforming evidence has emerged from study of individual differences in
working memory capacity (WMC) tasks. Unsworth and Engle (Unsworth & Engle, 2007) have mentioned that the nature of individual differences in working memory capacity
(WMC) can be better explained by considering a primary
(short-term) memory responsible for active maintenance and a
secondary (long-term) memory responsible for active search.
Their conclusion is consistent with Davelaar et al’s proposal
based on behavioral evidences and computational modeling
of free recall task in suggesting collaboration of LTM and
STM resources in retention of information (Davelaar, GoshenGottstein, Ashkenazi, Haarmann, & Usher, 2005). These evidences have invited theoretical efforts for modeling involvement of multiple storage resources with different temporal retention characteristics.
Some authors have proposed that LTM and STM resources
alternatively can be used for storage of information in WM
tasks depending on their relative operational cost. In this
paradigm a trade-off between cost of utilizing each of resources determines the preferred choice for storage of information. It is postulated that the cost of using STM resources
is related to their sever limited capacity while the cost of LTM
resources is related to interference-prone retrieval and speed
of learning. There have been theoretical efforts such as Ericsson and Knitsch’s long-term working memory framework
(Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995) or O’Reily, Braver and Cohen’s
distributed model of WM (O’Reilly, Braver, & Cohen, n.d.)
that explain this trade-off. These models basically accept
the same functional role for LTM and STM in retention of
episodic information. Although these models generally explain involvement of LTM resources in WM tasks they do not
explain why and how contribution of hippocampal region becomes necessary in performing novel working memory tasks
(Ranganath & Blumenfeld, 2005).
In a recent theoretical proposal Noori has proposed a role
for LTM in management of access to episodic information
stored in short-term resources of WM which can explain this
effect (Noori, 2015). This role is different from direct involvement in storage of episodic task-relevant information and is
rather related to retaining structural information needed for
schematic execution of some tasks. He describes this role

1733

in the framework of Symbolic Working Memory (SWM), a
model of a functional mode for WM in high-order cognitive
tasks for which a volatile storage system for retention of symbolic codes of human language is engaged. This symbolic
storage system in essence is an extension of sensorimotor
systems that are responsible for perception and articulation
of symbolic codes of human language. This symbolic storage system is capable of retaining symbolic code segments
in exchanges of sensory and motor codes between systems
respectively engaged in perception and articulation of language. This volatile symbolic serial storage (VSSS) that resembles the phonological loop of Baddeley and Hitch’s model
(Baddeley & Hitch, 1974) lacks an internal mechanism for
addressing stored segment codes and thus is not suitable for
selective operations needed for schematic processing of information in many complex WM tasks that rely on symbolic
representations.
However, this limitation can be overcome by accessorizing first, a registry system with addressable and schematically
reachable states and second, learning and LTM systems. A
state registry system (SRS) typically is a system capable of
location-based encoding ( e.g. a motor system with spatial
encoding capability) that is subject to address-based and voluntarily shift between its states. Furthermore, the process of
switching between states can by synchronized with the process of iteration of items during rehearsing or serial monitoring of items in the symbolic storage system. The key role of
LTM here is retaining information about associations between
the current state of the task and processing programs that take
segments of the symbolic codes from the symbolic storage.
The current state of the state registry system can be used as
the cue for locating a particular segment which encodes relevant and needed information at a specific stage of the task. In
this role LTM retains mappings between possible states of the
system and execution programs. These mappings are rather
stable during the course of the task execution and needed to
be learned in the beginning of the task and can be used in later
occasions. This is where learning actively takes place when
execution of a novel task is required. This information can
be shared across different episodes for mapping active state
of the task encoded partly in the state registry system (SRS)
and other instance of volatile memories. This gives LTM and
learning systems a crucial role in rendering selective access to
the content of serially encoded information in the phonological loop or other instance of symbolic storage which is necessary in many complicated task that are often categorized as
executive memory tasks. In a sense, LTM practically becomes
an essential part of memory management in those tasks that
draw on selective and schematic access to the information retained in the symbolic serial storage. This is also consistent
with reports of deficit in performing executive WM tasks in
AD1 patients (Baddeley, 1996; Baddeley & Wilson, 2002).
This hypothesis has non-trivial implications for understanding the nature of deficit in functioning of WM especially with
respect to what traditionally attributed to the function of central execution (Baddeley, 1996; Baddeley & Wilson, 2002).
This paper aims at testing this hypothesis. In the next sec1 Alzheimer’s

Disease

tion a paradigm for testing engagement of learning and LTM
systems in WM tasks is devised. The results along qualitative observation of body movements which suggest systematic
engagement of motor system in execution of a WM task are
consistent with what is described by Noori (Noori, 2015).

Experiments
Self-paced WM tasks in which selective processing on a few
items of WM are cued fulfil those conditions that SWM model
prescribes for engaging learning and LTM resources. For this
purpose in this study a self-paced triple counting (TC) task
is adopted. The task requires retaining three numbers form
which only one is processed at each counting event. The
schema here is finding the number which matches the most
recently presented target to be processed and used for producing a new value and replacing this new value with the old
value. Retaining three one-digit numbers very well falls in
range of verbal memory span of normal subjects. However,
what renders the difficulty of such tasks is arranging a reliable
way for accessing to the matching WM item at each stage
of the task. This is where SWM model suggests that a registry system can help tag items in their rehearsing sequence
by synchronizing the rehearsing process with iteration in state
registry system. The predicted role of learning system is learning the association between states of the registry system and
programs for processing number words in verbal short-term
memory system. This creates a condition in which items in
the rehearsal loop are associated to targets of counting during
an episode of the task in a learned order. An efficient regime is
learning these associations once and using them for different
episodes. This means that subject follows a fixed rehearing
regime (FRR) with respect to targets of counting. A less efficient yet plausible regime is learning a different association or
a different rehearsing order in different episodes of the task.
I refer to this regime as mixed rehearsing regime or MRR.
The immediate cost of employing MRR compared to FRR is a
higher chance of between-episode interference. This interference affects the order in which items should be retrieved from
the PL. This will translate to higher error rates for MRR condition compared to FRR condition. Resolving interference between different traces of previously learned associations might
also incur additional cost in terms of processing time.
I. Initialization of counters (random order)
#:0

%:0

?:1

II.

II. Counting (nine events)
%

?

%

#

III. Reporting ﬁnal counters (same order as I.)
II.

%:

#:

?:

Figure 1: Sequence of events in a trial of TC task.

To create a condition in which adopting a MRR strategy
is induced each trial of the task started with presentation of
initial counters (0 or 1) to targets of counting in a random
order (see Figure 1). The idea is that subjects may opt for
learning association between cues and initial numbers in the
order of initial target presentation which changes between dif-

1734

Experiment 1
Twenty two subjects (seventeen female) received verbal instruction about the task without any reference to a particular strategy. Subjects performed a training session including
four to six trials and succeeded to performing the task only
when they successfully carried out two trials of the task with
no error. One subject who could not satisfy this condition was
left out from the study. Subjects then were instructed to perform their first block with the same strategy of their last training trial. After finishing a block of twenty five trials of the
task subjects were asked to verbally report their strategy. All
subjects reported that they relied on rehearsing three counters
throughout the trial and at least once for every target presentation. Except five subjects who reported a fixed rehearsing order the rest of subjects reported that they adopted the order of
rehearsing based on the order of presentation of initial targets.
Only those sixteen subjects who reported a mixed rehearsing
strategy (MRR condition) continued to performing the second
block for which they were instructed to use a fixed order for
rehearsing (FRR condition). After two additional training trials subjects performed a block of twenty five trials of the task
under FRR condition.

Results Figure 2 depicts a summary of the results of experiment 1. The left panel compares the average and standard error of mean (SEM) for SoError and SumError for two consecutive blocks/conditions. The right panel compares the average
and STE of reaction times (RT) for two blocks/conditions.
The average of SoError was reduced from 0.358
(SEM=0.062) in the first block to 0.168 (SEM=0.044) in the

second block. The difference in average of SoErrors between
two blocks proved statistically significant as a result of carrying out a one-way ANOVA for correlated measurements
[F(1, 15) = 15.5; p = 0.0013].
Similarly the average of SumError was reduced from 0.726
(SEM=0.132) in the first block to 0.326 (SEM=0.093) in
the second block. To test the statistical significance of this
change in average of SumError the data from two consecutive blocks was submitted to a one-way ANOVA for correlated measurements which indicated a significant difference
[F(1, 15) = 15.6; p = 0.0012].

**

1.0
0.8

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2
Block 1 Block2
MRR
FRR

**

0.6

SoError
**

0

Reaction Time

Block 1 Block 2
MRR
FRR

0

1.0 s

0.8
0.6

SumError

2.0 s

Error

1.0

0s

ferent episodes, a condition which is apt to MRR condition.
Subjects may also be instructed to ignore the order in which
initial counters are presented and rehears numbers in a fixed
order across different episodes of the task, a strategy which is
apt to FRR condition.
The error in counting targets was measured by two different
measures a. the distance between the sum of counted values
and the sum of true values (SumError) b. the average distance
between counted values and real values after sorting both sequences in order (SoError). Both measures of error are insensitive to reporting items in a wrong order in the last stage
of the trial and moreover, SumError is even insensitive to any
error as a result of misidentification of visual targets. Also
the delay between issuing two target presentation events were
used as a measure of reaction time (RT).
Each trial of the task involves a fixed number of target presentation (nine) and the identity of targets may change between two consecutive target presentations with 50% of the
chance. Targets are three keyboard characters (#,% and ?)
which are presented visually and remain on the screen for only
600 milliseconds. At the end of each trial subjects report their
counted values in the same order in which initial counters are
presented. By adopting MRR subjects may save on the cost
of reordering counters for reporting items at the final stage.
This will decrease the difference between the cost of MRR
and FRR which in turn may help induce adopting MRR as
the preferred strategy for performance of the tasks when no
explicit instruction is provided.

Block 1 Block 2
MRR
FRR

Figure 2: Results of experiment 1.

To test whether the impact of SumError is a result of systematic counting error the distribution of displacement of sum
of counters (relative to the sum of real values) was closely
inspected. Note that the value of SumError is absolute value
this latter measure. The average of displacement of the sum of
reported counters for the first block was -0.072 (SEM=0.168)
and for the second block this value was 0.086 (SEM=0.095).
A one-way ANOVA for correlated measurements was carried
out to test the significance of the difference between average
values which indicated a statistically insignificant difference
[F(1, 15) = 0.1, p = 0.92]. Moreover the average of displacement of sum of reported counters for each block was compared with zero as the null hypothesis in a one-sample t-test.
A significant difference from zero would indicate a systematic
over counting or under counting (e.g. as a result of skipping
the counting process to reduce the load of the task). The null
hypothesis was not rejected for both cases indicating that the
sum of reported counters is not shifted away from the sum of
real counters in a specific direction. The t-test for the case of
MRR block returned t(15) = −0.4284; p = 0.67 and for the
case of FRR returned t(15) = −0.9013; p = 0.38. Furthermore inspecting distribution of the displacement of the sum
of reported counters revealed a symmetric distribution around
zero with a strong peak at zero. The difference between distributions was a larger variance for distribution of displacement
values for the case of MRR compared to FRR and stretching the distribution to larger displacements on both sides of
zero. This result is consistent with Garavan’s analyses on displacement of individual reported counters relative to their true
values in a dual-counting task. In Garavan’s experiment the
length of trial was random and often longer than this experiment. Garavan noticed that reported counters were generally
close to their real value and their displacement were symmetrically distributed around zero. He came to this conclusion
that the error in the case of dual-counting tasks is not related

1735

Results and discussion Figure 3 shows a summary of the
results of the second experiment. First, inspecting average
SoError values showed that SoError values in two blocks of
MRR were very close. The average SoError in the first block
was 0.322 (SEM=0.072) and in the second block the average was 0.344 (SEM=0.073). Average SoError values were
submitted to a one-way ANOVA for repeated measurements
which did not indicate a significant difference between mean
of SoError values [F(1, 16) = 0.7; p = 0.41].
Inspecting average SumError values showed slight increase
in the average of SumErrors from 0.656 (SEM=0.168) in the
first block to 0.751 (SEM=0.187) in the second block. A
one-way ANOVA ofr correlated measurements also indicated
that this difference is not statistically significant [F(1, 16) =
2.66; p = 0.122].
The average RT improved from 1637 ms (SEM=139 ms)
in the first block to 1298 ms (SEM=98 ms) in the second
block. This improvement proved statistically significant as a
result of carrying out a one-way ANOVA for repeated measurements [F(1, 16) = 11.9; p = 0.0033]. Further analysis revealed that a similar trend holds for both counting repeated
targets and counting unrepeated targets. Values of RT for
counting repeated events and unrepeated for both blocks were
submitted to a a 2×2 ANOVA for correlated samples for
both measurements with repeating condition as a factor and
the block identity as the second factor. The analysis revealed a highly significant main effect of repeating condition
[F(1, 16) = 37.64; p < 0.0001] and a significant main effect
of the block identity [F(1, 16) = 14.403; p = 0.0.0016]. The
analysis also detect a significant interaction between two factors [F(1, 16) = 6.4085; p = 0.022]. The average improvement of RT in this experiment was 340 ms (SEM=98 ms)
which was less than 530 ms (SEM=160 ms) average improvement in RT between the first block and the second block of the
first experiment. However, this difference proved insignificant
after a post-hoc one-way ANOVA for non-correlated measurements carried out [F(1, 31) = 1.02; p = 0.32].

Experiment 2

SumError

0.8

0.8

The second experiment is designed to test possible effects of
learning strategy-independent elements of TC task on performance measures in the previous experiment. In this experiment two blocks of TC were performed both under MRR condition. The protocol for the second experiment was similar
to that of experiment 1 except that subjects who performed
the task under MRR condition were asked to perform a second block with the same MRR strategy. Twenty healthy sub-

1736

0.6

1.0

0.4

0.2

0.2
Block 1 Block2
MRR MRR

**

0.6

SoError

0.4

0

Reaction Time
2.0 s

Error

1.0

Block 1 Block 2
MRR MRR

0

1.0 s

Discussion These results show a clear improvement in performing TC task in two blocks of the experiment. This improvement is reflected in both the average reaction time and
accuracy in counting task. However, in order to attribute this
difference to the change in rehearsing strategy one needs to
eliminate the possibility of improvement in performance of
the task as a result of procedural learning. The design of experiment 1 does not allow to rule out the possibility of improvement in performing the task as a result of learning those
aspects of task performance that are not related to the rehearsing strategy. All trials of MRR with low performance rate are
performed earlier during the task and high performance condition are confound with later trials. Garavan has previously
reported an improvement in reaction time as a result of continuous performance during concurrent counting of two targets
(Garavan, 1998). The design of a control experiment should
take this into consideration that if FRR as a more efficient
strategy is employed first it is hard to administer and control
for proper execution of MRR a less effective strategy in the
second block. Thus in designing a control experiment reversing the order of performance strategies or interleaving blocks
of different conditions might not be useful. The second experiment addresses this issue and provides an opportunity to test
the effect of learning on performance of the task.

jects (14 female) preformed the first block. Three subjects had
adopted a fixed order of rehearsal in performing the first block
which were eliminated from the study. Seventeen other subjects performed a second block of TC task with MRR condition. Before starting the second block subjects performed two
additional trials to balance the number of trials before starting
the second block with that of the first experiment. These extra
trials between two blocks were not included in the analysis of
results.

0s

to a systematic under counting or over counting however he
did not go further in suggesting a model for possible source of
error in this task.
In terms of reaction time measures the average RT reduced
from 1755 ms ± 197 ms (mean±STE) in the first block to
1225 ± 91 ms (mean±STE) in the second block. A oneway ANOVA for correlated measures was carried out which
yielded a significance difference between average of RTs in
two blocks (F(1,15)=10.27; p= 0.006). Reaction times were
analyzed in more detail by separating the data for counting
events related to counting a repeated target (when a target
is the same as the previous target) and the data for counting non-repeated targets. The result was submitted to a 2×2
ANOVA for repeated measures on both measurements with
repeating condition as a factor and the block identity as the
second factor. The analysis revealed a highly significant main
effect of repeating condition [F(1, 15) = 172.6; p < 0.0001]
and a significant main effect of the block identity [F(1, 15) =
10.4966; p = 0.0055]. The analysis did not detect a significant
interaction between two factors [F(1, 15) = 0.53; p = 0.47].
The observed significant effect of repeating condition is consistent with findings of previous studies in which processing
an immediately past object of working memory is shown to be
faster (Garavan, 1998; Oberauer, 2002).

Block 1 Block 2
MRR MRR

Figure 3: Results of experiment 2.

Results of this experiment first indicate that continued performance of the task affects reaction time and error measures
differently. While RT is subject to improvement the average
value of both measures of error remained in the same range.
As a result, two experiments together did not produce a conclusive result about the effect of rehearsing on improving reaction times. As Garavan had shown for the case of dualcounting task RTs can reach to their asymptotic range after
a long period of task execution and thus it seems that evaluating the impact rehearsing strategy on RTs is not reliable
unless reaching to the plateau of RTs. In contrast, in terms of
measures of error results of this experiment helped rule out an
improvement in error rates as a result of procedural learning.
This clearly helps establish this conclusion that switching to a
fixed order for rehearsal helped reduce errors notably.

Body movements patterns during the counting task
Movement behavior of eighteen subjects from both experiments (eight from the first experiment) was visually monitored
by the experimenter during performing the counting tasks for
overt body movement. Task-relevant body movements were
observed at least at one point during task execution in thirteen
subjects. Body movements were repeating and synchronized
with the process of rehearsing numbers. The body part, the
form of movement and the amplitude of movement varied between subjects. The most prevalent form of body movement
was taping or moving three fingers or pressing them against a
hard surface in order (n=5). The next prevalent form of body
movement was pointing to three locations in space by one finger or hand (n=4) (see Figure 4). Three subjects showed some
forms of foot movement. In one case the subject made overt
movement of two hands and one leg in association with rehearsing. Most of subjects even those who were aware of their
body movement did not mention it as a part of their strategy in
performing the task. Those subjects whose movement was not
visible were asked about experiencing a spatial arrangement
of numbers. Except two subject who rejected experiencing
any spatial arrangement of numbers the rest expressed either
a visualization or bodily movement such as pressing fingers
associated to three numbers in an order from left to right.

t=0.0 sec

t=0.0 sec

t=1.19 sec

t=0.48 sec

t=1.81 sec

t=0.72 sec

Figure 4: Two examples of rehearsal-synchronized overt hand
movement in triple-counting task. Subjects point to three locations.

dress2 . Despite of variation in manifestation of body movements most of these movements can be characterized by a. an
arrangement of three locations associated to three counters.
b. moving from left to right and then cycling back from the
rightmost location to the leftmost location. c. after each target
presentation subjects performed at least one cycle of movements.

General discussion
Before further discussion about how different models of WM
can explain the present data it is important to develop a deeper
understanding of the nature of these measures of error and
what they signify. Here I focus on the error in sum of counted
values as it is the least sensitive between two measures of error and yet captures the effect of the rehearsal strategy clearly
and significantly. Moreover, many factors that might cause
error in counting and reporting individual targets can be discounted for the case of sum of counted values. In fact, as long
as subjects add 1 to any of three counter values for each target presentation and report them in any order the error in sum
of counters should remain zero. Subjects had to update their
counter values after each target presentation and then press
a key to see the next target and this eliminated the chance of
missing any of counting events. The symmetric distribution of
displacement of sum of counted values relative to the sum of
real values also showed that the source of SumError can not
be a systematic missing or performing extra counting. One
possibility which is examined in more detail here is that an increased value replaces a wrong target of update. This requires
a two stage process in which once a value is retrieved from
WM to produce a new value ( by adding 1 to it) and then once
again the item associated to the old value should be retrieved
to be replaced by the new value. Note that replacing the newly
produced number with the exact same retrieved value has no
effect on SumError as long as subjects add 1 to the retrieved
value to produce the new number.
In a computer simulation of this process three variables
were selected to be increased in 9 steps. In each step the increased value was misplaces and replaced a wrong value with
a probability of p. The simulation for different values of p
shows that SumError monotonically increases with increasing
p starting from zero. Moreover, the difference between sum of
real values and sum of counted values is distributed symmetrically around zero with a variance which increases with the
amount of p (see Figure 5). This demonstrates that this model
of misplacing recently produced values with the wrong item
of WM can capture the trend in present data. Thus I focus
the rest of my discussion on explaining what different models
can offer as an alternative explanation for possible causes of
misplacing values.
Results of two experiments produced clear evidence of the
effect of rehearsing strategy on the performance of the triplecounting task measured by SumError and SoError so that
adopting a fixed order for rehearsing counter values across different trials significantly reduces the error. Rehearsing numbers in a fixed order throughout each trial was a strategy that
all subjects attempted to follow independent of the type of the

Some instances of movements which were video recorded
during the experiment can be found at the footnote web ad-

1737

2 http://tiny.cc/tc-motor

SumError

0.8
0.6

1.5

0.5

0.4
0.2

Relative frequency

2.5

some sort of cue to be effective as a factor in performance of
the task. However, this also creates a contradiction as one expect to see a disrupting effect for using the same retrieval cue
in FRR blocks contrary to what present data suggests. Altogether ability of LTM-grounded models for giving account for
this data will depend on the amendment about possible roles
of rehearsal order in retention and retrieval of information.

p=0.025
p=0.125
p=0.25

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6
p; displacement probability
Diﬀerence of sums

References

Figure 5: Simulated error of sum after nine counting events.

block. The difference between MRR and FRR blocks was
that in MRR condition subjects altered the rehearsing order
between trials while FRR condition subjects adhered to one
rehearsing order for all trials of the block. When the above
model for the source of error is considered, a viable model
should be able to explain this effect through explaining how
the chance of misplacing newly produced numbers increases
as a result of altering rehearsing order between episodes.
What indeed is represented by the order of rehearsing is
an internal representation which relates the order of three retained numbers in PL to an order for arranging three targets
of counting. This internal representation apparently is an important aspect of performing the task. The disruptive effect of
altering order of rehearsing between episodes or equivalently,
the constructive effect of using the same order for different
episodes suggests that retention of this internal representation
is mediated by LTM. Thus a short-term buffer such as the
episodic buffer in Baddeley’s multi-component model (MCWM) (Baddeley, 2000) by itself can not account for interference between trials as a result of changing rehearsal order.
When the present data is applied to Baddeley’s model it would
imply that episodic buffer also employs long-term memory elements as well as short-term buffers contrary to Baddeley’s
own description (Baddeley, 2000).
SWM model accounts for the difference between performance under FRR and MRR conditions by assuming the effect of proactive interference between traces of target-registry
state association. Since retrieving items from the rehearsal
loop is mediated by retrieving the association between targets
and states of registry system, using different associations for
different episodes in effect increases the probability of retrieving a wrong item from the rehearsal loop as a result of interference between traces of previous associations.
An important difference between explanation of SWM and
LTM-embedded models of working memory is that SWM explicitly assumes that the episodic information including three
running numbers and the state registry system are volatile and
thus short-term in nature. LTM-embedded models of working memory assume that episodic information are retained in
LTM although in active state and under spotlight of executive
attention (Cowan, 1999, 2001; Oberauer, 2009). To account
for the present data with a fully LTM-grounded model one
needs to first establish the relevance of rehearsing order to the
mechanism by which items of WM are retrieved. When the
same cue-based retrieval mechanism of LTM is assumed for
retrieving items in WM as working section of LTM then the
present data implies that the rehearsing order in PL encodes

Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. The psychology of learning and motivation, 2, 89–195.
Baddeley, A. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255(5044), 556.
Baddeley, A. (1996). Exploring the Central Executive. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A: Human Experimental Psychology, 49(1), 5. doi: 10.1080/713755608
Baddeley, A. (2000). The episodic buffer: a new component of
working memory? Trends in cognitive sciences, 4(11), 417–423.
Baddeley, A., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. The psychology of learning and motivation, 8, 47–89.
Baddeley, A., & Wilson, B. A. (2002). Prose recall and amnesia:
implications for the structure of working memory. Neuropsychologia, 40(10), 1737–1743.
Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of working memory. Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control, 62–101.
Cowan, N. (2001). The Magical Number 4 in Short-Term Memory:
A Reconsideration of Mental Storage Capacity. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 24(01), 87–114.
Davelaar, E. J., Goshen-Gottstein, Y., Ashkenazi, A., Haarmann,
H. J., & Usher, M. (2005). The demise of short-term memory
revisited: empirical and computational investigations of recency
effects. Psychological Review, 112(1), 3.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory.
Psychological Review, 102(2), 211–245.
Garavan, H. (1998, March). Serial attention within working memory. Memory & Cognition, 26(2), 263–276.
Jonides, J., Lewis, R. L., Nee, D. E., Lustig, C. A., Berman, M. G.,
& Moore, K. S. (2008, January). The Mind and Brain of ShortTerm Memory. Annual Review of Psychology, 59(1), 193–224.
Noori, N. (2015). The symbolic working memory and its function
in schematic processing of symbolic information. In The 37th annunal conference of the cognitive science society.
Oberauer, K. (2002, May). Access to information in working memory: exploring the focus of attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(3), 411–421.
Oberauer, K. (2009). Design for a working memory. Psychology of
learning and motivation, 51, 45–100.
Olson, I. R., Page, K., Moore, K. S., Chatterjee, A., & Verfaellie,
M. (2006, April). Working Memory for Conjunctions Relies on
the Medial Temporal Lobe. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26(17),
4596 –4601.
O’Reilly, R. C., Braver, T. S., & Cohen, J. D. (n.d.). A biologically
based computational model of working memory. In A. Miyake &
P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory (chap. 11).
Ranganath, C., & Blumenfeld, R. S. (2005, August). Doubts
about double dissociations between short- and long-term memory.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(8), 374–380.
Ruchkin, D. S., Grafman, J., Cameron, K., & Berndt, R. S. (2003).
Working memory retention systems: A state of activated longterm memory. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Scoville, W. B., & Milner, B. (1957, February). Loss of recent
memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 20(1), 11–21.
Shallice, T., & Warrington, E. K. (1970, May). Independent functioning of verbal memory stores: a neuropsychological study. ,
22(2), 261–273.
Unsworth, N., & Engle, R. (2007). The nature of individual differences in working memory capacity: active maintenance in primary
memory and controlled search from secondary memory. Psychological review, 114(1), 104.

1738

