Young Children’s Self-Directed Information Gathering on Touchscreens
Eric Partridge? (epartrid@u.rochester.edu)
Matthew G. McGovern (mgmcgove@buffalo.edu)
Amanda Yung?,× (ayung@cvs.rochester.edu)
Celeste Kidd?,× (ckidd@bcs.rochester.edu)
?


Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, Meliora Hall, Rochester, NY 14627-0268
Department of Computer Science, State University of New York at Buffalo, Davis Hall, Buffalo, NY 14260 USA
× Center for Visual Science, University of Rochester, Meliora Hall, Rochester, NY 14627-0270
Abstract

Self-directed learning, defined as the ability to choose what to
learn about, represents a unique educational opportunity. We
test the effect of self-direction on learning outcomes in children (N=32, age range=3-5 years) in a novel word-learning
task conducted via touchscreen tablets. Study participants
were randomly assigned to one of two learning conditions: one
in which learning was self-directed and one in which it was
not. Children in the self-directed condition performed better
on a recognition task, controlling for subject and item effects.
Our results suggest that self-directed learning facilitates information retention in children, in line with previous work that
has found improved information retention using self-directed
learning paradigms in adults (e.g., Markant, DuBrow, Davachi,
& Gureckis, 2014).
Keywords: Learning; cognitive development; developmental
experimentation.

Introduction
The idea that people learn best from material that they select
has been pervasive across the fields of education (e.g., Bruner,
Jolly, & Sylva, 1976; Montessori, 1912; Piaget, 1930), developmental psychology (e.g., Berlyne, 1960), and cognitive
science (e.g., Gureckis & Markant, 2012). Specifically, selfdirected learning—defined here as the ability to choose what
to learn about (see Gureckis & Markant, 2012 for a review)—
can provide the learner with volitional control over order and
timing of stimuli presentation, sequence of search decisions,
and validating or refuting hypotheses.
Early research on self-directed learning largely considered
its potential in adult learners (e.g., Brockett & Hiemstra,
1991; Brookfield, 1984; Tough, 1978). Some recent work has
investigated the potential of self-directed learning in younger
populations (e.g., Metcalfe, 2002; Nor & Saeednia, 2008);
however, most focuses on evaluating whether self-directed
learning benefits the academic performance of postsecondary
students (e.g., Chou & Chen, 2008).
Touchscreen tablets have increasingly been utilized in primary and secondary classrooms, with many school districts
providing tablets to all students. Yet quantitative research
on the use of tablets for educational purposes has not yet
carefully investigated specific causal mechanisms that might
yield improved learning, instead investigating the effectiveness of content-related (e.g., writing, reading, spelling) applications in the classroom (e.g., Brown & Harmon, 2013).
Work that directly investigates the mechanisms underlying

self-directed learning—especially in young children—is extremely limited. This work is crucial because understanding
how self-directed learning promotes better learning outcomes
is key to designing better educational curricula that maximize
children’s learning potential.
One theorized mechanism posited for explaining the benefits of self-directed learning relates to informational choice
and pacing. Allowing a learner to choose the order, duration, and temporal presentation of new information could
boost learning because learners are theorized to have mechanisms that guide their attention towards material best-suited
for learning (e.g., Berlyne, 1960; Dember & Earl, 1957;
Kidd, Piantadosi, & Aslin, 2012, 2014; Kinney & Kagan,
1976; Piantadosi, Kidd, & Aslin, 2014). Studies with adults,
for example, have demonstrated that they strategically select
information that maximally reduces uncertainty about category boundaries (e.g., Bardhan, Aslin, & Tanenhaus, 2010;
Markant & Gureckis, 2010) or reduces the hypothesis space
during complex rule learning (e.g., Markant Gureckis, 2012).
A common line of research along this theme in the education literature is the study of academic study time allocation in both adults (e.g., Metcalfe, 2002) and children (e.g.,
Dufresne & Kobasigawa, 1989). This line of research investigates how the decisions students make about what they study
and how much time they devote to different topics affects
learning outcomes. There is also evidence that children—like
adults—direct their attention towards material that reduces
uncertainty and improves learning (e.g., Schulz & Bonawitz,
2007). As an example, Bonawitz, van Schijndel, Friel, and
Schulz (2012) demonstrated that children preferentially play
with toys that violate their expectations.
Another theorized mechanism as to why self-directed
learning leads to better learning outcomes is that it increases
the level of engagement learners have with the learning material. Typically, these studies rely on either self-report or
reports from educators in order to estimate learners’ levels
of engagement (e.g., Henderson & Yeow, 2012; Milman,
Carlson-Bancroft, & Boogart, 2012) rather than objective,
quantitative measures. Further, and more problematically,
these studies do not directly test whether the increased levels of engagement themselves yield better learning outcomes.
Based on this previous literature, we would expect that
self-directed learning should improve learning outcomes in
young children. However, no previous study has quantita-

1835

tively evaluated whether self-directed learning yields better
learning outcomes controlling for the content of the information presented in children. In our study, we present the same
information to two groups of young children (3- and 4-yearolds) and manipulate whether their learning is self-directed or
not. In other words, all children see the same total amount of
learning material, but half select which learning material they
would like to hear directly.

Experiment
The aim of this study was to determine whether self-direction
increased the retention of novel object-word pairings when
tested on a touchscreen tablet. Participants were trained in
one of two conditions: choice and no choice. The choice condition allowed participants to tap directly on the toy object
while the participants in the no-choice condition could only
tap a button in the center of the screen (see Figure 2). The
button was present for both conditions to maintain visual consistency; however, it was grayed out in the choice condition
to indicate it did nothing (see Figure 2 for difference). All
participants were tested without parents in the room to avoid
parental influence on children’s behavior.

Figure 1: Stimuli paired with their novel names.

Table 1: Sentences recorded for the experiment.

Participants
We recruited 32 children (M = 3 years; 11 months, range
= 3;0 4;11) from the Rochester Baby Lab database. Children were randomly assigned to either the choice condition or
the no-choice condition (N = 16 per condition). The groups
were matched in age and distribution of gender. All participants had normal hearing and vision, according to parental
report, and heard at least 90% English in the home. Three
children were excluded from final analyses because they had
to leave the testing room unexpectedly (e.g., to use the bathroom) midway through the study (N = 3).

Materials
The study was run on an 11.6” Samsung Tablet PC Model
XE700T1A running Ubuntu 14.04. The stimuli were photos
of 15 novel toy characters that were randomly paired with
novel two-syllable words that followed the phonotactic rules
of English (Figure 1). The words were chosen to be maximally distinguishable, with phonologically distinct onsets
and no repeated syllables. The toy characters were chosen
as objects to be maximally interesting and engaging to the
children. All stimuli were presented on the touchscreen using Kelpy, the Kid Experimental Library in Python, which is
available under the GNU Public License (Piantadosi, 2012).
Spoken sentences used in the experiment were recorded by
an adult female in a soundproof booth.

Procedure
The study contained four blocks, each with a training and testing phase. The toy objects were presented during the training
phase, along with their lexical labels. Productive taps (toy
object in choice, button in no-choice) elicited a sentence containing the label for the object at the end. Once tapped, the

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Training sentences
”Look it’s a
.”
”Look at the
.”
”Say hello to the
Memory test prompt
”Can you find the

.”
?”

toy-to-be-labeled expanded in size to draw the participants
attention to the correct referrent (see Figure 2). Each time a
toy object was tapped, a sentence—from Sentences 1-3 (see
Table 1)—labeled the toy until it had been tapped 6 times
in total. After the sixth tap and labeling sentence, the toy
changed to grayscale to indicate that it could not be tapped or
presented again (as shown for the “kogay” in the bottom two
panels of Figure 2). The training phase ended when all toy
objects on the screen had been tapped/labeled 6 times in total
and were all grayscale.
The testing phase followed the training phase. All 15 toys
were presented on the screen at once. Children were asked
to find each toy that was presented during the training phase
after the appropriate verbal prompt (e.g., “Can you find the
kogay?”, sentence 4 in Table 1). The locations and presentation order of the 15 toys were randomized across trials and
participants. After a guess was made, the next verbal prompt
would be asked. No feedback was given to the participant
after a guess was entered; there were no changes in the appearance or behavior of toys during this phase. It is important
to note here that chance performance on this task was thus
very low; if children touched toys randomly during the test
phase, their accuracy would be 1/15.
The experiment was structured so that each successive
block raised the difficulty by increasing the number of toys

1836

Choi
ce

NoChoi
ce

Figure 2: Example displays for 4-object training block for the choice condition (left) and the no-choice condition (right).
presented. The first training block presented a single toy, followed by training blocks with 2, 4, and 8 toys, respectively.
The toys that were presented to children across the training
blocks were always different, such that each toy was trained
and tested in only one block, with no repetitions. Figure 2
includes examples of training screens for the 4-toy block in
both the choice and no-choice conditions. All children progressed through all blocks, regardless of their performance
on previous blocks. This design—with blocks of increasing difficulty—ensured that participants would not perform
at ceiling in order to give us the best possible chance of observing an effect due to condition.

toy increased), an age effect (accuracy increasing for older
children), and possibly an effect for the interaction between
condition and block.

Analysis
The primary analysis investigated the effect of self-direction
on learning outcomes. We hypothesized that self-direction
would have a positive impact on learning, and that children
in the choice condition would be more accurate in the toyidentification task than children in the no-choice condition.
To assess the effect of self-direction, we ran a generalized linear mixed effects regression predicting accuracy as a function
of condition (choice, no choice), block (1-, 2-, 4-, or 8-toy,
treated ordinally), age (scaled), interaction between condition
and block, and random intercepts by subject. Our primary
focus and expectation was a condition effect, with accuracy
significantly predicted by condition. Secondary expectations
included a block effect (accuracy decreasing as blocks per

A second analysis tested whether children across the two
conditions demonstrated different degrees of engagement
with the task as a function of the condition type (choice
or no choice. If self-direction causes learners to more
readily engage with learning material—as previous studies
based on subjective reports by educators and students have
suggested—we would expect children to be more engaged
during the choice condition than the no-choice condition. We
chose response times as an objective measure of task engagement. We recorded children’s response time to each question
during the testing phase, starting from the onset of the target word (e.g., the beginning of the “k” sound in “kogay” in
the memory-task question “Can you find the kogay?”). We
chose this point because it was the earliest moment at which
children could potentially identify the target toy. We hypothesized that participants would be more engaged during
self-directed learning, and would thus exhibit faster response
times in the choice condition due to increased interest and
attention to the task.
Outliers were removed from the data before it was entered
into the two analyses described above. Response-time outliers were defined as 2.5 standard deviations above the mean
(M=6.33 s, SD=13.35 s); thus, all trials with a time greater

1837

Table 2: Generalized linear mixed model results.
Factor
Intercept
NoChoice
Block
Age(scaled)
NoChoice:Block

Figure 3: Accuracy on testing phase by block and condition
(choice, no choice).
than 39.69 s were excluded from further analysis (N=7, adjusted M=5.04 s, adjusted SD=4.18 s). The discarded outliers
were scattered across children and appeared approximately
equally distributed across the choice and no-choice conditions.

Results
Accuracy
Testing phase accuracies per block and between conditions
are shown in Figure 3. Accuracy trends across condition
show that children perform better in the choice condition than
the no-choice condition on earlier blocks, but that there is no
difference on the later, more difficult testing blocks. Accuracy also decreases overall as the blocks progress and become
more difficult, as expected.
Table 2 details the results of the mixed-effect model. Children performed significantly worse in the no-choice condition as compared to the choice condition (β=-2.52, z=-2.58,
p<0.01). Children also performed worse on later blocks—
which required remembering more word-object pairings—
than on earlier blocks (β=-1.67, z=-6.88, p<0.0001)1 . Finally, there was a significant interaction between the nochoice condition and block (β=0.80, z=2.74, p<0.006). This
significant interaction indicates that the improved performance of the choice condition over the no-choice condition wanes in later blocks, when the memory task is made
more difficult by increased numbers of objects and children
progress further into the testing session. Age was not a sig1 Block was ordinally ranked in this analysis, but we note that
numerically ranking instead does not change the pattern of results
that we report here.

Coef.

4.55
-2.52
-1.67
0.04
0.80

SE
0.80
0.98
0.24
0.16
0.29

z
5.69
-2.58
-6.88
0.26
2.74

p
<1.3e-08 ***
<0.01 **
<6.0e-12 ***
0.79
<0.006 **

nificant predictor of performance in our sample of child participants (β=0.04, z=0.26, p=0.79).
These results support the hypothesis that self-direction facilitates learning, as children in the choice condition exhibited
better overall learning than those in the no-choice condition.
However, as Figure 3 shows, this effect is driven by the early
blocks with fewer objects. This suggests that the effect either only appears early in learning or for small numbers of
objects, which are indistinguishable given the current experimental design.
Importantly, the fact that children perform better in the
choice than the no-choice condition suggests that the boost
in performance is likely related to differences in engagement
across the two conditions. In the single-object test block—in
which children were only learning the name for a single toy
object—the children did not differ in terms of the order in
which the information was selected. In both conditions, children only heard the name of the single object on the screen.
The only factor that differed in this testing block was whether
children touched the object itself to hear its label (choice condition) or whether they touched a button to hear the object’s
label (no-choice condition). It is somewhat surprising, then,
that this subtle difference detectably impacted children’s performance in this block.
To further investigate the potential difference in engagement across the conditions (as evident from the difference in
the first testing block), response times were analyzed.

Response times
Though the difference across conditions in the single-object
block suggests that children were differentially engaged with
the learning material, this difference had no detectable impact
on children’s reaction times across the two conditions. Children made selections at approximately the same speed across
the choice condition (M=4.10 s) and the no-choice condition
(M=4.07 s). These means were not significantly different
from each other, according to a Wilcoxon signed-rank test
(W=22297, p=0.65).
Though differences in engagement did not appear in reaction times, reaction time is just one of many ways differences
in engagement could be manifested. Other independent measures (e.g., visual fixation, physiological changes) may be
needed to test our interpretation of engagement as the most
likely mechanism underlying observed differences in performance across conditions.

1838

Conclusion and Discussion
These results provide evidence that self-directed learning can
enhance short-term memory retention for novel object-word
pairings in children. The main effect of condition indicated
that self-direction positively affected accuracy on the memory task across conditions, though this effect was moderated
by block and, correspondingly, task difficulty. In the final
block—the one that required children to track and remember the most object-word pairings—children performed near
floor across both conditions. The observed difference across
conditions in the single-object block interestingly suggests
the boost in performance from self-selection is likely due
to differential degrees of engagement across conditions—not
the ability to select the order of incoming information.
A key aspect of this work is that it demonstrated the benefits of self-directed learning in children in a controlled context. Much of the previous research with children has taken
place in educational settings in which self-direction was confounded with other variables, such as the modality of information presentation. Our study carefully controlled for as
many extraneous variables as possible—including the modality, content, and duration of the learning material—across the
choice and no-choice conditions. Both groups of children
saw and heard exactly the same materials, exactly the same
amount of time, but only the choice group had the ability to
select the information to be presented directly.
Further work will be required to determine how selfdirection interacts with other factors known to impact learning, such as task difficulty. These findings are in line with previous work that has reported better learning in self-directed
conditions with adults (e.g., Markant, DuBrow, Davachi, &
Gureckis, 2014). Broadly, these results demonstrate that the
ability to select information enhances learning for young children, likely due to the increased engagement associated with
self-direction itself.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Madeline Pelz for assistance with
stimuli and suggestions for procedural designs; Holly Palmeri
and the research assistants at the Rochester Baby Lab for assistance scheduling and running child participants; Steve Piantadosi, Holly Palmeri, Madeline Pelz, Shirlene Wade, and
the members of the Kidd Lab at the University of Rochester
for helpful discussion and suggestions; and the University of
Rochester for funding for this project. This research was supported by an award from the Discover Grant Program at the
University of Rochester to the first and last authors.

References
Bardhan, N. P., Aslin, R., & Tanenhaus, M. (2010). Adults’
self-directed learning of an artificial lexicon: The dynamics of neighborhood reorganization. In S. Ohlsson &
R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 364–368).

Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Conflict, arousal, and curiosity. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Bonawitz, E. B., Schijndel, T. J. van, Friel, D., & Schulz, L.
(2012). Children balance theories and evidence in exploration, explanation, and learning. Cognitive Psychology,
64(4), 215–234.
Brockett, R. G., & Hiemstra, R. (1991). Self-Direction in
Adult Learning: Perspectives on Theory, Research, and
Practice. ERIC.
Brookfield, S. (1984). Self-directed adult learning: A critical
paradigm. Adult Education Quarterly, 35(2), 59–71.
Brown, M., & Harmon, M. T. (2013). iPad Intervention with
At-Risk Preschoolers: Mobile technology in the classroom.
Learning Space: Perspectives on Technology and Literacy
in a Changing Educational Landscape, 14(2), 56.
Bruner, J. S., Jolly, A., & Sylva, K. (1976). Play: Its Role in
Development and Evolution. New York: Penguin Books.
Chou, P.-N., & Chen, W.-F. (2008). Exploratory study of the
relationship between self-directed learning and academic
performance in a web-based learning environment. Online
Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 11(1).
Dember, W. N., & Earl, R. W. (1957). Analysis of exploratory, manipulatory, and curiosity behaviors. Psychological Review, 64(2), 91.
Dufresne, A., & Kobasigawa, A. (1989). Children’s spontaneous allocation of study time: Differential and sufficient
aspects. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 47(2),
274–296.
Gureckis, T. M., & Markant, D. B. (2012). Self-directed
learning a cognitive and computational perspective. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(5), 464–481.
Henderson, S., & Yeow, J. (2012). iPad in Education: A
case study of iPad adoption and use in a primary school. In
Proceedings of the 45th Hawaii International Conference
on System science (pp. 78–87).
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., & Aslin, R. N. (2012). The
goldilocks effect: Human infants allocate attention to visual sequences that are neither too simple nor too complex.
PLOS ONE, 7(5), e36399.
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., & Aslin, R. N. (2014). The
goldilocks effect in infant auditory attention. Child Development, 85(5), 1795–1804.
Kinney, D. K., & Kagan, J. (1976). Infant attention to auditory discrepancy. Child Development, 155–164.
Markant, D., DuBrow, S., Davachi, L., & Gureckis, T. M.
(2014). Deconstructing the effect of self-directed study
on episodic memory. Memory & Cognition, 42(8), 1211–
1224.
Markant, D., & Gureckis, T. M. (2010). Category learning through active sampling. In Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 248–
253).
Markant, D., & Gureckis, T. M. (2012). One piece at a time:
Learning complex rules through self-directed sampling. In
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive

1839

Science Society.
Metcalfe, J. (2002). Is study time allocated selectively to
a region of proximal learning? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 131(3), 349.
Milman, N. B., Carlson-Bancroft, A., & Boogart, A. V.
(2012). iPads in a preK-4th Independent School. In Proceedings of the International Society for Technology in Education Conference, San Diego, California.
Montessori, M. (1912). The Montessori Method. New York:
Frederick Stokes.
Nor, M. M., & Saeednia, Y. (2008). Exploring Self-Directed
Learning among Children. World Academy of Science, Engineering, and Technology, 46, 559–564.
Piaget, J. (1930). The child’s conception of physical reality.
London: Routledge& Kegan Paul.
Piantadosi, S. (2012). Kelpy: A Free Library for Child Experimentation in Python.
Piantadosi, S. T., Kidd, C., & Aslin, R. (2014). Rich Analysis
and Rational Models: Inferring individual behavior from
infant looking data. Developmental Science, 17(3), 321–
337.
Schulz, L. E., & Bonawitz, E. B. (2007). Serious fun:
Preschoolers engage in more exploratory play when evidence is confounded. Developmental Psychology, 43(4),
1045.
Tough, A. (1978). Major Learning Efforts: Recent research
and future directions. Adult Education Quarterly, 28(4),
250–263.

1840

