Semantic chaining and efficient communication: The case of container names
Yang Xu (yang xu ch@berkeley.edu) Terry Regier (terry.regier@berkeley.edu)
Department of Linguistics
University of California, Berkeley

Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology
Lehigh University
Abstract
Semantic categories in the world’s languages often reflect a
historical process of chaining: A name for one idea is extended
to a conceptually related idea, and from there on to other ideas,
producing a chain of concepts that all bear the same name.
The beginning and end points of such a chain might in principle be conceptually rather dissimilar. There is also evidence
supporting a contrasting picture: Languages tend to support
efficient, informative communication, often through semantic
categories in which all exemplars are similar. Here, we explore
this tension through computational analyses of existing crosslanguage naming and sorting data from the domain of household containers. We find: (1) formal evidence for historical semantic chaining, and (2) evidence that systems of categories in
this domain nonetheless support near-optimally efficient communication. Our results suggest that semantic chaining may
be constrained by the functional need for efficient, informative
communication.
Keywords: semantic variation; artifact categories; semantic
chaining; historical semantics; semantic universals; efficient
communication

Introduction
Languages vary widely in the ways they partition human experience into categories. For example, some languages use a
single color term to cover both green and blue (Berlin & Kay,
1969), and some languages have spatial terms that highlight
notions such as “attachment by spiking” (Levinson & Meira,
2003)—a notion that is not captured in the basic spatial lexicon of English. Yet at the same time, many logically possible
semantic categories are not attested, and similar categories
appear in unrelated languages. What explains this pattern of
wide but constrained variation?
An existing proposal holds that this variation may be
explained by the functional need for efficient communication—that is, the need to communicate precisely, using minimal cognitive resources. On this account, the different
category systems that we see across languages constitute
different means to this same functional end. This idea
has accounted for cross-language variation in semantic domains including color (Regier, Kay, & Khetarpal, 2007), kinship (Kemp & Regier, 2012), space (Khetarpal, Neveu, Majid, Michael, & Regier, 2013) and number (Xu & Regier,
2014). It also coheres naturally with a recent focus on efficient communication as an explanation for other aspects
of language (Piantadosi, Tily, & Gibson, 2011; Fedzechkina, Jaeger, & Newport, 2012; Smith, Tamariz, & Kirby,
2013). Importantly for our present purposes, in several of

the above studies of semantic categories, efficient communication is shown to be supported by tightly-clustered coherent
categories in which all exemplars tend to be similar to each
other.
This proposal appears to conflict with a well-established
and influential idea: that semantic categories reflect a historical process of chaining, whereby a name for one idea
is extended to a related idea, and then on to further ideas,
resulting in a chained structure in which the later items in
the chain may have little similarity to the early ones (Lakoff,
1987; Brugman, 1988; Heit, 1992; Bybee, Perkins, & Pagliuca, 1994; Hopper & Traugott, 2003). For example, it has
been suggested that such semantic chaining over historical
time may explain the extensions of English container names
such as bottle and jar. Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi and Wang
(1999) found that the extensions for such container names
include exemplars that are dissimilar to exemplars within the
category on average, but are very similar to certain individual exemplars, consistent with the idea of chaining. Sloman,
Malt and Fridman (2001) found that a computational model
that captures chain-like structures accounted well for the English naming data. These analyses examined the data without
reference to historical information, and thus did not directly
assess whether the data are consistent with chaining over historical time. But they do appear to challenge the proposal that
semantic systems support communicative efficiency through
categories in which exemplars tend to be similar to each other.
Two important questions are left open by this earlier work.
First, is there evidence for a genuinely historical process of
chaining in container naming? And second, if so, does chaining in this domain in fact hamper efficient communication?
Or is this semantic domain, like others, shaped by the need
for efficient communication, despite semantic chaining? The
studies we present address these questions.
In what follows, we summarize the theory of efficient communication, and demonstrate that chaining is in principle a
challenge to this theory. We also briefly describe the crosslanguage data on which we rely. We then present two studies
based on those data. The first study tests for historical chaining in the naming of containers, and the second study tests
whether container naming across languages is communicatively efficient. To preview our results, we find evidence for
historical chaining, yet we also find that despite this chaining, the container naming systems of three languages all support near-optimally informative communication. We con-

2709

clude that semantic chaining may be constrained by the need
for categories to be informative.

Formal presentation of theory
In this section, we present the theory of efficient communication in formal terms, following the formulation of Regier
et al. (2015). We then demonstrate that chaining can lead to
inefficient communication.
Consider the communicative scenario of Figure 1. Here,
the speaker has a target object in mind—in this case, a specific kind of bottle—and wishes to communicate that idea to
the listener. To that end, the speaker utters the word bottle.
Given that utterance, the listener then attempts to mentally reconstruct the speaker’s intended meaning. Because the word
bottle covers a range of possible objects, the listener’s representation is inexact and is shown as a probability distribution extending over that range. We take a communicative system to to be informative to the extent that it supports accurate
mental reconstruction by the listener of the speaker’s intended
meaning; that is, reconstruction that is as exact as possible.
Speaker

Listener

Finally, we take the overall communicative cost of a system to
be the expected communicative cost incurred in communicating about the domain. This is the sum of the unit costs of all
possible targets in the domain, each weighted by its relative
frequency of occurrence in usage, or need probability N(i):
E[C] = ∑ C(i)N(i)

(3)

i

We take a communicative system to be informative to the extent that it exhibits low communicative cost E[C]. We take the
complexity of a system to be the number of lexical categories
in the system. Finally, we take a system of categories to be
communicatively efficient to the extent that it it is more informative than most logically possible hypothetical systems of
the same complexity.

Chaining and inefficient communication
Semantic chaining can give rise to inefficient communication,
as illustrated in Figure 2.
Panel (a) of this figure shows two artificial category systems that partition the same set of 8 objects (shown as black
dots). The category system in the left half of the panel divides
these objects into two non-chained (or clustered) categories.
The system in the right half of the panel divides the same set
of objects into two chained categories. The complexity of the
two systems is the same (2 categories in each system), but
they differ in informativeness. Panel (b) shows the commu-

“bottle”

a)

Non−chained categories
A

Chained categories

B
A

Figure 1: A simple communicative scenario.

B

b)
We model the mental representations of both speaker and
listener as probability distributions. Unlike the listener’s distribution, the speaker’s distribution S is certain: it consists of
a point mass centered on the target, capturing our assumption that the speaker is certain of the meaning she wishes to
convey. Following Regier et al.’s (2015) analysis of color
naming, we take the listener distribution L(i) to be based on
the similarity (assessed empirically) of exemplar i to all exemplars in the category named by the word w:
L(i) ∝

∑ sim(i, j)

Number of systems

7

Hypothetical
Non−chained
Chained

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

2.4

2.6

2.8

Communicative cost

(1)

j∈w

We then take the unit communicative cost C(i) of communicating about a target object i using a particular communicative system to be a measure of the discrepancy between the
listener distribution L and the speaker distribution S: specifically the Kullback-Leibler divergence DKL (S||L) between
these two distributions. In the case of speaker certainty, this
reduces to surprisal:
C(i) = DKL (S||L) = ∑ S( j) log2
j

1
S( j)
= log2
L( j)
L(i)

(2)

Figure 2: Chaining and communicative inefficiency. a) Nonchained and chained systems of equal complexity (2 categories each). b) Communicative costs of these systems and
hypothetical systems of equal complexity.
nicative costs of these two systems, compared with the costs
of all hypothetical partitions of the 8 objects into 2 groups
of size 4.1 It can be seen that relative to these hypothetical
1 In computing cost, we assumed that the distance between
horizontally or vertically neighboring objects in the grid is 1,

2710

systems, the non-chained system from panel (a) is optimally
informative for this level of complexity, and thus communicatively efficient, whereas the chained system is not. This
demonstrates that semantic chaining has the potential to yield
inefficient communication, as formalized here.

Data
We reanalyze data from Malt et al. (1999) on the naming
and perceived similarity of household containers. The stimulus set for this research consisted of photographs of 60 household containers, representing a wide range of bottles, jars, and
similar containers. Figure 3 shows a sample of these objects.

panding over historical time? We test for historical chaining
over all three languages in the dataset.
We considered three common categorization models from
the literature, specified in Table 1: a chaining model, a clustering model, and a majority vote model. The chaining model
is a nearest-neighbor (or 1-nearest-neighbor) model, which
assigns a target item to the category that includes the exemplar most similar to that target item; this is the model that
was explored by Sloman et al. (2001). The clustering model
is based on Equation 1, and assigns a target item to the category whose examplars exhibit the greatest similarity to the
target overall. The majority vote model is a baseline model
that assigns a target item to the category that has the most
exemplars, without reference to any intrinsic relations among
exemplars. Similarities sim(i, j) were determined by the pilesort data, and the category (word) w for each container object
was determined by the modal head noun that was used to label it in the naming data.3
Table 1: Summary of models. In the rules below, i is the
target exemplar, j is any exemplar other than i, w is a lexical
category, sim(·, ·) is the similarity between two exemplars,
and |w| is the size of category w.
Model
Chaining
Clustering
Majority vote

Figure 3: Sample stimuli from Malt et al. (1999).
We used two types of data that had been collected relative
to this stimulus set. The first type is linguistic. Native speakers of American English, Mandarin Chinese, and Argentinian
Spanish were instructed to name each container stimulus in
their native language, giving whatever name they felt was
best.2 The second type of data is from a pile-sorting task. We
used pile-sorting by English and Chinese speakers from the
study by Malt et al. (1999) (for which data were retrievable),
and we focused on sorting based on overall similarity of the
containers (i.e. both the physical appearances and functions
of the containers). We aggregated pile-sorting responses from
subjects across languages, and took the similarity sim(i, j) of
any two objects i and j to be the proportion of all participants
who sorted those two objects into the same pile. These naming and similarity measures were used in our analyses below.

Study 1: Historical chaining
In our first study, we asked whether these data provide evidence for historical chaining. That is, has the current extension of the names been developed through a chain of uses exthat the similarity between any two objects i, j is sim(i, j) =
exp(−distance(i, j)), and that need probability n(i) is uniform
across all objects i.
2 Naming data were collected from 28 native speakers of English,
all students at Lehigh University in the United States, 51 native
speakers of Spanish, all from Comahue National University in Argentina, and 50 native speakers of Mandarin Chinese, 10 of whom
were students at Lehigh and 40 of whom were students at Shanghai
University in China.

Categorization rule
i → the category w of arg max j sim(i, j)
i → arg maxw ∑ j∈w sim(i, j)
i → arg maxw |w|

Each model was tested against the data in a manner that recapitulates the addition of new exemplars to categories over
historical time. We began by time-stamping the name of each
container item, providing an estimate of when that item appeared in history, as follows. For each container item in
the dataset, we determined the modal modifier- and headnoun phrase for that item (e.g. juice bottle) from the naming task, and performed a corpus search for that phrase in a
large historical corpus, the Google Ngram American English
corpus (Michel et al., 2011), over the period 1800-2000, and
recorded the frequency of use of that phrase for each year. For
each container phrase, we then applied a change-point detection algorithm (Kass, Eden, & Brown, 2014, sections 14.2.1
and 14.2.2) to these historical frequency traces, to determine
the year in which each phrase experienced a substantial rise
in frequency from a baseline of zero; we took that year to be
the date of emergence of that object with respect to the head
noun. We then simulated the sequential emergence of these
exemplars in history, and asked which of the three models
specified above best accounted for categorizations found in
the naming data.
For each model, this predictive analysis proceeded as follows. We first seeded the model with the earliest item that
appeared in history. As each remaining item became avail-

2711

3 E.g.

the category for juice bottle would be bottle in English.

100

Chaining
Chaining (randomized)
Clustering
Majority vote

Predictive accuracy (%)

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

English

Spanish

Chinese

Figure 4: Summary of historical analysis of chaining. Error bars (standard error) are shown only for the case of randomized
chaining, as that is the only case in which multiple simulations were run.
able, we used the model to predict its category membership,
based only on items already encountered and holding out the
category labels for the current item and all upcoming items.
Whenever the model mis-predicted the category membership
of an item due to encountering a novel category (one not yet
represented by already-considered exemplars), we introduced
that category and thus expanded the repertoire of categories
that the model had to choose from among beyond that point
in time. We then asked which model best predicted the data,
when presented in historical order.
Figure 4 summarizes the predictive accuracies of these
models. The results show that the chaining model accounts
for the data better than the two alternative models, supporting
the idea that historical chaining is involved in the formation
of these lexical categories. We also wished to test whether the
good fit of the chaining model is dependent on the historical
time-stamps provided by our corpus searches. To that end, we
re-ran the chaining model, but with the temporal sequence of
exemplars randomized. We ran 100,000 such randomized sequences for each attested language. For all three languages,
the mean prediction of the chaining model on the randomized historical sequences was significantly worse than with
the real historical sequence (p < 0.01), suggesting that the
success of this model does reflect the actual historical emergence of these items.4
These results demonstrate that the chaining model accounts
well for the diachronic development of the extension of container categories. This outcome supports the proposal that
historical semantic chaining is involved in the formation of
container lexical categories.
Figure 5 illustrates the historical semantic chaining in the
development of the English category bottle, on our analysis.
4 A separate followup analysis showed that the chaining model
does not outperform the other models on all datasets, suggesting
that its performance on the Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi, and Wang
(1999) dataset is attributable to a genuine match between the data
and the assumptions of the model.

We observe that chaining in this real-world category is interestingly different from the idealized case we considered earlier in Figure 2. Instead of forming a long chain, “natural” semantic chaining in this instance takes the form of short chains
grounded in hub exemplars (e.g. iodine bottle and baby bottle), which form local clusters within the category. These
short chains might help to preserve local clustering properties of a lexical category, in contrast with the idealized linear chain that can extend indefinitely with no local constraint.
But whether such natural chaining structures indeed support
efficient communication is a question we will test in the next
study.

Study 2: Chaining and efficient communication
We have seen that semantic chaining has the potential to
yield inefficient communication, and that the container naming data of Malt et al. (1999) show evidence of semantic
chaining over time. Left unaddressed is whether this natural semantic chaining in fact prevents efficient, informative
communication.
The data of Malt et al. (1999) have not previously been
analyzed with respect to whether they support efficient communication about containers. We conduct that analysis here,
separately for each of the three languages (English, Spanish,
and Chinese), using the computational formulation of efficient communication specified above. As before, we took
the category system of each language to be determined by
the modal head noun that was used to label it in the naming data, and we took similarities sim(i, j) to be determined
by the pile-sort data. We estimated the need probability n(i)
for each item i using frequencies of container names (modifier + head noun) from the Google Ngram American English
corpus; specifically, we took frequencies at year 1999 which
matches the year of publication of the original work by Malt
et al. (1999). We then applied Equations 1 through 3 to obtain the communicative cost for the container naming system
in each language.

2712

bottle of aspirin (1922)
bottle of vitamins
(1939)
spray bottle (1962)

iodine bottle (1857)

plastic bottle (1952)
glass bottle (1801)
baby bottle (1928)
squeeze bottle (1942)

detergent bottle (1954)

Figure 5: Semantic chaining in the English bottle category. Container names are annotated with dates identified from the corpus
searches. Spatial proximity between two items roughly corresponds to their judged similarity. Arrows indicate the trajectory
traced by the chaining model.
We take a category system to be near-optimally efficient if
it is more informative than most hypothetical systems with the
same number of categories. Thus, in order to assess the communicative efficiency of the English, Spanish, and Chinese
container naming systems, we need to compare the communicative cost of each to the costs of a large set of hypothetical
systems with the same number of categories as those reported
by Malt et al. (1999) for this stimulus set (English: 7 categories; Spanish: 15 categories; Chinese: 5 categories). We
also constrained the size of each category in a hypothetical
system to be equivalent to that in the corresponding attested
target system; this constraint ensures that attested and hypothetical categories are identical in number and size, and differ
only in the exemplars that are assigned to those categories.
Concretely, for each target language (English, Spanish,
Chinese), we constructed hypothetical comparison systems
through simulated chaining in similarity space (cf. Khetarpal
et al., 2013), as follows. We began by randomly choosing
an initial exemplar and assigning it to an arbitrary category.
We then extended that category to a new exemplar, which was
selected by sampling exemplars in proportion to their similarity with the existing exemplar. We then repeated this chaining process, where the probability of a category being chosen
for expansion was proportional to the number of remaining
(as-yet-unlabeled) exemplars in that category. This process
continued until we had assigned each exemplar to a category,
such that each category had the same number of exemplars
as in the attested target system. This procedure effectively
generated a hypothetical chained system in the same similarity space as an attested system. Our use of chained systems
as hypothetical competitors provides a conservative test, because it excludes from consideration unnatural-seeming hypothetical systems with disconnected (non-contiguous) categories.
For each of the three target languages, we created 100,000

such hypothetical chained systems, and we then compared
the communicative cost of the attested target language to the
costs of the hypothetical systems using the formulation presented earlier. The results are shown in Figure 6. Each of the
three attested systems is significantly less costly than its corresponding class of hypothetical chained systems (English:
p < 0.001; Spanish: p < 0.0001; Chinese: p < .03). We
conclude from these results that although these systems do
exhibit semantic chaining, each of them is nonetheless highly
informative relative to a large class of comparable hypothetical chained systems.

Discussion
In this paper, we have presented two related contributions.
First, we have provided what is, to our knowledge, the first
computational demonstration of historical semantic chaining
that is based in part on a large corpus of historical text. Second, we have shown that names for household containers in
English, Spanish, and Chinese all support highly informative
communication, despite the presence of historical chaining in
this domain, and the potential of chaining to hamper informative communication. This result suggests that historical
chaining may itself be constrained by the need for efficient,
informative communication. Thus, the present work extends
earlier analyses in the semantic domains of color, kinship,
space, and number, not just by the addition of another domain, but also by the addition of a general phenomenon—
historical chaining—that may be shaped by communicative
need across domains.
Our findings leave a number of questions open. How general is the phenomenon of historical chaining, and the nature
of it that we have suggested here? Does chaining appear in
similar “hub exemplars plus short chains” form in other domains? Are there alternative models of chaining? How general is our finding that historical chaining may be constrained

2713

Number of systems

2

x 10

English

4

Attested
Hypothetical

2

x 10

Spanish

4

2

1.5

1.5

1.5

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0
4.5

5

5.5

6

0
4

4.5

5

5.5

x 10

0
5

4

Chinese

5.5

6

Communicative cost
Figure 6: Efficiency analysis of container naming systems in English, Spanish, and Chinese. In each case, the attested system
exhibits low communicative cost (high informativeness) relative to a large set of hypothetical systems of equal complexity.
by communicative forces? Future studies can address these
questions by applying analyses similar to ours to other domains, as well as new analyses and computational models, to
explore the linguistic packaging of meaning across languages
and across time.

Acknowledgments
We thank Charles Kemp for earlier ideas on chaining and Rob
Kass for the concept of change-point detection. Work on this
project was funded by NSF award SBE-1041707 to the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC).

References
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their universality and evolution. University of California Press.
Brugman, C. M. (1988). The story of over: Polysemy, semantics, and the structure of the lexicon. Garland New York.
Bybee, J., Perkins, R., & Pagliuca, W. (1994). The evolution
of grammar. Tense, Aspect, and Modality in the Languages
of the World.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. L. (2012). Language learners restructure their input to facilitate efficient
communication. PNAS, 109, 17897–17902.
Heit, E. (1992). Categorization using chains of examples.
Cognitive Psychology, 24(3), 341–380.
Hopper, P., & Traugott, E. (2003). Grammaticalization. Cambridge University Press.
Kass, R. E., Eden, U. T., & Brown, E. N. (2014). Analysis of
neural data. Springer.
Kemp, C., & Regier, T. (2012). Kinship categories across languages reflect general communicative principles. Science,
336, 1049–1054.
Khetarpal, N., Neveu, G., Majid, A., Michael, L., & Regier,
T. (2013). Spatial terms across languages support nearoptimal communication: Evidence from Peruvian Amazonia, and computational analyses. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen,
N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), CogSci.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things: What
categories reveal about the mind. Chicago: University of
Chicago.

Levinson, S. C., & Meira, S. (2003). ‘Natural concepts’
in the spatial topologial domain–adpositional meanings in
crosslinguistic perspective: an exercise in semantic typology. Language, 79, 485–516.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40(2), 230–262.
Michel, J. B., Shen, Y. K., Aiden, A. P., Veres, A., Gray,
M. K., Pickett, J. P., et al. (2011). Quantitative analysis
of culture using millions of digitized books. science, 331,
176–182.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word lengths
are optimized for efficient communication. PNAS, 108,
3526–3529.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming reflects optimal partitions of color space. PNAS, 104,
1436–1441.
Regier, T., Kemp, C., & Kay, P. (2015). Word meanings across languages support efficient communication. In
B. MacWhinney & W. O’Grady (Eds.), The handbook of
language emergence (pp. 237–263). Hoboken, NJ: WileyBlackwell.
Sloman, S. A., Malt, B. C., & Fridman, A. (2001). Categorization versus similarity: The case of container names. In
U. Hahn & M. Ramscar (Eds.), Similarity and categorization. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Smith, K., Tamariz, M., & Kirby, S. (2013). Linguistic
structure is an evolutionary trade-off between simplicity
and expressivity. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, &
I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Xu, Y., & Regier, T. (2014). Numeral systems across languages support efficient communication: From approximate numerosity to recursion. In P. Bello, M. Guarini,
M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the
36th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.

2714

