Semantically underinformative utterances trigger pragmatic inferences
Ekaterina Kravtchenko (eskrav@coli.uni-saarland.de) and Vera Demberg (vera@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Computational Linguistics, SFB 1102; Saarland University
Campus C7.4; 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
Most theories of pragmatics and language processing predict that speakers avoid informationally redundant utterances.
From a processing standpoint, it remains unclear what happens
when listeners encounter such utterances, and how they interpret them. We argue that uninformative utterances can trigger
pragmatic inferences, which increase utterance utility in line
with listener expectations. In this study, we look at utterances
that refer to stereotyped event sequences describing common
activities (scripts). Literature on processing of event sequences
shows that people automatically infer component actions, once
a script is ‘invoked.’ We demonstrate that when comprehenders encounter utterances describing events that can be easily inferred from prior context, they interpret them as signifying that the event conveys new, unstated information. We also
suggest that formal models of language comprehension would
have difficulty in accurately estimating the predictability or potential processing cost incurred by such utterances.
Keywords: Psycholinguistics; pragmatics; redundancy; information theory.

Introduction
Many theories of language processing, pragmatics, and dialog contain constraints against utterances that add no new information to the discourse, or are informationally redundant
(Cohen, 1978; Grice, 1975; Levy & Jaeger, 2007). Informationally redundant utterances, while typically viewed as infelicitous in the linguistics literature, have also been investigated in the dialog literature. These utterances might state information already in the common ground, echo information
already stated, or provide information that was entailed (or
strongly implied) by the preceding discourse (Walker, 1993).
Baker, Gill, and Cassell (2008) note that redundant utterances
are surprisingly frequent, and often used in response to signs
of listener non-comprehension, when responding to listener
questions, or when speaking to strangers. Similarly, Walker
concludes that informationally redundant utterances are common in discourse, and that aside from addressing cognitive
resource limitations, they often serve a narrative function.
It is, however, less clear how comprehenders process or interpret utterances that are informationally redundant with respect to their own discourse model – in other words, ones
that do not address limitations in listener comprehension,
make explicit inferences that may not otherwise be obvious,
and so forth. We present evidence that certain types of informationally redundant utterances trigger pragmatic inferences, which increase their informational utility, presumably
because they otherwise violate conversational norms with respect to utterance informativity (Grice, 1975). While these
results, broadly, are predicted by formal models of pragmatic
reasoning, it is less clear whether formal language models

that attempt to model utterance predictability, and the resulting processing cost (e.g., Smith & Levy, 2013), would correctly represent either: a) the predictability of these utterances, if they are in fact infrequent (c.f., Walker, 1993); and b)
any difficulty comprehenders encounter in processing them.
In general, there have been no strong positions taken in the
psycholinguistics literature on whether redundancy should
impose processing cost on the listener. Nadig and Sedivy
(2002) and Arnold (2008), in the context of referring expression complexity, argue that redundancy may only be suboptimal from a speaker’s perspective, and if anything may facilitate comprehension. On the other hand, Smith and Levy
(2013) point out that utterances which assert ‘obvious facts,’
or otherwise overly predictable information, may be easy to
integrate semantically, but incur processing cost given their
(presumably) low probability of occurrence. To our knowledge, however, this has not empirically been investigated.
Although our study does not directly address the processing cost incurred by overly redundant utterances, contextdependent implicatures are often assumed to incur some
amount of cost, particularly when there is no explicit contextual support for the implicature drawn (Sedivy, 2007). Further, if these types of utterances are as infrequent as predicted
by most pragmatic theories, they would be expected to incur
cost on this basis. We therefore discuss the potential implications of this for later work. Finally, we argue in the Discussion section that any difficulty listeners do encounter in processing these utterances would, problematically, not be fully
accounted for by formal models of sentence comprehension
which don’t incorporate pragmatic reasoning.
In our study, we focus on utterances that are uninformative1 , in that they explicitly describe events in common,
stereotyped sequences that are normally automatically inferred (Bower, Black, & Turner, 1979). To our knowledge,
the pragmatic interpretation of redundant event mentions has
likewise not to date been investigated experimentally, nor addressed in the formal literature.

Processing of Event Sequences
In this study, we look at overt descriptions of events that are
part of typical and stereotyped event sequences (scripts), such
as going to a restaurant, or using the subway. Literature on
processing of event sequences shows that people anticipate
upcoming events or future states once a script is ‘invoked’,
and have faster reading times when information is consistent with previous script knowledge (Zwaan, Magliano, &
1 To clarify, we use the term uninformative to describe utterances
that contribute no new information to the common ground.

1207

Graesser, 1995). Likewise, when recalling stories based on
a variety of scripts, people have significant difficulty distinguishing between actions that were implied by the script,
but not mentioned overtly, and those that were actually mentioned in the story (Bower et al., 1979). This finding suggests
that event occurrences that are strongly implied by a script are
part of its conventional meaning (unless explicitly indicated
otherwise), whether they are explicitly mentioned or not.
Certain types of information may be more or less central to
a script - for example, going grocery shopping almost always
entails paying for your groceries, but does not typically entail
buying apples (although the latter is entirely consistent with
the script). The utterances we are interested in refer to central
events that are easily inferred in the context of the event sequence – for example, entering a restaurant, in the context of
a restaurant visit:
(1) a.
b.

Yesterday, Marie went out to eat. She entered the
restaurant. She ordered pasta, and read a book.
Yesterday, Marie went out to eat. She ordered pasta,
and read a book.

Presumably, readers would have automatically inferred, in
the second variant, that Marie had entered the restaurant, although it was not mentioned explicitly, and would find the
first variant slightly anomalous. Highly inferable events are
occasionally used as temporal anchors (After she entered the
restaurant, she...), and may be used to transition back from
interruptions to the script (She stopped to talk to Brad on the
street. She then entered the restaurant...). However, outside of
these contexts, mutually known and highly inferable events
in scripts are often not mentioned overtly (Bower et al., 1979;
Regneri, Koller, & Pinkal, 2010).

Interpretation of Redundant Utterances
There is evidence that speakers avoid redundancy, outside
constraints on grammar and meaning, at every level of linguistic processing (Jaeger, 2010). Likewise, comprehenders
should expect producers to make choices that conform to
these norms. At the utterance level, they approximate Grice’s
Quantity maxim, which dictates that speakers should provide
neither more nor less information than is required to communicate a meaning in context (Grice, 1975). According to the
latter, listeners would be predicted to draw (highly contextsensitive) implicatures from informationally redundant utterances, if they are to preserve the belief that the speaker is
cooperative.
An example of an utterance that might give rise to a
context-dependent implicature is the following, uttered by
one speaker to another (assuming both are familiar with John
and John’s typical habits):
(2) “John went grocery shopping. He paid the cashier!”
In this example, the speaker is arguably flouting a conversational maxim, by stating something which can be clearly
inferred from preceding information. The event described by

the second, uninformative utterance is already strongly implied to have occurred by having invoked the grocery shopping script, and mentioning it overtly is therefore redundant.
Such an utterance in itself contributes no extra information,
and if it is to conform with listener expectations about speaker
informativity, then the listener is likely to attempt to infer
what other information the speaker attempting to convey.
The most obvious inference appears to be that this behavior is atypical for John; i.e. that it could not have been inferred, given what had already been stated, that the behavior
described had taken place. In other words, a straightforward
interpretation might be that John is not typically in the habit
of paying at the grocery store. The only case in which the default inference(s) might not be made is if information was introduced into the common ground already suggesting that this
was an atypical event – say, that John is a habitual shoplifter.
In summary, on the one hand, reading something that is
very easy to infer, given world knowledge, intuitively should
not cause any particular difficulty. However, making assertive
utterances that contain no useful information clashes with listener expectations of speaker behavior, and presumably occurs only infrequently (Smith & Levy, 2013). Listeners are
therefore predicted to attempt to ‘make sense’ of the speaker’s
behavior by coming up with an alternate (informative) meaning for the utterance.

Methods
Participants
200 participants, located in the US, were recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk.

Materials
24 stimuli, written as brief stories/narratives, were constructed, based on distinct scripts or activities. Each appeared
with 2 initial contexts (typical vs. atypical), and assertive
utterances described 2 types of events (predictable vs. optional), for a total of 4 conditions2 .
Predictable events ([4a] in examples (3)) would typically
be inferred from the ‘speaker’ having invoked the script,
while optional events ([4b]) could not be inferred. To clarify, we are using the term predictable to specify that the event
can typically be inferred from the script, although this is, as
we show, dependent on context. Initial discourse context was
either typical ([1a], in (3a)), or atypical in that it implied the
predictable event was in fact unusual ([1b], in (3b)):
(3a)
Typical context
[1a] John often goes to his local supermarket, as it’s close
bytypical .
[2] Today he entered the apartment with his shopping bags
flowing over. He ran into Susan, his best friend, and talked
2 The study did not employ a full factorial design, as there was
no context alternation specifically targeting the optional event condition. The contrast most relevant to the hypothesis tested, however,
involves the utterance describing the predictable event, while the
other served primarily as a reference point.

1208

to her about his trip. Susan then wandered over to Peter,
their roommate, who was in a different room.
<first (baseline) set of questions>
[3] She commented: “John went shopping. [4a/b] He {paid
the cashiera-predictable | got some applesb-optional !} [5] I just
saw him in the living room.”
<second (final) set of questions>
In contrast, the following context manipulation was used in
order to render the predictable event optional, or unusual:
(3b)
Atypical context
[1b] John often doesn’t pay at the local supermarket, as
he’s usually brokeatypical .
[2] Today he entered the apartment with his shopping bags
flowing over. He ran into Susan, his best friend, and talked
to her about his trip. Susan then wandered over to Peter,
their roommate, who was in a different room.
<first (baseline) set of questions>
[3] She commented: “John went shopping. [4a/b] He {paid
the cashiera-predictable | got some applesb-optional !} [5] I just
saw him in the living room.”
<second (final) set of questions>
The story was presented incrementally. Participants first saw
the first two paragraphs (without numbering or formatting),
and the first set of questions. These always queried how often
the subject of the discourse engaged in the optional activity,
the predictable (inferrable) activity, and two scenario-relevant
distractor activities (not shown):
1. How often do you think John usually pays the cashier,
when at the grocery store?
2. How often do you think John usually gets apples, when
at the grocery store?
Each question could be responded to on a continuous sliding scale of ‘Never’ to ‘Always’ (see Figure 1). The slider
was not visible until the participant clicked on the point on the
scale that they thought was most appropriate, to avoid having
people default towards a particular value.
After responding to each question, the participant could
submit their answers. Once they did, the first question set disappeared, and the rest of the text was revealed, as well as the
second set of questions. At this point the entirety of the text
was visible to participants. The questions referred to the same
activities, but asked participants to update their estimates –
“Now how often do you think...?”. Participants could not see
their previous answers.
12 of the stimuli included 3 discourse participants, one of
whom engaged in the activity, the second who learned from
that participant that they engaged in it, and the third to whom
the second communicated this fact (as well as the relevant
specifics). The other 12 only included two – the discourse
subject who engaged in the activity, and the second participant to who they communicated this fact. Compared to the ex-

ample above, for instance, John might be communicating directly to Susan: “I went grocery shopping. I paid the cashier!
I just got back from the store.”.
The construction of these stimuli was constrained in several ways. The scripts were sufficiently complex to contain
multiple candidate activities; there were central as well as
optional components; and the central components were such
that the activity could still conceivably occur without them.
For example, one arguably cannot play tennis at all, without
using a racket. There was also established common ground
between all discourse participants, so that all were plausibly
(from the point of view of the reader) aware of the discourse
subject’s typical habits, particularly with regard to the activity
described.
Further, the activities were sufficiently stereotyped and
(relatively) culturally invariable, so that all participants could
be expected to agree on what a script entailed, what was or
wasn’t obligatory, etc.. Many of the scenarios, as well as
estimates of ‘centrality’ of the events for the script, were
taken from data provided by the authors of Raisig, Welke,
Hagendorf, and van der Meer (2009), who looked at retrieval of script knowledge from memory. Additional scenarios were created where participant norming suggested that
some scripts did not meet our criteria, were insufficiently familiar, or excessively culturally variable.

Procedure
Each participant was asked to read 4 stories randomly selected out of the total of 24, with each condition only presented once (given the very small number of items, there were
no fillers). They initially saw the first part of the story only
([1] and [2] in (3a/b)), and the first set of questions presented
in random order. After responding to all questions by selecting a point on the Never to Always scale (Figure 1), they
were able to proceed. The first set of questions, including
the responses, was then hidden, and the rest of the story ([3]
through [5] in (3a/b)) was presented. This was followed by
the second series of the questions, again presented in random
order, asking for updated ratings. When answering the second
set of questions, the entire story was visible to participants.

Figure 1: A sliding scale as used in the experiment.
Prior to seeing the experimental items, participants were initially given several practice questions, unrelated to the stimuli above, also using continuous sliding scales ranging from
Never to Always (or similar). Unlike the experimental stimuli,
these questions had ‘correct’ answers – such as How likely
is a fair coin to come up heads {never | twice | 5 times}, if
flipped 10 times. If participants provided responses that could
not be judged reasonably accurate, they were asked to re-read
the instructions, and respond again, before they were able to
proceed. This ensured that they were able to follow instructions, and were less likely to guess randomly throughout the

1209

experiment. There were no ‘accurate’ answers, or ‘accuracy’
checks, in the actual experiment.

Predictions

Baseline Activity Typicality
The responses to the first set of questions, aside from setting
a baseline, also provide a norming measure for participants’
prior expectations regarding how likely it is that the discourse
subject habitually engages in a particular activity. As would
be expected, the average baseline typicality rating of the predictable (typically inferable) activity in the typical context
(e.g., paying the cashier, when shopping) was rather high,
at 79.67 (1-100), while the baseline estimate for the same activity in the atypical context (where John is immediately introduced as someone unlikely to pay) was relatively low, at
41.89. The distribution of estimates can be seen in Figure 2.
The average baseline typicality ratings for the optional
(non-inferable) activity (e.g., getting apples) were also comparatively low regardless of context, at 38.06 and 35.68.
These numbers rule out the possibility that participants were
simply responding randomly, or in a manner counter to the
intended effects of context or activity ‘inferability.’

optional

predictable

atypical

0

25
50
75
Activity Frequency Estimate

Never

100

Always

Figure 2: This plot shows the baseline activity typicality estimates, on a scale of 0–100. The violin plots (overlaid on box
plots) show the distribution of estimates. The hollow circles
represent mean values.
A linear mixed effects regression analysis, fitted using χ2 test model comparison, showed that speakers are more likely
to decrease their estimates of activity typicality in the conditions with the typical context (β = -5.06, p<.001), and those
in which the critical utterance describes the predictable (inferable) activity (β = -6.98, p<.001) (see Table 1). We used
the maximal model, with by-subject random intercepts and
slopes for context and event predictability, as well as by-item
random intercepts and slopes for both factors and their interaction. Critically, there was a significant interaction, driven by
participants being significantly more likely to lower estimates
of activity typicality in the condition where the utterance described a predictable (inferable) activity in a typical context
(β = -5.08, p<.001). This is shown in Figure 3.

***
typical

Context

Results

Context

typical

We predicted that participants’ final estimates of how often
the discourse subject engaged in the relevant activity (paying
the cashier) would decrease from baseline following the predictable event utterance (He paid the cashier), in the typical
context (which only invokes the script). Here, participants are
expected to infer that John paid the cashier was mentioned
because it was ‘informative’; i.e., unpredictable, or atypical.
In contrast, the same utterance (He paid the cashier) would
not be expected to generate a similar inference in the atypical
context, as that context already establishes the paying event as
atypical, or ‘informative.’ There, participants’ final estimates
of how often the discourse subject (John) engaged in the relevant activity (paying the cashier) would either not change
from baseline, or would increase slightly (as the critical utterance now provided evidence that John at least sometimes
paid the cashier).
Likewise, the optional event utterance (He got some apples) would be expected to either not change, or slightly increase estimates of how typically the discourse subject (John)
engages in this activity. Prior to having evidence that John at
least sometimes gets apples, participants would have no evidence regarding the usual activity frequency, and might give
low estimates initially. This should occur regardless of context, which provides no information regarding the baseline
typicality of the optional activity.

atypical
optional
predictable

−100

Decrease

−50
0
50
Change from Baseline Estimate

100

Increase

Change in Activity Typicality Estimates

Figure 3: This plot shows the change from baseline estimates,
following the predictable or optional event utterances.

The variable of main interest was the change in rating, from
baseline estimate to final estimate, of how often the participants thought the discourse subject typically engaged in the
activity mentioned in the critical utterance ([4a/b] in the stimuli above). For the analysis, all factors were effect/sum coded.

The only condition in which estimates decreased from the
baseline was in the typical context–predictable event utterance condition. Numerically, there was in fact a slight increase in estimates following all other conditions.

1210

Table 1: This table shows the beta coefficients associated with
each main effect in the model, as well as corresponding standard errors, t-values, and significance levels.
Coef β SE(β)
Intercept
Context: Typical
Event: Predictable
Context * Event

2.85
−5.06
−6.98
−5.08

t

p

1.87
1.52 0.14
0.97 −5.21 <.001
1.53 −4.56 <.001
1.13 −4.49 <.001

One potential problem with the design is a ‘regression to
the mean’ effect in the typical context–predictable event utterance condition. The baseline estimates in this condition
are relatively high (79.67), and many participants gave this
condition a rating above 90 (1-100), with the median rating at
91.13. Given the predictability of the activity given the script,
participants had more room to re-adjust their estimate downward than upward on the scale, as their initial estimate was
closer to 100 than to 1. This gives rise to the possibility that
participants were simply inclined to change their initial estimates in one way or another, and that the decrease seen is an
artifact of the task design.
However, the question regarding the predictable, or ‘inferable’ activity was also present in the typical context–optional
event utterance condition, where a change in typicality ratings would not be predicted (as there was no mention of John
‘paying for the groceries,’ or not). The same hypothetical
tendency to alter one’s initial estimate would presumably be
present in this condition, as well; however, no change is seen
(+0.36). This strongly suggests that the decrease in estimates
from baseline, in the typical context–predictable event utterance condition, reflects a genuine change in belief, and is not
simply a byproduct of the task.

Discussion
To our knowledge, these are the first experimental findings
of uninformative event descriptions giving rise to pragmatic
inferences, which bring the utterance interpretation more in
line with listener expectations of speaker informativity. This
would be predicted by a large number of linguistic theories
which, on the one hand, propose that speakers should avoid
excessive redundancy; and on the other, predict that listeners,
acting on the expectation that speakers will be informative,
will draw pragmatic inferences from apparently uninformative utterances. Although intuitively, information consistent
with previous world knowledge should be easy to process,
comprehenders appear to treat these utterances as anomalous.
However, in the case that the anomaly of these utterances
results in some amount of processing difficulty on the part
of listeners, it is unclear whether formal models of language
comprehension would predict this difficulty, or accurately
estimate the presumed difference in their predictability (cf.
Smith & Levy, 2013), when compared to the same utterances
in an atypical context (as in our experiment). The utterances

in question (the predictable utterances in the different contexts) represent exactly the same string, and the preceding
context is identical stretching over multiple sentences. Thus
n-gram models, which can’t represent long-distance dependencies, would not predict any difference in predictability
(and consequently processing difficulty). More sophisticated
models incorporating syntax or semantics, likewise, would
not predict a difference, as there are no meaningful differences in syntactic structure, and semantic models wouldn’t
have access to the relevant event-based information that distinguishes the utterances.
Models of event sequences, which estimate event (vs.
string) probability, may be able to estimate differences in
predictability (and, consequently, processing) between utterances describing script-congruent and script-incongruent
events. However, the general prediction of such models is that
the more congruent an event is with an invoked script, the
more predictable utterances describing that event should be.
There is no principled way, within this framework, to divide
events into different grades of predictability, such that utterances describing predictable events are easier to process than
those describing not-so-predictable events, yet those describing very predictable events incur difficulty. In light of this, we
suggest that to predict any difference between the two utterances, formal models of language comprehension would need
to incorporate some form of pragmatic reasoning.
It may therefore be fruitful to further investigate these effects using online measures such as eye-tracking or self-paced
reading. As typical speaker behavior is to elide utterances
containing very predictable or easily inferable information,
the local predictability of uninformative utterances (at the utterance end) should be comparatively low. Online measures
such as reading times have been argued to reflect the predictability of linguistic events, rather than the ease of integrating information into one’s mental model of a situation (Smith
& Levy, 2013). Further, context-dependent pragmatic inferences are often presumed to incur a processing cost (Sedivy,
2007). In contrast, semantic integration accounts would predict no particular difficulty in processing information consistent with one’s prior beliefs about a typical event sequence
(Hagoort et al., 2009). Ease of semantic integration is typically highly correlated with predictability, making their effects difficult to disentangle (Smith & Levy, 2013), and this is
a rare case where the two are at odds. Online measures alone,
however, provide little information regarding how speakers
interpret, or make use of, such utterances, which this study
addresses.
However, as Walker (1993) points out, informationally redundant utterances may not be so anomalous, or rare, as
might appear at first glance. Most theories predicting their
scarcity assume a) unlimited working memory on the part of
listeners, and b) ability to easily or quickly generate all inferences entailed by the discourse. They can serve narrative
function, and are, for example, often used to draw attention
to salient aspects of a discourse, or to showcase evidence for

1211

certain beliefs. Further, as shown in this study, they can be
reinterpreted by listeners to reflect new or useful information,
even when not contextually supported. Overall, the inferences
drawn from apparently redundant utterances may also be of
a wider variety than tested here. However, uninformative utterances seem to share the property of necessarily provoking
inferences about what is meant aside from the literal meaning, in order to remain felicitous. Where no obvious nonliteral interpretation is available, comprehenders may simply
assume that the speaker is uncooperative, having production
difficulty, or has unconventional speaking patterns. It should
should be noted, that in the context of a grocery trip, an ‘uninformative’ segment like John paid the cashier, followed by
with euros instead of dollars, would not be so anomalous. The
literal string itself is not redundant here, as it’s part of a larger
utterance that contributes previously unknown/uninferred information.
There are several additional avenues for follow-up. Although readers, with some consistency, obtained the interpretation that explicit mention of an overly predictable event implied its atypicality, it is possible that some readers reached
other interpretations about what the speaker intended. Further, it’s unclear whether those participants who didn’t draw
the intended inference were drawing another inference, detecting no abnormality in the utterance, or detecting an abnormality but not attempting to resolve it. Directly querying
participants regarding non-literal interpretation of an utterance may, however, encourage the drawing of inferences they
might not otherwise have been inclined towards. Similarly,
the types of questions we used could have encouraged readers
to preferentially look for, and make the specific inferences we
intended them to draw. In that case, however, we would also
have expected to see changes in activity typicality ratings in
conditions where none were expected – which we don’t.
Summarizing, this study shows that comprehenders attempt to compensate for the uninformativeness of redundant
event mentions by assigning a more ‘informative’ pragmatic
meaning, thus increasing their utility. Listener expectations
regarding the information content of speaker utterances are
consistent with theories of language processing and production, such as Uniform Information Density (Jaeger, 2010),
as well as standard pragmatic accounts of what constitutes
‘cooperative’ speaker behavior (Grice, 1975). This study provides what is to our knowledge the first experimental account
of how speakers interpret utterances that are informationally
redundant given knowledge of stereotyped event sequences,
and contributes to what is still a small body of experimental literature on context-sensitive conversational implicatures.
Further, it points to potential problems for estimating utterance predictability in formal models of language comprehension.

Acknowledgments
We thank the members of SFB 1102, Pranav Anand, Leon
Bergen, Harm Brouwer, Florian Jaeger, Mindaugas Mozu-

raitis, and Noortje Venhuizen for helpful feedback. Special thanks go to three CogSci reviewers. This research was
funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) as part of
SFB 1102 ‘Information Density and Linguistic Encoding.’

References
Arnold, J. E. (2008). Reference production: Productioninternal and addressee-oriented processes. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 23(4), 495-527.
Baker, R., Gill, A., & Cassell, J. (2008). Reactive redundancy and listener comprehension in direction-giving. In
Proceedings of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and
Dialogue (p. 37-45). Columbus, Ohio.
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts in
memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177-220.
Cohen, P. R. (1978). On knowing what to say: planning
speech acts. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Toronto.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole &
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics: Vol. 3: Speech
acts (p. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Hagoort, P., Baggio, G., & Willems, R. M. (2009). Semantic
unification. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences (p. 819-836). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology, 61(1), 23-62.
Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize information density through syntactic reduction. In B. Schölkopf,
J. Platt, & T. Hoffman (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 19. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nadig, A., & Sedivy, J. (2002). Evidence of perspectivetaking constraints in childrens on-line reference resolution.
Psychological Science, 13, 329-336.
Raisig, S., Welke, T., Hagendorf, H., & van der Meer, E.
(2009). Insights into knowledge representation: The influence of amodal and perceptual variables on event knowledge retrieval from memory. Cognitive Science, 33(7),
1252-1266.
Regneri, M., Koller, A., & Pinkal, M. (2010). Learning script
knowledge with web experiments. In Proceedings of the
48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (p. 979-988).
Sedivy, J. C. (2007). Implicature during real time conversation: A view from language processing research. Philosophy Compass, 2(3), 475-496.
Smith, N. J., & Levy, R. (2013). The effect of word
predictability on reading time is logarithmic. Cognition,
128(3), 302-319.
Walker, M. A. (1993). Informational redundancy and resource bounds in dialogue. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Zwaan, R. A., Magliano, J. P., & Graesser, A. C. (1995). Dimensions of situation model construction in narrative comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(2), 386397.

1212

