Signatures of Domain-General Categorization Mechanisms
in Color Word Learning
Daniel Yurovsky

Katie Wagner

David Barner

Michael C. Frank

yurovsky@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

kgwagner@ucsd.edu
Department of Psychology
University of California,
San Diego

barner@ucsd.edu
Department of Psychology
University of California,
San Diego

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

slowly discover their exact extents through gradual approximation (Ameel, Malt, & Storms, 2008; Swingley, 2010).
Thus, several lines of research suggest that domain-general
learning and categorization mechanisms can account for children’s acquisition of concrete nouns. But are more abstract
words learned like concrete nouns, or are the challenges and
learning mechanisms distinct for different kinds of words?

Learning color words is a difficult problem for young children. Because color is abstract, this difficulty has been attributed to challenges in integrating over heterogeneous objects to discover color as a dimension of reference. On this
account, learning that color words refer to the color dimension
is slow, but subsequently mapping these words to particular
shades is fast. Recent work suggests an alternative: Children
may rapidly identify color as a referential dimension, but only
gradually discover the precise boundaries of each color word.
This alternative proposal predicts that the learning mechanisms
underlying the acquisition of color words should parallel those
underlying the acquisition of concrete object categories. We
test this prediction, finding that children’s performance in a
color naming task is modulated by three factors that have previously been studied in category learning: input frequency, category size, and perceptual salience. Because it allows for precise psychophysical measurement of category properties, color
presents a unique case study for investigating language acquisition and categorization more broadly.
Keywords: Language acquisition, word learning, categorization, cognitive development

Introduction
Young children can learn a surprising amount from just one
encounter with a new word (Carey & Bartlett, 1978; Markson
& Bloom, 1997). Notably, they will extend a new word beyond the single referent for which it was used to the category
this referent comes from. That is, a child learning the word
“ball” will extend it not just to the soccer ball at home, but
also to a basketball on the television and a balloon in the sky
(Clark, 1973). Using words in novel contexts is a signature
aspect of children’s early language use, one that gives insight
into our cognitive architecture and its development.
To generalize the meaning of “ball” to other balls, children must solve two problems. First, they must infer that
“ball” refers to a category organized by shape and not size
or color (dimension identification). Second, after identifying
shape as the relevant dimension, they must infer that balls are
spherical or elliptical, but not rectangular (extent identification). Children’s early vocabularies are dominated by concrete nouns like “ball” (Fenson et al., 1994), and we know a
lot about how they learn these nouns. By the time they are
two years old, children acquire a strong bias to extend words
that refer to solid objects by whole-object shape (e.g., Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988; Markman, 1990). This shape bias
facilitates rapid, correct dimension identification, suggesting
that once it is in place, the primary challenge for concrete
nouns is extent identification. Indeed, children appear to fast
map concrete nouns to their approximate meanings, but only

We investigate this question by taking color as a case study.
In contrast to concrete nouns, color words are used correctly
relatively late in development (Bartlett, 1977; Soja, 1994).
This delay is surprising because two pieces of evidence suggest that identifying the extents of color words should be easy.
First, these extents have been argued to reflect an optimal
partitioning of color space into discrete categories, leading
to cross-linguistic universals in the categories referred to by
color words (Berlin & Kay, 1969). Second, children’s color
perception appears adult-like well before their first birthday,
suggesting that they may have access to these perceptual categories by the time they are learning color words (Pitchford &
Mullen, 2003). Consequently, children’s relatively slow color
word learning has been argued to be a problem of dimension
identification; the same shape bias that facilitates dimension
identification for concrete nouns hinders domain identification for color (Sandhofer & Smith, 1999; Franklin, 2006).
There are two reasons to doubt this account, however. First,
even children who do not know the correct extents of any
color words seem to understand that they belong to the same
semantic domain: When asked about an object’s color, they
will produce a color word (Bartlett, 1977). Second, recent
work by Wagner, Dobkins, and Barner (2013) shows that
children’s extent identification for color words is not all-ornone. Children who extend color words incorrectly do not
use them haphazardly. Instead, their categories tend to be
consistent over-extensions of adult categories. For example,
children who used “blue” to label blue exemplars often also
used “blue” for purple and gray exemplars.
Thus, despite initial assumptions, learning the meaning of
the word “blue” may be quite similar to learning the meaning of the word “ball.” If so, the same factors that contribute
to the ease or difficulty of learning concrete noun categories
should also predict acquisition of color word categories. We
test this proposal with three factors that are well-studied in
category learning: input frequency, category size, and perceptual salience. Estimates of each of these factors for the 11
basic English color terms predict nearly all of the variance in

2775

1.00

Blue

Green

Orange

Purple

Yellow

Red

White

Black

Brown

Gray

Pink

0.75

Prop. Children

0.50
0.25
0.00
1.00

consistent
precise

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
2

2.5

3

3.5 2

2.5

3

3.5 2

2.5

3

3.5 2

2.5

Age(years)

3

3.5 2

2.5

3

3.5

Figure 1: Children’s knowledge of the extensions of the 11 basic English color terms across development. To be counted as
consistent, a child had to always refer to the same color with the same correct term (e.g. blue always called “blue”). To be
counted as precise, this term had to be used only for its correct color (blue called “blue,” no other color called “blue”). These
data show that extent identification for color words extends over several years and varies significantly from color to color. We
take precise knowledge as our main measure because it is the end-state of color categorization.
children’s color word acquisition in Wagner et al.’s data. This
work extends our understanding of early word learning by
showing that the same mechanisms responsible for learning
concrete nouns also play a significant role in a more abstract
semantic domain. Further, because color words allow precise psychophysical estimates of natural-language category
boundaries, they present a uniquely informative new window
into children’s categorization more broadly.

Empirical Data
Wagner et al. (2013) tested children’s color word knowledge
in two simple production tasks. In each, children saw a series
of uniformly-shaped but differently colored chips on a neutral
black background. Each chip was shown to the child one at
a time, and the child was asked “what color is it?” In one
task, the chips were squares. In the other, they were shaped
like fish. Children did not respond on a small proportion of
trials (4.7%), which were not further analyzed. Wagner et al.
(2013) tested a total of 141 children. We excluded children
with a family history of abnormal color vision, or who did
not cooperate on more than half of the trials, yielding a final
sample was 116 children, who we separated into half-year age
groups: 24 2-year-olds, 37 2.5-year-olds, 26 3-year-olds, and
29 3.5-year-olds.
Wagner et al.’s main investigation was an analysis of the
systematicity of children’s errors. Here, in contrast, we
consider their correct responses, particularly whether they
had consistent and precise extensions for each of their color
words. A child’s knowledge of a color word was considered
consistent if they correctly used the English label for a color
to label it in each task (e.g. called both the blue square and the

blue fish “blue”). A child’s knowledge was considered precise if they additionally did not use this term to refer to any
other chip incorrectly (e.g. never called a red or orange chip
“blue”). Figure 1 shows the proportion of children with consistent and precise knowledge of each of the 11 basic color
words across development.
These acquisition trajectories contain a number of features
that suggest an extended period of extent identification. First,
for every color, both consistent and precise knowledge increase significantly across development. Second, colors vary
significantly in their rates of acquisition and in the shapes of
their acquisition trajectories. Finally, some colors appear to
be initially overextended, characterized by a large proportion
of consistent but imprecise knowers, but others colors are
used precisely as soon as they are used consistently. These
patterns parallel those observed in children’s concrete noun
category learning, raising the possibility that the same underlying learning mechanisms may be responsible for learning
the meanings of these seemingly different kinds of words.

Predicting Color Word Learning
A single, domain-general account of concrete noun and color
word learning would imply that factors that predict relative
difficulty of different nouns should also predict relative difficulty among the color words. We investigate this hypothesis
through three concrete predictors: input frequency, category
size, and perceptual salience. In this analysis, we take as our
primary goal the prediction of children’s precise color knowledge. We return to the relationship between consistent and
precise knowledge in the general discussion.

2776

put frequency at age 4 and the average proportion of all 116
children in our sample who had a precise category for each of
the 11 colors. Frequency and precise color word knowledge
were highly and significantly correlated (r(10) = .79, p <
.01). Just as for concrete nouns, input frequency is significantly correlated with children’s acquisition for color words.

red
blue
orange
yellow
green

0.002

0.001

Category Size

white
black
brown
pink
purple
gray

0.000
1

2

3

Age(years)

4

Figure 2: Cumulative proportion of input, plotted for each
color word in CHILDES for children ages 1–4. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals computed by non-parametric
bootstrap across children. Colors vary significantly in their
input frequency, with the most frequent colors heard an order
of magnitude more often than the least frequent color.

Input Frequency
The effect of frequency on learning rates is ubiquitous across
domains and learning paradigms. In category learning, it is
common to observe improved categorization accuracy across
learning trials, as well as differential effects of exemplar frequency on learning rates between categories (e.g. HayesRoth & Hayes-Roth, 1977; Nosofsky, 1986). Frequency effects are also consistently observed in the language learning
domain. For instance, Goodman, Dale, and Li (2008) estimated the frequency with which young children heard 526
different words. They showed that words’ relative frequencies predicted significant variance in the ages at which children began to produce these words. This effect was particular strong for nouns (r = .55), although it explained some
variability in the acquisition of verbs (r = .22), adjectives
(r = .28), and closed class words as well (r = .24).
We follow Goodman et al. (2008), estimating the frequency
of each of the 11 basic color words by counting their token frequency in CHILDES, a large, open database of transcribed child-directed speech (MacWhinney, 2000). All tokens produced by each North American child’s mother and
father were included in our estimates of input frequency. For
each half-year age-bin between 1 and 4, we computed the
number of tokens of each color word per 1000 words heard
(Figure 2). Frequencies vary significantly from color to color.
For instance, a child will hear “red” approximately 3 times as
often as “brown” by the time she is 4 years old.
As our primary measure of the effect of frequency on color
word learning, we include it in a mixed effects model that
jointly predicts children’s precise color knowledge from frequency, category size, and perceptual salience. As an interim result, however, and for comparison to Goodman et al.
(2008), we estimated the correlation between cumulative in-

In addition to learning a category’s extent, a common measure
in the categorization literature is acquisition of the category’s
prototype: its most statistically representative exemplar. Recent work suggests that focal colors—those empirically estimated by native speakers to be the best examples of each
color—are category prototypes (Abbott, Regier, & Griffiths,
2012). Consequently, we predict that children’s acquisition of
labels for the 11 focal colors tested by Wagner et al. (2013)
should be predicted by factors that predict acquisition of category prototypes more generally.
One consistent finding with regard to category learning is
that category prototypes are learned more easily and more
rapidly for larger categories (Homa & Vosburgh, 1976; Hintzman, 1986). To estimate the category size of each color category, we used a dataset of judgments from adult native speakers of English in a large color naming task. Lindsey and
Brown (2014) asked 51 American English speakers to provide color labels for each of 330 Munsell color chips, a set
of color samples designed to densely sample color space (see
Berlin & Kay, 1969).1 To estimate the category size of each
color, we computed the proportion of Munsell chips for which
all speakers agreed it was the correct label (Figure 3).
0.25

Proportion of Munsell Chips

Cumulative Prop. Language Input

0.003

Green

0.20
Blue

0.15

0.10

Purple
Pink
Brown

0.05

White Orange

Yellow Red
Gray Black

0.00

Color

Figure 3: Proportion of the 330 Munsell chips judged by
American English speakers to belong to each of the 11 basic
color categories. The variance in these category sizes significantly predicts children’s acquisition of these color terms.
1 We

used Lindsey and Brown’s estimates because they are more
recent than those available in the World Color Survey (Berlin &
Kay, 1969). However, all results remain significant using Berlin
and Kay’s adult judgments.

2777

80 100
60

Yellow
Pink
Orange

Gray

Green
Blue

40

Red

20

Purple
Black

0

CIELAB L: Luminance

Complete Model

White

-80 -60 -40 -20

0

Brown

20 40 60

CIELAB a: Green/Red

-50

0

AB

L
CIE

150
100
llow
/Ye
e
u
Bl

50

b:

Figure 4: The position of the focal colors for each of the 11
English basic color words, plotted in CIELAB space. The
salience of each color was estimated as its Euclidian distance
to the origin (indicated by the line segments).

Category size was significantly correlated with children’s
probability of having a precise category for each color
(r(10) = .6, p < .05; we report full model results below).
Thus, as with input frequency, category size significantly correlates with rates of acquisition of color words, supporting the
previous suggestion that a significant proportion of the delay
in children’s color word learning is due to extent identification rather than dimension identification.

Perceptual Salience
Finally, if color words are learned by a domain-general categorization process, we should expect each color’s relative
perceptual salience to predict that color’s ease of acquisition. Across a number of categorization experiments, perceptually salient categories are reliably learned more rapidly
than less salient categories (Nosofsky, 1986; Lamberts, 1998;
Kruschke & Johansen, 1999).
To estimate the perceptual salience of each of the 11 basic color categories, we located each focal color’s position in
3-dimensional color space. A natural space for this purpose
is CIELAB—an opponent process space constructed by the
French International Commission on Illumination to approximate human perceptual space. It is widely used in analyses of human color perception (Berlin & Kay, 1969; Wagner
et al., 2013; Lindsey & Brown, 2014). CIELAB’s three dimensions (L, a, and b) correspond to a lightness dimension, a
green-red opponent process dimension, and a blue-yellow opponent process dimension. We define each color’s perceptual
salience as its Euclidian distance from gray at the center of
the space (Figure 4). The two opponent process dimensions
range from −128 to +127, so we picked 0 as their center. In
contrast, the luminance dimension ranges from 0 to 100, so
we chose 50 as the center. As with frequency and category
size, perceptual salience was significantly correlated with
children’s precise color knowledge (r(10) = .71, p < .05).

So far, we have shown that input frequency, category size,
and perceptual salience are each significant predictors of children’s knowledge of the meanings of color words at the aggregate level. We now return to the rich dataset that motivated these predictions: the variable trajectories of individual
color words across development (Figure 1). Although our
three predictors are typically varied independently in studies
of categorization, they are correlated in many natural categories, including those referred to by color words. We can
thus ask whether frequency, category size, and perceptual
salience each account for independent variance in learning.
We fit a mixed-effects logistic regression to the full dataset,
predicting whether each child had a precise color category for
each color word. We included in the model the number of
times each color appeared in the input for a child of that age
(Figure 2), each color’s category size (Figure 3), and each
color’s perceptual salience (Figure 4). Frequency and category size were both log-transformed, based on prior evidence
that learning scales in the log of input (Anderson & Schooler,
1991). All three factors were highly significant predictors of
children’s color knowledge (Table 1).
To visualize the effect of adding each factor, we plot model
predictions against children’s knowledge as each predictor is
included (Figure 5). The top panel shows a control model that
uses children’s age to predict their precise color-word knowledge. This model captures the global increase in precise
knowledge across development. A global increase across all
color-words could in-principle be predicted by a dimensionidentification account that included performance limitations.
That is, global improvement could arise from early precise
categories combined with developmental changes in motivational and/or attentional factors that lead older children to be
more engaged in and thus better at our task. However, neither this model nor any such account can capture either the
aggregate differences in difficulty among the colors, or their
idiosyncratic patterns of acquisition across development.
Using a single category predictor—the number of times
each color word appears in children’s input at each age—
substantially improves fit of the model, allowing it capture
some of the differences in difficulty. In addition, it allows
us to correctly predict different growth trajectories for each
color based on non-linearities in their cumulative frequency
across development (Figure 2). Category size and salience
Table 1: A mixed-effects logistic regression predicting children’s precise color word knowledge from category learning predictors. The model was specified as precise ∼
log(frequency)+log(size)+salience+(1|subj)

2778

Predictor
Intercept
Log(Frequency)
Log(Size)
Salience

Estimate (SE)
-1.71 (.46)
.54 (.14)
.71 (.12)
.018 (.004)

z-value
-3.69
3.97
5.73
3.96

Sig.
p < .001
p < .001
p < .001
p < .001

each contribute a small but significant amount of predictive
power to the model, adding up to capture 87% of the variance
in children’s knowledge across color and age.

1.00

r2 = 0.52

0.75

General Discussion
Age

0.50
0.25
0.00
1.00

r2 = 0.79
Frequency

0.50
0.25
0.00
1.00

r2 = 0.84

0.75

Frequency + Size

Proportion of Precise Knowers

0.75

0.50
0.25

Frequency,Size,Salience

0.00
1.00

r2 = 0.87

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

Model Predictions

1.00

Figure 5: Model predictions compared to children’s precise
color word knowledge for each of the 11 basic colors and 4
age groups in Wagner et al. (2013). Each point represents one
age group for one color, lines connect the four age groups for
each color. Each panel shows the model’s fit as an additional
predictor is added to the mixed-effects model; the last panel
shows the full model. Distance between the points and the
diagonal is a visual indicator of goodness of fit. When all
three factors were included, the model predicted nearly all of
the variance in children’s color word knowledge.

Children learn the meanings of color words significantly later
than they learn the meanings of equally frequent concrete
nouns. For instance, “blue” is 150% as frequent as “ball” in
CHILDES, but children do not seem to have a precise meaning for “blue” until they are 3 or 4 years old. This relative
delay has led to the consensus that these two different kinds
of words must present different challenges for the learner. In
particular, the consensus account holds that children rapidly
identify shape as the correct dimension on which to extend
concrete nouns, but only slowly discover that color is a relevant dimension for generalization.
Our analyses cast doubt on this interpretation by providing
evidence that the rates of acquisition of the meanings of individual color words are predictable from with their individual
category properties. This result suggests that even if domain
identification is more difficult for color words than concrete
nouns, it is not the primary reason for their relative delay.
Thus, a single, domain-general learning mechanism may account of learning for both kinds of words. Of course, these
results are fundamentally correlational; they cannot uniquely
identify the mechanism responsible for color word learning
(Glymour, 1998). Nonetheless, they provide strong prima facie evidence that our theory of color word learning may need
to be reconsidered, as has happened with dimension identification theories of delay for other kinds of abstract words
(Widen & Russell, 2008).
If domain identification is not the primary barrier for learning the meanings of color words, but rather extent identification, why is their acquisition so slow relative to equally frequent concrete nouns? We propose that this question may be
ill-posed; children may acquire color words no more slowly
than concrete nouns. Because color is such a densely packed
semantic domain, it is relatively easy for both researchers
and caregivers to identify imprecisions in children’s category
boundaries (Hidaka & Smith, 2010). In contrast, children
could have equally imprecise category boundaries for concrete nouns, but their use of these words could be indistinguishable from use by adults in typical contexts. That is, just
as there is a lag between children’s consistent use of color
words and their precise use of these same words, there is
likely to be a similar lag for concrete nouns. Indeed, explorations of children’s categories in equally restricted domains
of concrete nouns—e.g. the meanings of “cup,” “bowl,”
and “plate” find developmental change in category boundaries well into late childhood and even young adulthood
(Andersen, 1975; Ameel et al., 2008). Put another way, 2year olds may have the same imprecision in their “ball” category as in their “blue” category.
Because the color domain is amenable to precise psychophysical estimation of natural language category bound-

2779

aries, it is ideal for identifying changes in children’s word
meanings from inconsistent, to consistent, to precise over
early development. Color words provide a powerful new setting in which to investigate early learning and generalization
mechanisms, one that promises to unify our models of language acquisition with our models of categorization.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to all of the members of the Language and
Cognition Lab for their feedback on this project. This work
was supported by NIH NRSA F32HD075577 to DY.

References
Abbott, J. T., Regier, T., & Griffiths, T. L. (2012). Predicting
focal colors with a rational model of representativeness. In
N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 60–65). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Ameel, E., Malt, B., & Storms, G. (2008). Object naming and
later lexical development: From baby bottle to beer bottle.
Journal of Memory and Language, 58(2), 262–285.
Andersen, E. S. (1975). Cups and glasses: Learning that
boundaries are vague. Journal of Child Language, 2(1),
79–103.
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of
the environment in memory. Psychological Science, 2(6),
396–408.
Bartlett, E. J. (1977). Semantic organization and reference:
Acquisition of two aspects of the meaning of color terms.
Paper presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for
Research on Child Development, New Orleans.
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their universality and evolution. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Carey, S., & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new word.
Papers and Reports on Child Language Development, 15,
17–29.
Clark, E. V. (1973). What’s in a word? on the child’s acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E. Moore
(Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J.,
Pethick, S. J., . . . Stiles, J. (1994). Variability in early
communicative development. Monographs of the society
for research in child development.
Franklin, A. (2006). Constraints on childrens color term
acquisition. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
94(4), 322–327.
Glymour, C. (1998). What went wrong? reflections on science by observation and the bell curve. Philosophy of Science, 65, 1–32.
Goodman, J. C., Dale, P. S., & Li, P. (2008). Does frequency
count? parental input and the acquisition of vocabulary.
Journal of Child Language, 35(3), 515–531.
Hayes-Roth, B., & Hayes-Roth, F. (1977). Concept learning
and the recognition and classification of exemplars. Jour-

nal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16(3), 321–
338.
Hidaka, S., & Smith, L. B. (2010). A single word in a population of words. Language Learning and Development, 6(3),
206–222.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). ”Schema abstraction” in a multipletrace memory model. Psychological Review, 93(4), 411–
428.
Homa, D., & Vosburgh, R. (1976). Category breadth and the
abstraction of prototypical information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 2(3),
322–330.
Kruschke, J. K., & Johansen, M. K. (1999). A model of probabilistic category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(5), 1083–
1119.
Lamberts, K. (1998). The time course of categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24(3), 695–711.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive Development, 3(3), 299–321.
Lindsey, D. T., & Brown, A. M. (2014). The color lexicon of
american english. Journal of Vision, 14(2), 17.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The childes project: Tools for analyzing talk. third edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14(1), 57–77.
Markson, L., & Bloom, P. (1997). Evidence against a
dedicated system for word learning in children. Nature,
385(6619), 813–815.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification–categorization relationship. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115(1), 39–57.
Pitchford, N., & Mullen, K. (2003). The development of
conceptual colour categories in pre-school children: Influence of perceptual categorization. Visual Cognition, 10(1),
51–77.
Sandhofer, C. M., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Learning color
words involves learning a system of mappings. Developmental Psychology, 35(3), 668–679.
Soja, N. N. (1994). Young children’s concept of color and its
relation to the acquisition of color words. Child Development, 65(3), 918–937.
Swingley, D. (2010). Fast mapping and slow mapping in
children’s word learning. Language learning and Development, 6(3), 179–183.
Wagner, K., Dobkins, K., & Barner, D. (2013). Slow mapping: Color word learning as a gradual inductive process.
Cognition, 127(3), 307–317.
Widen, S. C., & Russell, J. A. (2008). Children acquire emotion categories gradually. Cognitive Development, 23(2),
291–312.

2780

