Social Cues affect Grasping Hysteresis in Children with ASD
Joseph L. Amaral (amaraljl@mail.uc.edu)
Heidi Kloos (heidi.kloos@uc.edu)
Veronica Romero (romerovc@mail.uc.edu)
Michael J. Richardson (michael.richardson@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati Department of Psychology, Mail Location 0376
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

drives behavior, ranging from coordination between
various regions of the brain (e.g., Minshew & Keller,
2010), coordination of representations during problem
solving (Stephen et al., 2009), and coordination
between social partners (e.g., Marsh et al., 2009).
There is evidence that coordination may differ
between typical development (TD) and ASD. For
example, there is growing evidence that, on the
neurological level, ASD may be more related to
diffuse, connective differences coupled with
differences in neural activation patterns (e.g.,
Belmonte et al., 2003; for a review, see Minshew &
Keller, 2010). Differences are also evident in tasks that
involve interpersonal motor coordination (e.g., Marsh
et al., 2009). Specifically, while TD children have a
tendency to inadvertently sync their movements with
others, children with ASD do not.
In the current study, we expand on these findings by
looking at the moment-to-moment emergence of
coordination in a grasping task. Specifically, we look
at the degree to which a pattern of behavior is affected
by preceding patterns of behavior, either by showing a
lagging, indicative of hysteresis (e.g., Guastello &
Liebovitch, 2009), or by showing anticipation,
indicative of enhanced contrast (Kelso, 1995). Both
hysteresis and enhanced contrast are considered flags
of complex systems. They have been demonstrated in
perception of speech categorization (Tuller, Case,
Ding & Kelso, 1994) and motor behavior (e.g., Frank,
Richardson, Lopresti-Goodman, & Turvey, 2009; van
der Kamp et al., 1998), among other domains. In the
current study, we are using the paradigm of a grasping
task to describe behavioral coordination in ASD.
Grasping can require one or two hands, depending
on the size of the object that is being moved. With
smaller objects, it is inefficient to use two hands for
grasping, while with larger objects it becomes
increasingly necessary to use two hands. The
transition between one- and two-handed grasping, as
the size of objects increases, demonstrates the
system’s ability to organize itself beyond an individual
trial (e.g., Frank et al., 2009). Importantly, the
transition between grasping styles occurs at different
object sizes when objects are presented in a

Abstract
Healthy development leads to a fluid integration of
competing constraints. A marker of such behavior is
hysteresis, reflecting a multi-stable system that takes into
account its immediate history. The current study investigates
patterns of hysteresis in typically developing children (TD)
and those diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).
The task was to grasp and lift objects that increased in size,
either from smallest to largest, or from largest to smallest.
The objects could be picked up with one or two hands,
marking a range of bi-stable behavior. Results of the
grasping task showed hysteresis in TD children, whether or
not the task was situated in the social context. In contrast,
children with ASD showed hysteresis only in the non-social
context. For both diagnostic groups, perseveration did not
correlate to the degree of hysteresis, regardless of the
presence or absence of social cues.
Keywords: multi-stability; motor behavior; autism

Introduction
Autism
Spectrum
Disorder
(ASD)
is
a
neurodevelopmental disorder that is characterized by
significant impairments in social interactions and the
presence of restricted patterns of behaviors and
interests (APA, 2013). To date, no definitive cause of
ASD has been identified. ASD may relate to an
inability to take the perspective of others (e.g., BaronCohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985); it may relate to a
tendency to focus on details in their environment, as
opposed to on overall impressions (e.g., Happé &
Booth, 2008); or there might be neurological
differences that drive the ASD deficits (e.g.,
McPartland, Wu, Bailey, Mayes, Shultz, & Klin,
2011). Differences in the ability to share attentional
focus with others (e.g., Meindl & Cannella-Malone,
2011), difficulty reacting to social cues (Loveland,
1991), and deficits in executive function (e.g.,
Ozonoff. 1997) have also all been argued to lie at the
heart of ASD.
Rather than focusing on an isolated cause, we argue
that human functioning (typical or atypical) can be
understood as patterns of coordination on all levels of
behavior, including the neurological, perceptual
cognitive, and social levels. It is the complex interplay
between microscopic and macroscopic factors that

96

descending versus ascending order (e.g., Richardson,
Marsh, & Baron, 2007; van der Kamp et al., 1998).
The current study explores how grasping patterns in
children with ASD and TD are affected by (1) the
presence or absence of social factors, and (2) general
mental flexibility. There is evidence that children with
ASD demonstrate perseveration (e.g., Rajenran &
Mitchell, 2007). We question whether hysteresis is a
form of perseveration.

location as the dolly. For each trial, E1 recorded
whether the child picked up the cube with one or two
hands. Cubes were presented in two phases. In the
ascending phase, participants were first presented with
the 2 cm cube, followed by successively larger cubes.
It ended when five consecutive cubes were picked up
with two hands. In the descending phase, they first saw
the 20 cm cube, followed by successively smaller
cubes. It ended when five consecutive cubes were
picked up with one hand.
All participants completed the non-social and social
conditions in a fixed order. Each participant was
randomly assigned to one of two presentation orders
(ascending phase first or descending first) and one of
two hand conditions (E1 extends one hand or two
hands in anticipation of the cube).

Methods
Participants
The sample consisted of 41 6- to 10-year-olds (35
boys) who met diagnostic criteria for ASD and 42 TD
6- to 10-year-olds (31 boys), group-matched by
chronological age. There was a significant difference
in IQ (i.e., GCA of the DAS-II; Elliott, 2007; IQASD =
98.9; IQTD = 108.6), t(81) = 3.04, p = .003). There was
also a marginally significant difference in mental
flexibility (measured as Wisconsin Card Sorting Test,
Computerized Version 4: WCST; Heaton, 2005;
Perseverative Error Standard Score: PERSASD = 98.00;
PERSTD = 104.33, t(66) = 1.73, p = .09). Age was
positively correlated to PERS for TD children, r(34) =
.40, p = .016, but not for ASD children, r(30) = .14, p
= .45. IQ was marginally correlated to PERS for TD
children, r(34) = .28, p = .093, and positively
correlated for ASD children, r(30) = .41, p = .019.

Results
The central questions pertained to whether children
showed hysteresis, as determined by whether their
grasping pattern changed on a larger cube in the
ascending phase than the descending phase. A
transition point was calculated in each phase, to
determine the cube size at which the grasping pattern
changed during a phase (cf. Lopresti-Goodman,
Richardson, Baron, Carello, & Marsh, 2009; Van der
Kamp et al., 1998). There were four transition points
for each child: one for the ascending phase and one for
the descending phase in both the non-social and social
contexts. Figure 1 shows the averages of obtained
transition points.
On the basis of preliminary analyses, we collapsed
data across order and condition for the non-social
context, and we collapsed data across order for the
social context. A 2 (diagnosis) X 2 (ascending vs.
descending phase) X 2 (social vs. non-social context)
mixed-design ANOVA revealed a significant main
effect of phase, F(1,81) = 23.97, p < .001, with
children transitioning on higher cubes in the ascending
(M = 11.04) than the descending phase (M = 9.98). The
main effects of diagnosis and context were not
significant, ps > .14. However, there was a significant
diagnosis-context interaction, F(1,81) = 3.99, p = .049,
with TD, but not ASD children transitioning on larger
cubes in the non-social context than the social context.
All other interactions failed to reach significance, ps >
.13. To follow up on these effects, we examinded the
effect of hysteresis for each context separately.

Stimuli and Setup
Stimuli consisted of 19 foam-board cubes, ranging in
size from 2 to 20 cm wide. The material made it
possible for children to pick up cubes easily (with
either one or two hands). No participants indicated any
difficulty lifting the cubes.
A low table was used, partitioned by 30 cm high
curtains (see Procedure). A rotating wooden dolly, 36”
in diameter, was used in the non-social context. It was
placed to the child’s left, such that part of its surface
was occluded by one of the curtains.
Design and Procedure
During the first visit, a battery of clinical measures was
administered. During the second visit, children
completed the grasping task (in addition to other tasks
not reported here), followed by the WCST.
For the grasping task, two experimenters were
present: E1 and E2. The child sat across from E1, with
E2 sitting behind a curtain, to the child’s right, and
outside of the child’s view. During a trial, E2 pushed
a cube through the curtain towards the child (without
picking it up). In the non-social context, the child was
asked to pick up the cube and place it on the dolly. In
the social context, the child had to pick up the cube
and hand it to E1 (who held out either one hand or two,
depending on condition), in approximately the same

Non-Social Context
As expected, a 2 (diagnosis) x 2 (phase) mixed-design
ANOVA revealed a main effect of phase, F(1,81) =
22.33, p < .001, with a higher transition point in the

97

Transition Cube Size (cm)

ascending (M = 11.25) than the descending phase (M
= 9.87). There was also a main effect of diagnosis,
F(1,81) = 5.66, p = .02, with a higher mean transition
point for TD children (M = 11.10 cm) than ASD
children (M = 10.02 cm). Importantly, there was no
diagnosis-phase interaction, p > .73, indicating
hysteresis in both diagnostic groups. This finding was
further supported by simple effects: Both TD and ASD
children transitioned on a larger cube in the ascending
than the descending phase, ps < .001.

15

A

13
11
9
7
5
Non-Social

Transition Cube Size (cm)

Social Context
A 2 x 2 x 2 mixed-design ANOVA was carried out,
with diagnostic group (TD vs. ASD) and condition
(one-hand, two-hand) as between-group factors, and
phase as the within group factor (ascending vs.
descending). There was again a main effect of phase,
F(1,81) = 10.33, p < .04, there was also a marginal
diagnosis-phase interaction, F(1,81) = 3.33, p < .09.
This interaction indicates that hysteresis was not
equally present in both diagnostic groups. To follow
up on this effect, we look at each diagnostic group
separately.
Considering TD children first, a 2 (phase) x 2
(condition) mixed-design ANOVA revealed a
significant effect of phase, F(1,40) = 5.73, p = .022,
with a higher transition point in the ascending phase
(M = 11.20) than in the descending phase (M = 9.89).
There was no effect of condition, p > .30, and no
significant interaction with condition, p > .50. Thus,
regardless of whether the experimenter held up one or
two hands when receiving the cube, TD children
showed evidence of hysteresis.
Now consider ASD children. Here, the 2 x 2 mixeddesign ANOVA revealed no effect of phase, p > .76,
or condition, p > .48; and there was no interaction with
phase, p > .66. Whether cubes were presented in the
ascending- or descending-first order, the transition
point did not change. Thus, across both social-context
conditions, children with ASD transitioned on
similarly sized cubes in both the ascending and
descending phases, failing to demonstrate hysteresis in
the social context. These results are very different
from what was found with ASD participants in the
non-social context. A 2 by 2 (context x phase)
repeated-measures ANOVA (with data collapsed
across condition) revealed a significant phase-context
interaction, F(1,40) = 5.05, p = .03. Thus, the pattern
of performance for children with ASD differed
significantly between the non-social and social
contexts.

Social (1 Hand) Social (2 Hands)

15

B

13
11
9
7
5
Non-Social

Social (1 Hand) Social (2 Hands)

Ascending Trials

Descending Trials

Figure 1: Mean transition point, in centimeters, for
the non-social and social context, separated by
ascending versus descending trials, and separated by
diagnostic group: TD (A) vs. ASD (B)
determined the difference between ascending-phase
transition point and descending-phase transition point
for each child. A positive transition difference
indicates hysteresis (i.e., later transition in the
ascending than the descending phase). By comparison,
a negative transition difference indicates enhanced
contrast (i.e., earlier transition in the ascending than
the descending phases. No difference indicates that the
child is switching grasping method at the same sized
cube for both ascending and descending phases.
Figure 2 shows the two transition differences
calculated for each child (depicted as scatterplots of
transition difference obtained for the non-social
context vs. social context). By simply glancing at the
figures, a difference in distributions is apparent: While
the distribution of scores along the x-axis is
comparable across the two diagnostic groups (nonsocial context), there is a clear shift in values along the
y-axis (social context).
Indeed, a majority of TD and ASD children showed
hysteresis in the non-social context (TD: 25/42 = 60%;
ASD: 27/41 = 66%), consistent with the aggregate
results. When looking across contexts, we see that one
third of TD children showed hysteresis in both
contexts (14/42 = 33%), while eight children showed
no hysteresis in any contexts (19%). The same pattern
held for ASD children: about one third showed

Individual Patterns of Performance
Are group results of hysteresis supported by individual
patterns of performance? To address this question, we

98

hysteresis in both contexts (12/41 = 29%), while only
nine children showed no hysteresis in any contexts
(22%). Importantly, about the same number of the
remaining TD children showed hysteresis in the nonsocial context only (11/42 = 26%) versus in the social
context only (9/42 = 21%). In contrast, there were
three times more ASD children who showed hysteresis
in the nonsocial (15/41 = 37%) compared to social
context only (5/41 = 12%). While these findings are
not statistically significant, they nevertheless mimic
the findings documented in the aggregate results.

adaptive, stable patterns, in the face of changing
environmental constraints. For the current paradigm,
this pattern is maintained in TD children across
nonsocial and social contexts. However, for children
with ASD, it breaks down in the presence of what
could be argued to be very minimal social cues.
In typical development, the degree to which
individuals demonstrate hysteresis during grasping
tasks can be affected by contextual factors such as
object presentation speed. Additionally, when
participants are distracted, they demonstrate more
hysteresis (Lopresti-Goodman et al., 2009). It is
possible that in the presence of a social situation,
children of ASD actually focused more on the task
than they did in its absence, resulting in less hysteresis.
However, this is speculative, as no measurements that
could shed light on attentional focus (e.g., eye gaze)
were gathered.
It was hypothesized that the degree to which a child
demonstrated hysteresis during the grasping task
would correlate to the amount of perseveration they
exhibited on the WCST. However, hysteresis and
perseverative errors were not correlated for either
diagnostic group in both the social and non-social
contexts. This is consistent with previous work that
has argued that hysteresis and perseveration are
separate concepts (e.g., Van Bers, Visser, van
Schijndel, Mandell, & Raijmakers, 2011).
When considering the implications of this study’s
results, one must do so within the context of its
limitations. First, with regards to the Grasping Task:
the non-social and social contexts were in a fixed
order, with the non-social context always first. This
was initially chosen because of the fact that to our
knowledge, no prior studies had explored hysteresis in
ASD utilizing a grasping paradigm. Therefore, it was
thought that if children ended their participation early,
data may still be available for the non-social context.
This would at least provide basic information about
grasping hysteresis in ASD. But, this posed a
potentially significant limitation.
The design of the Grasping Task limited the ability
to determine whether performance in the social
context may have been related to an order effect. On
the one hand, it would be plausible that an order effect
might correspond to more hysteresis due to task
disengagement. However, if learning occurred, it is
possible that children began to anticipate each
successive cube, and therefore be more likely to
demonstrate enhanced contrast. It is difficult to
conjecture in either direction given that the diagnostic
groups did not perform similarly across contexts.
Considerations must also be given when examining
performance on the Grasping Task as compared to the
WCST. Although it is thought to assess problem
solving and mental flexibility, the WCST involves

Figure 2: Scatterplot of transition differences in the
non-social and social contexts for TD children (A)
and children with ASD (B).
Hysteresis vs. Perseveration
There is evidence that children with ASD have a
tendency to perseverate (e.g., Rajendran & Mitchell,
2007). To what extent are the processes that govern
hysteresis the same processes that govern
perseveration? To answer this question, we correlated
the PERS scores with the transition differences
obtained in each of the two contexts. Results show no
significant correlations, ps > .15. In fact, the
correlation obtained for ASD children in the nonsocial context was opposite of what would be
predicted by a model that equates hysteresis with
perseverative errors.

Discussion
Hysteresis is often considered to be an indication of
the way in which a system transitions between two,

99

other cognitive processes which may affect
performance, such as attention, working memory, and
behavioral inhibition (e.g., Dehaene & Changeux,
1991). Also, most participants from the TD and ASD
groups demonstrated IQs and WCST scores which
were considered to be in the typical range of
performance, clinically. Past work as suggested that
ASD performance on the WCST may be related to
intellect (e.g., Kaland et al., 2008). Finally, there is
some evidence individuals with ASD perform better
on the computerized version of the WCST than the
standard version (e.g., Ozonoff, 1995).
Future work should explore whether the current
study’s results were due to an order effect.
Counterbalancing the social and non-social contexts or
introducing a distractor task (such as a condition in
which the blocks are presented in a random order)
would be beneficial. To address issues with the
WCST, including groups of children with wider
ranges of functioning, or considering a model in which
half of the children take the computerized WCST and
the other the standard version. Alternately, it might be
helpful to include other measures of perseveration or
executive functioning.
It will be important to also include physical
measurements of participants’ hands. Past research has
described body-scaled characteristics associated with
the transitions between grasping styles in TD children.
That is, transitions in grasping occur at a relatively
consistent ratio of cube to hand size. Scaling provides
evidence that such behavior emerges as a result of
complex self-organization that occurs between
organisms and their environments in the absence of
conscious thought (e.g., Frank et al., 2009; Van der
Kamp et al., 1998). Thus, including such data will help
determine whether or not the same body-scaling
occurs for children with ASD as TD, which may
provide more evidence for the coordination account of
ASD.
Given its limitations, the current project was able to
shed some light onto the way coordination emerges in
ASD as it compares to TD. Specifically, children with
ASD were able to complete the task in both the nonsocial and social conditions. However, their
performance patterns were sensitive to the presence or
absence of a social cue. Thus, as opposed to providing
evidence for global deficits in either social or motor
functioning, it suggests differing patterns of
coordination between domains.
This study adds to the existing literature in
important ways. First, it takes a novel
conceptualization in studying ASD. It does not take a
reductionist approach to symptomology, instead
favoring a developmental one stemming from a
dynamic systems perspective. Such a novel viewpoint
may help unify many of the conflicting findings

associated with ASD task completion. The varied
performance of individuals with ASD on different
tasks as often considered problematic because of the
search for a core deficit. If such tasks are approached
through the lens of the coordination account, focus
shifts to the effect of contextual factors on how tasks
are completed. Thus, differences in performance can
be explained through a common phenomenon.
To function adaptively, the mind connects past
events with each other. This connection between
events allows us to form categories, learn a language,
and engage in higher-order thought. If each experience
would remain separate, it would be difficult to
generalize information or to make predictions. The
connections between experiences, which can be
conceptualized as a form of coordination, emerge
spontaneously. This study provides preliminary
evidence that the ways in which contextual factors
affect these patterns differs between TD children and
those with ASD.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Holly Barnard, Amie
Duncan, Paula Fitzpatrick, Richard C. Schmidt, Carrie
Thomas, and Olivia Duvall for help with this study.
This research was supported by the National Institutes
of Health under grant number 1R21MH094659-01A1.

References
Amaral, J. L., Collins, S., Bohache, K. T., & Kloos, H.
(2012). Beyond the black and white of autism: How
cognitive performance varies with context. In H.
Kloos, B. J. Morris, & J. L. Amaral (Eds.), Current
Topics in Children’s Learning and Cognition,
Rijeka, Croatia: InTech.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985).
Does the autistic-child have a theory of mind.
Cognition, 21, 37–46.
Belmonte, M. K., Allen, G., Beckel-Mitchener, A.,
Boulanger, L. M., Carper, R. A., & Webb, S. J.,
(2004). Autism and abnormal development of brain
connectivity. The Journal of Neuroscience,24(42),
9228-9231.
Dawson, G., Meltzoff, A. N., Osterling, J., Rinaldi, J.,
& Brown, E. (1998). Children with autism fail to
orient to naturally occurring social stimuli. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 28, 479485.
Dehaene, S., & Changeux, J. P. (1991). The Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test: Theoretical analysis and
modeling in a neuronal network. Cerebral Cortex,
1, 62-79.

100

Elliott, C. D. (2007). Differential Ability ScalesSecond edition: Introductory and technical manual.
San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assessment
Frank, T. D., Richardson, M. J., Lopresti-Goodman, S.
M., & Turvey, M. T. (2009). Order parameter
dynamics of body-scaled hysteresis and mode
transition in grasping behavior. Journal of
Biological Physics, 35(2), 127-47.
Guastello, S. J., & Liebovitch, L. S. (2009).
Introduction to Nonlinear Dynamics and
Complexity. In S. J. Guastello, M. Koopmans, & D.
Pincus (Eds.), Chaos and Complexity in
Psychology: The Theory of Nonlinear Dynamical
Systems (1-40). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Happé, F. G. E. & Booth, R. D. L. (2008). The power
of the positive, Revisiting weak coherence in autism
spectrum disorders. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 61(1), 50-63.
Heaton, R. K. (2005). Wisconsin Card Sorting Test:
Computer Version 4 Research Edition. Odessa:
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Kaland, N., Smith, L., & Mortensen, E. L. (2008).
Brief report: Cognitive flexibility and focused
attention in children and adolescents with Asperger
Syndrome or High-Functioning Autism as measured
on the computerized version of the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Test. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 38, 1161-1165.
Kamp, J. van der, Savelsbergh, G.J.P.,& Davis, W.E.
(1998). Body-scaled ratio as a control parameter for
prehension in 5- to 9-year-old children.
Developmental Psychobiology, 33(4), 351-361.
Kelso, J.A.S. (1995). Dynamic patterns: The selforganization of brain and behavior. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Lopresti-Goodman, S. M., Richardson, M. J., Baron,
R. M., Carello, C., & Marsh, K. L. (2009). Task
Constraints of affordance boundaries. Motor
Control, 13, 69-83.
Loveland, K. A. (1991). Social affordances and
interaction II: Autism and affordances of the human
environment. Ecological Psychology, 3(2), 99-119.
Marsh, K. L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt, R. C.
(2009). Social connection through joint action and
interpersonal coordination. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1, 320–339.
McPartland, J. C., Wu, J., Bailey, C. A., Mayes, L. C.,
Schultz, R. T., Klin, A. (2011). Atypical neural
specialization for social percepts in autism spectrum
disorder. Social Neuroscience, 6 (5-6), 1-16.
Meindl, J. N., & Cannella-Malone, H. I. (2011).
Initiating and responding to joint attention bids in
children with autism: A review of the literature.
Research in Developmental Disabilities, 14411454.

Minshew, N. J., & Keller, T. A. (2010). The nature of
brain dysfunction in autism: Functional brain
imaging studies. Current Opinions in Neurology,
23(2), 124-130.
Ozonoff, S. (1995). Reliability and validity of the
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test in studies of autism.
Neuropsychology, 9, 491-500.
Ozonoff, S. (1997). Components of executive function
in autism and other disorders. In J. Russell (Ed.)
Autism as an Executive Disorder (pp. 179-211).
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Rajendran, G., & Mitchell, P. (2007). Cognitive
theories of autism. Developmental Review, 27(2),
224-260.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., & Baron, R. M.
(2007). Judging and actualizing intrapersonal and
interpersonal affordances. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance,
33, 845–859.
Savelsbergh, G.J.P., Kamp, J. van der, Davis, W.E. &
Wimmers, R.H. (1999). Hysteresis in perceptualmovement coordination. In G.J.P. Savelsbergh, H.
van der Maas & P.C.L. van Geert (Eds.), Non-linear
developmental processes (pp. 93-104). Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Schultz, R. T. (2005). Developmental deficits in social
perception in autism: The role of the amygdala and
fusiform face area. International Journal of
Developmental Neuroscience, 23(2–3), 125–141.
Travis, L. L., & Sigman, M. (1998). Social deficits and
interpersonal relationships in autism. Mental
Retardation and Developmental Disabilities
Research Reviews, 4(2), 65-72.
Tuller, B., Case, P., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1994).
The nonlinear dynamics of speech categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 20, 3-16.
Van Bers, B.M.C.W., Visser, I., van Schijndel, T.J.P.,
Mandell, D.J., & Raijmakers, M.E.J. (2011). The
dynamics of development on the Dimensional
Change Card Sorting task. Developmental
Science,14, 960-971.

101

