Sound-Symbolism is Disrupted in Dyslexia: Implications for the Role of
Cross-Modal Abstraction Processes
Linda Drijvers∗ (Linda.Drijvers@mpi.nl)
Centre for Language Studies
Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Cognition
PO Box 310, 6500 AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Lorijn Zaadnoordijk* (Lorijn.Zaadnoordijk@donders.ru.nl)
Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Cognition
PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Mark Dingemanse (Mark.Dingemanse@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
PO Box 310, 6500 AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract

dall, 2012). Other studies showed similar sound-symbolic effects using different auditory stimuli, focusing on consonants
(e.g. Westbury, 2005) or vowels (e.g. Nielsen & Rendall,
2011). Furthermore, the bouba-kiki effect has been found
cross-linguistically and cross-culturally (Davis, 1961; Tarte,
1974; Tarte & Barritt, 1971). To rule out the potential effect of orthography, sound-symbolism has been investigated
and found in young children before they have learned to read
(Maurer et al., 2006; Ozturk et al., 2013). Although it has
been suggested that preliterate orthographic intuitions could
still have an effect on the formation of sound-symbolic associations (Cuskley, 2013), the effect remains when the phenomenon is tested with participants who have a different or no
alphabet such as Tamils (Ramachandran, 2004) and Himba
(Bremner et al., 2013). These studies strongly indicate that
the shape of the letters does not drive the effect.
As an underlying mechanism for this phenomenon, it has
been suggested that the intuitive associations between the
pseudo-word kiki and the sharp shape of, for example, a
star may be explained by certain phonetic characteristics
of the word (Marks, 1978; Ramachandran, 2004; Spence,
2011). Ramachandran (2004) argued that our brain recognizes ‘sharpness’ in both modalities, and that these crossmodal abstractions from both types of stimuli are coupled
together. It was proposed that the bouba-kiki effect might occur due to the multi-modal combination of abstraction of the
nonsense stimuli, the abstraction of the shape of the mouth
and lips, and the inflection of the tongue (Ramachandran &
Hubbard, 2001). However, these claims have mostly been
supported by correlational evidence. The nature of the relation between the underlying cross-modal abstraction processes and the occurrence of sound-symbolism remains to be
clarified.
To obtain insight in the nature of this relation, we investigated sound-symbolic associations in dyslexic and nondyslexic participants. Dyslexia is a specific neurobiological
learning deficiency (Lyon et al., 2003) that typically manifests in impaired written word recognition and poor spelling
abilities, among other co-morbid symptoms (Bruck, 1990).

Research into sound-symbolism has shown that people can
consistently associate certain pseudo-words with certain referents; for instance, pseudo-words with rounded vowels and
sonorant consonants are linked to round shapes, while pseudowords with unrounded vowels and obstruents (with a noncontinuous airflow), are associated with sharp shapes. Such
sound-symbolic associations have been proposed to arise from
cross-modal abstraction processes. Here we assess the link between sound-symbolism and cross-modal abstraction by testing dyslexic individuals’ ability to make sound-symbolic associations. Dyslexic individuals are known to have deficiencies
in cross-modal processing. We find that dyslexic individuals
are impaired in their ability to make sound-symbolic associations relative to the controls. Our results shed light on the cognitive underpinnings of sound-symbolism by providing novel
evidence for the role —and disruptability— of cross-modal abstraction processes in sound-symbolic effects.
Keywords: sound-symbolism; bouba-kiki effect; dyslexia;
cross-modal abstraction

Introduction
A common view in theoretical linguistics is that linguistic
signs are essentially arbitrary, i.e. there is no intrinsic relation between the sound of a word and the meaning it represents (Hockett, 1960; Saussure, 1983). However, humans
readily treat sound as a cue to meaning, as shown in a line of
experiments initiated by Köhler (1929), in which participants
consistently matched certain pseudo-words to sharp shapes
(e.g. takete or kiki), and others to round shapes (e.g. maluma
or bouba). These effects have been placed under the banner of sound-symbolism: the existence of non-arbitrary, systematic relations between the sounds and meanings of words
(cf. Westbury, 2005). Such relations also exist in natural languages, as, for example, in the phonaesthemes of English (Bergen, 2004), and in the major word classes of ideophones or mimetics in languages like Japanese, Korean, Zulu
or Quechua (Dingemanse, 2012; Imai et al., 2008).
The robust effect of sound-symbolism has been replicated
(e.g. Nielsen & Rendall, 2011) and extended by using different visual stimuli (e.g. Maurer et al., 2006; Nielsen & Ren* The

first two authors contributed equally to this work.

602

The language deficit is independent of cognitive and intellectual abilities, and affects approximately 4 percent of the
population (Blomert, 2004; Shaywitz, 1998).
There are several reasons to expect that the performance of
dyslexic individuals can shed light on cognitive processes underlying sound-symbolism. Previous research has suggested
that dyslexic individuals show deviant cross-modal processing (McNorgan et al., 2013; Sela, 2014), as seen in deficiencies in reading abilities. Reading is an intrinsically crossmodal process that requires successful mapping between visual (orthographic) and auditory (phonological) representations (McNorgan et al., 2013). Deficits in cross-modal processes may lead to reading problems, and have been suggested to underlie many of the difficulties found in dyslexic
individuals (Froyen et al., 2011; Meyler & Breznitz, 2005). If
these deficits affect their ability to make sound-symbolic associations, this would point towards cross-modal abstraction
as a potential underlying mechanism of sound-symbolism.
This in turn would lead to specific hypotheses for the possible types of deficits in this mechanism in dyslexic individuals. If cross-modal abstraction processes underlie soundsymbolic effects in normal individuals, a disruption of the
same processes in dyslexia should affect performance in
sound-symbolic tasks (see Occelli et al. (2013) for a similar
argument and evidence from individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders).
We hypothesized that dyslexic individuals will deviate
from non-dyslexic controls by making fewer sound-symbolic
associations. This hypothesis is strengthened by the results
from a pilot, which showed that both dyslexic children and
dyslexic adults made significantly fewer sound-symbolic associations (in fact, they scored at chance level) compared to
controls (Drijvers, 2013). In the current study, which is based
on the pilot, changes have been made to improve the stimuli
and the measurements. Drijvers (2013) did not find an effect of age, hence our choice to conduct this experiment with
adult participants only. It is our expectation that the pilot results will be replicated, and provide evidence for the role of
cross-modal abstraction processes as a mechanism underlying sound-symbolic associations.

the ‘De Klepel’ (Van den Bos et al., 1994), in which pseudowords have to be read out as accurately and quickly as possible in two minutes. We administered a verbal competence
test (Analogies) from the Dutch Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale (Uterwijk, 2000), to confirm that the impairment of our
dyslexic participants was a reading impairment, rather than
a language-competence impairment (EMT: t(26) = 3.748, p
= .001, De Klepel: t(26) = 4.249, p < .000, WAIS: t(26) =
-.609, p = .548).
Ethical approval for the study was given by the Ethics
Board of the Faculty of Social Sciences of the Radboud University Nijmegen.

Stimuli
The participants were presented with 100 stimuli: 40 experimental items and 60 fillers in pseudo-randomized order. The
auditory target words consisted of 20 pseudo-words that had
no resemblance to real words in Dutch, with phonetic features
associated in previous work with being ‘pointy’ (10 words)
and ‘rounded’ (10 words) (Nielsen & Rendall, 2011; 2012).
To achieve an equal balance between segments that might be
associated with pointy and round figures, we used voiced obstruents and voiced sonorants as the consonantal segments for
the target words. Obstruents are articulated with a closure
of the vocal tract, stopping or interfering airflow, whereas
sonorants are produced with a continuous, non-turbulent airflow in the vocal tract. Therefore, obstruents can be classified as more ‘jagged’ than sonorants. The continuous airflow
in sonorants causes a more ‘round’ characteristic. ‘Round’
words were formed by sonorants and round vowels, whereas
‘pointy’ words were constructed of obstruents and unrounded
vowels (as in previous research, such as Maurer et al. 2006;
adjusted to Dutch pronunciation). For the ‘round’ stimuli, we
included /r/ in addition to /m/, /n/ and /L/ to keep an equal balance between nasals and liquids. For the ‘pointy’ stimuli, we
included both stop consonants and fricatives to keep a similar
balance over subcategories within voiced obstruents. All consonants in the stimulus items are voiced to rule out differences
due to consonant voicing. See Table 1 for an overview.
Table 1: Overview of consonants and vowels that formed the
target words

Methods
Participants
Twenty-eight Dutch participants (14 dyslexic individuals, 14
controls) were recruited (13 males; mean age: 22.50 (SD =
2.12); all right-handed) and gave informed consent before the
start of the experiment. All of the participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no auditory problems
or neurological disorders. The participants were naive to the
purposes of the experiment. The participants in the dyslexia
group were all diagnosed with dyslexia in their youth.
To confirm reading problems associated with dyslexia, we
administered the ‘Een-Minuut-Test’ (EMT: Brus & Voeten,
1972), in which existing words have to be read out loud as
quickly and accurately as possible within one minute, and

Obstruents

Sonorants

/z/
/g/
/v/
/b/

/m/
/n/
/l/
/r/

Unrounded
vowels
/i/
/e/

Round
vowels
/u/
/o/

All target words were bi-syllabic, had a CVCV-structure
and a trochaic stress pattern, congruent with the dominant
Dutch stress pattern. Counter-balancing and equally distributing vowels and consonants led to the following twenty tar-

603

get words: Pointy: /zige/, /gebi/, /vebi/, /bive/, /vivi/, /zeze/,
/zebi/, /vegi/, /gigi/, /bege/, and Round: /mumo/, /lonu/,
/nuro/, /romu/, /lumo/, /nolu/, /molo/, /rulu/, /roro/, /nunu/.
A female speaker recorded the auditory stimuli in a soundattenuated booth. These sound files were edited and standardized with Adobe Audition & Praat (Boersma & Weenink,
2014). All of the target words were preceded by a sentence
that asked the participant to look or search for one out of two
of the displayed visual stimuli. The auditory fillers consisted
of 60 words for everyday objects (e.g. ’gitaar’ (guitar)) that
were neither specifically round nor pointy. Specifically because our filler items were neither round nor pointy, we included more filler items (60) than experimental items (40), to
keep our participants from developing an answering strategy.
Each experimental item and filler item was presented twice,
with randomly selected shapes per participant.
The visual stimuli consisted of 100 randomly generated
figures that were either round (50) or jagged (50). We wrote
a Matlab script that generated random points on a 1000 by
1000 grid, with an adjustable density parameter to generate
a predefined number of points. Then, one or multiple of the
generated random points were selected, based on an object
parameter that could be set to a certain number of figures that
needed to be generated and an edging parameter where the
number of edges could be predefined. The center of gravity
of the generated figures was based on the mean of the figure.
This was done to ensure that all the figures were generated in
the middle of the grid (see Figure 1 for examples).
This method ensures the randomized generation of a wide
range of properly balanced, contrasting stimuli, constructed
according to the best practices outlined in recent work
(Nielsen & Rendall, 2011; Westbury, 2005). We made sure
all of the figures were single Gestalt shapes, uniformly filled
and without holes. All figures had a non-significant difference in the number of pixels to rule out size-effects on soundsymbolic associations and were presented in black to avoid
color confounds. To control for perceived size, we piloted a
simple test where 5 participants were asked to indicate which
of two (1 pointy, 1 round) shapes was larger. Here, answering options included ’left’, ’right’ and ’same size’. The results showed that perceived size does not confound our stimuli. Another pilot (10 participants) confirmed that our round
and pointy stimuli were indeed perceived as round and pointy.
These pilot-participants did not participate in the actual experiment.

Figure 1: Schematic overview of superimposed circles and
polygons and their internal lines, generated by the algorithm.
Inner lines are shown for clarification; they were not visible
to the participants during the experiment.

ticipants to make sound-symbolic associations in a twoalternative forced choice task. Natural language use may
not require such polarized choices, yet we expect any soundsymbolic patterning in language to be constrained by human
capacities for cross-modal abstraction we aim to investigate
here.

Procedure
Participants were placed in a sound-attenuated booth, and fitted with headphones that played the auditory stimuli at a 70
dB SPL rate. The experiment started with five test trials, to familiarize the participants with the experimental paradigm. A
trial started with a 500 ms fixation cross. For each trial, one
pointy figure and one round figure was randomly selected.
In every trial, two pictures (one left, one right, randomized
and counterbalanced) were presented next to each other. After 2000 ms the auditory stimulus was presented: “Kijk naar
de [target word/filler]” (Look at the [target word / filler]) /
“Welke van deze twee plaatjes is [target word/filler]” (Which
of these two pictures is the [target word/filler] / “Waar is
de [target word/filler]” (Where is the [target word/filler]).1
When the auditory stimulus stopped playing, the participants
had 4000 ms to indicate their choice on a button box.

Design and analysis
Responses that were given too late or were missing were removed (4 missing, 0.14%). The results were contrasted between the groups on the basis of their button-press responses.
We characterized button-presses as “correct” when the auditory stimulus was associated with the visual stimulus on the
basis of their sound-symbolic characteristics. The total number of correct responses per participant was contrasted between groups, as well as the total number of correct scores on
pointy and round items to test for any differences in complexity per figure type. Lastly, we compared the reaction times
per participant per group and per figure type.

Experimental considerations
A common risk in sound-symbolism research (though not
specific to it) is experimenter bias in the process of stimuli
selection. In this study, we attempt to avoid this by using
computer-generated visual stimuli as opposed to selecting or
creating them manually. Similarly, the auditory stimuli have
been created based on the phonetic properties of the sounds
(as established in prior work) as opposed to our own judgment
of their round or sharp features.
Our experimental setup investigates the capacities of par-

1 These sentences were chosen to optimize our design for eyetracking. The eye-tracking results are not presented here.

604

Results

Hubbard, 2001; Spence, 2011).
Even though we found only a small difference between the
number of sound-symbolic associations made by both groups,
it is possible that a more extreme difference between stimulus
items (e.g. by opposing voiceless obstruents and voiced sonorants, as suggested by Nielsen & Rendall (2011)) might have
resulted in a larger effect. The results from our MANOVA
showed a trend towards more expected answers in response
to auditory stimuli predicted to invite matches with round
shapes vs. the sharp shapes for the control group. Since we
used voiced obstruents instead of voiceless obstruents, our
stimuli may have been less ’sharp’ than the stimuli that have
been used in previous research. However, item-based analyses did not reveal any items that yielded more correct answers than other items. We will address this matter in future
research, where we aim to systematically test the contributions of different phonetic factors (e.g. voicing, manner of
articulation, place of articulation, vowel quality).
Our findings might have implications for research on
dyslexia. Making abstractions and coupling them has a strong
resemblance to analogical reasoning in terms of structure
(Emmorey, 2014; Gentner, 1983; Tufvesson, 2011). When
we consider the sound-symbolic association process in this
way, it immediately becomes clear that there are several steps
(i.e. the abstraction from two modalities as well as the coupling of them) in the process that could be disrupted. Although we suggest that a deficit in cross-modal abstraction
processes in dyslexic individuals causes them to make fewer
sound-symbolic associations, this experiment does not yet
show which part of the process might be disrupted. The
deficit could be in the abstraction of the visual stimuli, in the
abstraction of the auditory stimuli (e.g. due to or related to
dyslexic individuals difficulties in phonemic category formation (Serniclaes et al., 2004), in linking the abstractions, or
in a combination of these processes. Moreover, considering
the complex nature of the difficulties in dyslexia, it seems unlikely that the deficit in the cross-modal abstraction process
is of a simple nature. From a neuroscientific perspective, the
angular gyrus (AG) seems to be a potential neurobiological
locus for the difference that we observe between the control
group and the dyslexic individuals. The AG is thought to
be involved in sound-symbolism (Ramachandran, 2004; Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001), and has been shown to have
a disrupted function and connectivity pattern in dyslexic individuals (Horwitz et al., 1998; Pugh et al., 2000; Shaywitz,
1998). Future research may tap into this in order get a step
closer in understanding the underlying deficient mechanisms
in dyslexia and its neurobiological basis.

An independent t-test revealed a significant difference between the dyslexic and control group on the number of
sound-symbolic associations (t(26) = 2.444, p = .034, Cohen’s d = 0.88; see Figure 2). The control group scored
well above chance (73% correct), whereas the dyslexic participants scored slightly above chance (60% correct). A
MANOVA revealed no difference between the dyslexic and
control group on the number of correct answers per stimulus
type (round/pointy) (independent variable: dyslexia (yes/no),
dependent variables: total number of correct answers on
‘round’ items vs. total number of correct answers on ‘pointy’
items (F(2, 25) = 2.818, p = .079)). An independent t-test
on the reaction times did not yield a significant difference between the dyslexic group and the control group on reaction
times (t(26) = .554, p = .585). Additional item-based analyses showed no effects for specific items in our dataset (all
items n.s.): there was no item that yielded significantly more
or less correct answers compared to other items.

Figure 2: Mean number of sound-symbolic associations per
group.

Discussion
We investigated the cross-modal abstraction processes that
are claimed to underlie sound-symbolic associations. To test
this, we contrasted a control group with a group of dyslexic
individuals who are known to have deficiencies in their crossmodal abstraction processes. We hypothesized that dyslexic
individuals would make fewer sound-symbolic associations
than controls. The data showed a pattern that matched our hypothesis: Dyslexic individuals made signicantly fewer soundsymbolic associations than the control group. These results
provide further evidence for a disrupted cross-modal processing mechanism in dyslexic individuals, and strengthen the hypothesis that cross-modal abstraction may lay at the basis of
sound-symbolic associations (Marks, 1978; Ramachandran &

Conclusion
Sound-symbolism, long thought to be a marginal phenomenon in language, is increasingly appreciated for the insights it may provide into vocabulary structure, language evolution and cross-modal processing. A wide range of recent
studies have shown sound-symbolic effects to be strongly

605

consistent across age groups and cultures, suggesting it is a
robust and universal phenomenon. Just as important as showing its robustness is understanding the conditions under which
it may be broken. Here we have shown that sound-symbolism
may be disrupted in dyslexic individuals. We found that
dyslexic individuals make fewer sound-symbolic associations
than controls. We suggest that this difference is caused by
a deficit in cross-modal abstraction processes that leads to a
disrupted facilitation of sound-symbolic associations. More
research on the precise deviation of cross-modal abstractions
in dyslexic individuals is necessary to understand why and
how these mechanisms produce deviating associations in this
population, and how this can be viewed within the broader
context of the difficulties experienced in dyslexia. This study
has taken sound-symbolic research into the domain of language impairments, and the results suggest that this approach
provides a fruitful way to shed light on the human abilities to
match sound and sense.

Dingemanse, M. (2012). Advances in the cross-linguistic
study of ideophones. Language and Linguistics Compass,
6(10), 654–672.
Drijvers, L. (2013, March). Klanksymboliek bij dyslectici:
geen bouba/kiki-effect? [sound symbolism in dyslexia: no
bouba/kiki-effect?]. Poster session presented at the annual
Anéla Juniorendag of Anéla Dutch Association of Applied
Linguistics, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Emmorey, K. (2014). Iconicity as structure mapping. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences, 369(1651), 20130301.
Froyen, D., Willems, G., & Blomert, L. (2011). Evidence for
a specific cross-modal association deficit in dyslexia: an
electrophysiological study of letter–speech sound processing. Developmental science, 14(4), 635–648.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive science, 7(2), 155–170.
Hockett. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific American,
203(3), 88-96.
Horwitz, B., Rumsey, J. M., & Donohue, B. C. (1998). Functional connectivity of the angular gyrus in normal reading
and dyslexia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 95(15), 8939–8944.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008).
Sound symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition, 109(1), 54–65.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt psychology. New York: Liveright.
Lyon, G. R., Shaywitz, S. E., & Shaywitz, B. A. (2003). A
definition of dyslexia. Annals of dyslexia, 53(1), 1–14.
Marks, L. E. (1978). The unity of the senses: interrelations
among the modalities. London: Academic Press.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: sound–shape correspondences in toddlers
and adults. Developmental science, 9(3), 316–322.
McNorgan, C., Randazzo-Wagner, M., & Booth, J. R. (2013).
Cross-modal integration in the brain is related to phonological awareness only in typical readers, not in those with
reading difficulty. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 7.
Meyler, A., & Breznitz, Z. (2005). Visual, auditory and crossmodal processing of linguistic and nonlinguistic temporal
patterns among adult dyslexic readers. Dyslexia, 11(2), 93–
115.
Nielsen, A., & Rendall, D. (2011). The sound of round: evaluating the sound-symbolic role of consonants in the classic takete-maluma phenomenon. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology/Revue canadienne de psychologie
expérimentale, 65(2), 115.
Nielsen, A., & Rendall, D. (2012). The source and magnitude of sound-symbolic biases in processing artificial word
material and their implications for language learning and
transmission. Language and Cognition, 4(02), 115–125.
Occelli, V., Esposito, G., Venuti, P., Arduino, G. M., &
Zampini, M. (2013). The takete–maluma phenomenon in
autism spectrum disorders. Perception, 42(2), 233–241.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Nils Müller and the Technical Group
at the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics for technical help and equipment. We are also very grateful for the
input of the Computational Cognitive Science group at the
Donders Centre for Cognition and Elisabeth Norcliffe at the
MPI for Psycholinguistics. This research was funded by the
Max Planck Society and a NWO Veni grant awarded to Mark
Dingemanse.

References
Bergen, B. K. (2004). The psychological reality of phonaesthemes. Language, 290–311.
Blomert, L. (2004). Hoofdstuk 6: Kenmerken en prevalentie van dyslexie (K. P. v. d. Bos & L. Verhoeven, Eds.).
Antwerpen, Belgie/Apeldoorn, Nederland:Garant.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D.
(2014, December).
Praat: doing phonetics by computer [computer program]. Version 5.4.04, retrieved 28 December 2014 from
http://www.praat.org/.
Bremner, A. J., Caparos, S., Davidoff, J., de Fockert, J.,
Linnell, K. J., & Spence, C. (2013). bouba and kiki
in namibia? a remote culture make similar shape–sound
matches, but different shape–taste matches to westerners.
Cognition, 126(2), 165–172.
Bruck, M. (1990). Word-recognition skills of adults with
childhood diagnoses of dyslexia. Developmental Psychology, 26(3), 439.
Brus, B., & Voeten, M. (1972). Een-minuut-test. vorm a en b
[one minute test]. Nijmegen: Berkhout Testmateriaal.
Cuskley, C. F. (2013). Shared cross-modal associations and
the emergence of the lexicon.
Davis, R. (1961). The fitness of names to drawings. a crosscultural study in tanganyika. British Journal of Psychology, 52(3), 259–268.

606

Ozturk, O., Krehm, M., & Vouloumanos, A. (2013). Sound
symbolism in infancy: evidence for sound–shape crossmodal correspondences in 4-month-olds. Journal of experimental child psychology, 114(2), 173–186.
Pugh, K. R., Mencl, W. E., Jenner, A. R., Katz, L., Frost,
S. J., Lee, J. R., . . . Shaywitz, B. A. (2000). Functional neuroimaging studies of reading and reading disability(developmental dyslexia). Mental retardation and developmental disabilities research reviews, 6(3), 207–213.
Ramachandran, V. S. (2004). A brief tour of human consciousness: from impostor poodles to purple numbers. Pi
Press New York.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Hubbard, E. M.
(2001).
Synaesthesia–a window into perception, thought and language. Journal of consciousness studies, 8(12), 3–34.
Saussure, F. d. (1983). Course in general linguistics.
La Salle. IL, Open Court, (Originally published in 1916.
Translated by R. Harris).
Sela, I. (2014). Visual and auditory synchronization deficits
among dyslexic readers as compared to non-impaired readers: a cross-correlation algorithm analysis. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 8.
Serniclaes, W., Van Heghe, S., Mousty, P., Carré, R., &
Sprenger-Charolles, L. (2004). Allophonic mode of speech
perception in dyslexia. Journal of experimental child psychology, 87(4), 336–361.
Shaywitz, S. E. (1998). Dyslexia. New England Journal of
Medicine, 338(5), 307-312.
Spence, C. (2011, May). Crossmodal correspondences: a
tutorial review. Atten Percept Psychophys, 73(4), 971–995.
Tarte, R. D. (1974). Phonetic symbolism in adult native
speakers of czech. Language and Speech, 17(1), 87–94.
Tarte, R. D., & Barritt, L. S. (1971). Phonetic symbolism in
adult native speakers of english: Three studies. Language
and Speech, 14(2), 158–168.
Tufvesson, S. (2011). Analogy-making in the semai sensory
world. The Senses and Society, 6(1), 86–95.
Uterwijk, J. (2000). Wais-iii nederlandstalige bewerking.
technische handleiding [wais-iii dutch version. technical
manual]. Lisse: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Van den Bos, K., Lutje Spelberg, H., Scheepstra, A., &
De Vries, J. (1994). De klepel. vorm a en b. een test voor
de leesvaardigheid van pseudowoorden [a test for reading
ability of pseudo-words]. Nijmegen: Berkhout Testmateriaal.
Westbury, C. (2005). Implicit sound symbolism in lexical
access: Evidence from an interference task. Brain and language, 93(1), 10–19.

607

