Speaker-specific generalization of pragmatic inferences based on prenominal
adjectives
Amanda Pogue, Chigusa Kurumada, Michael K. Tanenhaus
{apogue, ckurumada, mtan}@mail.bcs.rochester.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester

Abstract
To navigate many-to-many mappings between referents and
linguistic expressions, listeners need to calibrate likelihood
estimates for different referential expressions taking into
account both the context and speaker-specific variation.
Focusing on speaker variation, we present three experiments.
Experiment 1 establishes that listeners generalize speakerspecific patterns of pre-nominal modification use across
different adjective types. Experiment 2 examined a) the
dimension of generalization (form-based or informativitybased); b) effects of the strength of the evidence (implicit or
explicit); and c) individual differences in dimensions of
generalization. Experiment 3 asked parallel questions for
exposure to over-specified utterances; we predicted more
conservative generalizations because in spontaneous
utterances, speakers are more likely to over-modify than
under-modify.
Keywords: sentence processing; adaptation; generalization;
pragmatics; informativity; referential expressions

Introduction
A key feature of human language is that there are many-tomany mappings between referents and linguistic
expressions. A pet dog can be referred to by many
expressions (e.g., the dog, Charlie, he, or my friend)
whereas the expression the dog can be used to refer to a real
dog, a toy dog, or a contemptible person. Referential
expressions can also be made arbitrarily long (e.g., the big
dog, the big brown dog, the big brown furry dog). One longstanding issue in psycholinguistic research is how language
users identify an intended referent at the rate of speed and
accuracy evidenced in our real time language use (BrownSchmidt & Hanna, 2011).
Listeners seem to deal with this variability by capitalizing
on the belief that speakers behave rationally, formulating
their utterances to be as economical as possible while
conveying all necessary information (Grice, 1975). For
example, a rational speaker is more likely to use a prenominal scalar adjective (e.g., the big dog) when there is a
complement set of referents of the same semantic type (e.g.,
a big and one or more small dogs) in the same context. By
assuming a rational model of the speaker, listeners can
choose the referent that maximizes the informativeness of a
linguistic element – the amount of uncertainty reduced by
the element – given an array of possible referents (Frank &
Goodman, 2012; 2014).
An important, but less explored, question is how the
listener copes with variability in referential expressions that

is not easily predictable based on the rational speaker
model. In fact, a number of studies report that spontaneous
utterances often contain prenominal modifiers that would be
deemed unnecessary for singling out a unique referent in a
given context (Belke, 2006; Deutsch & Pechmann, 1982;
Engelhardt, Bailey, & Ferreira, 2006; Pechmann, 1989;
Sonnenschein, 1984). For instance, 30% of speakers used
superfluous adjectives in a production study in Englehardt et
al., (2006) and 50% in Nadig & Sedivy (2002). Some of the
variability stems from factors such as the speakers’
inattentiveness or speech production difficulties, but much
of it is due to differences in speaking styles, goals of the
conversation, and their certainty about the likelihood of
getting their intended message across.
We propose a framework in which listeners navigate the
variability by adapting their referential expectations in a
speaker-specific manner. In this framework, as predicted by
the rational-speaker model, we expect listeners to make
inferences about how a particular referent would be referred
to in a given (postulated) referential domain. When the
actual input deviates from the expected signal, listeners
update their likelihood estimates for referential expressions,
by updating their assumptions either about the context or
about the speaker, so as to better predict the future input
from the same speaker.
As a first step in developing this approach we focus on
simple situations in which the input from one of two
speakers deviates from what is expected based on the
rational speaker model. Specifically, that speaker does or
does not use a scalar adjective (e.g., big/small) that would
be necessary for singling out a referent, or if used, would
provide redundant information (under- and over-modifying
speakers given the rational model). We then examine how
listeners generalize the information to new stimuli, which
allows us to extrapolate if and how the listener’s
expectations were adapted for the two speakers.
While speaker-specific adaptation has not thus far been
studied extensively with respect to reference resolution (but
see Grodner & Sedivy, 2011), its importance is increasingly
appreciated in other domains of language processing
involving rational inference under uncertainty (e.g.,
phonetic adaptation (see Kraljic & Samuel; 2007;
Kleinschmidt & Jaeger, 2015)). One important insight
coming from this literature is that rational listeners can
evaluate evidence according to its reliability. In the current
task, we expect that listeners should adapt their referential
expectations for a particular speaker differently depending
on the types of evidence.

1889

Likewise, to generalize meaningfully from limited
instances of exposure, rational listeners integrate their prior
knowledge about the statistical structure of the linguistic
input with the data at hand (Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007). Given
the prevalent over-modification observed in natural
discourse, a single instance of a redundant adjective use
provides less reliable evidence that the speaker would be
non-optimal in other domains of pragmatic language use
compared to an instance of under-modification. Integration
of prior likelihoods would result in more conservative
generalization (at the speaker-level) from evidence of overmodification compared to evidence of under-modification.
In the current paper we first establish that speakers will
generalize information from a single pair of adjectives to
unseen adjectives in a speaker-specific manner (Experiment
1). Focusing first on exposure to underspecified utterances,
Experiment 2 examines: a) the dimension of generalization;
b) effects of the strength of the evidence (implicit or
explicit); and c) individual differences in dimensions of
generalization. Experiment 3 then asks parallel questions
for exposure to over-specified utterances, where we predict
more conservative generalization.

Figure 1: Four image display in the Exposure Phase of
Experiment 1-2 (A); Experiment 3 Original & Explicit
Instruction Conditions (B), Explicit Evidence Condition
(C); Generalization Phase display (D)

We first asked whether listeners would generalize
information from observed to unobserved (new) adjectives
in a speaker-specific manner. Listeners were introduced to
two speakers and tasked with estimating which of four
objects a speaker was likely to be talking about. The two
speakers varied in their descriptions: only one speaker used
adjectives to pick out a unique referent (modifying speaker).
We then asked listeners to guess which speaker likely
uttered transcribed instructions that were either modified
(with novel, or previously used adjectives) or unmodified. If
listeners generalize their assumptions about the speaker’s
adjective use, they should attribute both the familiar and
novel modified instructions to the modifying speaker, and
the unmodified instructions to the other speaker.

counterbalanced across participants. Participants were
instructed to make their best guess when they thought the
speaker was unclear, or if they were uncertain. Participants
were not given any feedback on their responses.
In the Generalization Phase, participants read instructions
that they were told had been transcribed and were asked to
guess which of the two speakers most likely uttered each
instruction. On half of the trials the instruction contained a
modifying adjective. One third of the modified trials
contained the same adjectives as in the Exposure Phase; the
remaining two thirds contained new scalar adjective pairs
(skinny/wide, tall/short). On the remaining trials the written
instructions were unmodified. There were 24 trials
presented in a randomized order. Participants clicked on an
image of a male or female avatar that represented which
speaker they thought uttered the written instructions. An
example of the design of the Generalization Phase can be
seen in Figure 1D (In this version the transcription read,
“Click on the wide bottle.”).

Methods

Results and Discussion

Thirty-two English speaking adults residing in the USA
were recruited online using Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Participants were naïve to the design of the experiment, and
were compensated $1.00 for completing the task.
In Exposure Phase, participants listened to verbal
instructions of the form “Click on the ___.” and selected a
referent from a 2 x 2 grid with an image in each of the four
grid squares (Figure 1A). Instructions were recorded by two
speakers (one male and one female). In this Exposure Phase,
two of the items in the display contrasted in size. On half of
the trials one of the speakers would make a request using a
prenominal adjective such as, “Click on the big/small cake.”
On the remaining trials the other (under-informative)
speaker would produce unmodified instructions (e.g., “Click
on the cake”). There were 20 Exposure Phase trials (10 per
speaker) presented in a randomized order. Location of the
target object, adjective, and which speaker modified were

Choices in the Generalization Phase are plotted in Figure 2.
Participants selected the modifying-speaker, who used
big/small in the exposure phase, for the sentences that
include big/small (83%), and the non-modifying (underinformative) speaker in the unmodified trials (80%). Choice
patterns for new adjectives were almost identical to those
for exposure adjectives: 84% and 84% for skinny/wide, and
83% and 84% for tall/short. We constructed a mixed-model
logistical regression of the responses given for the
modifying speaker in the Generalization Phase with
Adjective Type (big/small, tall/short, skinny/wide), and Test
Trial Type (modified or non-modified) as the fixed effects,
and subject as a random effect. As predicted, Test Trial
Type was the only significant predictor of whether
participants would choose the modifying speaker (β = 2.988,
p < .001), confirming that listeners track speaker-specific

Experiment 1

1890

clarity. We hypothesized that while participants might pick
up on these speaker differences implicitly, the addition of an
explicit
cue
might
increase
informativity-based
generalizations by highlighting these low-level ambiguities
in the signal. If that is the case, then adaptation is modulated
both by the signal and by the listeners’ task.

Proportion of Responses Given for the Modifying Speaker

Experiment 1
1.00

Big/Small
Skinny/Wide
Tall/Short

0.75

Methods

0.50

0.25

0.00
Non Modified

Test Trial Type

Modified

Figure 2: The proportion of the responses given for the
modifying speaker on the different test trials by adjective
types in Experiment 1
differences in adjective use, and generalize to unseen
adjectives.

Experiment 2
We now examine the dimension of generalization. We ask
whether participants generalized based on utterance length
(form-based), or inferred that one of the speakers was more
or less informative (informativity-based). To this end, we
replaced bare noun instructions in the Generalization Phase
of Experiment 1 with orthogonal color adjectives (e.g., Click
on the green car when both cars in the scene are green). If
generalizations are form-based (i.e., based solely on whether
or not a speaker had used an adjective), participants should
select the modifying speaker on both the color-adjective
trials and the scalar adjective trials. On the other hand, if
generalization is based on informativity, participants should
select the previously non-modifying (under-informative)
speaker. Finally, participants could be conservative in their
generalizations, treating the classes of adjectives differently.
Listeners do not treat all adjectives as equal cues for
contrast (Sedivy, 2003). Thus participants might be hesitant
to generalize to a new class of adjectives. If this were the
case, participants would evenly choose between the
speakers for the color trials, because they contained a new
type
of
adjective
(conservative
evidence-based
generalizations).
We also asked whether the strength of the evidence might
affect the dimension of generalization. While explicit cues
are not always necessary for listeners to make inferences
about a speaker’s pragmatic incompetence (Kurumada et al.,
2014), Grodner & Sedivy (2011) found that explicit
instructions
enhanced
speaker-specific
pragmatic
adaptation. They suggested that the explicit cue called
attention to the low-level redundancy in the signal.
Therefore, in a separate condition we included instructions
that explicitly asked listeners to pay close attention to
potential speaker differences in clarity and appropriateness.
This provided an explicit top-down cue that emphasized the
task of tracking differences between speakers in terms of

Sixty-five English speaking adults residing in the USA who
had not previously participated in a study in this series, and
were naïve about the design, were compensated $1.00 for
completing the task on Mechanical Turk.
Half of the participants (n=33) read the same instructions
as in Experiment 1 with no special focus on speaker
differences (Original Instructions). The remaining
participants (n=32) were instructed to pay attention to
differences between speakers in terms of clarity and
naturalness, and report any oddities at the end of the task
(Explicit Instructions).
The Exposure Phase was identical to Experiment 1. The
Generalization Phase was modified such that the bare noun
instructions were replaced with instructions containing color
adjectives. On these trials the contrastive item pair differed
in size along the same dimensions as the scalar adjectives
used in the scalar modified trials, but did not differ in color.
Thus, instructions such as, “Click on the big bottle” (in
Figure 1D) would pick out a unique referent, whereas
instructions such as, “Click on the green bottle” would not.
Thus, all transcribed utterances in the Generalization Phase
contained either a scalar or a color adjective.

Results and Discussion
In the Original Instructions Condition, participants’
responses on scalar-modified trials were similar to those in
Experiment 1. For both seen and unseen adjective types,
they primarily picked the modifying speaker (81%). For the
color-modified trials, they exhibited a trend towards the
informativity-based generalization, preferring the nonmodifying (under-informative) speaker (68%). When
explicit attention was called to the clarity of the two
speaker’s utterances (Explicit Instructions conditions),
responses showed more pronounced trends towards the
informativity-based generalization. Participants selected the
speaker who previously used no adjective in the exposure
phase in the (under-informative) color-modified trials 88%
of the time. We conducted a mixed-effects logistic
regression analysis with Instruction Condition, Adjective
Type, and Test Trial Type as fixed effects, and subject as a
random effect. Instruction Condition (β = -1.297, p <.01),
an interaction of Instruction Condition by Test Trial Type (β
= 3.827, p <.001), an interaction of Adjective Type by Test
Trial Type (β = 2.152, p <.05), and a three-way interaction
between the fixed effects (β = -1.950, p <.05) were
significant predictors of whether participants chose the
modifying speaker. These results are consistent with the
hypothesis that explicit instructions biased participants to
generalize more on informativity. With explicit instructions

1891

Proportion of Responses Given for the Modifying Speaker

Experiment 2
Original Instructions

1.00

Explicit Instructions

Big/Small
Skinny/Wide
Tall/Short

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
Color−Modified

Scalar−Modified
Color−Modified
Test Trial Type

Scalar−Modified

Figure 3: The proportion of the responses given for the
modifying speaker on the different test trials by adjective
types in Experiment 2
fewer listeners attributed the color-modified instructions to
the modifying speaker, and attributed more of the scalarmodified instructions to the modifying speaker (see Figure
3).
One interesting possibility is that listeners differ in the
degree to which they make form-based and informativitybased generalizations. We tested for different patterns of
generalization across participants by fitting multivariate
mixture models to the data. Separate models were fit for
each Trial Type in each of the conditions for 1-6
components using the mixtools package (Benaglia,
Chaveau, Hunter, & Young, 2009) in R, which uses
expectation maximization (EM) to estimate the optimal
parameter values.
In scalar-modified trials, listeners primarily attributed
these instructions to the modifying speaker, and more so in
the Explicit Instructions condition. In the Original
Instructions condition our mixture model analysis found that
the majority (73%) of the participants selected the
modifying speaker for the scalar adjective trials on average
98.2% of the time, and the remaining 27% of participants
selected the modifying speaker on average 35% of the time.
In the Explicit Instructions condition the model found that
the majority (88%) of the participants selected the
Original Instructions

Explicit Instructions

Explicit Instructions

1.00

0.9
Scalar−Modified Trials

Scalar−Modified Trials
Trials
Scalar−Modified

0.9
0.75

0.7
0.50

0.25
0.5

0.00

0.7

0.5
Big/Small
Skinny/Wide
Tall/Short

0.000.00 0.25
0.50 0.25
0.75
Color−Modified Trials

1.00
0.00
0.50
Color−Modified Trials

0.250.75 0.50
0.75
Color−Modified Trials

1.00
1.00

Figure 4: Proportion of responses given for the modifying
speaker for color- by scalar-modified trials for each
individual subject in Experiment 2

modifying speaker for the scalar adjectives on average
98.2% of the time. The remaining 12% of the participants
selected the modifying speaker on average 59% of the time.
For color-modified trials a three-component model fit the
data significantly better than the one-component model
(χ2(6) = 373.2, p <.001) or the two-component model (χ2(3)
= 18.8, p <.001) in the Original Instructions condition.
Individual participants appear to be responding in three
different ways, with 12% of the participants selecting the
modifying speaker for these trials 98% of the time (evidence
for form-based generalizations), 30% selecting the
modifying speaker 57% of the time (evidence for
conservative evidence-based generalizations), and the
remaining 58% of the participants picking the modifying
speaker only 5% of the time (evidence for informativity
based generalizations). However, in the Explicit Instructions
condition a two-component model fit the data significantly
better than the one-component model (χ2(3) = 305.1, p
<.001) or the three-component model (χ2(3) = 0.14, p = 1).
This finding indicates that individual participants are
responding in two different ways, with only 18.8% of the
participants selecting the modifying speaker for these trials
75% of the time (evidence for form-based generalizations),
and the remaining 81.2% of the participants picking the
modifying speaker only 5% of the time (evidence for
informativity-based generalizations).
This analysis reveals that there is more variability in
responses in the Original Instructions condition, than in
responses in the Explicit Instructions condition. This is
evident in the tighter clustering pattern towards the top left
corner for the Explicit Instructions condition in Figure 4. In
this figure, if listeners generalizations are informativitybased, we expect results to cluster in the top left, whereas if
they were form-based we should expect clustering in the top
right corner (where the proportion of responses for the
modifying speaker is near to 1 for both test trial types). In
sum, calling explicit attention to the quality of the
instructions made listeners more willing to infer that the
non-modifying speaker would be less pragmatically optimal
overall and therefore more likely to use an underinformative color-adjective.

Experiment 3
Speakers rarely under-modify (except in highly
collaborative tasks; Brown-Schmidt & Tanenhaus (2008)).
In contrast, in tasks like the ones used here, speakers
frequently over-modify and listeners are less likely to
penalize over-informative utterances than under-informative
utterances (Engelhardt et al., 2006). Therefore a rational
listener should be less likely to generalize from overinformative input than from under-informative input. We
tested this prediction by repeating Experiment 1 with scenes
that no longer contained a size contrast in the Exposure
Phase, making the modified instructions (e.g., Click on the
big cake) over-informative. As in Experiment 2, we
manipulated whether or not the instructions explicitly called
attention to potential differences in clarity and naturalness.

1892

Methods
One hundred and five English speaking adults residing in
the USA were recruited online and compensated $1.00 for
completing the task on Mechanical Turk. Eight participants
were excluded for: 1) having previously participated in a
study in this series (n=6), 2) giving no response in the
Exposure Phase (n=1), and 3) technical difficulties (n=1).
Remaining participants had not previously participated in a
study in this series, and were naïve about the design.
Experiment 3A: In the Original Condition (n=31) the
Exposure Phase contained four singleton items (see: Figure
1B). Under these circumstances, the use of a scalar modifier
is over-informative. The Explicit Instructions Condition
(n=33) was identical to the Original Condition, except
participants were explicitly instructed to pay attention to
speaker differences as in Experiment 2. Both the Original
Condition and the Explicit Instructions Conditions used the
same Generalization Phase trials as in Experiment 1.
Experiment 3B Explicit Evidence (n=34): the Exposure
Phase contained a mix of trials with four singletons, or
including a contrast pair (see: Figures 1B-C). Crucially the
instructions made by both speakers never referred to an item
from the contrasting pair. To highlight the pragmatic nonoptimality of the over-informative instructions, we truncated
audio stimuli for the Exposure Phase, resulting in referential
ambiguity for the modifying-speaker’s utterances (e.g.,
“Click on the sma-” when there is more than one small
referent) but not for the non-modifying speaker’s utterances
(e.g., “Click on the ca-” when a target is a “camera” and
there is no onset overlap across referents). At the end of
each trial participants were told to select the referent.
Generalization Phase trials contained a scalar adjective, and
half of the trials also contained a redundant color adjective
(e.g., Click on the wide green bottle).

Results and Discussion
Experiment 3A: Participants’ responses to the Original and
Explicit Instructions Conditions were solely form-based:

1.00
1.00

Experiment 3A
Big/Small
Big/Small
Skinny/Wide
Skinny/Wide
Tall/Short
Tall/Short

0.75
0.75

0.50
0.50

0.25
0.25

0.00
0.00
Non Modified
Modified
Concisely−Modified
Test Trial Type

Experiment 3B

Proportion of Responses Given for the Over−Modifying Speaker

Proportion of
of Responses
Responses Given
Given for
for the
the Over−Modifying
Over−Modifying Speaker
Speaker
Proportion

Finally we also conducted a modified version of Experiment
3 (3b) with ambiguous (truncated) instructions to create a
stronger manipulation highlighting the redundancy of the
over-modified statements.
The Generalization Phase was analogous to that of
Experiment 2. If participants infer that speakers differ with
respect to informativity they should expect that the
previously modifying (over-informative) speaker would be
more likely to produce over-modified statements (e.g., Click
on the wide green bottle), whereas the non-modifying
speaker should be more likely to utter the conciselymodified instructions (e.g., Click on the wide bottle.).
However, we predict that because of prior knowledge that
speakers often over-modify, listeners will be conservative
and therefore hesitant to make informativity-based
generalizations based on exposure to over-informative
utterances. Therefore they should generalize more narrowly,
making only form-based generalizations.

1.00

Experiment 3B
Big/Small
Skinny/Wide
Tall/Short

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

Test Trial Type

Concisely−Modified
Over−ModifiedOver−Modified
Test Trial Type

Figure 5: The proportion of the responses given for the
modifying speaker on the different test trials by adjective
types in Experiment 3A and 3B
participants preferred to select the non-modifying speaker
for the non-modified generalization trials (86%) and the
modifying speaker for the modified generalization trials
(85%), even when we added instructions to pay attention to
quality. A mixed regression analysis with Condition
(Original, Explicit Instruction), Test Trial Type, and Scalar
Dimension as random effects and subject as a fixed effect
showed that only Test Trial Type was a highly significant
predictor (β = 3.997, p < .001), Condition, Scalar
Dimension, and the interactions were not significant
predictors (ps >.1).
Experiment 3B: Participants neither reliably selected the
non-modifying speaker for the concisely-modified trials
(45%), nor the modifying speaker for the over-modified
trials (57%). There were no significant predictors in the
Explicit Evidence Condition (ps > 1)1. Response patterns in
for both experiments are plotted in Figure 5.
In contrast to Experiments 1 and 2, participants made only
form-based generalizations in Experiment 3A. In
Experiment 3B listeners did not show evidence for having a
speaker preference for either type of test trial. Despite
explicit evidence of communicative non-optimality of overinformative utterances, participants were still unwilling to
consider the possibility that one speaker would be more
likely to be over-informative at test. This result stands in
contrast with those from Experiment 2, suggesting that
participants weigh under-informative utterances and overinformative utterances differently as evidence for
informativity-based generalization.

1

One may suspect that the truncated stimuli may be too noisy to
evidence any speaker-specific information. However, post-hoc
tests suggest that participants were more likely to pick the overmodifying speaker for over-modified test utterances that contained
Exposure Phase adjectives (62%, p < .01), and trended towards the
same pattern for the concisely modified trials (p = .06), but not for
any other test trial type (ps > .1). This indicates that listeners had at
least registered the over-modifying speaker’s adjective uses.

1893

General Discussion
We examined whether listeners track speaker-specific
information about referential expressions and adapt their
expectations according to the input. Results from the three
sets of experiments suggest that listeners generalize
information at the speaker level and adapt their referential
expectations for unseen items. This approach can close the
gap in the literature by providing a framework for how
rational listeners can make effective use of the variable
input that is commonly observed in spontaneous speech
production.
Importantly, we predicted that listeners condition their
adaptation on their prior beliefs about the statistical
structure of the data to avoid under- or over-generalization.
In our data, the effect of prior beliefs is evidenced by a clear
asymmetry that emerged between how listeners made
speaker-specific generalizations. Participants generalized
from a speaker’s use of under-modified expressions, which
are generally less common, and hence a reliable indicator of
the speaker being under-informative. On the other hand,
informativity-based generalization was not observed for the
more common over-modified expressions, even when they
resulted in difficulties in referential resolution in the current
communicative context. These patterns of generalization are
broadly compatible with the assumptions of rational
inference under uncertainty: listeners seem to optimize
inferences by combining their prior expectations and newly
observed data.
Finally, the effects of explicit instructions in Experiment
2 suggest that speaker-specific expectations for referential
expressions can be further calibrated according to the
listener’s construal of the task and context. In future
research we plan to investigate how listeners evaluate
speaker-, task- and context-specific information to optimize
interpretation of referential expectations.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to T. Florian Jaeger, the HLP and KurumadaTanenhaus Labs for helpful feedback and advice, Matthew
Overlan and Sarah Bibyk for voice recordings, and Chelsea
Marsh and Olga Nikolayeva for help in creating stimuli and
pilot testing. Support provided by a NSERC Postgraduate
Scholarship (AP) and NIH grant HD27206 (MKT).

References
Belke, E. (2006). Visual determinants of preferred adjective
order. Visual Cognition, 14, 261–294.
Benaglia, T., Chaveau, D., Hunter, D. R., & Young, D. S.
(2009). mixtools: An R Package for Analyzing Finite
Mixture Models. Journal of Statistical Software, 32, 1-29.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Hanna, J. (2011). Talking in another
person’s shoes: Incremental perspective-taking in
language processing. Dialog and Discourse, 2, 11–33.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2008). Real-time
investigation of referential domains in unscripted

conversation: a targeted language game approach.
Cognitive Science, 32, 643–684.
Deutsch, W., & Pechmann, T. (1982). Social interaction and
the development of definite descriptions. Cognition, 11,
159–184.
Engelhardt, P. E., Bailey, K. G. D., & Ferreira, F. (2006).
Do speakers and listeners observe the Gricean maxim of
quantity. Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 554–573.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting
pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science, 336,
998.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2014). Inferring word
meanings
by
assuming
that
speakers
are
informative. Cognitive psychology, 75, 80-96.
Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and
J.L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics, Vol. 3: Speech
acts (pp. 225-242). New York: Seminar Press.
Grodner, D., & Sedivy, J. (2011). The effect of speakerspecific information on pragmatic inferences. In Gibson,
E. A., & Pearlmutter, N. J. (Eds.). Processing and
Acquisition of Reference (pp. 239-272). Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press.
Kleinschmidt, D. F., & Jaeger, T. F. (2015). Robust speech
perception: Recognize the familiar, generalize to the
similar and adapt to the novel. Psychological Review,
122, 148-203.
Kraljic, T., & Samuel, A. G. (2007). Perceptual adjustments
to multiple speakers. Journal of Memory and
Language, 56, 1-15.
Kurumada, C., Brown, M., Bibyk, S., Pontillo, D. F, &
Tanenhaus, M. K. (2014). Rapid adaptation in online
pragmatic interpretation of contrastive prosody. In P.
Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 791-796). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Nadig, A. S., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Evidence of
perspective-taking constraints in children's on-line
reference resolution. Psychological Science, 13, 329-336.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27, 89–110.
Sedivy, J. C., K. Tanenhaus, M., Chambers, C. G., &
Carlson, G. N. (1999). Achieving incremental semantic
interpretation
through
contextual
representation.
Cognition, 71, 109–147.
Sedivy, J. C. (2003). Pragmatic versus form-based accounts
of referential contrast: evidence for effects of
informativity expectations. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 32, 3–23.
Sonnenschein, S. (1984). The effect of redundant
communication on listeners: Why different types have
different effects. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
13, 147–166
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as
Bayesian inference. Psychological review, 114, 245.

1894

