Statistical and Chunking Processes in Adults’ Visual Sequence Learning
Lauren K. Slone (laurenkslone@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 1285 Franz Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563 USA

Scott P. Johnson (scott.johnson@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1285 Franz Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563 USA
Abstract
Much research has documented learners’ ability to segment
auditory and visual input into its component units. Two types
of models have been designed to account for this phenomena:
statistical models, in which learners represent statistical
relations between elements, and chunking models, in which
learners represent statistically coherent units of information.
In a series of three experiments, we investigated how adults’
performance on a visual sequence-learning task aligned with
the predictions of these two types of models. Experiments 1
and 2 examined learning of embedded items and Experiment
3 examined learning of illusory items. The pattern of results
obtained was most consistent with the competitive chunking
model of Servan-Schreiber and Anderson (1990).
Implications for theories and models of statistical learning are
discussed.
Keywords: statistical learning; transitional probability;
chunking; implicit learning

Introduction
The means by which humans acquire and represent
knowledge is fundamental to cognitive science. One
important mechanism shown to support learning across
domains is learners’ ability to detect statistical associations
among elements in a sensory array (e.g., Fiser & Aslin,
2001, 2002; Saffran, Newport, & Aslin, 1996a). Notably,
this statistical learning (SL) ability has been demonstrated
across the lifespan (e.g., Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996b)
and even across species (e.g., Toro & Trobalón, 2005).
Despite the scope of SL, the processes underlying SL
remain unclear. Traditionally, SL has been conceptualized
as sensitivity to statistical relations among elements. For
instance, in their seminal studies of statistical word
segmentation, Saffran et al. (1996a,b) exposed participants
to a continuous stream of speech in an artificial language.
After very limited exposure, participants showed evidence
of segmenting the stream into its component words. Saffran
et al. proposed that this ability might have resulted from
computation of transitional probabilities (TPs) between
syllables in the stream. Transitional probability (TP) is
defined as the probability of event Y given event X, and is a
measure of the strength with which X predicts Y. Saffran et
al. hypothesized that learners could track TPs between
adjacent syllables, using peaks in TP to group syllables into
words, and dips in TP to identify breaks between words.
The view that SL occurs via computations has prevailed

in literatures on auditory artificial language learning (e.g.
Saffran et al., 1996a,b) and visual sequence (e.g., Fiser &
Aslin, 2002) and scene learning (e.g., Fiser & Aslin, 2001).
Models instantiating such computational approaches to
segmentation are typically SRNs (e.g., Elman, 1990), which
learn and represent statistical relations between elements,
but do not represent the units they segment.
Recently, there have been attempts to account for word
segmentation with a different type of model: chunking
models (e.g., Frank, Goldwater, Griffiths, & Tenenbaum,
2010; Orbán, Fiser, Aslin, & Lengyel, 2008; Perruchet &
Vinter, 1998), which propose that learners do represent the
statistically coherent “chunks” of information from the
input. Perruchet and Vinter’s (1998) PARSER model, for
instance, assumes that elements perceived within one
attentional focus are “chunked” into a new, larger
representation. Representations of chunks presented
repeatedly are strengthened in memory; chunks presented
rarely are forgotten. Applied to Saffran et al.’s (1996a,b)
task, PARSER claims that representations of chunks within
words are strengthened (because they are repeated more
frequently), while chunks spanning word boundaries are
forgotten. Thus, chunking models like PARSER predict that
segmentation operates according to very different means
(representing units) than those proposed by statistical
models (representing statistical relations, not units).
It is unclear which type of model best accords with how
learners process and represent information. Recent studies
have been designed to distinguish between these models by
examining situations in which chunking and statistical
models make contrasting predictions. These studies examine
learning of (1) embedded items and (2) illusory items.
Embedded items are features that occur only within larger
features (Fiser & Aslin, 2005). Statistical models assume
learners represent statistical relations between all pairs of
adjacent elements such that, as learners become familiar
with a unit, distinguishing components embedded in that
unit improves relative to random configurations of elements
(see Giroux & Rey, 2009). Many chunking models, in
contrast, assume that as learners become familiar with a
unit, they become less able to distinguish components
embedded in that unit from random configurations of
elements (see Giroux & Rey, 2009). That is, representations
of embedded items and their larger units compete in
memory. Over time, memory for the unit gets strengthened
while competing representations of embedded items vanish.

2218

These contrasting predictions concerning embedded items
have been empirically tested with adults in auditory
artificial language learning tasks (Giroux & Rey, 2009) and
in visual scene learning tasks (Fiser & Aslin, 2005). Results
from both studies align with the predictions of chunking
models: while learners distinguish units (e.g., words) from
random configurations of sounds or shapes, they are unable
to distinguish embedded units from random configurations.
Illusory items are items that are never presented to
participants, but have the same statistical structure as other
items that are presented. For example, if tazepi, mizeru, and
tanoru,are words presented in a speech stream, and TPs are
.50 between syllables within these words (e.g., between ta
and ze and between ze and ru), a statistically matched
illusory word would be tazeru (Endress & Mehler, 2009). If
learners only represent statistical relations between
elements, words and illusory words should be
indistinguishable. If learners chunk and represent entire
words, however, they should fail to recognize illusory
words. In an auditory artificial language learning task
Endress and Mehler (2009) found that, while participants
distinguished words from lower-TP “part-sequences,” they
did not distinguish words from illusory words, suggesting
that they represented statistical relations, rather than chunks.
Thus, studies of embedded and illusory items have
yielded conflicting evidence regarding whether learners
represent statistical relations or chunks. However, these
studies employed widely varying methods, making it
difficult to determine whether differences in performance
across tasks were due to different underlying processes, or
simply to methodological differences between studies.
The goal of the present series of experiments was to
overcome this limitation and to extend previous work by
investigating learning of both embedded (Experiments 1 and
2) and illusory (Experiment 3) items in a visual sequencelearning (VSL) task. There are three main contributions of
this work: (1) we contribute a variety of new human data
about VSL under a range of experimental conditions; (2) we
examine learning of both embedded and illusory items using
highly comparable methods across tasks; and (3) we
consider how the data fit with a variety of statistical and
chunking models.

Apparatus and Stimuli An Eyelink 1000 eye tracker with a
55.9-cm color monitor displayed stimuli and collected eyetracking data. A PC computer running Experiment Builder
software controlled stimulus presentation and sent markers
stored with eye tracker data, allowing us to coordinate
participants’ eye movements with the stimuli. The eyetracking system recorded point-of-gaze (POG) coordinates
(spatial resolution within 1.0° visual angle) at 500 Hz.
Stimuli were 10 colored shapes on a black background
(Figure 1). Each shape loomed for 750 ms within one of 10
grid locations on the monitor. Shapes were randomly
organized for each participant into four units: two triplets
and two pairs (e.g. triplet 1: star, diamond, square; triplet 2:
hourglass, circle, heart; pair 1: plus, arrow; pair 2: triangle,
banner). For simplicity, the 10 shapes will be referred to by
the letters ABCDEFGHIJ, where ‘ABC’ and ‘DEF’ are the
two triplets and ‘GH’ and ‘IJ’ are the two pairs. Shapelocation pairings were randomized across participants, but
consistent throughout the experiment for each participant.

Figure 1: Sample stimulus array used in Experiment 1. Only
one shape appeared on the screen at a time.
The familiarization stimulus was a continuous sequence
of pseudo-randomly ordered shape units. Units could not
repeat and there were no breaks or delays between shapes or
units such that TPs were 1.0 between shapes within units
and .33 between shapes spanning unit boundaries.
Test stimuli were 10, 2-shape sequences. Two sequences
were pairs from the familiarization sequence (GH, IJ), two
were embedded pairs (BC from ‘ABC’, EF from ‘DEF’),
and six were part-sequences composed of the last shape of
one unit and the first shape of a different unit (e.g., FA).

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Thirty-six undergraduate students were
recruited from Psychology classes at the University of
California, Los Angeles. Participants were randomly
assigned to participate in either a 10-minute (N = 18; 15
females; M age 20.2 years; range = 18.6 to 21.9) or 20minute (N = 18; 14 females; M age 20.9 years; range = 18.5
to 29.1) familiarization condition. Data from an additional
16 participants were excluded from the final sample due to
poor calibration or insufficient eye tracking data (n = 10),
eye tracker failure (n = 1), or sleepiness (n = 5). All
participants earned course credit for their participation.

Procedure Participants sat 60 cm from the computer
monitor. POG was calibrated using Experiment Builder
software. Participants viewed the familiarization sequence
for either 10 (80 repetitions of each unit presented) or 20
(160 repetitions of each unit) minutes, depending on their
assigned condition. Participants were not given instructions
other than to watch what appeared on the screen.
Following familiarization, participants completed a brief
training session to familiarize them with a two-alternative
forced-choice (2AFC) task. The training session consisted
of 4 trials and employed the same procedure as the test
phase, except that letters were presented rather than shapes.
The test phase consisted of 12, 2AFC trials. In each trial,
participants viewed two 2-shape sequences presented
successively with a 750 ms pause between sequences.
Participants were instructed to choose which was more

2219

familiar by clicking one of two corresponding mouse
buttons. Half the test trials were “part vs. pair” trials that
contrasted a part-sequence with a pair, and half were “part
vs. embedded” trials that contrasted a part-sequence with an
embedded pair. Part-sequences had no shapes in common
with the pairs and embedded pairs against which they were
contrasted. We presented test types in alternation,
randomizing which we presented first and counterbalancing
whether the part-sequence appeared first or second across
trials. Table 1 provides a full example of the test sequences.
Table 1: Sample test sequences contrasted in Expt. 1.
Part vs. Pair Contrasts
Part-Sequence
Pair
FA
GH
JD
GH
FI
GH
CD
IJ
HA
IJ
CG
IJ

Part vs. Embedded Contrasts
Part-Sequence Embedded Pair
FA
BC
JD
BC
FI
BC
CD
EF
HA
EF
CG
EF

Results and Discussion
Saccade Latencies Saccade latencies during familiarization
were analyzed to assess implicit learning of sequence
structure. Latencies were calculated as the time from shape
onset until the initiation of the first eye movement that
resulted in a fixation to that shape. Learning can be inferred
if mean saccade latency to the first shapes of units – whose
locations are not predictable from preceding shapes – are
greater than mean saccade latency to the latter shapes of
units (second shape of pairs, second and third shapes of
triplets) – whose locations are predictable.

Figure 2. Mean saccade latency to the first and latter shapes
of units in Expts 1 (A) and 2 (B) by familiarization duration,
and in Expt 3 (C). Error bars represent standard error.
A 2 (familiarization duration: 10 vs. 20 mins.) x 2 (unit
type: pair vs. triplet) x 2 (shape number: first vs. latter)
repeated-measures ANOVA revealed only a main effect of
shape number: F(1,34) = 15.25, p < .001, partial η2 = .31;
see Figure 2A. Saccade latencies were significantly greater
to the first shapes, relative to the latter shapes, of units,
suggesting that participants were sensitive to the unit
structure of the sequence in both familiarization conditions.
Button Responses: Predictions Both statistical and

chunking models predict that successful VSL should be
indicated by participants’ choosing pairs as more familiar
than part-sequences on part vs. pair trials. Statistical models
also predict that participants should choose (high TP)
embedded pairs as more familiar than (low TP) partsequences in part vs. embedded trials. In contrast, chunking
models predict that participants may initially form chunks of
all 2-shape sequences, but that representations of pairs and
triplets will be strengthened as familiarization increases,
even as representations of part-sequences and embedded
pairs within triplets are weakened due to competition with
units. Thus, chunking models predict that participants
should fail to distinguish between embedded pairs and partsequences, particularly after the longer (20 minute)
familiarization (see Giroux & Rey, 2009).
Button Responses: Results Mean percentage of pair
selections on part vs. pair trials, and embedded pair
selections on part vs. embedded trials, were computed for
the two familiarization conditions (Figure 3A). A 2 (test
type) x 2 (familiarization duration) ANOVA revealed only a
main effect of test type (F[1,34] = 8.61, p < .01, partial η2 =
.20). Participants chose pairs as more familiar than partsequences more often then they chose embedded pairs as
more familiar than part-sequences, regardless of
familiarization condition. This finding may suggest that
participants represented pairs more strongly than embedded
pairs, as predicted by chunking models. Nevertheless, onesample t-tests (this and all other t-tests reported were twotailed) revealed that participants chose both pairs (t[35] =
9.21, p < .0001) and embedded pairs (t[35] = 4.93, p <
.0001) as more familiar than part-pairs significantly more
often than chance (50%), as predicted by statistical models.
Together these results do not clearly support either
statistical or chunking models. However, because pairs and
embedded pairs were not directly contrasted, it is difficult to
draw strong conclusions about whether or not these
sequences were represented differently. Experiment 2 was
designed to address this issue. Test trials in Experiment 2
contrasted pairs and part-sequences as in Experiment 1, but
also directly contrasted embedded pairs and pairs. If
participants are equally familiar with pairs and embedded
pairs, this suggests they primarily represent statistical
relations between shapes. However, if participants choose
pairs as more familiar than embedded pairs, this suggests
participants represent some combination of both chunks and
statistical relations (as embedded pairs were chosen as more
familiar than part-sequences in Experiment 1).

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Thirty-six undergraduate students were
recruited and randomly assigned to a 10-minute (N = 18; 16
females; M age 20.6 years; range = 18.6 to 24.1) or 20minute (N = 18; 13 females; M age 20.3 years; range = 19.0
to 22.2) familiarization condition, as in Experiment 1. Data

2220

10-min. familiarization
20-min. familiarization

Figure 3. Mean percentage of button responses for the various test types in Experiments 1 (A) and 2 (B) by familiarization
duration condition, and in Expt. 3 (C). Error bars represent standard error. The dashed line indicates chance performance.
from an additional 5 participants were excluded from the
final sample due to sleepiness (n = 4) or failure to complete
the experiment (n = 1).
Apparatus, Stimuli, and Procedure The apparatus,
stimuli, and procedure were identical to that of Experiment
1, with the following exceptions: (1) only two partsequences were used: FA and CD, and (2) the test phase
consisted of only 8, 2AFC trials. Half were “part vs. pair”
trials, and half were “pair vs. embedded” trials (Table 2).
Table 2: Sample test sequences contrasted in Expt. 2.
Part vs. Pair Contrasts
Part-Sequence
Pair
FA
GH
CD
GH
FA
IJ
CD
IJ

Pair vs. Embedded Contrasts
Pair
Embedded Pair
GH
BC
GH
EF
IJ
BC
IJ
EF

Results and Discussion
Saccade Latencies A 2 (familiarization duration) x 2 (unit
type) x 2 (shape number) ANOVA revealed a main effect of
shape number (F[1,34] = 9.63, p < .01, partial η2 = .22), and
interaction of shape number and exposure duration (F[1,34]
= 4.54, p < .05, partial η2 = .12); see Figure 2B. There were
no other significant main effects or interactions. Post-hoc ttests revealed that saccade latencies were significantly
greater to the first shape of units in the 20-minute (t[17] =
3.43, p < .01), but not in the 10-minute (t[17] = 0.75, p =
.46) familiarization condition. Saccade latencies to the first
and latter shapes of units were not significantly different in
the 10- and 20-minute conditions (ts[34] < 1.71, ps > .05).
These data suggest that participants were sensitive to the
unit structure of the familiarization sequence after 20
minutes, but not 10 minutes, of exposure. It is unclear why
this was the case, given that the familiarization phase was
identical to that of Experiment 1, in which participants did
show evidence of sensitivity to sequence structure after only
10 minutes. It could be that there was a ceiling effect among
the participants in the 10-minute condition of Experiment 2.
Previous research suggests that it typically takes a minimum

of 150 ms for an adult to program an eye movement
(Fischer, Biscaldi, & Gezeck, 1997). Participants may have
already been near ceiling, with saccade latencies to the first
shapes of units being only 169 ms on average (see Figure
2B), such that they were unable to show significantly
reduced saccade latencies to the latter shapes.
Button Responses Figure 3B shows the mean percentage of
pair selections on part vs. pair and pair vs. embedded trials.
A 2 (test type) x 2 (familiarization duration) ANOVA
revealed only a main effect of test type (F[1,34] = 10.53, p
< .01, partial η2 = .23). Participants chose pairs as more
familiar on significantly more trials when contrasted with
part-sequences compared to when contrasted with
embedded pairs, regardless of familiarization condition.
Moreover, one-sample t-tests revealed that participants
chose pairs as more familiar than part-sequences
significantly more often than chance (t[35] = 5.02, p <
.0001), but did not choose pairs as more familiar than
embedded pairs significantly more often than chance (t[35]
= 0.68, p = .50). These findings suggest participants
represented pairs and embedded pairs similarly, as predicted
by the statistical approach.
Overall, the results of Experiments 1 and 2 investigating
adults’ representation of embedded pairs in visual sequences
suggest that participants represented statistical relations
between items rather than chunks, a finding that contrasts
with previous studies of embedded items conducted with
auditory sequences (Giroux & Rey, 2009) and visual scenes
(Fiser & Aslin, 2005). This difference is all the more
striking given that our VSL task was designed to be as
similar as possible to Giroux and Rey’s auditory SL task.
It may be that learners represent both statistical relations
and chunks (even proponents of the statistical approach
argue that SL produces some kind of psychological units;
e.g., Saffran, 2001), raising questions as to the relation
between statistical and chunking processes (see Perruchet &
Pacton, 2006). Another possibility, however, is that the
assumption made by some chunking models – that higherorder chunks always compete with and replace lower-order
chunks – may be incorrect. If learners were able under
certain circumstances to maintain representations of various

2221

orders of chunks simultaneously, such as chunks and the
smaller embedded chunks they contain, this might help to
explain participants’ performance in Experiments 1 and 2.
Servan-Schreiber and Anderson’s (1990) ‘competitive
chunking’ model proposes that (1) learners may be able to
represent both lower-order chunks and the higher-order
chunks that contain them, and (2) the familiarity of a
sequence depends on the number of stored chunks needed to
describe it. Thus, when participants viewed pairs and
embedded pairs at test in Experiment 2, these sequences
may have seemed equally familiar because pairs and
embedded pairs were each represented by a single chunk,
not because participants represented their underlying TPs.
Similarly, when participants viewed part-sequences and
embedded pairs in Experiment 1, embedded pairs may have
seemed more familiar because they were represented by a
single chunk whereas part-sequences were not, since their
component shapes did not occur together consistently. The
data from Experiments 1 and 2 cannot distinguish between
these two interpretations – that learners represented
statistical relations, or represented both embedded chunks
and their larger (triplet) chunks.
Thus, Experiment 3 employed an illusory sequence design
to: (1) examine how adults represent illusory visual
sequences, and (2) distinguish between the statistical and
competitive chunking explanations of Experiments 1 and 2.
An illusory design can achieve this second aim because
statistical and competitive chunking models make different
predictions concerning the fate of illusory items.

Figure 4. Sample triplets and illusory triplets used in Expt.
3. Numbers above arrows indicate TPs between shapes.
Apparatus and Procedure The apparatus and procedure
were identical to Experiments 1 and 2, with the following
exceptions: (1) participants viewed the familiarization
sequence for 18 minutes (80 repetitions of each triplet
presented), and (2) half of the test trials were “triplet vs.
part,” and half were “triplet vs. illusory” trials (Table 3).
Table 3: Sample test sequences contrasted in Expt. 3.
Triplet vs. Part Contrasts
Triplet
Part-Sequence
ABF
IAE
DBC
FDH
AEC
IAE
GHF
FDH
DHI
FDH
GEI
IAE

Experiment 3
Method

Triplet vs. Illusory Contrasts
Triplet
Illusory Triplet
ABF
ABC
DBC
ABC
AEC
ABC
GHF
GHI
DHI
GHI
GEI
GHI

Results and Discussion

Participants Eighteen undergraduate students (N = 18; 14
females; M age 19.6 years; range = 15.6 to 28.5) were
recruited as in Experiments 1 and 2. Data from an additional
4 participants were excluded from the final sample due to
poor calibration (n = 1), eye tracker failure (n = 1), or
sleepiness (n = 2).
Stimuli Stimuli were 9 colored shapes that each loomed
within one of 9 grid locations. Shapes were organized into
six triplets, with each shape appearing in two triplets. The
familiarization stimulus was a continuous sequence of
pseudo-randomly ordered triplets. Triplets could repeat such
that TPs were .50 between shapes within triplets and .33
between shapes spanning triplet boundaries. Triplets were
organized such that two illusory triplets were created that
had the same TP structure as triplets, but were never
presented during familiarization (Figure 4). Hereafter, the 9
shapes will be referred to by the letters ABCDEFGHI,
where the six triplets are ABF, DBC, AEC, GHF, DHI, GEI,
and the two illusory triplets are ABC and GHI.
Test stimuli were 10, 3-shape sequences. Six sequences
were triplets, two were illusory triplets, and two were partsequences composed of the last shape of one triplet and the
first shape of a different triplet.

Saccade Latencies Saccade latencies to the first and latter
shapes of triplets were not significantly different: t[17] =
0.94, p = .36 (see Figure 2C). Thus, participants showed no
oculomotor evidence of implicit learning of sequence
structure. This was likely due to TPs between shapes within
units being .50 in Experiment 3 (compared to 1.0 in
Experiments 2 and 3), such that the latter shapes of units
were not completely predictable from the previous shape,
even if the triplet structure had been learned.
Button Responses: Predictions Both statistical and
chunking models predict that successful VSL should results
in triplets being more familiar than part-sequences.
Statistical models also predict that triplets and statisticallymatched illusory triplets should seem equally familiar,
whereas chunking models predict that triplets should seem
more familiar because they are represented by a single
higher-order chunk (e.g., ‘ABF’), whereas illusory triplets
are represented by two lower-order chunks (e.g., ‘AB’,
‘BC’; Servan-Schreiber & Anderson, 1990) or no chunks at
all (e.g., Fiser & Aslin, 2005). Even if illusory triplets are
represented by two lower-order chunks, illusory triplets
should seem relatively unfamiliar simply because a greater
number of stored chunks are needed to describe them

2222

Acknowledgments

(Servan-Schreiber & Anderson, 1990).
Button Responses: Results A paired- samples t-test
revealed that the percentage of trials on which participants
chose triplets as more familiar (see Figure 3C) did not differ
significantly when triplets were contrasted with illusory
triplets versus part-sequences (t[17] = 0.24, p = .81).
Moreover, one-sample t-tests revealed that participants
chose triplets as more familiar than both part-sequences and
illusory triplets significantly more often than chance: ts(17)
> 2.81, ps < .02. These findings suggest that learners
represent visual sequences in terms other than statistical
relations between items, as predicted by chunking models.

General Discussion
The present series of experiments investigated processes of
VSL. Specifically, we examined whether adults represent
sequences in terms of chunks or statistical relations. We
used highly comparable methods to examine performance
on embedded and illusory item tasks that, in previous
research, have suggested different underlying mechanisms.
Participants in Experiments 1 and 2 provided evidence of
representing embedded pairs, contrary to the predictions of
typical chunking models (e.g., Orbán et al., 2008), but
consistent with both statistical and competitive chunking
models. Experiment 3 examined participants’ endorsement
of illusory items to distinguish between statistical and
competitive
chunking
explanations.
Participants
distinguished triplets from statistically-matched illusory
triplets, suggesting that they represented sequences in terms
of chunks rather than statistics. Only the Servan-Schreiber
and Anderson (1990) competitive chunking model is able to
account for the data obtained across all three experiments.
Yet, the present data contrast with findings from previous
studies of embedded (Fiser & Aslin, 2005; Giroux & Rey,
2009) and illusory (Endress & Mehler, 2009) items. This
may mean that current models of SL are inadequate, as no
single model can account for performance across tasks and
domains. However, it is also possible that the
representations resulting from SL are task-dependent such
that representations vary depending on characteristics of the
information to be learned. Adults may, for instance,
represent units and their embedded chunks when the
quantity of information or complexity of the task is
relatively low (e.g., Experiments 1 and 2), but may represent
only the highest order of chunks when a greater quantity or
complexity of information puts additional demands on
attention and memory systems (e.g., Fiser & Aslin, 2005).
Further research is needed to examine these possibilities.
Regardless, the present experiments have important
implications for theories and models of SL. Studies of
chunking have a long history in the implicit learning
literature, but have only recently been introduced to
statistical learning research (Perruchet & Pacton, 2006). The
present data suggest that our understanding of SL will profit
from researchers continuing to consider the role chunking,
particularly competitive chunking, may play in SL.

This research was funded by NIH R01-HD73535 to SPJ and
by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE-0707424 to
LKS. The authors would like to thank the participants and
the volunteers and staff of the UCLA Baby Lab.

References
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Endress, A., & Mehler, J. (2009). The surprising power of
statistical learning: When fragment knowledge leads to
false memories of unheard words. Journal of Memory and
Language, 60, 351-367.
Fischer, B., Biscaldi, M., & Gezeck, S. (1997). On the
development of voluntary and reflexive components in
human saccade generation. Brain Research, 754, 285-297.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12, 499-504.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2002). Statistical learning of
higher-order temporal structure from visual shape
sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 28, 458-467.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2005). Encoding multi-element
scenes: Statistical learning of visual feature hierarchies.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 521.
Frank, M. C., Goldwater, S., Griffiths, T., & Tenenbaum, J.
B. (2010). Modeling human performance in statistical
word segmentation. Cognition, 117, 107-125.
Giroux, I., & Rey, A. (2009). Lexical and sublexical units in
speech perception. Cognitive Science, 33, 260-272.
Orbán, G., Fiser, J., Aslin, R. N., & Lengyel, M. (2008).
Bayesian learning of visual chunks by human observers.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105,
2745-2750.
Perruchet, P., & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and
statistical learning: One phenomenon, two approaches.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 233-238.
Saffran, J. R. (2001). Words in a sea of sounds: The output
of infant statistical learning. Cognition, 81, 149-169.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996b).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996a). Word
segmentation: The role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Servan-Schreiber, E., & Anderson, J. R. (1990). Learning
artificial grammars with competitive chunking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 592.
Toro, J. M., & Trobalón, J. B. (2005). Statistical
computations over a speech stream in a rodent.
Perception & Psychophysics, 67, 867-875.

2223

