Statistical Structures in Artificial languages Prime Relative Clause Attachment
Biases in English
Felix Hao Wanga, Mythili Menonb, Elsi Kaiserb {wang970, mythilim, emkaiser} @usc.edu
a

Department of Psychology, bDepartment of Linguistics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089
Abstract

The phenomenon of syntactic priming is well studied in the
literature, but the mechanisms behind it are still under debate.
In this study, we trained English-speaking participants in
artificial language sequences with dependencies that are either
adjacent or non-adjacent. The participants then wrote
completions to relative clause (RC) fragments. We found that
participants who learn non-adjacent dependencies in the
artificial language, exhibit a bias to write high-attachment
(non-adjacent) continuations for RCs, when compared to
participants in a control condition who exhibit low-attachment
(adjacent) biases in RCs. The implications for theories of
syntactic priming and its relations to implicit learning are
discussed.
Keywords: implicit learning; syntactic priming; relative
clause attachment bias; non-adjacent dependencies

Introduction
Although the phenomenon of syntactic priming has been
very well studied in the literature, the exact processes
behind priming are still unclear. We build on insights from
research in child language development and adult sentence
processing regarding the representation of abstract
dependencies in language and other cognitive domains (e.g.
Gomez, 2002; Scheepers, Sturt, Martin, Myachykov,
Teevan & Vizkupova, 2011). We explore whether an
abstract relation represented through word-level statistical
regularities in an artificial language can prime the
attachment biases of relative clauses. Specifically, we
explore the question whether adjacent and non-adjacent
structures derived from statistics can prime the low versus
high attachment preferences during the production of
English relative clauses.
Structural priming
Structural priming refers to the observation that people are
more likely to reuse syntactic structures that they have
already used (e.g. Bock, 1986; Bock, 1989). Researchers
have demonstrated structural priming with different
syntactic structures, including verb phrase structures
(Pickering & Branigan, 1998) and relative clause attachment
(Mitchell, Cuetos, Corley & Brysbaert, 1995; Scheepers,
2003). In the classic paradigm (Bock, 1986), participants
read sentences and were asked to describe semantically
unrelated pictures. The question is whether their structural
choices in the descriptions are influenced by the structure of
the sentences they had previously read. For example, if
participants have read a sentence like “The teacher sent the
girl a letter” (recipient girl mentioned before direct object

letter) and then are asked to describe a picture where a
soccer player is giving a ball to a boy, they are more likely
to say The soccer player gave the boy a ball rather than The
soccer player gave a ball to the boy. In general, reading or
producing sentences of one type can prime the production
and comprehension of sentences with the same structure.
Structural priming occurs even if the lexical items in the
prime sentence and the target sentence are different, and
thus cannot be attributed to lexical repetition (e.g., Corley &
Scheepers, 2002; Pickering & Branigan, 1998; Branigan,
Pickering & Cleland, 2000).
There are two theoretical accounts for structural priming:
the Lingering Activation account and the Implicit Learning
account. The “lingering activation” account (Pickering &
Branigan, 1998) suggests that people are using the same
structures repeatedly because the activation for the
structures lingers in the language production system. This
account predicts that when structures leave activations
lingering, these activations are more likely to be reused.
Furthermore, since there is also lingering activation of
lexical items, priming with the same lexical item with the
same syntactic structure will yield stronger priming (‘lexical
boost’). Crucially, because activation – of lexical items as
well as syntactic structures – is assumed to decay over time,
this account predicts priming effects should diminish
relatively rapidly with time. The “implicit learning account”
(Bock & Griffin, 2000; Chang, Dell & Bock, 2006) suggest
that syntactic priming does not require (and usually does not
involve) any explicit awareness on the part of the
participants that they are reusing structures. In the classic
structural priming paradigm, exposure to the structures of
interest is covert in that participants are not aware that
certain sentences are primes while others are fillers. As a
whole, these observations suggest that adapting to the
structures in question is not a conscious choice, i.e. priming
is an implicit process.
Hartsuiker, Bernolet, Schoonbaert, Speybroeck &
Vanderelst (2008) suggest that both the “implicit learning”
and “lingering activation” accounts are partially right.
Hartsuiker et al. monitored the timing course of syntactic
priming, using stimuli triggering priming from the same
verb or different verbs. Between trials, the timing between
the exposure to a structure (prime) and the production of the
target sentence was varied. Hartsuiker et al. discovered that
there is indeed a larger priming effect when both prime and
target use the same verb (“lexical boost”). Furthermore, this
effect decays with time, consistent with the predictions of
the “lingering activation” account. Given that our design did
not use any English verbs to achieve the priming effect, our

2607

results validates the implicit learning account for the
phenomenon when syntactic structures get reused without
having the same lexical items. However, it does not speak to
the lingering activation account. We agree with Hartsuiker
et al. that these two accounts are not mutually exclusive.
Artificial language paradigm
To study syntactic priming without the influence from
lexical items, we decided to use an artificial language
paradigm. Artificial language can provide adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies, which are structural and can be
learned.
In order to demonstrate implicit learning, researchers have
used the artificial language paradigm (e.g., Saffran, Newport
& Aslin, 1996; Gomez, 2002). In an artificial language,
people can learn statistical patterns in nonsense words (e.g.
voy glaik fex, choon glaik jub). Participants can readily learn
these structures, in the absence of any semantic information.
Constructed with nonsense words, these linguistic materials
only convey distributional patterns. Furthermore, statistical
learning goes beyond the specific items (words or syllables)
being learned (Thiessen, Kronstein & Hufnagle, 2013;
Mintz, Wang & Li, 2014). According to Thiessen et al.
2013, statistical learning initially gathers statistics about the
input presented to learner and uses this information to learn
and infer patterns. Under this view, the representations that
learners generate from artificial language input have been
argued to be abstract and structural.
Adjacency and non-adjacency
Two key concepts relevant for structural representations are
the notions of adjacency and non-adjacency. Starting with
the seminal study of Saffran, Newport & Aslin (1996), there
is a large body of work showing that adults and children can
learn adjacent relations from continuous streams of
syllables. More recent artificial language work (Gomez
2002; Maye & Gomez, 2005) demonstrated that adults and
children are also able to learn non-adjacent dependencies
between words.
Relative clauses
The notions of adjacency and non-adjacency are also
relevant in the domain of syntax, for example in the
representation of relative clauses. In English sentences with
the structure NP1 of NP2 who (e.g., Jessica visited the
doctors of the supermodel who), the following relative
clause completions (eg. who lived in Los Angeles) can
potentially attach to either one of the NPs. In high
attachment completions, the following relative clause
attaches back to the higher NP1 (eg. the doctors lived in Los
Angeles). In the low attachment completions, the relative
clause attaches back to the lower NP2 (eg. the supermodel
lived in Los Angeles).
In our experiment, participants are asked to complete
sentence fragments ending in ‘who’. Thus, they can
complete the sentence fragment modifying either the
immediately adjacent noun (NP2), or the non-adjacent noun

(NP1). If there are more high-attachment sentences
produced, we call this a high-attachment bias, and vice
versa. The high attachment completions are instances of
non-adjacency whereas the low attachment completions are
adjacency. In English, the default preference for attachment
completions is low attachment, i.e. participants tend to
attach ambiguous relative clauses to the lower NP (e.g.
Cuetos and Mitchell, 1988).
As pointed out by Scheepers (2003), the distinction
between high and low in relative clause attachment bias has
to do with syntactic sequencing. The syntactic rules used to
generate these representations are the same, and the only
exception is that in low attachment, the relative clause is
modifying the noun immediately preceding it, whereas in
high attachment, the relative clause is modifying the noun
non-adjacently preceding it. In our opinion, this provides a
striking analogy to artificial language dependencies, because
artificial language provides combinatorial properties where
words are corresponding to other words, according to some
combinatorial pattern. The only potential issue is the grain
size of sequencing (word vs. phrase level). However, there
is previous research suggesting that grain size may not
matter to a large extent (Melinger & Dobel, 2005).
Aims of this work
In this study, we test whether structural representations
arising from distributional information can prime relative
clause completions. If relative clause attachment biases
come from representations that are completely different
from distributional dependencies, exposure to any artificial
language with only distributional properties will not result
in any changes in the completion of relative clauses. On the
other hand, if relative clause attachment biases come from
representations that are shared with sequential
representations from an artificial language, the relative
clause bias is predicted to change as a result of learning
structures that are different from the default.
To this end, we primed participants with an artificial
language which conveyed structures that are consistent with
our prediction. In this experiment, we will test this
hypothesis with English.

Experiment
In this experiment, we explore the effect of statistical
structures from an artificial language on participants’
completions of ambiguous relative clauses fragments. Our
experiment has a learning phase and a testing phase.

Methods
Participants
A total of 50 adult native English speakers participated.
Given the four conditions described below, there were 20
participants in the critical non-adjacent dependency
condition, 10 in the control condition, and 10 in each of the
two adjacent dependency conditions.

2608

Stimuli
First, we describe the stimuli used in the training phase of
the experiment. In the training phase, we used artificial
words, similar to the stimuli used in Gomez (2002)’s nonadjacent dependency experiment. A female American
English speaker read and recorded these nonsense words in
a sound isolated room. The speaker pronounced the stimuli
one word at a time. We digitally spliced the recordings into
individual word files that began at the onset of each word.
Word files generated from this procedure are all shorter than
0.8 seconds, and silences were added to make each word
files 0.8 seconds long. This allowed us to concatenate word
files into sentences with words occurring every 0.8 seconds.
Between each artificial sentence, there was also a 0.8 second
pause in between, to signal the start and the end of each
‘sentence’.
Similar to Gomez (2002), each sentence is made of 3
words, which differ in terms of their distributional
properties, between the 4 conditions of the experiment. We
used monosyllabic words (for eg. voy, nud, choon, glaik,
blit, ghire, ghen, sowch, dess, fex, dap, jub). In the nonadjacent dependency condition (AiXCi), words at the
beginning and the end always co-occurred. Three different
pairs of words co-occured as A words or C words, while a
total of 6 different words were used as X words at the
intermediate position. Thus, we had a total of 18 unique
trigrams. The correspondence between A words and C
words were counterbalanced between subjects, such that the
wrong correspondence in one condition is correct in the
other condition, and vice versa. In the adjacent dependency
condition, the X words were moved to the front (XAiCi
condition) or to the back (AiCiX condition), such that the
dependency is adjacent. In the control condition, 18 unique
word trigrams were created such that there were same
numbers of adjacent or non-adjacent dependencies in these
trigrams.
We also created sentence fragments for participants to
complete in the testing phase. There were 2 kinds of
sentence fragments: targets and fillers. All target sentence
fragments are similar to example (1), where NP1 the doctors
and NP2 the supermodel are connected by the preposition
‘of’ and are followed by the relative pronoun ‘who’.
(Targets were constructed using stimuli used by Rohde,
Levy & Kehler, 2011. We made sure that none of our verbs
had strong implicit causality biases, using Hartshorne and
Snedeker (2012).
(1)
John met [the doctors]NP1 of [the supermodel]NP2
[who invented a vaccine]RC.
The participants’ task was to write a completion for the
sentence. We analyzed the completions for whether the
relative clause modifies NP1 (e.g. the doctors who invented
a vaccine) or NP2 (e.g. the supermodel invented a vaccine).
Relative clauses that modify NP1 are called high
attachments and relative clauses that modify NP2 are called
low attachments.
In targets, the subject of the sentence was always a proper
name (equal numbers of male and female names). The two

NPs were definite animate nouns, preceded by the definite
article. The NPs were controlled for number. Half of the
sentences had NP1-singular and NP2-plural (e.g. the doctor
of the supermodels) and the other had the opposite
configuration (e.g. the doctors of the supermodel). This
facilitates coding because number marking on the verb
usually disambiguates (e.g. …was happy vs. …were happy).
All verbs in the target fragments (e.g. counted) were nonimplicit causality (non-IC verbs), chosen in order to avoid
verb semantic bias. Fillers were non-ambiguous English
sentence fragments of similar length. Each participant
completed the same 18 target sentences and 18 filler
sentences. The fillers do not involve relative clauses, and are
comprised of a range of sentence types. They are open to a
range of reasonable continuations, and do not follow a
particular structure.
Design and Procedure
There are two phases to the experiment, the training phase
and the testing phase. During the training phase, participants
listened to sequences in the artificial language and in the test
phase, participants either answered an artificial language
question, or completed a sentence fragment.
The training phase consisted of a simple artificial
language learning task. In this phase, participants listened to
an artificial language according to the condition that they
were in. To briefly reiterate, there were 4 between-subject
conditions: the AiXCi condition (Non-adjacent dependency
condition), the AiCiX and XAiCi conditions (adjacent
dependency condition), and the control condition where
about equal numbers of adjacent and non-adjacent
dependencies exist in the 18 trigrams used. In between
trials, participants were also asked the question “What was
the last word you heard?” with 2 words to choose from.
Participants then pressed a key to indicate their choice. This
question was presented every few minutes, in order to keep
them alert during this task. The training phase lasted about
20 minutes.
The test phase immediately followed the training phase.
Before the test phase started, we reminded participants of
the two types of tasks: questions about the artificial
language and sentence fragments for them to complete. Half
of all the test trials were questions about the artificial
language (36 trials), and the other half were sentence
completions (36 trials). The artificial language portion
consisted of trigrams that are composed in the same fashion
as in the training phase. Three words at a pace of 0.8 second
per word were presented to the participant, and then a
question appeared on the screen: “Did you hear this in the
training phase or not?” Across the testing session, there
were 36 test items, half of which are targets (trigrams from
the artificial language), and the other half foils (trigrams not
in the artificial language). The foils in the AXC, ACX, XAC
conditions are such that the correspondence in terms of the
dependency is incorrect (AiXCk, k~=i). The foils in the
control conditions are reversed strings from the training

2609

trigrams. For sentence completion trials, half of the sentence
fragments were target and half were foils.
The trials were block pseudo-randomized in the following
way. The two types of trials that were critical were the
relative clause target sentence completions and artificial
language questions that are from the language. The relative
clause target sentence completions are always preceded
from an artificial language item from the language, that is,
participants are supposed to answer, “Yes” to the artificial
language question. We mixed these trials with all the other
trials in a randomized order within 3 blocks. The testing
phase lasted between 15 to 30 minutes, and the whole
experiment was done under an hour.
Coding
We coded only the target sentences. The coding of the
sentences resulted in three types: high attachment (HA), low
attachment (LA), and ambiguous. For the logistic regression
model, HA was coded as 1 and LA was coded as 0, and
ambiguous was treated as missing. Coding was done with
mostly syntactic considerations, given that the two NPs in
our sentences are different in terms of number, so the verb
from the continuation in the relative clause shows overt
morphological agreement with the NPs. If verb number did
not disambiguate (e.g. went, asked), semantic cues were
used to decide high attachment (e.g. Emily worked with the
mother of the children who just got tenure) from low
attachment (Chris counted the fans of the singer who just
finished the encore). If both verb marking and semantic cues
were unclear, the sentence was coded as ambiguous.
The continuations were double coded by two native
English speakers, who exhibited >99% agreement. (The
remaining <1% of the items were resolved by discussion).
Training Phase Results
In all conditions, participants were able to correctly endorse
correct items in the artificial language and rejected foils
above chance. For each of the four conditions, we ran a
mixed-effects logistic regression, with respect to
participants’ responses in the testing phase (Table 1). The
responses included both the target artificial language items
and the foil items. In the regression, subjects were specified
as random effect with no fixed effects. This way, the coefficient of the intercept indicates a comparison with chance
(Jaeger, 2008), and we report the co-efficient (β) with the
associated z and p-values.

Now, we turn to the priming results. As mentioned, the
outcome is a binary response for high/low attachment, with
others were coded as missing. The sentences coded as
missing included tiny proportions of continuations where
the participant entered continuations that are syntactically
incorrect, as well as those that are semantically completely
ambiguous with regard to attachment. These sentences were
missing at random, and a Goodness of Fit test showed that
there are no in-between condition differences in terms of the
amount of data missing (p=0.09). In a mixed-effects logistic
regression model that predicts the proportion of completion
being high attachment (coded as 1) vs. low attachment
(coded as 0), the artificial language learning condition was
specified as the fixed effects while holding subjects and
items as random effects. The general model fit was
indicated by the Wald chi-squared test, which yields a pvalue smaller than 0.001.
Our main results show that when comparing between
conditions, we find that the non-adjacent dependency
condition is significantly different from the control
condition, while the adjacent dependency conditions are not.
In other words, as can be seen in Figure 1 (below), we see
that although in the control condition, the participants are
biased to produce more low attachment completions (55%),
in the non-adjacent dependency condition (AiXCi) the
number of low attachment completions is significantly
lower (37%). In the adjacency conditions (AiCiX, XAiCi),
the low attachment completions are not significantly
different from the control condition (52 % for AiCiX, 48%
for XAiCi). Moreover, in the non-adjacency condition, there
is an overall bias for high attachment completions (42 %).
These results are in Table 2, and we plot out the proportions
of sentence completions in each artificial language condition
in Figure 1.
Table 2. Result of logistic regression for priming
Cond.
AXC
ACX
XAC

β
0.82
2.14
0.281
0.637

Z
2.76
3.78
0.99
4.94

β
0.951
0.229
0.25

Z
4.38
0.89
1.00

p-value
<0.001***
0.372
0.318

Sorted by artificial language manipulation type for
Experiment 1, as compared to the control condition.

0.6	  
0.5	  

Table 1. Artificial language learning test phase results
compared to chance
Condition
AXC
ACX
XAC
Control

Manipulation
Non-Adjacent
Adjacent
Adjacent

0.4	  

p-value
0.006 **
<0.001 ***
0.32
<0.001 ***

0.3	  

HA	  

0.2	  

LA	  

0.1	  
0	  
AXC	  

Priming results: RC Completion patterns

2610

ACX	  

XAC	  

control	  

Figure 1. Proportions of sentence completions in each
artificial language condition
Since the non-adjacent dependency condition is changing
participants’ performance, we ran more tests to examine the
patterns of data in this condition closely. Two further
analyses investigate the specific relationship between
participants’ item-level judgment about artificial language
tests and their tendencies to complete a target sentence with
a high attachment continuation. Table 3 (below) details the
numbers of yes/no responses for the artificial language item
immediately before the completion of the target sentence
completions.
Table 3. Completing high-attachment RC and answering
correctly to the AXC question preceding it.
Response
Yes (correctly)
No

High attachment
105
40

Low attachment
96
48

Table 3 shows this non-existent relationship in the nonadjacent condition. Fisher’s exact yields p=0.798, ns.
Figure 2 demonstrate the relationship at the participant
level, correlating general performance on artificial language
tasks and the proportion of high attachment completions.
Both of these analyses show no apparent relations between
the two. We come back to this point in the discussion.

Figure 2. Participant level artificial language task
performance and high attachment completion proportions
per subject.
The correlation between (i) correctly remembering specific
word-level (Ai with Ci) correspondences and (ii) a bias
towards producing non-adjacent dependencies is weak (0.053) and non-significant (p= 0.82).
Summary
In this experiment, we studied attachment biases in the
completion of relative clause fragments in English. We
observe a main effect of artificial language condition.
Specifically, the non-adjacent dependency condition
changes the attachment bias significantly. On average,
participants produced 18.6% more high attachment relative
clause completions in the non-adjacent artificial language

condition than in the control condition. We find this result
that participants reuse the structure from the artificial
language to the participants’ native language very similar to
the phenomenon of syntactic priming, This result has
interesting theoretical implications, as we discuss in the next
section.

General Discussion
We conducted an experiment where we provided structures
for people to learn in an artificial language task, and we
tested how these structures change the biases in relative
clause attachment in natural language. In doing so, we
provide the first demonstration that implicit learning of
structures changes the bias in relative clause attachment,
providing empirical evidence for the link between the two
processes, structural learning and sentence production.
We used the artificial grammar learning paradigm in this
study to induce implicit learning. Different language
learning tasks require different kinds of learning
mechanisms and it is important to choose the right task to
induce implicit learning. Unlike learning the meaning of
lexical items, which is dependent on the explicit learning
system (Trueswell et al, 2013; Wang & Mintz, in revision),
learning grammars from an artificial language stream uses
an implicit learning process (e.g., Ullman 2004). For these
reasons, we chose the artificial language learning task that
yield abstract structural representations.
This study allows us to characterize syntactic priming as
implicit learning using an experimental approach. Previous
work (Chang, Dell & Bock, 2006) used a connectionist
model to specify how the process of implicit learning
happens. In their model, it is assumed that reading sentences
of a particular structure changes the weights over that
structure such that the bias for that structure increases. This
was in turn used to demonstrate, in production, why
syntactic priming occurs. This model provides a
computational account of how implicit learning happens and
how it influences syntactic behaviors. Our approach
provides an empirical validation for this computational
account, in that we directly measure the result of implicit
learning via assessing outcomes of artificial language
learning. Our data provide a causal link between implicit
learning and syntactic priming. This can explain the
presence of syntactic priming only when the artificial
language with the combinatorial properties (non-adjacent)
that are different from default biases (adjacent) which lead
to preference for non-adjacent attachment in RC
completion.
Once the structural representation is learned from the
artificial language, the artificial language tests suggest that it
does not matter whether participants are aware of the
particular dependencies at the lexical level. The canonical
way of assessing artificial grammar learning task (asking
yes/no questions for one string at a time) requires explicit
reflection of whether strings are grammatical or not, which
is not the best way to probe implicit representations. Future
work should use a more implicit measure of artificial

2611

language learning to observe more subtle effects. In our data
at least, we observe a zero correlation between the
performance in the ‘explicit’ artificial language task and the
sentence completion task. We take this as an indication that
the learning of the abstract patterns results in implicit
representations (Fiser & Aslin, 2001; Saffran, Newport,
Aslin, Tunick & Barrueco, 1997).
We have a few future directions from this work. We are
interested in investigating how to assess implicit
representations better and find a correlation between
implicit learning measures with priming. Also, we are
interested in the generalizability of the current finding with
regard to language (English, in the present study) to a
different language. Preliminary work with Spanish suggests
that the priming effect is present for Spanish speakers as
well. In the Spanish data, we collected data for second
language background, confirming that the priming effect is
not a result of sampling bias. Future work with implicit
learning processes in domains other than language
processing are also underway to assess the domain
generality of syntactic priming.

References
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive psychology, 18(2), 355-387.
Bock, K. (1989). Closed-class immanence in sentence
production. Cognition, 31, 163–186.
Bock, K., & Griffin, Z. M. (2000). The persistence of
structural priming: Transient activation or implicit
learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
129, 177-192.
Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J. and Cleland, A.A. (2000)
Syntactic priming in written production: evidence for
rapid decay. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. B13-B25.
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, J. K. (2006). Becoming
syntactic. Psychological Review, 113, 234–272.
Corley, M and Scheepers, C. 2002. Syntactic Priming in
English Sentence Production: Categorical and Latency
Evidence from an Internet-Based Study. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review 9 (1), 126-131.
Cuetos, F., & Mitchell, D. C. (1988). Cross-linguistic
differences in parsing: Restrictions on the use of the Late
Closure strategy in Spanish. Cognition, 30(1), 73-105.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12(6), 499-504.
Gómez, R. L. (2002). Variability and detection of invariant
structure. Psychological Science, 13(5), 431-436.
Gómez, R., & Maye, J. (2005). The developmental
trajectory of nonadjacent dependency learning. Infancy,
7(2), 183-206.
Hartshorne, J. K., & Snedeker, J. (2013). Verb argument
structure predicts implicit causality: The advantages of
finer-grained semantics. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 28(10), 1474-1508.

Hartsuiker, Bernolet, Schoonbaert, Speybroeck &
Vanderelst (2008). Syntactic priming persists while the
lexical boost decays: Evidence from written and spoken
dialogue. Journal of Memory and Language 58 (2), 214238.
Jaeger, T. Florian (2008). Categorical Data Analysis: Away
from ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards Logit
Mixed Models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
434-446.
Melinger, A., & Dobel, C. (2005). Lexically-driven
syntactic priming. Cognition, 98(1), B11-B20.
Mitchell, D. C., Cuetos, F., Corley, M. M. B., & Brysbaert,
M. (1995). Exposure-based models of human parsing:
evidence for the use of course-grained (non-lexical)
statistical records. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
24, 469-488.
Mintz, T. H., Wang, F. H., & Li, J. (2014). Word
categorization from distributional information: Frames
confer more than the sum of their (Bigram) parts.
Cognitive Psychology, 75, 1-27.
Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (1998). The
representation of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming
in language production. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39(4), 633-651.
Rohde, H., Levy, R., & Kehler, A. (2011). Anticipating
explanations in relative clause processing. Cognition,
118(3), 339-358.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., Aslin, R. N., Tunick, R. A., &
Barrueco, S. (1997). Incidental language learning:
Listening (and learning) out of the corner of your ear.
Psychological Science, 8(2), 101-105.
Scheepers, C. (2003). Syntactic priming of relative clause
attachments: Persistence of structural configuration in
sentence production. Cognition, 89(2), 179-205.
Scheepers, C., Sturt, P, Martin, C.J, Myachykov, A, Teevan,
K, Vizkupova, I. (2011). Structural Priming Across
Cognitive Domains: From Simple Arithmetic to RelativeClause Attachment. Psychological Science 22: 13191326.
Thiessen, E. D., Kronstein, A. T., & Hufnagle, D. G. (2013).
The extraction and integration framework: A two-process
account of statistical learning. Psychological Bulletin,
139(4), 792-814.
Trueswell, J.C., Medina, T.N., Hafri, A. & Gleitman, L.R.
(2013). Propose but verify: Fast mapping meets crosssituational word learning. Cognitive Psychology, 66 (1),
126-156.
Wang and Mintz (in revision). Characterizing the Difference
Between Learning about Adjacent and Non-adjacent
Dependencies.
Ullman, M.T. (2004). Contributions of Memory Circuits to
Language: The declarative/procedural model. Cognition,
92 (1), 231-270.

2612

