Temporal Binding and Internal Clocks:
Is Clock Slowing General or Specific?
Richard Fereday (FeredayR@cardiff.ac.uk), Marc J. Buehner (BuehnerM@cardiff.ac.uk)
Cardiff University, School of Psychology, Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, Wales, UK
Abstract

effect (Buehner & Humphreys, 2009; Buehner, 2012). In the
SAM, participants have to press a key in anticipation of a
target event. A series of studies using the SAM has
repeatedly demonstrated early anticipation of target events
that were triggered by a causal relation, compared to targets
that were equally predictable, but were merely associated
with the predictor, rather than caused by it. Specifically,
Buehner and Humphreys (2009) found that it is not
sufficient for an intentional action to be followed by the
target – the action has to cause it. Furthermore, even a nonintentional mechanical cause that triggers an outcome
results in binding (Buehner, 2012). Thus, causality is both
necessary and sufficient to bind events together in
subjective time.
However, temporal binding occurs not only in the form of
shifts in the perception of events delineating an interval, but
also manifests itself via direct distortions of time perception.
For example, Humphreys and Buehner (2010) found verbal
estimates of intervals separating causal actions from their
outcomes to be reliably lower than estimates of intervals
separating two unrelated events. These changes to time
perception are not merely based on post-perceptual
judgment biases, but also occur when participants reproduce
the experienced interval (by holding down a key for the
duration of the experienced interval; Humphreys &
Buehner, 2010), or when they compare target intervals to
standards in a method of constant stimuli (Nolden, Haering
& Kiesel, 2012). Thus, temporal binding manifests itself
both via shifts in event perception as well as a direct
shortening of experienced time.
Eagleman and Holcombe (2002) suggest that temporal
binding arises due to a recalibration of sensory streams:
Differences in processing latencies associated with different
modalities are overcome by realigning sensory streams, thus
ensuring a unitary percept. Because motor acts usually
produce causal outcomes immediately, a delay between
action and outcome forces a recalibration of the system. A
short delay between an action and its outcome, it is argued,
can be adapted to, thus realigning the perceptual-motor
system to bring action and outcome closer together in time.
In contrast, temporal binding could also arise due to
changes in time perception. Our sense of time is distorted by
many factors, such as arousal (Droit-Volet & Meck, 2007).
These distortions are typically explained by cognitive
models (commonly referred to as ‘internal clock’ models),
such as scalar expectancy theory (SET: Gibbon, Church &
Meck, 1984). Internal clock models contain a pacemakeraccumulator process that represents perceived durations: A
pacemaker emits pulses at rate r, which are counted in an
accumulator; changes to r affect temporal judgments, such
that decreases and increases in r result in respectively fewer

The perception of time is distorted by many factors, but is it
possible that causality would affect our perception of time?
We investigate timing changes in the temporal binding effect,
which refers to a subjective shortening of the interval between
actions and their outcomes. Two experiments investigated
whether binding may be due to variations in the rate of an
internal clock. Specifically, we asked whether clock processes
in binding reflect a general timing system, or a dedicated
clock unique to causal sequences. We developed a novel
experimental paradigm in which participants made temporal
judgments of either causal and non causal intervals, or the
duration of an event embedded within that interval. While we
replicated the temporal binding effect, we found no evidence
for commensurate changes to time perception of the
embedded event, suggesting that temporal binding is effected
by changes in a specific and dedicated, rather than a general
clock system.
Keywords: temporal binding; internal clock models; motorsensory recalibration; causality; time perception

Temporal binding refers to the perceptual attraction of
actions to their effects (Haggard, Clark & Kalogeras, 2002).
When an action triggers a causal outcome, the action is
perceived to occur later, and its outcome earlier, than two
unrelated events. Temporal binding can be interpreted as
bi-directional constraint of Bayesian causal inference
(Eagleman & Holcombe, 2002): The closer together two
events occur in time, the more likely they will be judged as
causally related (e.g. Buehner, 2005). Consequently, it
follows that if two events are known to be causally related,
they are also more likely to be contiguous in time.
Early experiments (Haggard et al, 2002) on temporal
binding used the Libet clock method (Libet, Gleason,
Wright & Pearl, 1983), in which participants watch a fastmoving clock hand (1 rotation every 2560ms) while
experiencing different events. The participant's has to
report the hand position at the time when she perceives a
target event. Judgment errors derived over repeated trials
are then used as a proxy measure of event awareness. Using
this method, Haggard et al. found a systematic shift in
judgment errors for causal actions (key presses), which
triggered an outcome (tone) after 250ms. More specifically,
participants showed delayed awareness of their causal
action, and early awareness of its consequence, relative to
single-event judgment errors. In other words, actions and
outcomes mutually attracted each other in subjective
awareness. This temporal binding effect did not occur when
participants reported the times of two unrelated events.
Studies using the stimulus anticipation method (SAM)
have replicated and expanded upon the temporal binding

686

and more pulses accumulated in a given interval I.
Consequently, increases and decreases in r will lead to
changes in temporal perception of I. Most work on internal
clock models, however, is generally of a hypothetical
nature. Few studies have attempted to find empirical support
for changes in r. However, Wearden, Edwards, Fakhri and
Percival (1998), found that auditory stimuli are perceived as
longer then visual stimuli, and, more importantly, that
regressions of subjective over objective durations yielded a
higher slope for auditory compared to visual stimuli. In
other words, the difference between judgments in the two
modalities grew as a function of duration, as would be
expected by differences in r. Might it be possible that
changes in the causal nature of event sequences likewise
lead to modulation of pacemaker speed whereby causal
intervals are perceived as shorter due to a slower r? To date,
there exists only one study that directly investigated this
possibility (Wenke & Haggard, 2009).
Wenke and Haggard (2009) combined the temporal
binding procedure with a temporal discrimination paradigm:
In a causal condition, participants pressed a key to generate
a tone after 600, 800 or 1000 ms; in a corresponding noncausal condition, their finger was passively pulled down by
a motor, which was followed by a tone – the computer
scheduled both events, making it obvious that there was no
causal connection between the passive movement and the
tone. In addition, participants experienced two electric
shocks administered via electrodes on their fingers. On a
given trial, participants were prompted to either report
whether the shocks were successive or simultaneous, or to
estimate the duration of the action/movement – tone
interval. In addition to replicating the binding effect,
Wenke and Haggard found that simultaneity detection on
causal trials was poorer (i.e. higher thresholds) compared to
noncausal trials. This is what would be predicted if
temporal binding is effected via a slowing of the internal
clock: a slowing of r lengthens the period between pulses,
increasing the likelihood that two sequential shocks fall into
the same period, which in turn leads to higher
discrimination thresholds.
However, considering the causal structure of Wenke and
Haggard’s (2009) design reveals that we have to be careful
in interpreting their results. Because the shocks always
occurred after the action or passive movement and never
before it, they would have been subject to temporal binding
in the causal conditions, just as much as the tone. This
means that the first or both shocks would subjectively
appear closer to the action. Thus, higher thresholds in the
causal condition may not have resulted from a slower r, but
could simply reflect temporal binding of shock(s) to key
press via sensory realignment. Consequently, it remains
unclear whether binding reflects changes to r.
We set out to investigate more carefully whether temporal
binding might implicate changes to r. It is important to note
that changes to internal clock processes in temporal binding
may manifest in two distinct ways: First, temporal binding
might reflect a general slowing of the timing system;

secondly binding might only affect clock processes that are
specific to the action-outcome interval. According to the
first possibility, a slowing of a general all-purpose clock
would result in changes to any stimulus presented
simultaneously with the interval. According to the latter,
effects of clock slowing will be limited only to the causal
interval. Therefore, a key question we ask is whether clock
slowing is a general or specific process.
We developed a new embedded interval estimation
procedure to address this question. Participants experienced
causal and noncausal intervals; in the former they pressed a
key to trigger a tone after a random interval, in the latter a
visual change on the computer screen was followed by the
tone. We embedded an additional event into certain trials at
different points; sometimes this event occurred before the
interval, in other trials it occurred during the interval, and in
others not at all. Participants had to estimate the duration of
either the interval, or the embedded event. If clock slowing
is general, then embedded event estimates should be shorter
for events embedded into causal intervals, compared to
events embedded into noncausal intervals. Alternatively, if
clock slowing is a binding-specific process then estimates
for embedded events should not differ between causal and
noncausal conditions. Likewise, if temporal binding does
not implicate any changes to clock speed, then there should
also be no differences in the estimates for embedded events.

Method
A key concern in developing the embedded interval
estimation procedure was to ensure that the embedded
stimulus was independent of the main interval. More
specifically, embedded events had to be perceived as
causally unrelated to key presses. To make it clear that the
embedded event was independent of the action, we
scheduled one-third of trials to contain an embedded event
before the key press, one-third after the key press, and onethird to contain no embedded event. To achieve this, we
used an algorithm that predicted a participant’s key press
time for each causal trial, and scheduled delivery of the
embedded event either before or after this predicted time. In
noncausal trials we employed stimulus delivery times
recorded from participants in a pilot experiment with the
same algorithm. This procedure ensured noncausal trials
mirrored causal trials as closely as possible.
Participants were asked to estimate the duration of either
the interval or the embedded event. To make sure that they
focus on all aspects of the task, participants were not told
which event they had to estimate until the end of each trial.
Participants Thirty-five and 34 Students of Cardiff
University participated in exchange for course credits or £5
in Experiments 1 and 2, respectively.
Apparatus and stimuli The experiment was implemented
in Psychopy (Peirce, 2007) on PCs connected to 19”
monitor with resolution of 1280 x 1024 pixels. In
Experiment 1, the embedded event was a tone (523.25 Hz),
and in Experiment 2, a yellow polygon (vertices bounded by

687

a 270 x 210 pixel rectangle) and lasted for either 300 or 500
ms. A 1000 ms presentation of a red square (400 pixels2)
served as the outcome on causal trials and marked the end of
noncausal intervals. A black square (400 pixels2) was
presented at the beginning of each trial. All visual stimuli
were presented centrally on the screen.
Design and procedure Three factors were employed in the
study: Trial type consisted of two levels (causal, noncausal),
embedded event location of three levels (before interval,
during interval, no event) and embedded event duration of
two levels (300, 500 ms). Dependent variables (measured
on separate trials) were estimates of overall interval and
embedded event duration.
Causal trials began with the black square on the screen.
Participants pressed a key at a time of their choice. This led
to the immediate disappearance of the black square, and
triggered the red square after a random interval (range 7001300 ms). Noncausal trials also began with the black square,
which remained on the screen according to a predetermined
time derived from the instrumental trials of previous pilot
participants as explained below; following the
disappearance of the black square, the red square appeared
after a random interval of the same 700-1300ms range.
Both types of trials, were presented in blocks of 30 trials, 10
of which were scheduled to contain an embedded stimulus,
during the relevant interval, 10 to contain an embedded
stimulus before the interval (i.e. before the participant
pressed the key or before the black square disappeared on its
own), and 10 trials in which no embedded stimulus was
scheduled. At the end of each trial, participants were
prompted to estimate either the duration of the embedded
stimulus, or the duration of the key press – outcome interval
(on causal trials) or the duration between the disappearance
of the black square and the appearance of the red square (on
noncausal trials).
To schedule delivery of the embedded stimulus, an
algorithm was used to predict participants’ key press time,
with the embedded event scheduled at a random time (range
50 - 400 ms) before or after the predicted key press. Based
on pilot data, we set the algorithm to begin with a prediction
of 800 ms on the first trial, and implemented a cumulative
average based on key press times up to the first five trials).
Thereafter, a rolling average calculated over the last five
trials was employed. Values shorter than 400 ms or longer

than 3000 ms were not considered for the averages.
At the beginning of each causal trial, the computer thus
determined the length of the to-be-experienced key press –
outcome interval (from a random range of 700-1300 ms), as
well as whether and when it was to contain an embedded
event. If an embedded event was scheduled, its duration
could be either 300 or 500 ms (see design specifics below).
For the participant, the trial began with the display of the
black square, which remained on the screen until he or she
pressed the Z key, which led to the immediate disappearing
of the black square and triggered the appearance of the red
square after the scheduled interval. Depending on the
schedule, the embedded event occurred between 50-400 ms
before or after the predicted time of the key press, or not at
all. Following the display of the outcome (red square),
participants were prompted to estimate either the duration of
the action-outcome interval (on a scale from 0 – 2000 ms) or
the duration of the embedded event (on a scale from 0 –
1000 ms). The screen then blanked for a random duration
(1200 - 2000 ms) before the next trial.
For noncausal trials we adopted an analogous procedure.
We replayed values from causal trials of a pilot version of
the experiment, where we recorded the time of participants’
key presses, the durations of the intervals, as well as the
positions and durations of the embedded events (based on
the same prediction algorithm as described above). In the
current experiment, for each participant, we randomly
selected a pilot participant’s data file and replayed its values
in noncausal trials, using the recorded key press time to
schedule the disappearance of the black square. For
example, if a pilot participant pressed the key 900 ms into
the trial, experienced an interval of 1100 ms, with a 300 ms
embedded event presented 800 ms after his or her key press,
a corresponding noncausal trial in the current experiment
would display the black square for 900 ms at the start of the
trial, followed by the red square after 1100 ms; in addition
an embedded event of 300 ms duration would be presented
800 ms after the disappearance of the black square. Note
that the algorithm cannot perfectly predict a participant’s
key press, and that consequently the number of trials where
the embedded event was experienced before or after the
action will fluctuate between participants (see Table 1). To
optimize the experience on noncausal trials, we screened
previous participants’ stimulus patterns and excluded those

Table 1: Mean percentage of trials on which an embedded event was experienced before and during the overall interval, for
interval and embedded event judgment trials in Experiment 1 and 2 (standard deviation in parenthesis).
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Judgment
Causal
Noncausal
Causal
Noncausal
prompted
Before
During
Before
During
Before
During
Before
During
Interval
50.16
44.35
41.94
53.63
47.66
45.55
44.38
51.72
(11.09)
(12.63)
(6.28)
(6.35)
(9.71)
(11.55)
(7.04)
(6.64)
Embedded
50.40
45.16
46.05
49.27
51.41
41.95
46.48
48.67
Event
(10.02)
(11.76)
(5.62)
(6.23)
(10.34)
(12.28)
(5.53)
(6.57)
Note: Before, During = Embedded Event occurred before/during the interval. Percentages do not sum to 100 because a
mean range of 3.91 - 6.80% of trials contained embedded events that began during or after the outcome, and are thus not
included. 2 x 2 (Trial Type [causal, noncausal] x Embedded Event Location [before, during]) ANOVAs found no significant
effects (ps>.05), with one exception: Interval judgment trials in Experiment 2 had more events in noncausal than causal
trials (means of 48.05 and 46.60 %, respectively), F(1, 31) = 7.79, p < .01. We attribute this to random fluctuation.
688

where embedded event timings deviated by more then 30%
from the schedule (e.g. where the balance of embedded
events occurring before and during the relevant interval
deviated from the scheduled 50-50% balance to an extent
exceeding 35-65% in either direction). Each causal and
noncausal block consisted of 30 trials prompting for an
interval and 30 requesting an embedded event duration
judgment, presented in random order. For each judgment
type, there were 10 trials with the embedded event
scheduled before, 10 with it scheduled during the interval,
and 10 trials with no event. The duration of embedded
events was either 300 or 500 ms, with both durations
occurring equally often across trial and judgment types. 10
trials in each block prompted for an embedded event
judgment when in fact no embedded event had occurred.
These served as catch trials, and participants were instructed
beforehand to enter an X on such trials.
Each participant worked through two causal and
noncausal blocks in an alternating sequence, with the
beginning of the sequence (causal, noncausal)
counterbalanced.

Embedded Event Location interaction was also significant,
F(2, 60) = 6.33, p < .01.

Figure 1: Mean interval judgment errors from causal and
noncausal trials broken down by embedded event location.
Error bars represent standard error.
Embedded Events Inspection of Figure 2 finds a general
overestimation of embedded events, with somewhat greater
overestimation for events embedded in causal intervals,
contrary to what is predicted from a general clock slowing
hypothesis. ANOVA found no effect of trial type, F(1, 30) =
1.29, p = .27, or embedded event location, F(1, 30) = .83, p
= .37, nor an interaction, F(1,30) = .00, p = .97.

Results
Data analysis Data were screened based on catch trials.
Participants who failed to correctly recognize more than
30% of catch trials in at least one condition (Four
participants in Experiment 1, two in Experiment 2) were not
considered for analysis.
Data for interval judgments were classified into three
categories: trials where an embedded event occurred before
the interval, during interval, or not at all. Data for embedded
event judgments were classified into two categories: trials
where the embedded event occurred before the interval and
trials where it occurred during the interval. Note that this
classification is based on actual rather than scheduled
embedded event location. Table 1 shows that the prediction
algorithm achieved approximately equal distribution of
embedded events before and during intervals. There are no
systematic deviations from the intended 50-50 balance, and
no deviation is larger than 9%.
All analyses were computed with respect to judgment
errors, defined as the difference between the estimated and
the actual value, where underestimation is conveyed by
negative values and overestimation by positive values.

Figure 2: Mean embedded event judgment errors for
events occurring before and during the interval, broken
down by trial type. Error bars represent standard error.

Experiment 2

Experiment 1

Intervals Figure 3 shows that intervals again were generally
underestimated, with greater underestimation for causal
intervals. An exception, similar to Experiment 1, are interval
judgments from noncausal trials where an embedded event
occurred before the interval, which seemed to reflect
overestimation. Above all, Figure 3 shows a clear binding
effect regardless of embedded event location. ANOVA
supports these findings, with a significant effect of trial
type, F(1, 31) = 13.03, p < .01. The effect of embedded
event location, F(2, 62) = 7.14, p < .01, as well as the Trial
Type x Embedded Event Location interaction, F(2, 62) =
3.75, p < .05 were also significant.

Intervals Figure 1 shows that intervals were generally
underestimated, with causal intervals underestimated to a
greater extent, replicating the typical binding effect. An
exception to this are noncausal intervals with an embedded
event before the interval, which were overestimated. Figure
1 also shows that intervals with an event presented during
the interval, were underestimated more than intervals with
no event and an event before. Analysis of variance
(ANOVA) found a significant effect of trial type, F(1, 30) =
24.97, p < .001, and a significant effect of embedded event
location, F(2, 60) = 17.58, p < .001. The Trial Type x

689

Figure 4: Mean embedded event judgment errors for
events occurring before and during the overall interval,
broken down by trial type. Error bars represent standard
error.
their attention between tracking overall interval duration and
monitoring the potential occurrence of an embedded event.
A common assumption of internal clock models is that
subjective time is modulated by attention, with greater
attention paid to time passing resulting in more clock pulses
accrued leading to in the experience of a subjectively longer
interval (cf. the common adage “A watched pot never boils”
or “Time flies when you are having fun”, Avni-Babad &
Ritov, 2003). This attentional modulation would have
affected causal and noncausal trials equally, as reflected by
analogously less negative judgment errors on causal trials.
However, the binding effect presumably was so robust as to
prevent causal trials to be overestimated.
Importantly, our finding that temporal binding is robust
regardless of the presence of events embedded into the
causal interval demonstrates the reliability of the procedure,
as does replicating the audio-visual illusion from Wearden
et al (1998). What then, can our results say about time
perception within the temporal binding effect? At a
minimum, our results suggest that temporal binding does
not occur due to general slowing of the pacemaker. Does
this rule out a clock-slowing account of temporal binding?
Not necessarily. It could be entirely possible that temporal
binding selectively affects dedicated time-keeping
processes, allocated to keeping track of action-outcome (or
cause-effect) intervals. Computationally, this would
necessitate multiple clocks, each capable of independent and
simultaneous timing. Buhusi and Meck (2009) provide
evidence for such a notion: Rats were trained to time 3
different durations, presented simultaneously. Quantitative
modelling demonstrated (1) that rats were able to time each
duration by independently stopping and resetting separate
clocks, and (2) that durations are perceived differently
depending on context, (e.g., the relative overestimation of
auditory relative to visual stimuli implicates modality
differences in clock rates, Wearden et al, 1998). Tentative
support for clock-slowing in binding is evidenced in
Humphreys and Buehner (2009), who found a linear
relationship between perceived and actual durations for a
range of intervals. Specifically, they reported different

Figure 3: Mean interval judgment errors from causal and
noncausal trials broken down by embedded event location.
Error bars represent standard error.
Embedded Events Figure 4 shows that embedded visual
events were underestimated, in contrast to embedded
auditory events in Experiment 1, which were overestimated.
This most likely reflects the typical finding that auditory
events are judged longer than visual events (Wearden et al,
1998). More important for our purposes here, though, is
whether embedded event judgments varied as a function of
trial type. As in Experiment 1, this was not the case. There
were no significant effects of trial type, F(1, 31) = .03, p =
.87, embedded event location, F(1, 31) = 2.36, p = .14, nor a
Trial Type x Embedded Event Location interaction, F(1, 31)
= .00, p = .96.

Discussion
We developed a new procedure - the embedded interval
estimation procedure - to study the role of internal clocks in
temporal binding. Using this method, we replicated the
binding effect in two experiments, with causal intervals
judged as shorter for all embedded event locations. In
contrast, we found no difference between causal and
noncausal embedded event judgments, both when the event
began before and during the interval, and regardless of
whether the embedded event was visual or auditory.
Interestingly, we found embedded events overestimated in
Experiment 1 and underestimated in Experiment 2, thus
replicating the finding that auditory stimuli are judged as
longer than visual (Wearden et al, 1998).
An unanticipated result concerns judgments of noncausal
intervals from trials with an embedded event before the
interval, which were longer than from any other interval
category. One possible explanation for this implicates the
trial structure we employed: Because on a given trial at most
one embedded event occurred, the presentation of an event
before the interval meant participants knew that no further
event will occur during the remainder of the trial.
Participants would then have been able to attend exclusively
to the interval, whereas otherwise they would still divide

690

slopes for causal and noncausal intervals, suggesting a
stable pacemaker rate within but variable between
conditions.
In both experiments we focused on interval perception.
What about the sensory realignment perspective on binding?
It is important to note that clock- and event-based
perspectives on binding need not be mutually exclusive. A
slower clock between action and outcome, for example, can
lead to a contraction of time (i.e., binding), which in turn
would result in the outcome perceived sooner. Thus, there
could be shifts in event perception in addition to a slower
clock. Consider now, general and specific clock slowing. In
the former case, there would be no perceived shift in the
outcome because events would now be judged in relation to
the same slowed clock speed. In the latter, the actionoutcome clock rate would differ to other timing streams,
meaning that the outcome would be perceived earlier
relative to other events timed at a standard clock rate. Thus,
a specific clock process could account for the perceived
event shifts in temporal binding in addition to distortions of
interval perception.
In sum, our results have conclusively ruled out the
possibility that temporal binding is effected by a slowing of
a general clock. They fit equally well with sensory
realignment perspectives on binding that do not implicate
subjective time-keeping at all (e.g., Eagleman & Holcombe,
2002) and the notion of multiple dedicated specific clock
processes. One way to disentangle these accounts is by
systematically investigating clock processes in causal (i.e.,
action-outcome) and purely observational (noncausal)
intervals. We are currently investigating differences in the
point of subjective equality (PSE) for a range of causal and
noncausal interval durations. Regressing PSEs over actual
durations will allow us to conclusively test for differences in
r: Steeper slopes for noncausal compared to causal PSEs
would unambiguously implicate different pacemaker rates.
Thus, our ongoing research extends the line of thought
explored in the current article that suggests a dedicated
clock process in action-outcome (causal) intervals. We
therefore suggest that the perceptual shifts associated with
temporal binding are possible due to multiple clocks
operating concurrently.

Buhusi, C. V., & Meck, W. H. (2009). Relativity theory and
time perception: single or multiple clocks? PLoS ONE, 4,
1-6.
Droit-Volet, S., & Meck, W. H. (2007). How emotions
colour our perception of time. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 11(12), 504-513.
Eagleman, D. M., & Holcombe, A. O. (2002). Causality and
the perception of time. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(8),
323-325.
Gibbon, J., Church, R. M., & Meck, W. H. (1984). Scalar
timing in memory. In J. Gibbon, & L. G. Allan (Eds),
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences: Timing and
time perception. New York: New York Academy of
Sciences, pp. 52-77.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary
action and conscious awareness. Nature Neuroscience,
5(4), 382-385.
Humphreys, G. R., & Buehner, M. J. (2009). Magnitude
estimation reveals binding at super-second intervals.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 35(5), 1542-1549.
Humphreys, G. R., & Buehner, M. J. (2010). Temporal
binding of action and effect in interval reproduction.
Experimental Brain Research, 203(2), 465-470.
Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W., & Pearl, D. K.
(1983). Time of conscious intention to act in relation to
onset of cerebral activity (readiness-potential). Brain,
106, 623-642.
Pierce, J. (2007). Psychopy – Psychophysics software in
Python. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162(1-2), 813.
Wearden, J. H., Edwards, H., Fakhri, M., & Percival, A.
(1998). Why “sounds are judged longer than lights”:
Application of a model of the internal clock in humans.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51B, 97120.
Wenke, D., & Haggard, P. (2009). How voluntary actions
modulate time perception. Experimental Brain Research,
196(3), 311-318.

References
Avni-Babad, D., & Ritov, I. (2003). Routine and the
perception of time. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 132(4), 543-550.
Buehner. M. J. (2005). Contiguity and covariation in human
causal inference. Learning and Behavior, 33(2), 230-238.
Buehner, M. J. (2012). Understanding the past, predicting
the future: causation, not intentional action, is the root of
temporal binding. Psychological Science, 23(12), 14901497.
Buehner, M. J., & Humphreys, G. R. (2009). Causal binding
of actions to their effects. Psychological Science, 20(10),
1221-1228.

691

