That went over my head: Constraints on the visual vocabulary of comics
Neil Cohn (neilcohn@visuallanguagelab.com) & Beena Murthy
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. Dept. 0526, La Jolla, CA 92093-0526
Abstract

been hypothesized that comic reading experience is
necessary to understand these signs (Forceville, 2011), and
indeed several studies have provided evidence that their
comprehension is modulated by age and experience reading
comics (Nakazawa, 2005).
We have theorized that these form-meaning pairs are
encoded in memory analogously to lexical items in a
language (Cohn, 2013). To create meaning with these
“morphemes,” this “visual language” uses similar
combinatorial strategies as in the morphology of verbal
languages: speech balloons attach one sign to another
(affixation), eyes that become hearts or dollar signs replace
one sign with another (suppletion), and multiple body parts
repeat elements to show movement (reduplication). It is
important to stress that this comparison between the “visual
language” of graphics and verbal languages of speech is an
analogy of function only. Speech balloons are not meant as
an affix in exactly the same way that “un-“ serves as affix in
the word “untie.” Rather, the analogy here is that the brain
may use a similar strategy of “attachment” in governing
combinatorial structure across domains, whether or not they
involve a common underlying cognitive process.

“Upfixes” are graphic representations originating in the visual
vocabulary used in comics where objects float above a
character’s head, such as lightbulbs to mean inspiration. We
posited that these graphic signs use an abstract schema stored
in memory. This schema constrains upfixes to their position
above the head and requires them to “agree” with the
expression of their associated face. We asked participants to
rate and interpret upfix-face pairs where the upfix was either
above the head or beside the head, and/or agreed or disagreed
with the face. Our stimuli also contrasted conventional and
novel upfixes. Overall, both position and agreement impacted
the rating and interpretations of both conventional and
unconventional upfixes, and such understanding is modulated
by experience reading comics. These findings support that
these graphic signs extend beyond memorized individual
items, and use a learned abstract schema stored in long-term
memory, governed by particular constraints.
Keywords: visual language; visual morphology; visual
metaphor; emotion; comics.

Introduction
Comics have long been recognized as using a visual
vocabulary of unique graphic representations, many of
which have permeated the broader visual culture. For
example, iconic lightbulbs floating above the head no longer
represent a source of light, but mean inspiration. Meanwhile
stars, a symbol of an object, mean dizziness when above
someone’s head. “Visual morphemes” (Cohn, 2013) like
these have generally been viewed as unique and
individualized representations (Kennedy, 1982; McCloud,
1993; Walker, 1980), possibly with metaphoric or embodied
meanings (Forceville, 2005, 2011; Kennedy, 1982; Slepian,
Weisbuch, Rutchick, Newman, & Ambady, 2010).
However, we have argued that many graphic signs extend
beyond individual instances, and instead belong to a class of
abstract schema stored in memory which uses combinatorial
structure (Cohn, 2013). Here, we explore this hypothesis
specifically for these “above the head” meanings.
Some work has recognized that the context and position
of visual morphemes matters for their interpretation (Cohn,
2007; Forceville, 2011; McCloud, 1993). For example,
McCloud (1993) noted that curvy lines above coffee
indicate heat, but curvy lines above trash indicate a bad
smell. Similar observations were made by Forceville (2011),
who noticed that a spiraling “twirl” above a character’s head
meant dizziness, but twirls next to a body showed motion.
Stars also vary in meaning: when above the head they mean
dizziness, but substituted for eyes they indicate a desire for
fame (Cohn, 2007, 2013). Thus, context matters for
interpretation. Because of this context sensitivity, it has

Figure 1. Conventionalized “upfixes” from the visual
vocabulary used in comics.
“Upfixes” provide particularly rich examples of visual
affixation, named because they go “up” from a head (Cohn,
2013). As in Figure 1, upfixes use a diverse range of images
and symbols to convey their meaning. Some upfixes involve
symbols with fixed meanings, such as hearts or exclamation

417

marks, which retain their meaning even away from a face.
Other upfixes derive from idiomatic verbal expressions,
such as “seeing stars” with stars twirling above characters’
heads to show dizziness. Still others use metaphors
(Forceville, 2011; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), often using
iconic representations. Gears turning above the head
indicate thinking, invoking the metaphors that the MIND IS A
MACHINE and MOVEMENT IS PROGRESS (Cohn, 2010), while
storm clouds meaning a bad mood rely on a metaphor of
WEATHER AS AN EMOTIONAL FORCE (Shinohara &
Matsunaka, 2009). Thus, specific upfixes use several
methods to derive meaning, though they may involve a
general metaphor related to mental states due to their
proximity to the head.
Prior work has established that comic readers do interpret
emotional meanings from upfixes, beyond their facial
expressions. Ojha (2013) asked participants to interpret four
different upfixes (spirals, spikey lines, twirls, sweat drops)
placed above faces with neutral expressions. When choosing
between possible interpretations (anger, surprise, confusion,
agitation), participants identified a variety of emotions for
each upfix, but most frequently chose the same two
meanings (surprise: ~38%, agitation: ~38%) regardless of
the specific upfix. While these results support that upfixes
contributed to the interpretation of emotion, they contrasted
the idea that certain upfixes carried specific meanings. In a
second study, participants were given this same list of
particular emotions and were forced to choose an upfix
paired with a neutral face which best represented that
emotion. Here, interpretations more consistent with the
specific upfixes appeared (max: 53%), though with a wide
range for each upfix. Also, no interaction appeared between
participants’ interpretations and comic reading expertise.

While conventionalized upfixes are stored in memory, this
abstract schema is “semi-productive,” allowing for novel
upfixes using this broader pattern. In addition, this schema
has certain constraints. It restricts upfixes to a space above
the head and pushes the emotion of the facial expression to
“agree” with this graphic sign. Thus, a lightbulb above the
head to indicate inspiration would make less sense if placed
beside the head (Figure 2b). It also must accompany a
happy face, and would be strange if placed above a sleeping
face (Figure 2c). An even more strained interpretation
should appear if both constraints are violated, such as when
a lightbulb appears beside a head and with a sleeping face
(Figure 2d).
If upfixes do use an abstract schema, the constraints on
agreement with the face should be motivated by each
individual upfix. Within this schema, item-specific
constraints determine their relationship to the face. For
example, a lightbulb as an upfix may carry with it
constraints that it should accompany a happy or inspired
face, while storm clouds would carry information about
being associated with a sad face. That is, meaning does not
come from the face or upfix alone, but out of their
combination. This interpretation may explain the variety of
interpretations found in Ojha’s (2013) studies: the upfixes
had no specific relationship to the neutral facial
expressions. Essentially, these upfixes “disagreed” with
their faces, although possibly a “weak” disagreement
because the faces used neutral expressions rather than
conflicting emotions. If true, more consistent interpretations
should arise for upfixes that agree with their matched facial
expression than those disagreeing with their faces.
Given these precedents, we sought evidence that comic
readers store this abstract “upfix schema” in their long-term
memory—beyond just individual conventions—and that
restrictions on position and agreement constrain the
interpretation of these combinatorial signs. Participants
were presented with faces and conventional and
unconventional upfixes manipulated like those in Figure 2.
They rated these images for how “easy they were to
understand,” and offered an interpretation of their meaning.
If upfixes do not involve specific constraints,
manipulations to position or agreement should have little
effect on their rating or interpretation. In contrast, lower
ratings to moved or disagreeing upfixes would show that
such restrictions do affect comprehension. Such findings
alone would not show evidence for an abstract schema.
Because of their unfamiliarity, unconventional upfixes
should lead to lower ratings than to conventional upfixes. If
these items are indeed fully unconventional and do not
invoke an abstract schema, then consistent ratings should
appear across all manipulations. However, if manipulations
to agreement or position in unconventional upfixes follow
the same pattern as to conventional upfixes, this would
provide evidence for an abstract schema, since these
instances should otherwise be novel and not stored in longterm memory.

Figure 2. Constraints on the position and agreement of an
upfix with its associated face/head.
In theoretical work, we have argued that upfixes are not
simply context-dependent, conventionalized visual tokens
(Cohn, 2013). Rather, they use an abstract schema encoded
in the long-term memory of individuals who have acquired
this visual vocabulary (prototypically, comic readers).

418

Methods

lucky, high, hurried, daydreaming, angelic, inspired, hungry
sad/depressed, singing, confused, or afraid. A final label of
“other” was used where interpretations were ambiguous or
unclear.

Stimuli
We created 32 face-upfix pairs (16 conventional and 16
unconventional). Our novel upfixes used images that could
have a logical semantic association (rainbows, pot leaf), a
fixed meaning (peace sign), or more abstract shapes that
with no overt meaningful associations (plus signs, circles,
triangles). Conventional upfixes were: hearts, stars, gears
turning, an exclamation mark (!), a question mark (?),
Zzzzs, dollar signs ($), birds and stars, storm clouds,
bubbles, skull and crossbones, light bulb, spiral and stars,
scribble, halo, and music notes. Unconventional upfixes
were: triangles, a flame, a pot leaf, a rainbow, a four leaf
clover, clouds, a single large water droplet, a fork and knife,
Xs, plus signs (+), spirals, a peace sign, a sun, ellipses (…),
sparkles, and circles.
Normal upfixes were located above the head and had an
emotion that agreed with the meaning of the face (Figure
2a). Moved upfixes displaced the sign directly to the right of
the head, instead of above it (Figure 2b). Disagreeing
upfixes altered the emotional expression of the face so that
it disagreed with the upfix (Figure 2c). Finally, Dual
violations both moved the upfix to the right side of the head
and altered the emotion so that the face disagreed with the
upfix (Figure 2d). Altogether, this yielded a 2
(Conventionality: conventional vs. unconventional) x 2
(Position: above head vs. beside head) x 2 (Agreement:
agree
vs.
disagree)
experimental
design.
We
counterbalanced stimuli in a Latin Square design with four
separate lists each containing 32 face-upfix pairs, such that
each participant would view each type of upfix only once.
We then created packets containing these stimuli which
presented them in a randomized order.
Because meaning might vary based on the relationship
between upfix and face, our stimuli used a variety of
different reference types. “No meaning” signs had no
intrinsic meaning when separated from the upfix, such as
triangles or scribble. “Fixed” meanings had a symbolic
meaning outside of their use as upfixes, such as hearts
(regardless of whether their origins may have been
metaphoric or metonymic). “Metaphoric” meanings used
underlying mappings between domains, such as lightbulbs
or gears (Forceville, 2011; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), and
finally “associative” meanings may have had intrinsic
and/or metonymic meaning, which changed when acting as
an upfix, such as spiraling birds. Similar emotions (such as
Happy or Angry/Grumpy) used several different faces, so as
not to repeat the same face multiple times.
All normal face-upfix pairs were categorized using a list
of 25 different emotions/meanings, which was subsequently
used in analyzing participants’ interpretations to these
stimuli. These categories were assigned based on knowledge
of conventionalized upfixes and graphic depictions of
emotional facial expressions. They included: Happy,
angry/grumpy, peaceful, love, dizzy/dazed, pain, surprise,
curious/ unsure, sleepy/tired, drunk, death, greed, thinking,

Participants
Seventy-two volunteers (39 males, 33 females, mean age:
21.5) from the UC San Diego community participated in the
study. Prior to experimentation, all participants gave their
informed written consent and filled out the “Visual
Language Fluency Index” (VLFI) questionnaire used to
assess their expertise at the visual language of comics by
asking about the frequency with which they read various
types of visual narratives (comic books, comic strips,
graphic novels, Japanese comics, etc.) and drew comics,
both currently and while growing up. We then computed a
“VLFI score” shown to correlate significantly with both
behavioral and neurocognitive measures (see Cohn,
Paczynski, Jackendoff, Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2012). An
idealized average along this metric would be a 12, with low
being below 7 and high above 20. Participants on the whole
had an average fluency, with a mean score of 15.7 (SD =
9.1, range = 1.75 - 41.25). Data from two participants were
excluded due to misunderstanding the task.

Procedure
Participants were given packets that contained the various
face-upfix pairings. Beneath each graphic was a row of
numbers from 1 to 7 where participants circled the rating for
how easy the meaning was to understand (1 = very difficult,
7 = very easy). Below this rating, participants were given a
line where they were asked to write their interpretation of
the images. The experiment took participants roughly 5
minutes to complete.

Data Analysis
We averaged across participants’ ratings for each type of
upfix and then calculated the mean rating for each condition
for each participant, collapsing across items. To investigate
what participants thought these upfixes meant, we assigned
participants’ freely given interpretations of the upfixes to
one of 25 different emotional categories. For example,
responses like “having an idea”, “eureka!”, and “realizing
something” were all grouped into the category of “inspired”
(such as for lightbulb upfixes). We then compared these
responses against our coding of expected interpretations for
the upfixes. A participant whose response agreed with the
predicted interpretation was given a “1” and all other
interpretations were given a “0.” For each participant, we
then calculated their mean rate of making the expected
interpretation for each condition, collapsing across items.
Ratings and interpretations were analyzed using 2
(Conventionality) x 2 (Position) x 2 (Agreement) repeatedmeasures ANOVAs, followed by t-tests to analyze pairwise
interactions between conditions. Finally, to investigate the
role of comic reading frequency on participants’ assessment

419

of the stimuli, mean ratings and accuracies were then
correlated with each individual’s VLFI score.

ps<.001), though we found only a trending effect between
Conventional Disagreeing and Dual upfixes, t(69)=1.8,
p=.08. Finally, faces that disagreed with their upfix
(Disagree, Dual) were rated lower than those that agreed
with their upfix (Normal, Moved), (all ts>4.0, all ps<.001).
However, violations of position on the whole were rated
higher than those with disagreements, though this effect was
more noticeable in Conventional upfixes, since no
difference appeared between Unconventional Moved and
Disagreeing upfixes (p=.217).
Participants’ VLFI scores positively
correlated with the ratings for Normal
Conventional upfixes, r(68)=.29, p<.05,
Conventional Moved upfixes, r(68)=.23,
p=.059, Normal Unconventional upfixes,
r(68)=.235, p=.051, and Unconventional
Agreement violations, r(68)=.26, p<.05.
In all cases, the correlations suggested
that participants with greater fluency
gave higher ratings than those with lower
fluency.

Results
Ratings
Analysis of participants’ ratings found main effects of
Conventionality, Position, and Agreement and interactions
between Conventionality and Agreement, (all Fs>23.92, all
ps<.001). A trending interaction appeared between

Interpretations
Our second analysis focused on
participants’ interpretations of the faceupfix pairs. We found main effects for
Conventionality and Agreement (all
Fs>20.7, all ps<.001), but not Position,
(p=.728). We also found interactions
between Conventionality and Agreement,
Agreement
and
Position,
and
Conventionality,
Agreement,
and
Position (all Fs>4.2, all ps<.05).
As
depicted
in
Figure
3b,
interpretations of Conventional and
Unconventional upfixes differed the most
for Normal upfixes, t(69)=4.7, p<.001,
and Moved upfixes, t(69)=1.97, p=.053.
No difference in Conventionality arose
for Disagreeing or Dual upfixes, (all
ts<1.5, all ps>.144). The lack of a main
effect of Position suggested that location
Figure 3. Participants’ (a) ratings and (b) rates of agreeing with expected
of the upfix alone did not influence its
interpretations for manipulated upfixes.
meaning as much as Agreement between
upfix and face. Differences were found
Conventionality, Position, and Agreement, F(1,69)=2.97,
between
positions
of Conventional Normal and Moved
p=.089. No two-way interactions were found between
upfixes
and
between
Conventional Disagreeing and Dual
Conventionality and Position, or Agreement and Position,
upfixes
(all
ts<2.2,
all
ps<.05). However, Unconventional
(all Fs<.776, all ps>.38).
agreeing
upfixes
(Normal,
Moved) were interpreted with the
As depicted in Figure 3a, Conventional upfixes were rated
same
consistency,
as
were
disagreeing
upfixes (Disagreeing,
higher than Unconventional upfixes, but only those that
Dual)
(all
ts<-.15,
all
ps>.884).
Agreement
had a larger
agreed with their faces (Normal, Moved), (all ts>3.9, all
influence
on
interpretation
of
their
meaning.
Upfixes that
ps<.001). No differences appeared between Conventional
agreed
with
their
faces
(Normal,
Moved)
were
interpreted
and Unconventional upfixes with disagreements, both with
more
accurately
than
those
disagreeing
with
their
faces
and without movement (all ts<1.2, all ps>.24). Upfixes
(Disagree,
Dual),
regardless
of
conventionality
(all
ts>4.28,
moved beside the head (Moved, Dual) were rated lower than
all ps<.001).
those above the head (Normal, Disagree) for both
Conventional and Unconventional upfixes (all ts>4.0, all

420

Participants’ VLFI scores also correlated with the means
for the expected interpretation, but only for Conventional
Normal upfixes, r(68)=.267, p<.05, again showing higher
agreement for interpretations by participants with greater
expertise.

have item-specific constraints. That is, upfixes on their own
do not determine the meaning by mere placement above a
head, but rather each upfix carries specifications for how it
should contextually relate to an accompanying face. These
results may therefore inform why interpretations may have
been less forthcoming for upfixes above neutral faces, as
found in Ojha’s (2013) study. Neutral faces would
“disagree” with the upfixes that they accompanied, and thus
yield more variability of interpretations than if paired with
agreeing faces. It is also worth noting that,
methodologically, the present study elicited unprompted
responses from participants. Yet, interpretations of Normal
conventional upfixes (67%) were greater than the highest
rates of interpretation for all upfixes in Ojha’s (2013) study
(max: 53%) where participants were provided with an
explicit list of emotions to choose from. Given the fact that
higher rates of expected interpretations in our study were
provided by unprompted responses, these results further
support that comic readers are able to recognize the explicit
meanings of upfixes when they agree with their faces.
Overall, agreement appeared to impact the interpreted
meaning more than position. These results may be caused
by both the face and the upfix contributing meaningful
information, which unite to form a combinatorial meaning.
Their relative position merely connects these two semantic
components together. Thus, more of the meaning may be
recoverable when altering the position between upfix and
face than if those component parts do not agree. This
indicates that agreement is a stronger constraint on the
semantics of upfixes than position, though both factor into
the overall meaning (as indicated by the differences in
ratings across all manipulations).
Despite this seeming lack of an influence by upfix
location, the positional information tested here was fairly
restricted: for positions above versus beside the head,
position appears to contribute little dissociable interpretation
so long as the elements agree with each other. It may be the
case that other positions carry more semantic weight. As
discussed, twirls above the head mean something different
than behind a body (Forceville, 2011), and stars in the eyes
differ in meaning from those above the head (Cohn, 2013).
Comparison between visual morphemes where the positions
carry meaningful contrast may therefore yield different
results.
In addition, our correlations with visual language fluency
scores also suggested that participants with more experience
reading comics rated upfixes as being more comprehensible,
even when conventional upfixes were moved or when
unconventional upfixes disagreed with their face. In these
cases, proficient comic readers may have been able to use
their prior knowledge to interpret familiar meanings (as in
moved upfixes) or to generalize across unfamiliar meanings
(unconventional normal and disagreeing upfixes). These
results suggest that knowledge of these particular upfixes,
and the construction of an abstract upfix schema, is acquired
as part of a “fluency” in the visual vocabulary used in
comics (Cohn, 2013). Such findings are consistent with

Discussion
This experiment sought evidence for an abstract
combinatorial schema within the visual vocabulary used in
comics. We examined whether “upfixes”—the graphic signs
that float above character’s heads—are constrained by their
position above the head and by their agreement with a face’s
emotion.
Participants’ ratings suggested that manipulations to
position and agreement had a significant impact on how
easy the images were understood. Upfixes that were moved
beside the head were rated as significantly harder to
understand than those where the upfix remained above the
head. An even greater decrement in understandability
occurred for violations to the agreement of upfix and facial
expression. Ratings decreased further to dual violations that
manipulated both of these factors, suggesting a compounded
effect of violating both constraints. Crucially, these
manipulations affected the judgment of both conventional
and unconventional upfixes. If upfixes were simply stored
as specific instances, then we would expect unconventional
upfixes to be rated the same no matter their agreement or
position with the face, since these novel instances would
have no instantiation in memory. Rather, ratings to
unconventional upfixes displayed the same pattern as to
conventional upfixes. This suggests that these constraints
applied beyond associations made to individual
conventionalized signs, but rather reflects an abstract
schema stored in memory.
Nevertheless, Conventional upfixes were rated higher
than unconventional upfixes, but only for those that agreed
with their faces—whether moved or normal. Conventional
and unconventional upfixes that disagreed with their face
were rated as equally understandable. These findings
suggest that conventional upfixes appear just as novel as
unconventional upfixes when the face disagrees with its
meaning. That is, conventional upfixes that disagree with
their face appear “novel.”
Participants’ interpretations of these upfixes reinforced
these results. The location of the upfix mattered less in
participants’ interpretations of upfix meanings than
agreement. Upfixes that agreed with their face were more
accurately interpreted than those that disagreed. For these
disagreeing upfixes (Disagreeing, Dual), conventionality did
not influence interpretations. As in the ratings, the conflict
between upfix and face meant that conventional upfixes
appeared just as novel as unconventional ones, and thus
were less likely to conform to the expected interpretations
of their meaning (i.e., the meaning when they were in
normal position and agreed with their face).
These results suggest that, despite tapping into an abstract
schema, conventionality does have an influence, as upfixes

421

previous work showing that understanding of visual
morphology increases with age and frequency reading
comics (Cohn & Maher, 2015; Nakazawa, 2005).
These results support that upfixes are constrained by
particular rules, and are not merely memorized on an itemspecific basis. Yet, it remains an open question whether they
constitute a unique case that uses combinatorial rules or
whether other visual morphology is constrained by similar
abstract principles, either within or outside visual narratives.
In our previous work, we have argued that several elements
of the visual vocabulary used in comics involve abstract
schemas and/or morphological processes analogous to those
in verbal morphology such as affixation, suppletion, and
reduplication (Cohn, 2013). Would other schema be
restricted by comparable constraints, or are upfixes an
isolated case? Further study on these visual vocabulary
items (both within and across cultures’ unique graphic
conventions) would need to investigate these possibilities.
It is also unclear through this experiment what sort of
cognitive processes might guide these combinations. Given
the broad analogy between verbal and visual morphology, it
is worth asking whether combinatorial principles in both of
these domains draw upon similar underlying cognitive
resources, or whether these constraints require domainspecific processing. While this analogy between the
“morphology” of verbal and visual languages does not
necessarily predict shared cognitive mechanisms (Cohn,
2013), similar neurocognitive responses are evoked by
violations to the “grammar” of sequential images as by
violations of syntactic structure in sentences (Cohn,
Jackendoff, Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2014; Cohn et al.,
2012; Sitnikova, Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2008). Thus, it is
not inconceivable to posit that combinatorial rules used to
construct the units within such sequences—the morphology
of words or images—may also recruit similar cognitive
processing. Indeed, neurocognitive responses similar to
those shown to language have appeared in research on
motion lines in visual narratives (Cohn & Maher, 2015) and
the processing of natural scenes (Võ & Wolfe, 2013), which
has already suggested the potential for such overlap.
Altogether, these findings provide initial support for
combinatorial principles underlying the comprehension of
visual morphology. These results suggest that the
construction of meaning in the graphic form—at least in the
structure conventionally used in comics—uses complexity
beyond recognizing individual visual signs. Rather, “fluent”
readers may generalize across conventional items to derive
novel meanings from an abstract schema stored in memory
for graphic meanings above the head.

Cohn, N. (2013). The visual language of comics:
Introduction to the structure and cognition of sequential
images. London, UK: Bloomsbury.
Cohn, N., Jackendoff, R., Holcomb, P. J., & Kuperberg, G.
R. (2014). The grammar of visual narrative: Neural
evidence for constituent structure in sequential image
comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 64, 63-70. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.09.018
Cohn, N., & Maher, S. (2015). The notion of the motion:
The neurocognition of motion lines in visual narratives.
Brain
Research,
1601,
73-84.
doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2015.01.018
Cohn, N., Paczynski, M., Jackendoff, R., Holcomb, P. J., &
Kuperberg, G. R. (2012). (Pea)nuts and bolts of visual
narrative: Structure and meaning in sequential image
comprehension. Cognitive Psychology, 65(1), 1-38. doi:
10.1016/j.cogpsych.2012.01.003
Forceville, C. (2005). Visual representations of the idealized
cognitive model of anger in the Asterix album La Zizanie.
Journal of Pragmatics, 37(1), 69-88.
Forceville, C. (2011). Pictorial runes in Tintin and the
Picaros. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 875-890.
Kennedy, J. M. (1982). Metaphor in Pictures. Perception,
11(5), 589-605.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
McCloud, S. (1993). Understanding Comics: The Invisible
Art. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
Nakazawa, J. (2005). Development of manga (comic book)
literacy in children. In D. W. Shwalb, J. Nakazawa, & B.
J. Shwalb (Eds.), Applied Developmental Psychology:
Theory, Practice, and Research from Japan (pp. 23-42).
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Ojha, A. (2013). An experimental study on visual metaphor.
(Doctoral Dissertation), International Institute of
Information Technology, Hyderabad, India.
Shinohara, K., & Matsunaka, Y. (2009). Pictorial metaphors
of emotion in Japanese comics. In C. Forceville & E.
Urios-Aparisi (Eds.), Multimodal Metaphor (pp. 265293). New York: Mouton De Gruyter.
Sitnikova, T., Holcomb, P. J., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2008).
Two neurocognitive mechanisms of semantic integration
during the comprehension of visual real-world events.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(11), 1-21.
Slepian, M. L., Weisbuch, M., Rutchick, A. M., Newman,
L. S., & Ambady, N. (2010). Shedding light on insight:
Priming bright ideas. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 696-700.
Võ, M. L.-H., & Wolfe, J. M. (2013). Differential
Electrophysiological Signatures of Semantic and
Syntactic Scene Processing. Psychological Science. doi:
10.1177/0956797613476955
Walker, M. (1980). The Lexicon of Comicana. Port Chester,
NY: Comicana, Inc.

References
Cohn, N. (2007). A visual lexicon. Public Journal of
Semiotics, 1(1), 53-84.
Cohn, N. (2010). Extra! Extra! Semantics in comics!: The
conceptual structure of Chicago Tribune advertisements.
Journal of Pragmatics, 42(11), 3138–3146. doi:
10.1016/j.pragma.2010.04.016

422

