The London Underground Diagram as an example of cognitive niche construction
Pedro Atã (ata.pedro.1@gmail.com)
Iconicity Research Group

Institute of Arts and Design, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Brazil

João Queiroz (queirozj@pq.cnpq.br)
Iconicity Research Group

Institute of Arts and Design, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Brazil

Abstract

Signs and icons

The London Underground Diagram (LUD) is a cognitive
artifact and a well-known example of representational efficiency, having been copied by urban transportation systems
worldwide. Here we describe the design of the LUD as an
example of cognitive niche construction happening through
iconic meaning of a problem space. We argue that the LUD's
meaning is grounded on the offer of opportunities for action
through diagrammaticity. Our examination suggest that
iconicity is at the core the cognitive niche construction.

Charles Sanders Peirce, founder of the modern philosophy
of signs, defined semiotics as a kind of logic: a science of
the essential and fundamental nature of all possible varieties
of meaning processes (semiosis). Peircean approach of semiosis is related to formal attempts to describe cognitive
processes in general. His framework provides: (i) a pragmatic model of semiosis and a conception of mind as a signinterpretation process (see Fetzer, 1988; Ransdell, 1977);
(ii) a list of fundamental varieties of representations based
on a theory of logical categories (Savan 1987/88).
According to Peirce’s model, any description of semiosis
involves a relational complex constituted by three terms
irreducibly connected -- Sign, Object and Interpretant (S-OI). The irreducibility indicates a logical property of this
complex: the sign process must be regarded as associated to
the interpretant, as an ongoing process of interpretation
(Hausman, 1993, p. 9; Colapietro, 1989), and it is not decomposable into any simpler relation (see EP 2:391).
There are three fundamental kinds of signs underlying
meaning processes – icons, indexes, and symbols. Respectively, a sign may be analogous to its object, spatio-temporally connected to it, or might represent it by means of a
law, rule or norm. These classes correspond to relations of
similarity, contiguity, and law between sign and object (see
Table 1). Icons are signs which stand for their objects through similarity or resemblance, irrespective of any spatiotemporal physical correlation that S may have with an existent O. If a determinative relation of the sign (S) by the object (O) is a relation of analogy, that is, if S is a sign of O in
virtue of a certain quality that S and O share, then S is an
icon of O. S and O are related due to the identity of some
aspect they share. Icons are very dependent on the material,
form and structure of which they are made – “An Icon is a
sign which refers to the Object that it denotes merely by
virtue of characters of its own, and which it possesses, just
the same, whether any such Object actually exists or
not” (CP 2.247). In this sense, an Icon logically determines
its Object, i.e. S-O in S-O-I is dependent on the intrinsic
properties of S.
In contrast, if S is a sign of O by reason of “a direct physical connection” (CP 1.372) between them, S is said to be
an index of O. In that case, S is really determined by O, in
such a way that both must exist as events -- “An Index is a
sign which refers to the Object that it denotes by virtue of

Keywords: Cognitive niche; Iconicity; Diagrams; Cognitive
semiotics

Introduction
The concept of cognitive niche, an extension of the concept
of ecological niche, stresses the environmental offer of opportunities for thought as a major process in cognitive development. The construction of cognitive niches has been
related to enhancement of problem solving activities (Clark,
2008), the evolution of culture (Pinker, 2008; Laland &
O’Brien, 2011) and the birth of language (Bickerton, 2009).
At the core of these research endeavors is the notion of
meaning, which binds together cognitive niche construction,
cultural evolution, problem solving and language. However,
there hasn’t been more attentive examinations on how cognitive niche construction is grounded on meaning and viceversa.
The London Underground Diagram (LUD) is a wellknown example of representational efficiency, having been
copied by urban transportation systems worldwide. Here we
describe the design of the LUD as an example of cognitive
niche construction happening through iconic meaning of a
problem space. Our argumentation has the following structure: (i) we briefly introduce the notions of sign and icon,
following C.S. Peirce’s pragmatic philosophy of signs; (ii)
we briefly describe the design innovations that characterize
the LUD in comparison to older maps of the Underground
system; (iii) we claim that these design innovations make
the LUD a more specialized icon of a specific problem space; (iv) we claim that such iconic meaning of a problem
space characterizes the LUD’s role in cognitive niche construction.

114

being really affected by that Object” (CP 2.248). The notion
of spatio-temporal co-variation is the most characteristic
property of indexical processes. The examples range from a
pronoun demonstrative or relative, which “forces the attention to the particular object intended without describing
it” (CP 1.369), to physical symptoms of diseases, photographs, weathercocks, thermometers. Finally, in a symbol,
the relation between S and O is logically dependent on the
third term, I. In a symbolic relation, the interpretant stands
for ‘the object through the sign’ by a determinative relation
of law, rule or convention (CP 2.276).

In later versions of the London Underground Diagram
based on the last of Beck’s diagrams (published in 1959),
his successors retained the essential structure from the original: octagonal grid and colored lines meeting at angles of
90° or 45°; stations arranged to show the position of each
one to the next instead of the real geographic distance
between them; the presence of the simplified River Thames
along the bottom of the diagram helping the notion of position and scale; non-interchange stations represented by ticks
and interchange stations represented sometimes by rings
sometimes by diamonds (Garland, 1994). Graphical changes
such as changing the color of the lines and the fonts used in
the names of the stations in order to improve the grasping of
information by the users and reduce their possibility of confusion were made, also to accommodate the expansion of
the system. As a result of the adaptations and modifications
made by Beck and his successors, we have the diagram as
we know it today (see Figure 1).

Table 1. The fundamental types of signs underlying meaning processes – icons, indexes, and symbols. They are characterized in terms of relative dependence of sign-objectinterpretant (S-O-I) components in triadic relation.
Type of sign

S-O relation

S-O-I dependence

icon

“similarity”

dependent on intrinsic
properties of S

index

“contiguity"

dependent on S-O spatiotemporal co-variation

symbol

“law"

S-O dependent on I mediation

What does the LUD signify?
Previously to the LUD, maps of the London Underground
System adhered to geographically more accurate representations of the lines and station locations. While both the LUD
and a geographically accurate map convey information
about stations, connections between stations and connections between lines, only the map convey reliable information
about geographic location of stations, distance between stations, length of lines and specific directions and changes of
directions of lines. We can say that there is more information to be discovered about the Underground System in a geographically accurate map than in the LUD.
To characterize the LUD as a sign whose object is the
London Underground System, while correct, doesn’t reveal
much about the functional role it plays. Beck’s design has
selected, between a multitude of information possible to be
communicated by a map or diagram, just what was required
for a user of the Underground system to solve the specific
problem of navigating the system. His design communicates
something not only about “the Underground System” in
general as a “thing” or “substance”, but about a problem
space typical of the users of the system, and partly inherent
to the system itself.
The representational features of the LUD are an icon of a
formal structure of this problem space. This formal structure
comprises an initial state (the user’s current station), a final
state (user’s goal station), intermediate states (the intermediate stations and their structure of connectivity) as well as a
set of rules for moving between states (the user needs to
move along a line, can only embark or disembark on stations and can only change between specified lines on interchange stations). More specifically, the iconicity between
the LUD and the formal structure is not because of similarity of superficial qualities, but because both share a structure of relations between its parts: the connectivity between
stations (ticks and diamonds) and tube lines (graphical color-coded lines) in the LUD is analogous to the connectivity
between problem states in the problem space. Thus, the reltion between the LUD and the problem space of the Underground users is based on diagrammaticity.

As soon as an icon can be considered as consisting of
interrelated parts, and since these relations are subject to
experimental manipulation governed by laws, we are working with diagrams. The diagram, therefore, is an icon of
relations (NEM 4:316; Johansen, 1993, p.99). The object of
the diagram is always a relation, and the related parts of the
diagram represent the relations that constitute the object
represented.

The London Underground Diagram
The design of the London Underground Diagram (LUD)
is a well-known example of representational efficiency. Present in virtually every major city in the world, it has established an international paradigm on how to perform simple
decision-making tasks regarding networks of stations and
lines. The original version of the LUD was created by the
Henry C. (Harry) Beck in 1933. Beck’s design was based
upon electrical circuit diagrams, which omit or falsify the
relative physical position of wires in order to convey information about connectivity. Beck saw a similarity with the
underground railway network in that it was possible to ignore the geographical information altogether and remove some
of the sources of confusion in the previous, more literal
maps.
Beck’s initial sketch was transformed into a properly labeled and color-coded diagram where he compressed the outlying portions of lines. The central area of the network appears to be viewed through a convex lens so as to enlarge its
scale, route lines are simplified in verticals, horizontals and
diagonals (45°) and the distance between stations has been
evened (Garland, 1994).

115

Figure 1: The London Underground Diagram as we know it
today.

blobs and color-coded lines stand for her as possibilities for
action (I) — “Marylebone is in the brown line, I can access
the brown line in Oxford Circus, or maybe in Baker Street,
after transfering to the grey line in Green Park”. She thinks
about displacement in terms of connectivity — and not, say,
in terms of distance —, not because she has taken some time
to think about the best way to think about urban dislocation,
but because the LUD makes it almost impossible to think
otherwise: she is not using the diagram as merely input for
abstract processing of information about the underground
system, but rather making a decision based on visual manipulation of the diagram itself: even if the underground system didn’t exist in reality, the diagrammaticity in the LUD
would still afford similar decisions regarding the options to
go from blob ‘A’ to blob ‘B’. That is, in S-O-I, the S-O relationship is dependent on internal relations of S (i.e., diagrammaticity). This diagrammaticity of the LUD when coupled to a context of action and decision making, offers opportunities for action and shapes decision making.
To solve a problem using the LUD involves assessing the
potential actions offered and choosing one. Several factors,
strategies and preferences might be involved in the choice:
being late, having heard that someone was robbed in one
particular station, trying to make the least possible connections, trying to pass through the least number of stations,
avoiding a certain crowded line etc. Regardless of the motives, if the choices are informed mainly by the manipulation
of the LUD, they can only happen in terms of the opportuni-

The LUD constructs the cognitive niche
For Laland & O’Brien (2011, pp. 192-193) niche construction “should be thought of as the dynamical products of
a two-way process involving organisms both responding to
‘problems’ posed by their environments and solving some of
those problems, as well as setting themselves some new
problems by changing their environments through niche
construction”. Similarly, for Clark (2008, pp. 62-63), cognitive niche construction is a process of transformation of
problem spaces by building physical structures that, combined with appropriate culturally transmitted practices, enhances problem solving or even make possible new forms of
thought.
Taking into account the characterization of niche construction as related to transformation of problem spaces, and
our claim that the LUD is an icon of a problem space, how
can we further characterize the role of the LUD, with its
diagrammatic meaning, in a process of niche construction?
In the following we argue that LUD’s diagrammatic meaning of opportunities for actions is the LUD’s role in niche
construction, arguing that meaning and niche construction
cannot be dissociated.
Take someone who is in Victoria station and needs to go
to Marylebone station. She consults the LUD, performing SO-I: the LUD (S) represents a problem space (O), so that the

116

ties for action that the LUD embeds. To solve a problem
using the LUD corresponds to actualizing in experience one
of the many potential actions offered by the LUD.
Some of the strategies, needs and preferences of users
may not be supported by the design choices of the LUD:
trying to figure out which station is closer to a particular
street, for example. The set of potentialities for action that a
representation designed specifically for solving problems of
navigation in the underground system embeds is only one
between many other possible sets that might be derived
from the system: that of a mechanic trying to locate a particular electrical fault in the system, for example, or that of a
rat which lives in the underground. The set of potentialities
that the LUD offers is a crucial part of any description or
characterization of how thousands of commuters and tourists (and not mechanics, and not rats), relate to the London
Underground System everyday. This set opportunities for
action is a part of the cognitive niche of Londoners, and it is
founded on diagrammatic meaning. Meaning, in this case, is
not a matter of a certain type of reference of a thing to a
mind, but is inextricably connected to the niche itself, i.e.,
the niche is the context required for meaning to develop.

Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing The Mind. Oxford University
Press.
Fetzer, J. H. (1988). Signs and Minds: An Introduction to
the Theory of Semiotic Systems, In J. Fetzer (Ed.), Aspects of Artificial Intelligence (pp. 13-161). Dordrecht,
The Netherlands.
Garland, K. (1994). Mr. Beck’s underground map. London:
Capital Transport Publishing.
Hausman, C.R. (1993). Charles S. Peirce’s Evolutionary
Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johansen, D. (1993) Dialogic Semiosis. Indiana: Indiana
University Press.
Laland, K. N., & O’Brien, M. J. (2011). Cultural Niche
Construction: An Introduction. Biological Theory, 6, 191–
202.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1935). The Collected Papers of Charles
Sanders Peirce. [C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss, Eds., Cambridge-MA: Harvard University Press, 1931–1935], Vols.
VII–VIII [A. W. Burks Ed. same publisher, 1958]. Electronic edition reproducing Vols. I–VI. Charlottesville:
Intelex Corporation. (Here referred as CP, followed by
volume and paragraph number.)
Pinker, S. (2010). The cognitive niche: Coevolution of intelligence, sociality, and language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107, 8993–8999.
Ransdell, J. (1977). Some Leading Ideas of Peirce’s Semiotic, Semiotica 19 (3/4),157-178.
Savan, D. (1987-1988). An Introduction to C. S. Peirce’s
Full System of Semeiotic. Toronto Semiotic Circle, Monograph Series of the TSC, Number 1.

Conclusion
How is meaning grounded on cognitive niche construction and vice versa?
According to Peirce’s pragmatism, signs are action-oriented, context-dependent processes and entities – they are determined by the fact that they figure in a process in which
what is selected as relevant is grounded on the needs of
agents acting locally in a cognitive niche. Meaning works as
a constraining factor of possible patterns of problem solving
behavior.
In relation to other types of underground maps, the LUD
does not introduce a distinct kind of semiotic process, but
specializes the semiotic process to signify mainly in terms
of connectivity. In this sense, the LUD serves as an example
of meaning as an action-oriented process.
The utilization of the LUD by an Underground user can
be understood as a meaning process S-O-I in which O is a
problem space. As this is an iconic process, O is dependent
of the intrinsic qualities of S, so that changes in S generate
transformations in O. Beck’s design innovations (changes in
S) transform the problem space (O), participating in cognitive niche construction. In this sense, iconic meaning (more
than indexicality or symbolicity) is at the core of cognitive
niche construction. This approach suggests a new philosophical treatment of the relation between problem space,
cognitive niche construction and meaning processes.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for the insightful comments and examples.

References
Bickerton, D. (2009). Adam’s tongue. New York: Hill and
Wang.

117

