The Moral Rhetoric of Climate Change
Eyal Sagi (eyal@u.northwestern.edu)
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Rd. Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Timothy M. Gann (tgann@ucmerced.edu)
Sierra Nevada Research Institute and Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced
5200 North Lake Rd. Merced, CA 95343 USA

Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced
5200 North Lake Rd. Merced, CA 95343 USA
argument, it is important to remember that such moral
concerns are not exclusive, and that a single argument can
exhibit traits from several different concerns.
Research based on Moral Foundations Theory has
demonstrated that sensitivity to the different moral concerns
varies across cultures (Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009), as
well as based ideological beliefs (Graham et al., 2009;
Koleva, Graham, Iyer, Ditto, & Haidt, 2012). In this paper,
we are interested in how U.S. progressive and conservative
media differ in the moral concerns they highlight in
discussing climate change, and how the moral rhetoric they
employ changes over time.

Abstract
Communication in the media about climate change in the
United States is complicated by the intensely ideologically
polarized state of the debate surrounding the issue; moral
rhetoric is an important dimension of how ideology is
communicated. In this study we examined how moral rhetoric
regarding this issue differs on the basis of a publication's
perceived ideological lean. To address the question, we built a
corpus from a diverse group of online news media that were
rated for their perceived ideological lean. Using Latent
Semantic Analysis we calculated the average loading for the
five moral domains identified in Haidt's Moral Foundations
Theory (Haidt & Joseph, 2004) on the terms "climate change"
and "global warming." We found that there were higher moral
loadings overall for "climate change" with a greater difference
seen among the more progressive media.

Climate Change in the Media

Keywords: Climate Change; Moral Rhetoric; Climate
Communication; Latent Semantic Analysis

Introduction
Morality is a building block of modern society. It underlies
our reasoning and decision making, and guides many of our
everyday actions. In this paper we examine the moral stance
taken by the popular media with respect to a topic that has
been the subject of vigorous debate for decades: climate
change. In doing so, we use a new computational approach to
identify the types of moral reasoning exhibited in the media
when discussing this topic and how they vary based on
ideology, and over time.
We base our analysis of moral reasoning on Moral
Foundations Theory (Graham et al., 2013; Haidt & Joseph,
2004), which identifies five different types of moral intuitions
or concerns: Harm, Fairness, Loyalty, Authority, and Purity.
Each of these moral concerns accounts for a different style of
reasoning about moral dilemmas. For instance, consider a
person who believes that climate change is a problem because
it endangers the lives of people and animals. This person is
primarily concerned with the harm that climate change could
cause to living beings. In contrast, another person might
argue that climate change is problematic because of its
complexity and global reach, making it the obligation of
nations to adhere to guidelines set by international treaties.
That person is using a type of argument that emerges from
reasoning about authority. Critically, when analyzing any

Media coverage of climate change has a strong influence
on public opinion (e.g., Brulle, Carmichael, & Jenkins, 2012;
Hart, Nisbet, & Myers, 2015). It is possible that the moral
stance taken by the media is important not only because it is
a reflection of public opinion, but also because it may help
shape it. This is especially true when media serve as a conduit
that summarizes and explains complex scientific research
that is difficult to understand with little or no relevant
knowledge. In debates around climate change, the public
often relies on reporters to provide them with a reliable
analysis of the subject matter. For instance, Brulle et al.
(2012) found that media coverage was a major factor that
affected the level of public concern about the climate change.
Moreover, Hart et al. (2015) find that exposure to media
coverage affects liberals and conservatives opinions on
climate change differently, especially where perceptions of
harm are concerned. Because of this, the moral stance taken
by the media on the topic has the potential to greatly influence
the type of arguments and reasoning that the public employs
when considering climate change.
There is much research on how the media covers events
that have a prominent impact on the climate change debate,
and what effects coverage has on public opinion.
“Climategate”, which came to light in late 2009, is a good
example. This well publicized event, which involved emails
obtained through the hacking of a server at the Climatic
Research Unit at the University of East Anglia, cast doubt on
the integrity of climate scientists. It had a deleterious effect

2063

Predictions
In this paper, we investigate two main hypotheses. First,
following the results of Gann and Matlock (2014), we
hypothesize that the terms climate change and global
warming are used somewhat differently. In particular,
progressives, more than conservatives, are likely to use
climate change. Feinberg and Willer (2013) showed that
progressives were more sensitive to moral frames when
discussing the environment. Thus, we predict that if
particular moral concerns are emphasized in the media, such
emphasis will be greater for progressives than conservatives.
However, they also demonstrated that conservatives were
responsive to appeals based on the purity concern, and that
may be reflected in articles appearing in conservative
publications.
Second, we hypothesize that the rhetoric surrounding these
terms will be sensitive to the geo-political climate and
affected by relevant events. In particular, as discussed above,

Progressive

Think Progress
Mother Jones
The Huffington Post
Slate Magazine
The New York Times
NBC
CNN
The Nation
The New York Post
USA Today
Reuters
Human Events
Real Clear Politics
The New American
Hot Air
The American Spectator
Forbes Magazine
The Wall Street Journal
The Weekly Standard
Town Hall
The National Review
Fox News
The American Conservative

Conservative

on public trust in climate science (Leiserowitz, Maibach,
Roser-Renouf, Smith, & Dawson, 2013), and was followed
by a greater incidence of searches on the world wide web
associated with climate skepticism (Anderegg & Goldsmith,
2014). There was also an increase in pejorative religious
metaphor in blog entries in the period following the scandal
(Nerlich, 2010).
In addition to media coverage, ideology and the position of
political elites are important predictors of public attitudes
toward climate change (Brulle et al., 2012). The influence of
partisan politics also has grown markedly since the turn of
the century (McCright & Dunlap, 2011). Ideology also
strongly influences how people interpret media related to
climate change; for example, the loss of trust in climate
scientists seen in Leiserowitz et al. (2013) was most marked
amongst conservatives. A content analysis by Painter and
Ashe (2012) found that ideology has a strong association with
the kinds of articles published in certain news outlets, with
more unchallenged skepticism appearing in more
conservative media. There is also an ideological effect on the
terminology as used in partisan media, with ‘climate change’
and ‘global warming’ showing different degrees of
synonymity (greater for progressives) and semantic
neighbors, depending on the ideological lean of the
publications they appear in (Gann & Matlock, 2014).
However, the analysis in that study did not examine the use
of moral language in particular.
In addition to an increase in web searches, as seen in
Anderegg and Goldsmith (2014), there is evidence of changes
to the climate change discourse following major events such
as Climategate. In examining the public response to news
media, Koteyko, Jaspal, and Nerlich (2013) analyzed
comments attached to articles regarding climate change in a
British tabloid both before and after Climategate, using
keyword comparisons, collocations, and concordance
analysis, and found a greater incidence of pejorative
references to science, and an emphasis on uncertainty, after
Climategate.

1

2 3 4 5 6
Rating of Ideology

7

Figure 1: Mean rating of ideology for each of the media sites
in the corpus. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

we expect that the Climategate scandal will affect the level of
authority exhibited in the use of the terms. Because the
scandal introduced more skepticism into the discussion, we
predict that rhetoric on authority will decrease in response to
the event rather than increase. That is, the use moral rhetoric
that evokes the authority concern should be more prevalent
prior to Climategate (i.e., in 2009 and earlier) than after it.

Method
The Corpus
Our corpus consists of 18,906 articles drawn from 23 online
news sites chosen based on popularity, as measured by their
Alexa rank, or on their potential for ideological lean. To be
included in the corpus articles had to have at least 200 words,
and have at least one instance of “climate change” or “global
warming.” All articles were published between January 1st,
2008 and December 31st, 2013.
To get a sense of the ideological lean of these publications,
we surveyed 200 native English speakers on Amazon

2064

Mean Loading

Authority

Fairness

Harm

Loyalty

Purity

0.35
0.33
0.31
0.29
0.27
0.25
0.23
0.21
0.19
0.17
0.15
climate change

global warming

climate change

Conservative

global warming
Progressive

Figure 2: Mean loadings on the five moral domains, by source ideology and term. Error bars represent standard error.
Mechanical Turk. The first page of the survey asked
participants to rate how familiar they are with each
publication. The second page asked them to rate each
publication on ideological lean, ranging from 1 (very
conservative) to 7 (very progressive). Only publications that
a given rater had said they were familiar with on the first page
appeared for them on the second. Figure 1 shows the list of
publications and average ideological lean ratings. We
identified the twelve most progressive publications as
representing the progressive media and the remaining eleven
publications as representing the conservative media.

Measuring Moral Rhetoric
We based our measure of moral rhetoric on the method
described in Sagi and Dehghani (2014), which is built around
the assumption that word co-occurrence patterns provide a
rough approximation of their intended meaning. That is, the
distribution of words in language is not random, and words
that relate to similar topics tend to occur in proximity to one
another.
Methods such as Latent Semantic Analysis capitalize on
this assumption by analyzing these patterns and using them
to identify words that convey similar meanings (LSA;
Deerwester, Dumais, Furnas, Landauer, & Harshman, 1990;
Landauer & Dumais, 1997). Following the Wordspace
paradigm (Schütze, 1998; Takayama, Flournoy, Kaufmann,
& Peters, 1998), we constructed a matrix in which the rows
and columns represented words and each cell contained the
count of the co-occurrence of the corresponding row and
column words within the corpus. We then calculated a
singular value decomposition of this matrix to construct a
semantic vector space. In this space, each word is represented
by a vector, and the distance between two word vectors is
inversely related to the probability that the words will co1

occur in the text. The similarity of meaning between words is
thus related to the cosine of their angle, which, for normalized
vectors, is equivalent to the correlation between the vectors.
Furthermore, these patterns of co-occurrence are not random.
Words that relate to similar topics tend to occur together more
frequently than unrelated words (e.g., moon and earth occur
with each other more frequently than either tends to occur
with gun).
Likewise, these vectors can be aggregated using vector
summation to produce a representation of a phrase, sentence,
or even paragraph. In our analysis we computed the context
vector for each occurrence of a term by summing the vectors
of words that occur within a ±15 word window around the
term.
We calculated the cosines in this space between vectors
representing the contexts of our terms of interest (global
warming and climate change) and those representing a set of
terms associated with the domain of each particular moral
concern, as identified in the Moral Foundations Dictionary
(Graham et al., 2009)1. These cosines provide us with a
profile of the moral rhetoric associated with each occurrence
of the terms. Specifically, for each document we calculated
the average loading of each moral domain separately for the
two terms.

Results
We calculated the average loading on the five moral domains
for each occurrence of the terms climate change and global
warming. For our analysis, we averaged these loadings on a
per-article basis. Out of 4,925 articles taken from the
conservative media, there were 3,487 conservative that
mentioned climate change and 2,907 that mentioned global
warming. The progressive media part of the corpus
comprised of 13,981 articles in which we found 11,164

See Appendix A for a sample of terms from the dictionary.

2065

articles with mentions of climate change and 8,461 articles
with mentions of global warming. Figure 2 shows the overall
mean loadings in the corpus for each moral domain, by
ideology and term. A small sample of sentences in which
climate change and global warming appear is provided in
Appendix B.2
To get a better sense of the difference in the overall use of
rhetoric between conservatives and progressives we
computed a mixed model in which the mean loading of the
five domains was the dependent variable and the ideological
position and term were the independent variables. The
article’s source was a random factor in this analysis. This
analysis revealed that there was more moral rhetoric
associated with climate change than global warming (F(1,
24672) = 122.44, p < .0001). Moreover, a significant
interaction indicated that while both groups had similar levels
of moral rhetoric associated with global warming,
progressives used significantly more morally loaded rhetoric
when referring to climate change than conservatives (F(1,
24672) = 7.70, p < .01; simple effects: climate change F(1,
13926) = 5.08, p < .05; global warming F(1, 10726) = 2.87,
n.s.).
Next, we explored differences in the moral rhetoric
associated with the two terms separately for conservative and
progressive media. For this analysis we conducted a mixed
model for each of the five moral domains with the term as an
independent variable. As before, the source of each article
was included as a random variable. Because this analysis
involved multiple comparisons, we applied a Bonferroni
correction when interpreting the results. Conservative media
used rhetoric that was similar across the two terms on fairness
and purity. However, they used a higher level of rhetoric for
climate change with respect to the moral domains of
authority (F(1, 4302) = 8.52, p < .005), harm (F(1, 4706) =
11.85, p < .001), and loyalty (F(1, 5125) = 56.01, p < .0001)3.
In contrast, progressive media rhetoric regarding climate
change demonstrated a higher level of moral rhetoric on all
five domains. The smallest of these differences was for the
domain of fairness (F(1, 5766) = 16.12, p < .0001).
These results are in accordance with our hypothesis that
progressives, moreso than conservatives, endorse the term
climate change over the term global warming and associate
it with greater levels of moral rhetoric. Nevertheless, it
appears that the overall pattern of moral rhetoric is similar
between the terms and ideologies, with the domains of harm
and loyalty showing the most loading while fairness is the
least loaded domain.
Following our second hypothesis, we were also interested
in the influence of events on the rhetoric associated with the
terms. In particular, we were interested in the effect of the
Climategate scandal on the perception of authority with

relation to the terms. Since Climategate unfolded mostly
during 2010 and the months immediately before and after, we
compared the loadings of the 5 moral dimensions for each
term during the years 2008-2009 to their loadings from 2011
and onwards. After applying the Bonferroni corrections,
there were only two statistically significant changes in
rhetoric – Following the scandal, progressive media’s use of
moral rhetoric when referring to climate change shows a
lesser degree of concern for authority (F(1, 4450) = 9.22, p <
.005) and an increased concern for purity (F(1, 2497) = 9.70,
p < .005).
The first is in accordance with our prediction that the
concern of authority will bear the brunt of the repercussions
from the scandal. However, the second result is unexpected
and might bear more scrutiny. One possible interpretation is
that the media associated the scandal with cheating and
impure motives on the part of the researchers, and these
associations colored the debate. Interestingly, the scandal
appeared to have only affected progressive media’s use of
climate change. In particular, the analyses of these domains
for the term global warming or conservative media sources
were all highly insignificant (F < 1 in all cases). This suggests
that the effect of the scandal was highly localized to the
progressive media.
To gain further insights into this result, we sampled the text
from articles that fit this change in the rhetoric used by the
progressive media. Based on this sample, it is possible that
the progressive media shifted its focus from reporting on
legislation to reporting on the science and implications of
climate change. For example, in 2009, we see frequent
references to legislative efforts, including phrases such as “…
impose meaningful limits on the nation’s contribution to
climate change” (The New York Time, January 26 th, 2009)
and “Chances for a climate change bill being enacted …”
(Reuters, March 31st, 2009). In contrast, after 2010 we find
skeptical attitudes expressed more frequently, towards the
underlying science as well as its political interpretation (e.g.,
“… a philosophy that has long cast climate change as
primarily a conventional pollution problem, not a technology
problem”, The New York Times, April 25th, 2011). Likewise,
we also identified an increased focus on the challenges
involved in dealing with climate change. For example, a
report from Reuters quotes the representatives from an
alliance of insurers stating “… we are conscious of the long
term risks that climate change poses to society” (July 7 th,
2012). While these types of differences are not obviously
linked to the Climategate scandal, they can plausibly be
interpreted as its repercussions, for instance, increased
scrutiny of the science, its conclusions, and its predictions
both in the academic sphere and the political arena.

2 We provide sentences rather than contexts because the contexts
are cut off arbitrarily and can therefore be difficult to read. However,
the sentences provided substantially overlap with these contexts and
can be considered as representing them in a more readable form.
3 In these and the following results, the reported df depends on
both whether the term was referred to in the article, and whether

words from the appropriate dimension were mentioned. We only
calculated the distances between contexts within each article
because we feel that this more accurately reflects how the terms
were used by the author.

2066

Discussion
In this paper we examined the moral rhetoric used in media
coverage of climate change issues. We found that both
conservative and progressive media show a greater moral
loading on all dimensions when using the term climate
change than when using the term global warming. This
difference was greater for progressive media sources than for
conservative ones, showing the preference of progressive
media for the term “climate change.” Moreover, the data
suggests that harm and loyalty are the primary moral
concerns evident in these discussions.
These results also accord with those of Feinberg and Willer
(2013), who found that progressives show more overall moral
concern than conservatives, and that progressive media show
the most concern for harm. However, in our corpus the
concern of loyalty also seems to be prevalent. At first this
might appear odd, but deeper examination of the terms
suggests that this could relate to the frequent reference to
national and international aspects of the issue. In particular,
the moral concern of loyalty is primarily about forming
coalitions and a sense of community. This aspect of the
concern is germane to climate change, especially given that
the media coverage is focused on national and global policy
and conflicts surrounding them. For example, in a 2011
article about the Kyoto Protocol in Think Progress we find
“… further hurt the international community’s endeavor to
cope with climate change …” (November 1st, 2011).
Interestingly, our results do not show the same trends as
some recent findings on public perceptions of climate change.
In particular, Anderegg and Goldsmith (2014) analyze data
from Google Trends and report that public interest in the
Climategate scandal was short lived. Furthermore, they
observe an increase in climate skepticism, but it was short
lived and declined back to its baseline level in less than a
month. While we found longer lasting effects of the scandal,
they were confined to the progressive media’s use of the term
climate change. This suggests that the lasting impact of the
scandal on the rhetoric used in the media was limited in
scope. Anderegg and Goldsmith’s study also observed a
higher frequency of queries on global warming than climate
change. In contrast, in our corpus climate change is more
frequent than global warming and a similar pattern is also
found in the google books corpus. This discrepancy, together
with our different findings about the possible repercussions
of Climategate, suggest that there are important differences
between the public’s perceptions of an issue and the media’s
reporting of it.

Acknowledgments
Part of the research was funded by the Center for Climate
Communication and the Sierra Nevada Research Institute, at
University of California, Merced.

References
Anderegg, W. R., & Goldsmith, G. R. (2014). Public interest
in climate change over the past decade and the effects of

the “climategate” media event. Environmental Research
Letters, 9(5), 054005.
Brulle, R. J., Carmichael, J., & Jenkins, J. C. (2012). Shifting
public opinion on climate change: an empirical assessment
of factors influencing concern over climate change in the
US, 2002–2010. Climatic Change, 114(2), 169–188.
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T.
K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by latent semantic
analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science,
41(6),
391–407.
http://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)10974571(199009)41:6<391::AID-ASI1>3.0.CO;2-9
Feinberg, M., & Willer, R. (2013). The moral roots of
environmental attitudes. Psychological Science, 24(1),
56–62.
Gann, T. M., & Matlock, T. (2014). The Semantics of
Climate Change and Global Warming. In P. Bello, M.
Guarini, & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty
Sixth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
769–774). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Retrieved
from
https://mindmodeling.org/cogsci2014/papers/096/paper09
6.pdf
Graham, J., Haidt, J., Koleva, S., Motyl, M., Iyer, R., Wojcik,
S., & Ditto, P. (2013). Moral foundations theory: The
pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. Advances in
Experimental
Social Psychology, 47, 55–130.
http://doi.org/10.1177/0963721412456842
Graham, J., Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and
conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(5),
1029–1046. http://doi.org/10.1037/a0015141
Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2004). Intuitive ethics: How innately
prepared intuitions generate culturally variable virtues.
Daedalus, 133(4), 55–66.
Hart, P. S., Nisbet, E. C., & Myers, T. A. (2015). Public
attention to science and political news and support for
climate change mitigation. Nature Climate Change,
advance
online
publication.
http://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2577
Koleva, S. P., Graham, J., Iyer, R., Ditto, P. H., & Haidt, J.
(2012). Tracing the threads: How five moral concerns
(especially Purity) help explain culture war attitudes.
Journal of Research in Personality, 46(2), 184–194.
Koteyko, N., Jaspal, R., & Nerlich, B. (2013). Climate
change and “climategate” in online reader comments: a
mixed methods study. The Geographical Journal, 179(1),
74–86.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological
Review,
104(2),
211–240.
http://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.104.2.211
Leiserowitz, A. A., Maibach, E. W., Roser-Renouf, C.,
Smith, N., & Dawson, E. (2013). Climategate, public
opinion, and the loss of trust. American Behavioral
Scientist, 57(6), 818–837.

2067

McCright, A. M., & Dunlap, R. E. (2011). The politicization
of climate change and polarization in the American
public’s views of global warming, 2001–2010. The
Sociological Quarterly, 52(2), 155–194.
Nerlich, B. (2010). “Climategate”: paradoxical metaphors
and political paralysis. Environmental Values, 19(4), 419–
442.
Painter, J., & Ashe, T. (2012). Cross-national comparison of
the presence of climate scepticism in the print media in six
countries, 2007–10. Environmental Research Letters, 7(4),
044005.
Sagi, E., & Dehghani, M. (2014). Measuring Moral Rhetoric
in Text. Social Science Computer Review, 32(2), 132–144.
http://doi.org/10.1177/0894439313506837
Schütze, H. (1998). Automatic word sense discrimination.
Computational Linguistics, 24(1), 97–123.
Takayama, Y., Flournoy, R., Kaufmann, S., & Peters, S.
(1998). Information mapping: Concept-based information
retrieval based on word associations. Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications.

Appendix A – Samples terms from the Moral
Foundations Dictionary
Moral Concern / Domain
Authority

Fairness

Harm

Loyalty

Purity

Terms
command; control;
disobedience; duties;
permit; protest
balanced; discrimination;
disproportionate; honesty;
injustice; preference
abuses; care;
damage; defend;
protection; violent
ally; enemy;
group; insider;
national; united
cleanup; dirty;
exploitation; innocent;
integrity; pristine

2068

Appendix B – Samples from the corpus
Text

Source and
Mean Loading

In the national debate on health care, it
is imperative that the international
community and our lawmakers at home
not ignore the value of preventing the
damage that climate change will cause
to both the environment and human
health.

Think
Progressive
(12/7/2011)

The good news is that there is a
growing consensus among corporate
leaders and institutional investors that
today’s
major
sustainability
challenges, such as climate change
and water scarcity, present major risks
and opportunities for businesses, and
that managing those risks and seizing
those opportunities will be a key to
success in the 21st century economy.

Forbes
Magazine
(2/21/2012)

US Ambassador to the United Nations
Susan Rice this week issued a
blistering rebuke of Russia, China and
other countries that blocked the
Security Council from adopting a
statement linking the threat of climate
change to international peace and
security.

Fox News
(7/21/2011)

The Copenhagen Accord was bogged
down for hours by protests from
delegates, who felt they were excluded
from the process or said the deal didn’t
go far enough in cutting the greenhouse
gas emissions that cause global
warming.

Fox News
(12/19/2009)

He concluded that, in his view, “global
warming was the greatest and most
successful pseudoscientific fraud I
have seen in my long life as a
physicist.”

The New
York Times
(10/15/2010)

Obama and Calderón said their
discussions ranged from working
together to combat global climate
change, to efforts at comprehensive
immigration reform.

CNN
(4/17/2009)

A severe drought in the Southwest is
devastating
crops
and
farm
communities -- and sending a warning
about climate change.

The Nation
(3/16/2011)

0.65

0.53

0.52

0.51

0.40

0.23

0.01

