The pragmatics of negation across contexts
Ann E. Nordmeyer

Michael C. Frank

anordmey@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

but supportive contexts can substantially reduce this processing difficulty (Wason, 1965; Glenberg, Robertson, Jansen,
& Johnson-Glenberg, 1999; Lüdtke & Kaup, 2006; Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008; Dale & Duran, 2011; Nordmeyer &
Frank, 2014a). Previous work has linked reaction time to syntactic surprisal, an information-theoretic measure predicting
that low-probability utterances will be processed slower than
high-probability utterances (Levy, 2008). If pragmatic surprisal—the probability of an utterance being produced given
the context1 —is responsible for the context effects seen in
negation processing, these context effects should be reflected
in adults’ explicit felicity judgments as well.

Why do some negative sentences sound strange, even when
they are both true and grammatical? We explore the pragmatics of negation by examining adults’ explicit felicity judgments
of negative sentences in context. In Experiment 1, we found
that a pragmatically supportive context elicited higher felicity ratings for negative sentences, and that negative sentences
expressing nonexistence were rated higher than negative sentences referring to an alternative object. In Experiment 2, we
used a within-subjects design to compare three context types,
and found that negative sentences were rated more felicitous in
a context where most of the characters possessed the negated
object, compared to contexts where the other characters possessed an alternative object or nothing. We discuss the pragmatics of negation in light of these results, arguing that the
felicity of negative sentences is influenced by changes in the
informativeness of these sentences in different contexts.
Keywords: Negation; felicity judgments; pragmatics

Introduction
A sentence that is both grammatical and true can nevertheless
sound odd in some contexts. If you open a mysterious box
and find that it is empty, it’s weird to say “This box doesn’t
have any chocolates in it,” despite the truth of the proposition. But the same sentence becomes perfectly reasonable if
you are in a chocolate store surrounded by boxes filled with
chocolate. What is it about context that makes some sentences sound strange (infelicitous) in one situation, but normal in another?
Theories of pragmatics attempt to provide an account of
how language users move from the literal semantics of a sentence to an inference about the speaker’s intended meaning.
For example, according to Grice’s (1975) Cooperative Principle, speakers should produce utterances that are truthful, relevant, and informative. By assuming that speakers do so, listeners can make inferences about intended meaning that go
beyond the sentence’s literal meaning. Modern neo-Gricean
theories tend to derive such inferences from the tension between being informative with respect to a communicative
goal and minimizing the effort expended (Horn, 1984; Levinson, 2000; Frank & Goodman, 2012). These theories make
predictions about sentence felicity: As in our example above,
a sentence that is not pragmatically optimal can sound strange
even when it is both grammatical and true.
We explore this relationship between contextual pragmatics and felicity using negation. As the previous example
demonstrates, negative sentences are particularly sensitive to
the effects of context, making them a good case study. When
presented without any context, negative sentences are difficult to process relative to positive sentences (Clark & Chase,
1972; Carpenter & Just, 1975; Just & Carpenter, 1971, 1976),

We focus on two types of negation: nonexistence and alternative negation. The same sentence can express either of
these concepts depending on the context. For example, the
sentence “This box doesn’t contain chocolate” might refer to
an empty box (e.g. nonexistence) or a box containing an alternative object (e.g. broccoli instead of chocolate). Previous
work suggests that adults are faster to identify the referent of
nonexistence compared with alternative negation (Nordmeyer
& Frank, 2013, 2014b). This finding could be due to processing demands (e.g. identifying a missing feature is easier than
identifying a changed feature), but it could also reflect an expectation about the pragmatics of negation. Adults may find
alternative negation infelicitous because they expect the sentence to describe present, rather than absent, features.
We examined the effects of a pragmatic context on adults’
explicit felicity judgments for different negative sentences.
In Experiment 1, we tested the effect of context on nonexistence negation and alternative negation. We found that negative sentences presented in a supportive context were rated
as more felicitous, and that nonexistence negation was rated
higher than alternative negation. In Experiment 2, we found
that alternative negation was rated as more felicitous in a context where all of the other characters possessed the negated
object, compared to contexts where the other characters possessed the alternative object or no object. We discuss these
results within a neo-Gricean framework, demonstrating that
a model of informativeness can predict the same qualitative
pattern seen in our data. Together these findings suggest that
adults’ felicity judgments reflect preferences for negative sentences that are more informative given the context.
1 We operationalize context as information that influences expectations about an upcoming utterance. Here we control context by
manipulating the base rate of certain features in the stimuli; in more
natural contexts this could include information in the setting of a
conversation or another shared task Clark (1996).

1739

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 explored how different contexts (see Figure 1)
affected participants’ felicity ratings for negative sentences.
Half of the participants in Experiment 1 saw sentences presented in a context where none of the surrounding characters had any objects (the none condition), and the other half
saw sentences presented in a context where everyone except
for the target character possessed the negated object (the target condition). In half of the true negative trials, the referent of the negative sentence was a character who had nothing
(nonexistence negation). In the other half of true negative trials, the referent of the sentence was a character who had some
other object (alternative negation). Finally, we examined how
different syntactic framings might influence sentence judgments (“has no X” and “doesn’t have X”). If previously seen
context effects are driven by the informativeness of negation
in different contexts, then these same effects should appear
regardless of the syntactic framing of the sentences.

Nonexistence,*none*

Experiment*1*

Nonexistence,*target*

Alterna6ve,*none*

Experiment*2*

Alterna6ve,*target*

Method
Participants We recruited 94 adults (50 male, 41 female,
three declined to report gender) to participate in an online
experiment through Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants
ranged in age from 18-65. We restricted participation to individuals in the United States. We paid 35 cents for the experiment, which took approximately five minutes to complete.

Alterna6ve,*foil*

Stimuli We created 16 trial items. On each trial, four
Sesame Street characters were shown standing behind tables.
One character was randomly selected as the “target” character, designated by a red box (see Figure 1). The remaining
three characters were designated as “context” characters.
Participants were randomly assigned to the none context
condition or the target context condition. In the none condition, the context characters all stood behind empty tables.
In the target condition, each context character had an identical object on their table. The objects belonged to one of
four categories: animals (cat, dog, horse cow), vehicles (car,
bus, boat, truck), food (apple, banana, cookie, orange), and
household objects (fork, spoon, bowl, plate). Stimuli were
created using images from the Bank of Standardized Stimuli
(Brodeur, Dionne-Dostie, Montreuil, & Lepage, 2010).
Below the characters was a sentence about the target character. Across the entire experiment, six of these sentences
were positive sentences such as “[character] has a/an [object].” Five were negative sentences of the form “[character]
has no [object]” and five were negative sentences of the form
“[character] doesn’t have a/an [object].”
The target character had a target object, an alternative object (“alternative” trials), or nothing (“nonexistence” trials),
allowing us to examine two different negative concepts (see
Figure 1 for depictions of these trials and the different context conditions). Trial conditions were crossed such that
each participant saw six true positive trials, two false positive trials (one alternative and one nonexistence), two false

Figure 1: The five types of true negative trials across Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. In this example, the target object is
an apple and the alternative object is a cat. Below each set of
pictures a sentence appeared about the character in red, e.g.
“Abby doesn’t have an apple.”
negative trials (one “has no” sentence type and one “doesn’t
have” sentence type), and eight true negative trials (two “has
no”/nonexistence, two “has no”/alternative, two “doesn’t
have/nonexistence”, and two “doesn’t have/alternative”).
Each of these trial types was randomly assigned to a target
object, and trials were presented in a random order.
A slider bar was positioned beneath the sentence, with a
seven-point scale ranging from “Very Bad” to “Very Good.”
A progress bar at the top of the screen informed participants
how much of the experiment they had completed.
Procedure Participants first saw an instructions screen that
briefly described the task and informed them that they could
stop at any time. Once participants agreed to participate, they
saw an instructions screen that explained the task in more detail. Participants were asked to rate how “good” each sentence was based on how a hypothetical speaker might behave,
e.g. “if no one would ever say a particular sentence in this
context, or if it is just wrong, rank that as ‘Very Bad,’ but if
something is right and sounds perfectly normal, mark it as
‘Very Good.”’ Participants were encouraged to use the entire scale. On each trial the pictures, sentence, and slider bar
appeared simultaneously, and participants had to make a selection on the scale in order to progress to the next trial.

1740

has no X

doesn't have X

Data Processing We excluded from analysis
two partici6
pants who did not list English as their native language. Thus,
4
data from a total of 92 participants were analyzed, 47 in the
none context condition and 45 in the target context
condition.
2
Rating

has no X

0
None

Target

True negative sentences were rated significantly higher in
a
Context
target context compared to a none context. For example, the
sentence “Abby has no apples” was rated higher when all of
the other characters had apples, compared to contexts where
all of the other characters had nothing. This finding supports our hypotheses and replicates patterns previously seen
in studies of processing time using explicit felicity judgments.
Negative sentences expressing nonexistence were rated as
more felicitous than negative sentences referring to an alternative object (see Figure 2). True positive sentences did not
show any effect of context, nor did false sentences of any
sentence type, likely due to a ceiling effect for true positive
sentences and a floor effect for false sentences.
To test the reliability of these findings, we fit a linear
mixed-effects model examining the interaction between context, negation type (e.g. nonexistence or alternative), and
negation framing (e.g. “has no X” vs. “doesn’t have X”) on
felicity ratings.2 Because we were primarily interested in the
effects of context on true negative sentences, we focused on
these trials in our analyses. The effects of context on true negative sentences reported in both experiments are significant in
full models of all sentence types as well.
Examining the model, we found a main effect of context,
with true negative sentences presented in a target context eliciting significantly higher ratings than true negative sentences
presented in a none context (β = 1.08, p < .001). We found
main effects of negation type, with alternative negation receiving lower ratings than nonexistence negation (β = −.43,
p < .05), as well as a marginally significant effect of negation framing, with sentences of the form “has no X” receiving lower ratings than sentences of the form “doesn’t have X”
(β = −.49, p = .052). There were no interactions between
negation frame, negation type, and context.
Participants showed a slight preference for negative sentences with the framing “doesn’t have X” over “has no X”.
This preference did not interact with context or negation type;
participants preferred the “doesn’t have” framing for both alternative negation and nonexistence negation, and rated both
sentence frames higher when they were presented in a target context. This finding suggests that effects of context on
the felicity of negative sentences are not due to features of a
specific syntactic frame.
In previous work we found that adults were somewhat
faster to look at the referent of nonexistence negation com2 The model specification was as follows:
rating ∼
context × negation type × negation frame + (negation
type × negation frame | subject) + (negation
type × negation frame | item).
Significance was calculated using the standard normal approximation to the t distribution
(Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013). Data and analysis code can
be found at http://github.com/anordmey/cogsci15.

Alternative
Alterna(ve*
Nonexistence
Nonexistence*

None

Rating

Results and Discussion

6

doesn't have X

Negation
Type
Nega(on*type*

Negation Ty

4

Alternat

Target

Nonexis

2

0
None

Target

None

Target

Context
Figure 2: Ratings for different types of true negative sentences in Experiment 1. Sentences of the form “...has no X”
are shown on the left, and sentences of the form “...doesn’t
have X” are shown on the right. Negative sentences referring
to an alternative object are shown in black, and negative sentences expressing nonexistence are shown in gray. Error bars
show 95% confidence intervals.

pared with alternative negation (Nordmeyer & Frank, 2014b).
In that experiment, the difference between nonexistence and
alternative negation could have arisen because of superficial,
stimulus-level differences (i.e. it might be easier to identify
a character with nothing than one with an alternative object).
Our replication of this result using explicit felicity judgments
suggests that this difference could result from pragmatic factors as well. One explanation for participants’ preference
for nonexistence negation is that a sentence such as “Abby
doesn’t have an apple” is more informative when Abby has
nothing compared to when she has an alternative object. In
a strong context (e.g. one where everyone else has apples),
using negation to point out Abby’s lack of apples is informative because it uniquely identifies her character in the array.
When Abby has some alternative object (e.g. a cat), however,
there is a more informative utterance that a speaker could use
(e.g. “Abby has a cat”). The existence of a more informative
utterance makes these negative sentences less felicitous, even
when they appear in context.
Overall, we found that a pragmatic context increases the
felicity judgments of negative sentences. Across all types
of negation, participants assigned higher ratings to sentences
that were presented with a target context compared to sentences that were presented with a none context. This corroborates previous work in which more informative negative
sentences were processed faster than less informative negative sentences (Nordmeyer & Frank, 2014a). In the next section, we expand on this finding by testing the same sentences
in a new context designed to test alternative possibilities for
how context affects the pragmatics of negative sentences.

1741

6

Table 1: Coefficient estimates from a mixed-effects model
predicting true negative sentence ratings in Experiment 1.
Coefficient Std. err. t value
5.28
0.19 27.16
1.08
0.27 4.04
-0.43
0.17 -2.50
-0.49
0.25 -1.94
-0.21
0.23 -.92
-0.26
0.34 -0.77
-0.22
0.23 -0.94
0.22
0.32 0.67

4

Rating

(Intercept)
Context (context)
Negation type (alternative)
Frame (“has no”)
Context ×Negation type
Context ×Frame
Negation type×Frame
Context×Negation type×Frame

2

0

Experiment 2

None

In Experiment 2, we examined the effect of three contexts
on alternative negation: A target context, in which all context characters had the negated target object (identical to Experiment 1), a none context, in which none of the context
characters had any objects (identical to Experiment 1), and a
foil context, in which all context characters had an alternative object (e.g. a different object than the one negated in the
negative sentences; see Figure 1). Participants saw all three
context conditions throughout the experiment, allowing us to
examine within-subject effects of context.
The addition of the “foil” context allowed us to test two
competing hypotheses about the pragmatics of negation. In
true negative trials with a foil context, all characters had the
same objects on their table (e.g. cats), and the negative sentence referred to a different object (e.g. “Abby doesn’t have
apples”). Some previous work suggests that a critical element of the effect of context on negative sentences is the fact
that the referent of the negative sentence is the “odd one out”
(Wason, 1965). If this is the case, the foil context might be
even worse than the none context, because the target of the
negative sentence does not stand out from the context. If,
however, the effect of context is driven by the informativeness of negation, then there should be no difference between
the foil and none contexts, because negative sentences are no
less informative in the foil context.

Method
Participants We recruited 194 participants (115 male, 76
female, three declined to report gender) to participate in an
online experiment through Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants ranged in age from 18-65. We restricted participation
to individuals in the United States. We paid 40 cents and the
experiment took approximately seven minutes to complete.
Stimuli Trials in Experiment 2 had the same structure as
trials in Experiment 1, with a small set of exceptions. First,
there were 24 trials. Second, all negative sentences were
of the form “[character] doesn’t have a/an [object].” Third,
on each trial, the target character either had a target object
on their table, or had an alternative object (eliminating the
nonexistence trials). Each participant evaluated nine true positive sentences, three false positive, three false negative, and
nine true negative trials.

Foil

Target

Context

Figure 3: Ratings for true negative sentences in three context
conditions in Experiment 2. Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals.
In Experiment 2, context was a within-subjects factor with
three levels. In the none context, context characters had nothing on their table, identical to the none context condition in
Experiment 1. In the target context, context characters each
had a target object on their table, same as the target context
condition in Experiment 1. In the foil context, context characters had an alternative object on their table (e.g., all characters
have a cat, but the sentence is about the presence/absence of
apples; see Figure 1). Each context condition appeared an
equal number of times within each trial type.
Procedure

The procedure was identical to Experiment 1.

Data Processing We excluded from our analysis four participants who did not list English as their native language and
six participants for having participated in a previous version
of the study. Thus, we analyzed data from a total of 184 participants.

Results and Discussion
True negative sentences were rated significantly higher when
they were presented in a target context compared to either
the none context or the foil context (Figure 3). There was no
difference between sentences presented in a foil context and
sentences presented in a none context. As in Experiment 1,
context did not affect ratings for true positive sentences or
false sentences.
We fit a linear mixed-effects model to true negative sentence ratings to test the effects of context.3 True negative
sentences presented in a target context received significantly
higher ratings than true negative sentences presented in a
none context (β = .70, p < .001). There was no significant
difference between sentences presented in a foil context and
sentences presented in a none context (β = .09, p = .22).
In Experiment 2, negative sentences were rated as most fe3 The model specification was as follows: rating ∼ context
+ (1 | subject) + (1 | item)

1742

has no X

doesn't have X

6

Experiment 1

Model
Both of the preceding studies found a significant effect of
context on participants’ ratings of true negative sentences.
Why does context have this effect on negative sentences? One
hypothesis is that felicity ratings are influenced by the informativeness of negative sentences. On theories of pragmatics, speakers should produce sentences that are appropriately
informative based on the context. In a context where most
characters have apples and one does not, it is informative to
mention the latter character’s lack of apples, because this feature is unique to the character being described.
We used a recent probabilistic model of pragmatics to
make predictions about participants’ felicity ratings, testing
this hypothesis. Details of this model—the “rational speech
act” model of pragmatics—can be found in several previous publications (Frank & Goodman, 2012; Goodman &
Stuhlmüller, 2013; Nordmeyer & Frank, 2014a). Here we
give a brief sketch of the intuitions behind the model. The
probability of a speaker making an utterance in context is defined as being proportional to the informativeness of the word
in context minus its cost. Informativeness in context is calculated as the number of bits of information conveyed by the
utterance. We assume that the utterance has a uniform probability distribution over its extension in context (e.g., “doesn’t
have apples” applies to any character without apples, leading
to a uniform probability of picking out each individual character without apples). We defined cost as the number of words
in the utterance multiplied by a cost-per-word parameter; in
our simulations, we did not differentiate between different
negative sentence frames, and treated negative sentences as
having one word more than positive sentences. Probabilities
were normalized over a sparse vocabulary of possible positive
or negative utterances that could describe the characters.
Our model predicted the same qualitative pattern as the
data from participants’ felicity ratings (Figure 4). Sentences
presented in a target context were preferred over sentences
presented in a none context, because true negative utterances
are more informative when everyone in the context possesses
the negated object (e.g., the sentence “Abby doesn’t have
an apple” uniquely identifies Abby when everyone else does

Experiment 2

Negation Type

Model Probabilities

Rating

licitous in a context where all of
the context characters pos4
sessed the negated object. Negative sentences presented in
a foil context did not differ significantly
from negative sen2
tences in a none context. In the foil context, all characters
(including the target character)0 had the same alternative obWeak
Strong
ject. If the pragmatics of negation require
the
referent of Weak
a
Context
negative sentence to be the “odd one out” (e.g. lacking a
feature that everyone else has), we would expect sentences
presented in a foil context to be rated lower than sentences
presented in the none context. The fact that there was no difference between these two contexts suggests that this is not a
necessary feature of a supportive pragmatic context for negation. Instead, negation appears to be pragmatically licensed
in contexts where the negative sentence is highly informative.

0.20

Alternative
Nonexistence

0.15

Negation Type
Alternative

0.10
Strong

Nonexistenc

0.05
0.00
None

Target

None

Foil

Target

Context

Figure 4: Predictions of a model of the informativeness of
an utterance in context. The model predicts how probable a
sentence is given a certain context. Best-fitting parameters
were used for this simulation (cost = .8), but the qualitative
pattern persists over a wide range of parameter values. Negative sentences expressing nonexistence are shown in black,
and negative sentences referring to an alternative object are
shown in gray.
have apples). The model predicted that true negatives presented in a foil context were more probable than true negatives presented in a none context, due to the fact that the
positive utterance (e.g. “Abby has a cat”) is less informative in the foil context; this difference is not significant in
the experimental data. Nonexistence negation was assigned
higher probability than alternative negation, because alternative negation could be described by an equally informative
and less costly positive utterance (e.g., “Abby has a cat”).
Overall, participants’ felicity ratings appear to parallel the informativeness of sentences in context.

General Discussion
The same negative sentence can sound perfectly fine in one
context, but strange in another. It can refer to nothing in one
context, but a difference in another. In our experiments, we
found that contextual differences led to significantly different
pragmatic judgments for otherwise identical true grammatical
negative sentences. What is it about the context of negative
sentences that elicits these effects?
The negative sentences that received the lowest felicity ratings across both experiments were alternative negations in a
none context. On these trials, participants saw e.g. three characters with nothing, and a character with a cat (see Figure 1).
The sentence “Abby doesn’t have apples” referred to the character with a cat. Although this sentence is true, it sounds very
odd: Why is the speaker talking about Abby’s lack of apples,
which is true of everyone in the context, instead of mentioning the cat? Compare this example to nonexistence negation
in a target context: Three characters have apples, and Abby
has nothing. Here, the same sentence sounds perfectly natural, because Abby’s lack of apples is unique, and there is
little else to say about her. In this latter context, producing a

1743

negative sentence is reasonable and perhaps even expected.
Work on children’s acquisition of negation has found that
preschoolers struggle to respond correctly to true negative
sentences (Kim, 1985; Nordmeyer & Frank, 2014b), despite
producing negation spontaneously and accurately before age
two (Pea, 1980, 1982). One possibility is that children are behaving rationally based on a Gricean view of communication.
In most experiments of children’s comprehension of negation,
children hear negative sentences without any supportive pragmatic context. In contrast, studies that have elicited spontaneous negations from children tend to use familiar contexts,
such as reading picture books in an interactive, game-like setting (Pea, 1982; Hummer, Wimmer, & Antes, 1993). When
children hear a true negative sentence and indicate that it is
“wrong” (e.g. Kim, 1985), they may be reacting to the infelicity of the sentence rather than its truth value.
According to Grice’s Cooperative Principle, speakers
should produce utterances that are maximally informative in
order to effectively communicate their intentions to a listener.
If listeners expect speakers to abide by this principle, they
should prefer sentences that are more informative. Our results
support this view of communication. Under a model in which
the goal of communication is to convey your intended meaning in the most efficient and effective way possible, negative
sentences that were more informative (and therefore more
likely to be produced by a speaker) were given higher felicity ratings. These data suggest that general pragmatic factors,
rather than some specific quirk of negation, can explain the
relative felicity of different negative sentences in context.

Acknowledgments
The first author gratefully acknowledges the support of a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship.

References
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language,
68, 255–278.
Brodeur, M. B., Dionne-Dostie, E., Montreuil, T., & Lepage,
M. (2010). The bank of standardized stimuli (boss), a new
set of 480 normative photos of objects to be used as visual
stimuli in cognitive research. PloS one, 5, e10773.
Carpenter, P., & Just, M. (1975). Sentence comprehension:
A psycholinguistic processing model of verification. Psychological Review, 82, 45–73.
Clark, H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Clark, H., & Chase, W. (1972). On the process of comparing
sentences against pictures. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 472–
517.
Dale, R., & Duran, N. (2011). The cognitive dynamics of
negated sentence verification. Cognitive Science, 35, 983–
996.
Frank, M., & Goodman, N. (2012). Predicting pragmatic
reasoning in language games. Science, 336, 998.

Glenberg, A., Robertson, D., Jansen, J., & Johnson-Glenberg,
M. (1999). Not propositions. Journal of Cognitive Systems
Research, 1, 19–33.
Goodman, N. D., & Stuhlmüller, A. (2013). Knowledge
and implicature: Modeling language understanding as social cognition. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5(1), 173–184.
Grice, H. (1975). Logic and conversation. 1975, 41–58.
Horn, L. R. (1984). Toward a new taxonomy for pragmatic inference: Q-based and R-based implicature. In D. Schiffrin
(Ed.), Meaning, form, and use in context: Linguistic applications (pp. 11–42). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Hummer, P., Wimmer, H., & Antes, G. (1993). On the origins
of denial negation. Journal of Child Language, 20, 607–
607.
Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1971). Comprehension of negation
with quantification. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 10, 244–253.
Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1976). Eye fixations and cognitive
processes. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 441–480.
Kim, K. (1985). Development of the concept of truthfunctional negation. Developmental Psychology, 21, 462.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory of
generalized conversational implicature. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126–1177.
Lüdtke, J., & Kaup, B. (2006). Context effects when reading
negative and affirmative sentences. In Proceedings of the
28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1735–1740).
Nieuwland, M., & Kuperberg, G. (2008). When the truth
is not too hard to handle. Psychological Science, 19(12),
1213.
Nordmeyer, A. E., & Frank, M. C. (2013). Measuring the
comprehension of negation in 2-to 4-year-old children. In
M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Nordmeyer, A. E., & Frank, M. C. (2014a). A pragmatic account of the processing of negative sentences. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Nordmeyer, A. E., & Frank, M. C. (2014b). The role of context in young children’s comprehension of negation. Journal of Memory and Language, 77, 25–39.
Pea, R. (1980). The development of negation in early child
language. In D. Olson (Ed.), The social foundations of language and thought (pp. 156–186). New York, NY: Norton
New York.
Pea, R. (1982). Origins of verbal logic: Spontaneous denials
by two-and three-year olds. Journal of Child Language,
9(3), 597-626.
Wason, P. (1965). The contexts of plausible denial. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 4(1), 7–11.

1744

