The early emergence and puzzling decline of relational reasoning:
Effects of prior knowledge and search on inferring “same” and “different”
Caren Walker (caren.walker@berkeley.edu)

Sophie Bridgers (sbridge@stanford.edu)

Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall, UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Stanford University
450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall, UC Berkeley
Berkeley, California 94720 USA
Abstract
We explore the developmental trajectory and underlying
mechanisms of relational reasoning. We describe a surprising
developmental pattern: Younger learners are better than older
ones at inferring abstract relations. Walker and Gopnik (2014)
demonstrated that toddlers are able to infer the relations
“same” and “different” in a causal system. However, these
findings appear to contrast with the literature suggesting that
older children have difficulty inferring these relations. Here
we manipulate the data and children’s search procedure to
assess the influence of these factors. In Experiment 1, we find
that while younger children have no difficulty learning these
relational concepts, older children fail to draw this abstract
inference. In Experiment 2, we demonstrate that older
children have learned the hypothesis that individual kinds of
objects lead to effects. Finally, Experiment 3 indicates that
including an explanation prompt during learning also
improves performance. Findings are discussed in light of
computational theories of learning.
Keywords: cognitive development, causal learning, relational
reasoning, Bayesian inference.

A growing literature indicates that children as young as
16 months of age are able to learn specific causal properties
from contingency information and can act on that
knowledge to bring about novel effects in the world (e.g.,
Gopnik & Wellman, 2012). But when and how can children
learn abstract principles about causal structure? Higherorder generalizations, “framework theories” (Gopnik &
Wellman, 1992), or “overhypotheses” (Goodman, 1955),
provide the learner with information about the types of
specific hypotheses that are likely to be true. Recent
computational work suggests that these generalizations in
turn might help children learn new specific causal
relationships from perceptual data more quickly and
accurately (e.g., Goodman, Ullman, & Tenenbaum, 2011).
The ability to quickly learn abstract relations might explain
how children acquire the impressive amount of causal
knowledge evident in early “intuitive theories.”
Here we explore the mechanisms underlying the ability to
infer a particularly fundamental abstract relation – the
‘sameness’ or ‘difference’ between objects. This type of
reasoning is a particularly distinctive feature of human
cognition – it has even been proposed to be a central
dimension on which humans differ from other primates

(Penn, Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008). Intuitively, it might
seem plausible that these abstract, relational hypotheses
would be acquired later than lower-level, concrete ones
based on specific features of objects. However, theoretical
advances drawing on Bayesian accounts of the “blessing of
abstraction” (Goodman et al., 2011) combined with
empirical research on early learning (Dewar & Xu, 2010;
Schulz, Goodman, Tenenbaum, & Jenkins, 2008) suggest
that children’s ability to learn abstract principles does not
necessarily depend on extensive prior experience. In fact,
recent research suggests that in some cases, younger
children may actually be better at learning new abstract
causal relations than older children and adults (Lucas,
Bridgers, Griffiths, & Gopnik, 2014).
In the current paper, we examine children’s developing
ability to infer an abstract causal principle – a relation
between objects (i.e., “same” and “different”) causes an
effect – from a limited set of observations. Walker and
Gopnik (2014) demonstrated that toddlers (18-30-montholds) are surprisingly adept at learning and using the
relational concepts “same” and “different” in a causal
relational match-to-sample (RMTS) task. Children were
randomly assigned to same or different conditions, and
observed as four pairs of objects (two “same” pairs and two
“different” pairs) were placed on a toy that played music. In
the same condition, pairs of identical objects activated the
toy while pairs of different objects did not. This pattern of
activation was reversed for the different condition. During
test, children were given a choice between two novel pairs:
one pair of “same” and one pair of “different” objects, and
asked to select the pair that would activate the toy. Children
overwhelmingly selected the pair that was consistent with
their training. These results suggest that the ability to reason
about abstract relations is in place very early – emerging
spontaneously only a few months after the first evidence of
children’s ability to learn about specific causal properties.
However, Walker and Gopnik’s (2014) results contrast
with a large body of research and a long-standing theory
that active and explicit relational reasoning is a late
developing ability (e.g., Gentner, 2010). In particular,
preschool-aged children appear to have difficulty inferring
abstract relational principles, and instead consistently
demonstrate a bias to attend to individual object kinds (e.g.,
Christie & Gentner, 2014; Gentner & Medina, 1998). These

2559

robust findings have led some to conclude that reasoning
about relations depends on direct instruction, language, and
other social input (e.g., Gentner, Anggoro, & Klibanoff,
2011). This type of experience has been proposed to explain
the differences in relational reasoning abilities between
human and non-human primates (e.g., Gentner, 2010).
How might we interpret this contrast? First, it is possible
that older children failed to engage in relational reasoning in
previous studies because of methodological problems – the
tasks were simply too difficult. The toddlers in Walker and
Gopnik (2014) may have succeeded because the novel
causal procedure simply made the task easier. In
Experiment 1, we therefore used exactly the same reasoning
task as Walker and Gopnik (2014). In addition to replicating
the earlier study with 18-30-month-olds, we also assessed
relational reasoning performance in older children (ranging
from 30-48-month-olds) using the same task. If the toddlers
in Walker and Gopnik (2014) succeeded because of the
particular methodological features of the task, then we
would expect that older children would succeed as well.
There is at least one reason, however, why younger
children might indeed genuinely outperform older children
in learning these causal relational concepts. It may be that 3year-olds have difficulty inferring such relations because
they have learned a different overhypothesis namely, that
individual kinds of objects, rather than relations between
them, have causal powers. According to probabilistic
models of cognitive development, learners search through a
space of potential hypotheses and test them against the data
(e.g., Gopnik & Wellman, 2012). To do this, learners
combine two probabilities: the “prior” – the probability of a
particular hypothesis before any data are observed, and the
“likelihood” – the probability of the data given the
hypothesis. Combining the two probabilities with Bayes rule
produces the “posterior” – the probability of the hypothesis
given the data. A learner can then compare the posteriors of
different hypotheses, settling on the ones with the highest
probabilities. Therefore, if the prior probability of one
hypothesis is high, it will take stronger data to overturn it.
Having an overhypothesis, or general principle, leads the
learner to assign a higher prior probability to particular
types of specific hypotheses. As a result, the learner would
need more evidence for a competing hypothesis than if they
began with no prior expectations and instead assigned all
possible hypotheses an equal prior probability (i.e., a “flat”
prior). In other words, with increasing knowledge, learners
develop a set of expectations that constrain the hypotheses
they consider. This makes it more difficult to learn new
information that is inconsistent with the general principles
learners have already inferred (see Lucas et al., 2014).
A principle of simplicity such as the “Bayesian Occam’s
razor” (Jefferys & Berger, 1992) would lead toddlers to
prefer the relational hypothesis. The relational hypothesis
proposes fewer causes to account for the data, and previous
work demonstrates that young children show such
simplicity preferences (Bonawitz & Lombrozo, 2012).
However, if older children have learned the general

principle that individual object kinds are more likely to be
causal, this may serve to constrain their interpretation of the
data, leading them to privilege individual properties over
relational ones, in spite of simplicity considerations.
In Experiment 2, we adapted the causal RMTS procedure
to test the hypothesis that older children are able to reason
about abstract relations, but have learned the overhypothesis
that kinds of objects are more likely to be causal.
Experiment 2 provided older children with explicit negative
evidence that would lower the probability of an individual
object kind hypothesis. By providing evidence against the
individual cause hypothesis, these negative observations
may prompt older children to override that hypothesis, even
though it is more consistent with their prior knowledge, and
instead consider the abstract relational principle.
Finally, in Experiment 3, we aim to scaffold the relational
inference using a different mechanism. Rather than
changing the data, we change the way that children search
through the hypothesis space. In particular, previous work
has demonstrated that asking children to explain patterns of
events imposes top-down constraints on their search
procedure, leading them to privilege more general and
inductively rich hypotheses (e.g., Lombrozo, 2012; Walker,
Lombrozo, Legare, & Gopnik, 2014; Walker, Williams,
Lombrozo, & Gopnik, 2012). If preschool-aged children are
already able to reason about relational properties, but assign
a higher probability to individual object kind hypotheses,
then introducing a prompt to explain may lead children to
privilege abstract properties instead.
Across studies, we test the hypothesis that older
children’s “failure” on traditional relational reasoning tasks
is due to their increasing knowledge about the importance of
individual object kinds, rather than to their inability to
represent relations.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants A total of 141 children participated in
Experiment 1, including 56 36-48-month-olds (M = 41.6
months; range = 36.0 - 48.2 months), 40 30-36-month-olds
(M = 33.6 months; range = 30.1 - 35.8 months), and 45 1830-month-olds (M = 25.1 months; range = 18.9 - 29.9
months). Half of the children in each age group were
randomly assigned to one of two between subject
conditions: same and different. An additional 10 participants
were tested but excluded due to experimenter error or failure
to complete the study.
Materials and Procedure The procedure for Experiment 1
was an exact replication of the procedure used in
Experiment 2 of Walker and Gopnik (2014) (see Figure 1).
Children were tested individually in a small testing room,
seated at a table across from the experimenter. During the
training phase, children saw 4 pairs of painted wooden
blocks (2 same and 2 different) placed on top of the toy. The
toy consisted of a 10- x 6- x 4-in. opaque white box that

2560

appeared to play music when certain blocks were placed on
top. The box contained a wireless doorbell that was
activated by surreptitiously depressing a button.
In the same condition, the pairs that activated the toy
consisted of two identical blocks, while in the different
condition the pairs that activated the toy consisted of two
blocks that differed in both shape and color. The
experimenter started the training phase by introducing the
toy to the child, saying, “This is my toy! Sometimes it plays
music when I put blocks on top and other times it does not.
Should we try some and see how it works?” The
experimenter then took out two blocks, saying, “Let’s try
these ones!” and placed both blocks simultaneously on the
toy, and the toy played music. The experimenter responded
to the effect by saying, “Music! My toy played music!” The
experimenter then placed the two blocks on the toy one
more time and said, “Music! These ones made my toy play
music!” Next, the experimenter took out a second pair of
blocks in the opposite relation as the first pair. The
experimenter placed these two blocks simultaneously on the
machine, and the toy did not activate. In response, the
experimenter said, “No music! Do you hear anything? I
don’t hear anything.” The experimenter placed this pair on
the machine again and said, “No music. These ones did not
make my toy play music.” The experimenter then repeated
this with two more pairs of blocks, one pair that activated
the toy and one pair that did not.

observed on the machine and the pairs they were asked to
choose between in the test phase were the same across
conditions; the only difference between the two conditions
was which relation activated the toy. The experimenter said,
“Now that you’ve seen how my toy works, I need your
helping finding the things that will make it play music. I
have two choices for you.” The experimenter took out two
trays, one supporting a novel same pair and one supporting
a novel different pair, saying, “I have these” (holding up one
tray) “and I have these” (holding up the other tray). Once
the child looked at both trays, the experimenter continued,
saying, “Only one of these trays has things that will make
my toy play music. Can you point to the tray that has the
things that will make it play?” The experimenter then placed
both trays on opposite sides of the table just out of reach of
the child, and prompted the child to point. The side of the
correct pair was counterbalanced between children.
Children’s first point or reach was recorded. Children
received 1 point for selecting the pair of novel test blocks in
the relation that matched their training (same or different)
and 0 points for selecting the pair of test blocks in the
opposite relation.

Results and Discussion
Replicating results reported by Walker and Gopnik
(2014), 18-30-month-olds in Experiment 1 selected the test
pair that was consistent with their training, in both same
(78%), p = .005 (one-tailed binomial) and different (77%), p
=.009 (one-tailed binomial) conditions. However, 3-yearolds failed to select the correct test pair in either same
(46%), p = .85 or different (43%), p = .57 conditions (see
Figure 2), with 18-30-month-olds outperforming 3-year-olds
in both cases (same: χ2(1) = 5.37, p = .02; different: χ2(1) =
5.99, p = .02). The performance of 30-36-month-olds fell
between these younger and older groups, selecting the
correct test pair marginally above chance (70%) in the same
condition, p = .06 (one-tailed binomial) and at chance (50%)
in the different condition, p = 1.0.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of training and test
trials in the same and different conditions in Experiment 1.
The test phase began after all 4 pairs of blocks had been
demonstrated on the machine. In both conditions, the child
was given a choice between a novel same pair and a novel
different pair to activate the machine herself. None of the
objects in the test pairs had been observed on the machine
during the training phase. The pairs of blocks children

Figure 2: Proportion of correct relations selected for 3year-olds following the manipulations in Experiments 1-3.
Results demonstrate a surprising decline with age on the
causal RMTS task. To provide additional support for this

2561

developmental trajectory, we combined children across age
groups and conducted a logistic regression, treating age as a
continuous factor and correct selection (collapsing across
same and different) as the dependent variable. Results of the
logistic regression show a significant decline between 18
and 48 months, χ2(N = 141, df = 1) = 3.88 (Wald), p < .05

Experiment 2
Results of Experiment 1 replicate Walker and Gopnik’s
(2014) findings that young children are already equipped
with the capacity to infer relational properties, though older
children fail. We hypothesized that older children may be
expressing a learned bias to attend to individual object
properties and ignore abstract relations between them. In an
effort to assess this claim in Experiment 2, we manipulated
the data that children observed to provide direct evidence
against the individual object kind principle. In particular,
Experiment 2 provided older children with explicit negative
evidence that would lower the probability of an individual
object kind hypothesis. To do so, 3-year-olds observed the
same procedure described in Experiment 1, with one
change: Before the experimenter placed the pairs of blocks
on the toy simultaneously, she first placed each block on the
toy one at a time, and children observed that the toy failed to
activate.

= 1.0 (exact binomial), leading to a significant difference
between same and different conditions, χ2(1) = 4.98, p = .03.
How might we explain this emerging asymmetry between
the “same” and “different” conditions in older children? If
children 1) have developed the overhypothesis that
individual kinds of objects are causal, 2) assume that the
experimenter is randomly sampling blocks, and 3) assume
that some fixed proportion of block types activate the toy,
then the pattern of data that they observe in the “same”
condition has a lower likelihood of occurring than the
pattern of data in the “different” condition. Given
assumptions 1-3, the probability that the toy will activate on
any given trial should be higher when two different kinds of
blocks are placed on the toy (i.e., when there are two
potential activators), than when two of the same kinds of
block are placed on the toy (i.e., when there is only one
potential activator). In other words, given that there is only
one kind of block presented in each positive evidence
training trial in the “same” condition, these data offer
stronger counterevidence to the individual object kind
hypothesis than the data in the “different” condition. We
intend to test this hypothesis in future work.

Methods
Participants A total of 56 3-year-olds (M = 41.9 months;
range = 35.9 - 49.9 months) were randomly assigned to one
of two conditions (28 same, 28 different). An additional 4
participants were excluded for failure to complete the study.
Materials and Procedure Materials were identical to
Experiment 1 and the procedure included the following
changes. For each pair, the experimenter first placed each
block on the machine sequentially, before placing them both
on simultaneously (see Figure 3). Therefore, in addition to
observing positive evidence that pairs of same or different
blocks (depending upon the child’s condition) activated the
toy together, children also observed negative evidence for
the causal efficacy of individual blocks (i.e., each block
failed to activate the toy on its own). This was followed by a
test phase, which was identical to Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Three-year-olds who were provided with negative
evidence for the individual object kind hypothesis selected
the correct relation significantly more often than chance
(64%), p = .045 (exact binomial) (see Figure 2). However,
this overall effect was entirely due to the improved
performance of children in the same condition, in which
79% of children selected the correct pair, p = .005 (exact
binomial). This performance was significantly better than
children of the same age in the same condition in
Experiment 1, χ2(1) = 6.17, p = .01, and no different than
the 18-30-month-olds (78%). Children in the different
condition did not differ from chance performance (50%), p

Figure 3: Schematic representation of two (of four)
training trials in the same condition.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we examined whether we could induce
relational reasoning another way – by introducing a prompt
to explain during training trials. Experiment 3 contrasted
two conditions in which we asked 3- and 4-year-olds to
either report whether the toy activated in each training trial
or to explain why the toy did or did not activate in each case.
We hypothesized that generating an explanation may
motivate a different search procedure, increasing the chance
that children will accept the relational hypothesis.

Methods
Participants Forty-eight 3- and 4-year-olds (M = 45.1
months; range = 36.5 -58.9 months) were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions (explain: n = 24, M = 45.9
months, range = 37.0 – 58.9 months; report: n = 24, M =
44.2 months, range = 37.2 – 58.5 months). Half of the
children in each condition (12 per condition) observed
evidence that was consistent with the same relation and the
other half observed evidence that was consistent with the

2562

different relation. An additional 3 participants were
excluded for failing to complete the study.
Materials and Procedure The procedure for Experiment 3
was nearly identical to Experiment 1 (see Figure 1), except
for the following changes. Children in the explain condition
were prompted for an explanation after the second
placement of each training pair on the toy, asking, “Why do
you think these ones made/did not make my toy play
music?” In the report condition, the experimenter asked,
“What happened to my toy when I put these ones on it? Did
it play music?” (prompting a yes/no response).

Results and Discussion
Three- and 4-year-olds who were prompted to explain
during the training trials selected the correct relation
significantly more often than chance (79%), p = .007 (exact
binomial) (see Figure 2). Children in the report condition
did not differ from chance (42%), p = .54, and there was a
significant difference between explain and report
conditions, p = .017. Unlike in Experiment 2, there was no
significant overall difference between same (58%) and
different (63%) relations, p = .76. There were also no
differences found between same and different within each
condition (explain: same = 75%, different = 83%; report:
same = 42%, different = 42%). Comparing the overall
pattern of responses of 3- and 4-year-olds who explained to
the 18-30-month-olds in Experiment 1, reveals no
significant difference, χ2(1) = 0.02, p = .88, while 3- and 4year-olds in the report condition performed significantly
worse than the 18-30-month-olds, χ2(1) = 9.0, p = .003, and
no differently from the 3-year-olds in Experiment 1, χ2(1) =
0.06, p = .81, replicating the pattern in Experiment 1.

General Discussion
Across three experiments, we assessed the influence of
both the data that children observed (Experiments 1 and 2),
as well as their search procedure (Experiment 3) on their
relational reasoning ability. In Experiment 1, we replicated
the finding that 18-30-month-olds are able to infer the
relations “same” and “different” from very little data in a
causal task. We also contrasted toddlers’ performance with a
group of 30-36-month-olds and a group of 3-year-olds. As
in previous work, older children failed to learn the relation.
Instead, we found evidence for a genuine decline in
relational reasoning between 18 and 48 months of age.
The findings of Experiment 2 help to further explain this
decline. They suggest that children may learn to privilege
individual kinds of objects: When provided with evidence
against this hypothesis, 3-year-olds were able to infer the
relation in the “same” condition. Finally, in Experiment 3,
we demonstrated that prompting children to explain during
learning leads 3- and 4-year-olds to privilege the abstract
relational hypothesis in both the same and different
conditions. This is consistent with previous work indicating
that explaining prompts generalization in causal reasoning
(e.g., Legare & Lombrozo, 2014; Walker et al., 2014).

Discovering when and how children learn relational
concepts is important for understanding the processes
underlying early causal learning, but it is also important for
understanding the development of relational reasoning.
First, these results indicate that relational reasoning is not a
late developing ability, as has been previously proposed
(e.g., Christie & Gentner, 2010, 2014; Gentner, 2010).
Instead, toddlers are able to infer the relational causal
principles “same” and “different” from just a few pieces of
evidence, and act based on this inference. These abilities are
in place early – emerging spontaneously only a few months
after the ability to learn specific causal properties. Although
older children often fail to infer the relational hypothesis,
this failure can be explained by appealing to the role of prior
knowledge in constraining their judgments.
The earlier literature invoked a “relational shift” in the
preschool period and attributed this to a number of factors,
including an increase in relational knowledge (Gentner &
Ratterman, 1991), exposure to relational language (Christie
& Gentner, 2014), and various maturational variables
(Halford, 1992; Thibaut, French, & Vezneva, 2010). While
we agree that relations are learned through experience, we
propose that this learning occurs much earlier, and need not
proceed from local properties to more abstract ones. Our
results suggest that the developmental trajectory of
relational reasoning may be better characterized as a “ushaped curve,” in which early reasoning abilities are
overshadowed by children’s development of conflicting
hypotheses (e.g., Karmiloff-Smith & Inhelder, 1974-1975).
These findings are also relevant to the broader evolution
of relational reasoning (Penn et al., 2008) and causal
cognition in general. There is an ongoing debate in the
comparative literature regarding whether differences in
relational reasoning indicate a qualitative difference, or
merely a quantitative gap (see Penn et al., 2008). The fact
that very young human children already show the relational
reasoning advantage, with no explicit prompting or cultural
tutelage, may indicate that this is indeed a significant
phylogenetic difference. Although it is possible that the
younger children’s success is due to the use of a perceptual
heuristic, as has been suggested for nonhuman primates
(e.g., Wasserman et al., 2001), several features of the study
design weigh against this possibility: children saw pairs of
objects (rather than multi-element displays), they observed
only two positive and two negative trials, they never acted
on an object, and their behavior was never reinforced.
Indeed, no other species has come close
to demonstrating the first-trial performance of these human
children after so few observations (see Penn et al., 2008).
Finally, these results are consistent with other cases in
which younger children are more flexible learners than older
ones (Defeyter & German, 2003; Lucas et al., 2014; Seiver
et al., 2013). The very fact that children know less to begin
with may, paradoxically, make them better (or at least more
flexible) learners. In Bayesian terms, this flexibility results
from a “flatter” initial prior. As we acquire abstract
knowledge about causal structure, this experience provides a

2563

set of inductive biases that are usually quite helpful,
allowing the learner to draw quick conclusions when a new
situation is consistent with their past experiences. However,
experience can also be a double-edged sword – occasionally
leading learners away from the correct hypothesis.
However, this flexibility may also reflect different search
procedures, as well as different kinds of prior knowledge. In
Experiment 3, asking children to explain the data led to
better performance. There may therefore be a general shift
from broader to narrower search procedures as children
grow older, independent of their specific knowledge.
Developmental differences in both prior knowledge and
search procedures may help to explain why very young
children are such extraordinarily powerful learners.

Acknowledgments
Research was funded by the National Science Foundation
(to A. Gopnik). We the University of California, Berkeley
Early Childhood Education Centers, the Lawrence Hall of
Science, The Bay Area Discovery Museum, and Habitot.
We thank Tania Lombrozo, Fei Xu, Elizabeth Bonawitz,
and Keith Holyoak for their helpful feedback and Rotem
Aboody, Samantha Hubacheck, Dongwon Lee, and
especially Avnee Nulkar for their help with data collection

References
Bonawitz, E. B., & Lombrozo, T. (2012). Occam’s rattle:
Children’s use of simplicity and probability to constrain
inference. Developmental Psychology, 48(4), 1156-1164.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11(3), 356-373.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2014). Language helps children
succeed on a classic analogy task. Cognitive Science,
38(2), 383-397.
Defeyter, M. A., & German, T. (2003). Acquiring an
understanding of design: evidence from children's insight
problem solving. Cognition, 89(2), 133-155.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5),
752-775.
Gentner, D., Anggoro, F. K., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2011).
Structure mapping and relational language support
children’s learning of relational categories. Child
Development, 82(4), 1173-1188.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65(2-3), 263-297.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S.A. Gelman & J.P. Byrnes (Eds.),
Perspectives on thought and language: Interrelations in
development. London: Cambridge University Press.
Goodman, N. (1955). Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. Indiana:
Hackett Publishing Co.
Goodman, N., Ullman, T., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011).
Learning a theory of causality. Psychological Review,
118(1), 110-119.

Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (1992). Why the child's
Theory of Mind really is a theory. Mind & Language, 7(12), 145-171
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (2012). Reconstructing
constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning
mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 138(6), 1085.
Halford, G. S. (1992). Analogical reasoning and conceptual
complexity
in
cognitive
development.
Human
Development, 35(4), 193-217.
Jefferys, W. H., & Berger, J. O. (1992). Ockham's razor and
Bayesian analysis. American Scientist, 80, 64-72.
Karmiloff-Smith, A., & Inhelder, B. (1974-1975). If you
want to get ahead, get a theory. Cognition, 3(3), 195-212.
Legare, C. H., & Lombrozo, T. (2014). Selective effects of
explanation on learning during early childhood. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 126, 198-212.
Lombrozo, T. (2012). Explanation and abductive inference.
In K.J. Holyoak & R.G. Morrison (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Lucas, C. G., Bridgers, S., Griffiths, T. L., & Gopnik, A.
(2014). When children are better (or at least more openminded) learners than adults: Developmental differences
in learning the forms of causal relationships. Cognition,
131(2), 284-299.
Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., & Povinelli, D. J. (2008).
Darwin’s mistake: Explaining the discontinuity between
human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 31(2), 109-130.
Premack, D. (1983). The codes of man and beasts.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 6(1), 125-136.
Schulz, L. E., Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., &
Jenkins, A. C. (2008). Going beyond the evidence:
Abstract laws and preschoolers’ responses to anomalous
data. Cognition, 109(2), 211-223.
Thibaut, J. P., French, R., & Vezneva, M. (2010). The
development of analogy making in children: Cognitive
load and executive functions. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 106(1), 1-19.
Walker, C. M., & Gopnik, A. (2014). Toddlers infer higherorder relational principles in causal learning.
Psychological Science, 25(1), 161-169.
Walker, C. M., Lombrozo, T., Legare, C. H., & Gopnik, A.
(2014). Explanation prompts children to privilege
inductively rich properties. Cognition, 133(2), 343-357.
Walker, C. M., Williams, J. J., Lombrozo, T., & Gopnik,
A. (2012). Explaining influences children’s reliance on
evidence and prior knowledge in causal induction.
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (p. 1114-1119). Austin, TX.
Wasserman, E. A., Fagot, F., Young, M. E. (2001). Samedifferent conceptualization by baboons (Papio papio): The
role of entropy. Journal of Comparative Psychology,
115(1): 42-52.

2564

