The mental number-line spreads by gestural contagion
Tyler Marghetis

Luke C. Eberle

Benjamin K. Bergen

tmarghet@ucsd.edu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego

leberle@ucsd.edu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego

bkbergen@ucsd.edu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Mathematical expertise builds on a foundation of space,
especially the ability to map exact numbers to linear space.
This “mental number-line” is known to vary cross-culturally,
but there is debate about the mechanisms responsible for its
cultural elaboration. We investigated the role of co-speech
gesture, a ubiquitous cultural activity, in stabilizing and
entrenching the mental number-line within a community.
Imitating culture-specific gestures systematically shaped
gesturers’ mental number-line. Moreover, gestures were used
spontaneously to infer speakers’ spatial understanding of
number, and merely observing these gestures was sufficient to
shape the observer’s own mental number-line. These findings
establish co-speech gesture as one mechanism for propagating
and perpetuating the number-line.
Keywords: numerical cognition; SNARC; mental numberline; gestural contagion; gesture

Introduction
“[Space] provides a location for all things that come into
being. […] [E]verything that exists must of necessity be
somewhere, in some place and occupying some space.” –
Plato, Timaeus
From calculus to the complex plane, mathematics is rife
with links between number and space. This is reflected in
the human mind (Hubbard et al, 2005; Lakoff & Núñez,
2000; Winter, Marghetis, & Matlock, 2015). In many
cultures, for instance, people can conceptualize exact
numbers as locations along a horizontal path (e.g., Dehaene
et al, 1993; Dehaene et al, 2008; Shaki, Fischer, & Pretrusic,
2009), known as a mental number-line (MNL). The MNL
has been argued to contribute to diverse mathematical
abilities, including the mental representation of number
(Zorzi, Priftis, & Umiltà, 2002; Opfer, Thompson, &
Furlong, 2010), arithmetic (Knops et al, 2009, Marghetis et
al, 2014), and understanding complex concepts like
imaginary numbers (Lakoff & Núñez, 2000).
The MNL figures prominently in debates about the origin
of abstract concepts in the human mind, since there is
evidence that it emerges from a mix of innate biases and
cultural influences (e.g., Shaki et al, 2009; Núñez,
Cooperrider, & Wassman, 2014; Rugani et al, 2015). For
instance, human neonates associate approximate numerical
magnitude with spatial length (de Hevia et al, 2014), an
early disposition that may support the acquisition of more
precise mappings between exact numbers and spatial
locations (i.e. the MNL). These early dispositions are
elaborated considerably by cultural experience, with crosscultural variability in the MNL’s orientation (Shaki et al,
2009), whether the number-space mapping is linear or

logarithmic (Dehaene et al, 2008), and even whether the
MNL exists at all (Núñez & Wassman, 2012). For instance,
while Western adults typically exhibit a left-to-right MNL,
Arabic-speaking Palestinians exhibit a right-to-left MNL
(Shaki et al, 2009). Thus, beyond any innate biases, culturespecific aspects of the MNL propagate and stabilize within
communities. This cultural elaboration requires explanation.
How this happens, however, is poorly understood.
Language is one possible mechanism. Many languages, like
English, place numbers in vertical space (e.g. “high [/low]
number”). But language can’t be the whole story. There are
no known uses of horizontal spatial language or
distinctively linear versus logarithmic language to refer to
number. In neither English nor Arabic, for instance, are
numbers described using the words for left and right. Other
proposed mechanisms include writing direction (Shaki et al,
2009), finger-counting routines (Bender & Beller, 2012;
Fischer, 2008), experience with technical artifacts (Siegler
& Ramani, 2009), and formal education in topics like
measurement (Dehaene et al, 2008). There is correlational
evidence in favor of each proposed mechanism, but
determining distinct causal contributions has proven
challenging, in part because the mechanisms are correlated
with one another and other cultural variables.
One cultural activity that has not been considered in this
debate is co-speech gesture, communicative bodily
movements produced spontaneously by speakers in all
cultures (McNeill, 1992). This may be because—compared
to more stable aspects of culture like artifacts or writing—
gesture is transient and thus less likely to be noticed or,
when noticed, harder to measure. But there are reasons to
suspect that gesture might play a critical role in propagating
and perpetuating the MNL. Both novices and experts
gesture when talking about mathematics, and these gestures
can reveal spatial intuitions that are absent from speech
(Goldin-Meadow & Beilock, 2010; Marghetis & Núñez,
2013). Moreover, oriented, culture-specific associations
between number and location emerge in children as young
as four years old (Opfer et al, 2010; Hoffman et al, 2013),
which means that cultural influences on the MNL begin
before formal education, literacy, or mastery of artifacts like
physical number-lines. But not before gesture starts to shape
development (Rowe & Goldin-Meadow, 2009). Gestures
about number, in particular, appear early: Two-year-old
children and their caregivers produce numerical gestures
spontaneously during play (Lee et al, 2014).
Critically,
cross-cultural
differences
in
the
conceptualization of abstract concepts often covary with
differences in gesture. Americans, for instance, think and
talk about the future as ahead of them, and also point

1506

The mental number-line spreads by gestural contagion

forward when talking about the future, while the Aymara
people of the Andes place the future behind them in
language, thought, and gesture (Núñez & Cooperrider,
2013). Numerical gestures similarly vary cross-culturally.
The Oksapmin people of Papua New Guinea indicate exact
numbers by pointing to locations along a body-based path
that runs hand-to-hand (e.g., right thumb for one, left ear for
sixteen), though individuals differ in the orientation of this
system (i.e., left-to-right or right-to-left) (Saxe, 2014).
By contrast, when Americans talk about arithmetic, they
gesture spontaneously in ways that reflect complementary
spatial conceptualizations of number: as if numbers are
locations along a horizontal path or, alternatively, as if
numbers are collections of objects (Fig. 1; cf. Núñez &
Marghetis, 2013). Path gestures represent numbers by
pointing to locations along a horizontal axis in front of the
speaker—smaller numbers to the left, larger numbers to the
right (Fig. 1A). Collection gestures represent numbers as
volumes in space, using either single-handed grasping
gestures or, for larger numbers, two-handed gestures that
delimit larger regions (Fig. 1B). These two kinds of gesture
thus represent number in complementary ways.
Given the structural similarity between “Path” gestures
and the MNL (e.g. both involve mapping numbers to
locations along a path), these gestures may reflect gesturers’
path-based understanding of number, that is, their MNL.
Could these Path gestures not only reflect but actively shape
the MNL? Along with other primates, humans imitate and
learn from others’ actions (Tomasello, 2014), but humans
may be unique in acquiring gesture through social learning
(Halina et al, 2013). Gesture systems are, among other
things, repositories of culture-specific understandings of
abstract concepts. The spread of gestures and their
associated meanings may thus disseminate abstract concepts
within human communities (Sperber, 1996), a process we
call “gestural contagion.” In several experiments, we asked
whether gestural contagion contributes to propagating and
perpetuating the MNL.

Path
gesture

2

same video stimuli were used in all experiments. Here, the
speaker produces a gesture for each addend and their sum;
boldface indicates lexical affiliates.

Study 1: Reproducing gesture shapes the MNL
Since gestures, acquired through imitation, can shape the
gesturer’s own mental representations (Goldin-Meadow &
Beilock, 2010), we first investigated whether imitating
culture-specific gestures might shape one’s own MNL. If
observing and imitating numerical gestures shapes
gesturers’ own conceptualization of number, then
participants should exhibit a more pronounced left-to-right
MNL after reproducing left-to-right Path gestures.

Participants
Native-English-speaking adults from UC San Diego
participated in exchange for partial course credit (n = 50,
Mage = 21 years). In all three studies, we determined sample
sizes in advance. For Study 1, sample size was determined
on the basis of similar studies on the plasticity of the MNL
(e.g. n = 44 in Fischer et al, 2010). All procedures were
approved by UC San Diego’s Institutional Review Board.

Materials
We created sixteen brief video clips, two for each of eight
mathematical facts (e.g. 4 + 3 = 7; 8 – 6 = 2; 4 > 1). In each
video clip, a man—depicted from the neck down—was
heard stating a mathematical fact (e.g. “Four plus three
equals seven.”) and accompanied his speech with either
Path or Collection gestures (Fig. 1A). To create the videos,
we first audio-recorded the man stating the eight
mathematical facts. Then, for each recorded fact, we made
two video-recordings: one in which the man produced
naturalistic Path gestures in time with the pre-recorded
speech, and another in which he produced naturalistic
Collection gestures. These two video-recordings were then
combined with the pre-recorded audio to create eight pairs
of video files. Paired videos thus had identical audio1 but
contrasted in co-speech gesture (i.e. Path vs. Collection),
allowing us to control for any differences in speech.

Procedure2

“Four plus five equals nine.”
Collection
gesture
Fig. 1: When Americans talk about number, they gesture
spontaneously as if numbers are either locations along a
path or collections of objects. We created pairs of videos
(n=8) that had identical audio but different gestures: Path
(top) or Collection (bottom). Gestures were modeled after
naturally occurring co-speech numerical gestures. The

In a between-subjects design, participants completed two
tasks: an initial Gesture Imitation task in which they
reproduced either Path or Collection gestures, followed by a
standard Number Comparison task designed to measure
associations between numbers and lateral space, i.e. the
SNARC effect (Dehaene et al, 1993).
Gesture Imitation task: Participants viewed either Path
or Collection video clips (see Materials, above) and
reproduced the clips’ speech and gesture. The type of
gesture (Path vs. Collection) was manipulated between1

To minimize incongruity between cross-spliced audio and video,
the speaker’s throat and mouth were kept outside the video frame.
2
In all three studies, we report how we determined all sample sizes,
exclusions, manipulations, and measures (Simmons et al, 2012).

1507

The mental number-line spreads by gestural contagion

subjects and assigned randomly. In each trial, the
experimenter played a video clip once and then asked the
participant to reproduce exactly the speech and gesture.
Participants were given the opportunity to re-watch each
video until they were able to reproduce both speech and
gesture. Since our hypothesis was about the impact of the
specific gestures in the videos, participants were reminded
to reproduce everything that happened in the video
whenever they made errors. One block consisted of viewing
and reproducing all eight Path or Collection videos.
Participants completed four blocks—always with the same
type of gesture—for a total of thirty-two trials.
Number Comparison task: Participants judged whether
positive integers (1 to 9, inclusive) were greater or less than
5, a replication of the classic SNARC paradigm (Dehaene et
al, 1993). Each trial began with a fixation cross in the center
of a computer monitor, replaced after 1000ms by an Arabic
numeral between 1 and 9 (excluding 5). Participants had up
to 3000ms to respond by pressing one of two buttons on a
serial response box: the leftmost button with their left index
finger or the rightmost button with their right index finger.
Participants completed two blocks, each of which began
with eight practice trials (one for each numeral) followed by
eighty experimental trials (ten for each numeral); trial order
was randomized within blocks. Critically, we manipulated,
between blocks, the mapping between responses (greater vs.
less than 5) and spatial location (left vs right). Thus, e.g., in
response to numbers less than five, participants had to
respond on the left in one block and on the right in the other.
Block order was counterbalanced between subjects. If a
participant had a canonical left-to-right mental number-line,
therefore, they would be faster to categorize smaller
numbers when responding on the left, and faster to
categorize larger numbers on the right. We measured
accuracy and reaction time.

Results
Two participants were removed for poor accuracy (< 80%).
Accuracy was high among remaining participants (M =
94.8%, 95% CI [93.6, 96.1]). Before analyzing reaction
times, we removed incorrect responses (5.2% of trials),
followed by responses that were either faster than 275ms or
slower than three standard deviations above the participant’s
condition mean (2.3% of trials).
Reaction times were analyzed in a 2x2x4 mixed-design
ANOVA, with Gesture Type (Path vs. Collection) as a
between-subjects factor, and Response (left vs. right) and
Numerical Magnitude (1-2, 3-4, 6-7, or 8-9) as withinsubjects factors. Overall, participants exhibited a left-toright MNL, as revealed by a two-way interaction between
Response and Numerical Magnitude (F(3,138) = 7.4, p =
.0001). This was modulated, as predicted, by the type of
gesture they had reproduced (F(3,138) = 3.17, p = .026).
To quantify this effect, we calculated, for each participant
and each number, the difference between mean left- and
right-sided reaction times (dRT), and then regressed dRT
against numerical magnitude. The magnitude of the

3

regression slope (“SNARC coefficient,” β) indicates the
strength of the number-space association; the slope’s sign
indicates the association’s orientation (negative slopes
indicate a left-to-right MNL). Participants in both conditions
showed evidence of a canonical left-to-right MNL (βpath = 17.5; βcollection = -4.5; Fig. 2A), but, as predicted, the MNL
was far more pronounced after observing and reproducing
Path gestures (t46 = -1.8, p = .036, one-tailed; Fig. 2B).
In sum, imitating culture-specific gestures shaped
gesturers’ MNL. Gesturing as though numbers were
locations along a path caused participants to conceptualize
numbers accordingly.

Fig. 2: Effect of gesture on the MNL, as indexed by the
SNARC effect. (A, C) In both studies, there was evidence
overall of a left-to-right MNL (i.e. negative regression
coefficient), but this was significantly more pronounced for
Path gestures. Error lines and shaded regions indicate
bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. (B, D) In both
studies, participants’ MNL, as indexed by SNARC
regression coefficients (± SEM), was more pronounced in
the Path gesture condition.

Study 2: Gesture shapes interpretation of
gesturers’ understanding
We next investigated whether merely observing gestures,
rather than imitating them, could propagate spatial
understandings of number within a community. Since
humans excel at inferring conspecifics' intentional states
(Tomasello, 2014), observers might use a speaker’s gestures
to discern their number understanding, thus becoming aware
of spatial construals in circulation within the community.
We tested this possibility in an online experiment.

Participants
Participants (n = 50), recruited from Amazon Mechanical
Turk, were native-English speaking adults located in the
USA and participated in exchange for payment. Sample size

1508

The mental number-line spreads by gestural contagion

was determined on the basis of similar studies on gesture
and comprehension (e.g. n = 44, Kelly et al, 2010).

Procedure
Participants began by viewing all eight video clips from
Study 1, with gesture (Path vs. Collection) assigned
randomly between-subjects. Without mentioning gesture,
we then asked participants to describe the speaker’s
understanding of number. First, they were asked to describe,
in a few sentences, the speaker’s “understanding of number
and arithmetic.” Second, they were asked whether the
speaker’s understanding was best captured by “numbers are
like locations along a path” or “numbers are like collections
of objects.” Lastly, as a manipulation check, participants
were asked whether they had paid attention to the speaker’s
gestures (every participant responded at least “maybe a
little”) and were played two video clips and asked whether
or not they recognized them (every participant was correct
on either one or both of these clips). They finished by
supplying demographic information (gender, age, ZIP code,
education, primary occupation, languages spoken). No other
measures were collected.

4

best characterized in terms of “locations along a path” or
“collections of objects,” their responses were shaped by his
gesture (p < .001, Fisher’s exact; Fig. 3B), with most
participants (71%) responding that he understood numbers
as “locations along a path” if he had produced Path gestures
(p = .03, binomial test), and most (80%) responding that he
understood numbers as “collections of objects” if he had
produced Collection gestures (p = .01).
Numerical gestures, therefore, were meaningful for naïve
observers, who spontaneously relied on them to infer the
speaker’s spatial conceptualization of number.

Results
To determine the “gist” of participants’ descriptions, we
used an unsupervised machine learning technique, Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). On the basis of the words in a
set of texts (in this case, participants’ descriptions), LDA
builds a generative model of latent topics discussed in the
texts (Griffiths et al, 2007). Since participants were exposed
to two ways of gesturing about number, we decided a priori
to fit a model with two latent topics.
One of the latent topics extracted by the model was
associated with terms like “part,” “whole,” and “together,”
and appeared to capture a collection-based understanding of
number (e.g. “numbers as groups of things”). The other
topic was associated with terms like “left” and “right,” and
appeared to capture a path-based understanding (e.g. “sees
them going from left to right”). As a measure of the gist of
participants’ descriptions, we used the mean-centered
posterior probability that each description dealt with the
path-based (vs. collection-based) topic. A positive value of
this measure thus indicates that the description was more
path-related than average; a negative value indicates that the
description was more collection-related than average.
Critically, even though gesture had not been mentioned in
any instructions, the gist of participants’ descriptions was
shaped by the speaker’s gesture (Fig. 3A). There was a
significant effect of gesture on participants’ interpretation of
the gesturer’s conceptualization (p < .01, Mann-Whitney). If
the speaker used Path gestures, descriptions of his
understanding were more path-based overall (M = -0.12)
and most participants (74%) gave a path-based description;
if he used Collection gestures, descriptions were more
collection-based (M = 0.20) and most participants (58%)
gave collection-based descriptions. Indeed, when we asked
participants whether the speaker’s conceptualization was

Fig. 3: Gesture shaped observers’ interpretation of
speaker’s conceptualization of number (Study 2). (A)
Participants spontaneously incorporated information from
the speaker’s gesture into their descriptions of his
conceptualization (p < .01). Positive values of gist indicate
more collection-based descriptions; negative values, more
path-based descriptions. Error lines indicate SEM. (B)
When forced to decide whether the speaker conceptualized
numbers as “locations along a path” or “collections of
objects,” most participants chose the conceptualization that
aligned with his gesture (p < .001).

Study 3: Gesture observation shapes
observer’s MNL
Intersubjective coordination of thinking is a cornerstone of
human culture (Tomasello, 2014). Study 3 thus investigated
whether merely observing gestures not only sways
observers’ inferences about the speaker’s understanding (as
found in Study 2) but also shapes observers’ own MNL. As
in Study 1, participants were exposed to prerecorded Path
and Collection gestures, with one change: We directly
manipulated whether participants reproduced the gestures
actively or merely observed them passively.

Participants
Native-English-speaking adults from UCSD participated in
exchange for partial course credit (n = 122, Mage = 21 years).
An a priori power analysis found that a sample size of 116
participants would have sufficient power (1-β > 0.95) to

1509

The mental number-line spreads by gestural contagion

replicate the effect from Study 1. We thus settled in advance
on n = 124 or as close as possible by the end of the term.

Table 1. Influences on the MNL (Studies 1 and 3)

Procedure
The design was identical to Study 1, with one exception: In
the Gesture Imitation task, participants either had to
reproduce speech and gesture both, as in Study 1, or had to
reproduce speech alone, assigned randomly between
subjects.3

Results
Four participants were removed for poor accuracy (< 80%).
Accuracy was high among remaining participants (M =
94.3%, 95% CI [93.9, 94.6]). As in Study 1, before
analyzing reaction times, we removed incorrect responses
(5.7% of trials), followed by those either faster than 275ms
or slower than three SDs above participants’ condition mean
(4.0%). Reaction times were analyzed in a mixed-design
ANOVA, with Gesture Type (Path vs. Collection) and
Gesture Reproduction (Reproduce vs. Observe) as betweensubjects factors, and Response (left vs. right) and Numerical
Magnitude (1-2, 3-4, 6-7, or 8-9) as within-subjects factors.
There was a significant overall left-to-right MNL (F(3,339)
= 12.5, p << 0.001), once again influenced by whether
participants were exposed to Path or Collection gestures
(F(3,339) = 2.8, p = .038). Critically, this was unaffected by
whether participants had reproduced rather than merely
observed the gestures (all Fs < 1.72, all Ps > 0.19).
Regression analyses, as in Study 1, confirmed the overall
tendency of a left-to-right MNL in both gesture conditions
(βpath = -10.0; βcollection = -3.9; Fig. 2C), along with a
significant impact of gesture, such that participants in the
Path condition had a more pronounced left-to-right MNL
than in the Collection condition (t117 = -1.8, p = .04, onetailed; Fig. 2D).
Moreover, gesture had a significant influence on the MNL
even when only passively observed (F(3, 171) = 2.8, p = .04).
Thus, gestures had a significant impact on the MNL even
when merely observed passively.
Finally, to confirm the causal influence of gesture across
Studies 1 and 3, we constructed a linear mixed-effects
model4 of individual SNARC coefficients. The model
confirmed the causal influence of gesture on the MNL (p =
.016), unmodulated by whether gestures were reproduced or
observed (P = .68; Table 1).

3

5

Afterwards, participants completed a pilot study on arithmetic
(e.g. 4 + 3) and bisection (e.g. bisection 3 and 7) problems. These
data are not analyzed here. No other measures were collected.
4
We used the maximal converging random effects structure:
uncorrelated intercepts and slopes for both factors and their
interaction. Models were fit using restricted maximum likelihood;
we used Satterthwate's approximation to get p-values for parameter
estimates. SNARC coefficients were standardized for each
experiment to control for differences in sample populations.

Predictor of SNARC effect
Gesture (Path vs. Collection)
Reproduction (vs. Observation)
Gesture x Reproduction
Intercept

Coef.
–0.372
0.188
–0.134
0.000

No. of observations (groups)
Log-likelihood

165 (2)
–231.33

SEM
0.15
0.16
0.32
0.07

P(>|t|)
.02
.24
.68
.99

Table 1. Effect of gesture content on the MNL (indexed by
SNARC effect) in Studies 1 and 3. There was evidence
overall of a left-to-right mental number-line (i.e. negative
regression slope), but this was significantly more
pronounced after exposure to Path gestures.

General Discussion
Previous research has found considerable cross-cultural
variability in the mental number-line, often attributed to
differences in writing practices, finger-counting, or formal
education. Our findings suggest that co-speech gesture also
plays a causal role in propagating and perpetuating the
MNL. Imitating culture-specific numerical gestures
impacted the gesturer’s MNL; observing those gestures
helped the observer infer the speaker’s spatial understanding
of number and influenced the observers’ own MNL, even
when unmediated by gesture imitation. In humans,
therefore, action imitation and interpretation appear to
propagate not just culture-specific behaviors, as previously
established by work on social learning of action (Tomasello,
2014), but also culture-specific conceptualizations of
abstract ideas (cf. Sperber, 1996).
By taking advantage of within-culture variability in the
gestural representation of number (Fig. 1), we were able to
experimentally manipulate one aspect of culture while
controlling for others, such as literacy, language, or formal
education. These other factors, however, may also shape the
spatial conceptualization of number, with multiple
mechanisms operating over disparate timescales to
reproduce an interpersonally-shared MNL. Artifacts like
graphs and practices like literacy, for instance, are enduring
cultural influences that can stabilize the MNL on an
historical timescale. The specific contribution of gesture
may derive from its combination of flexibility and
conventionality. Spatial-numerical associations, while stable
at the population-level, are highly flexible within
individuals (e.g., Fischer et al, 2010). Gesture may regiment
individuals’ flexible conceptualizations, aligning numerical
intuitions within a community to maintain socially
coordinated thinking. It remains to be seen whether gestural
contagion could spread the MNL to communities that lack
the concept entirely (Núñez et al, 2012) or reverse the MNL
in communities where it already exists (Shaki et al, 2009;
Fischer, 2008).

1510

The mental number-line spreads by gestural contagion

If non-human primates acquire complex behaviors but not
gestures through social learning (Halina Rossano, &
Tomasello, 2013), gestural contagion may be a uniquely
human mechanism for cultural transmission, particularly of
space-related domains. Cultures differ in how they talk and
think about abstract concepts like time, social relations, and
even space itself, and these culture-specific understandings
are often expressed in gesture (Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013;
Enfield, 2005; Levinson, 2003). Thus, differences in
multimodal communication may not only reflect but
actively drive cross-cultural differences in abstract thought,
including but not limited to the MNL. Across a variety of
conceptual domains, cultural knowledge may be propagated
and entrenched through gestural contagion.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Natalie Allen and Myrna Aboudiab for help with
data collection, to Lera Boroditsky for advice, and to Kensy
Cooperrider, Esther Walker, David Barner, and Rose
Hendricks for comments on an early draft.

References
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2012). Nature and culture of finger
counting. Cognition, 124, 156-182.
de Hevia, M. D., Izard, V., Coubart, A., Spelke, E. S., &
Streri, A. (2014). Representations of space, time, and
number in neonates. PNAS, 111, 4809-4813.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371.
Dehaene, S., Izard, V., Spelke, E., & Pica, P. (2008). Log or
linear? Science, 320, 1217-1220.
Enfield, N. J. (2005). The body as a cognitive artifact in
kinship representations. Current anthropology, 46, 51-81.
Fischer, M. H. (2008). Finger counting habits modulate
spatial-numerical associations. Cortex, 44, 386-392.
Fischer, M Mills, & Shaki, S (2010) How to cook a SNARC:
Number placement in text rapidly changes spatial–
numerical associations. Brain & Cognition, 72, 333-336.
Goldin-Meadow, S., & Beilock, S. L. (2010). Action’s
influence on thought: The case of gesture. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 5, 664-674.
Griffiths, T, Steyvers, M & Tenenbaum, J (2007). Topics in
semantic representation. Psychological Review, 114, 211.
Halina, M., Rossano, F., & Tomasello, M. (2013). The
ontogenetic ritualization of bonobo gestures. Animal
Cognition, 16, 653-666.
Hoffmann, D., Hornung, C., Martin, R., & Schiltz, C.
(2013). Developing number–space associations: SNARC
effects using a color discrimination task in 5-yearolds. Journal of experimental child psychology, 116, 775.
Hubbard, E. M., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Dehaene, S.
(2005). Interactions between number and space in parietal
cortex. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 435-448.
Kelly, S., Özyürek, A., & Maris, E (2009). Two Sides of the
Same Coin: Speech and Gesture Mutually Interact to
Enhance Comprehension. Psychological Science, 21, 260.

6

Knops, A, Thirion, B, Hubbard, E, Michel, V & Dehaene, S
(2009). Recruitment of an area involved in eye movement
during mental arithmetic. Science, 324, 1583-1585.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where Mathematics Comes
From. New York: Basic Books.
Lee, J., Kotsopoulos, D., Tumber, A., & Makosz, S. (in
press). Gesturing about number sense. Journal of Early
Childhood Research.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and cognition.
Cambridge University Press.
Marghetis, T., & Núnez, R. (2013). The motion behind the
symbols: a vital role for dynamism in the
conceptualization of limits and continuity in expert
mathematics. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5, 299-316.
Marghetis, T, Núñez, R, Bergen, B (2014) Doing arithmetic
by hand: Hand movements during exact arithmetic reveal
systematic, dynamic spatial processing. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 67, 1579-1596.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind. U. of Chicago Press.
Núñez, R., & Cooperrider, K. (2013). The tangle of space
and time in human cognition. TiCS, 17, 220-229.
Núñez, R., Cooperrider, K., Doan, D., & Wassmann, J.
(2012). Contours of time: Topographic construals of past,
present, and future in the Yupno valley of Papua New
Guinea. Cognition, 124, 25-35.
Núñez, R & Marghetis, T (in press). Cognitive linguistics
and the concept (s) of number. In R. Cohen-Kadosh & K.
Dowker (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Numerical
Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Opfer, J. E., Thompson, C. A., & Furlong, E. E. (2010).
Early development of spatial‐numeric associations:
evidence from spatial and quantitative performance of
preschoolers. Developmental Science, 13, 761-771.
Rowe, M. L., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2009). Differences in
early gesture explain SES disparities in child vocabulary
size at school entry. Science, 323, 951-953.
Rugani, R, Vallortigara, G, Priftis, K, & Regolin, L (2015).
Number-space mapping in the newborn chick resembles
humans’ mental number line. Science, 347, 534-536.
Saxe, G. B. (2012). Cultural development of mathematical
ideas. Cambridge University Press.
Shaki, S., Fischer, M. H., & Petrusic, W. M. (2009).
Reading habits for both words and numbers contribute to
the SNARC effect. PBR, 16, 328-331.
Siegler, R. S., & Ramani, G. B. (2009). Playing linear
number board games—but not circular ones—improves
low-income preschoolers’ numerical understanding.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 101, 545.
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2012). A
21 word solution. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2160588
Sperber, D. (1996). Explaining culture. Oxford: Blackwell.
Tomasello, M. (2014). A natural history of human thinking.
Harvard University Press.
Winter, B., Marghetis, T., & Matlock, T. (2015). Of
magnitudes and metaphors. Cortex, 64, 209-224.
Zorzi, M., Priftis, K., & Umiltà, C. (2002). Neglect disrupts
the mental number line. Nature, 417, 138-139.

1511

