The Effect of Disrupted Attention on Encoding in Young Children
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

targeted activity” (Setliff & Courage, 2011, p. 613). The
present work focuses on the relationship between selective
sustained attention and encoding in children as the task of
flexibly modulating attention may be particularly
challenging for young children due to the protracted
maturation rate of selective sustained attention. In infancy
precursors to this ability are evident. For example, newborns
are able to orient to a specific stimulus, although initially the
orienting response is based on exogenous factors such as
saliency and novelty of the stimulus (Barry, 2009; Ruff &
Rothbart, 1996; see Fisher & Kloos, in press for review).
With age, endogenous control of attention emerges (Setliff
& Courage, 2011; Oakes, Kannass, & Shaddy, 2002)
resulting in a gradual decrease in distractibility (Oakes et al.,
2002; Ruff & Capozzoli, 2003). The duration of selective
sustained attention also increases with significant
improvements evident in middle childhood – particularly
after age 7 (for review see Fisher & Kloos, in press; White
1970; Bartgis, Thomas, Lefler, & Hartung, 2008).
In addition to developmental constraints on children’s
attentional capacity there are environmental demands that
may make it difficult for young children to maintain a state
of selective sustained attention in learning contexts. For
example,
traditional
learning
environments
may
inadvertently compete for children’s attention as the
classroom visual environment itself can serve as a source of
distraction (see Fisher, Godwin, & Seltman, 2014). Thus, in
the present study educational displays were utilized as an
ecologically valid source of distraction.

There is a growing body of research experimentally
demonstrating a relationship between selective sustained
attention and young children’s learning outcomes.
Collectively, this work has documented that as selective
sustained attention decreases children’s learning also declines.
However, a precise understanding of how disrupted attention
negatively impacts learning is lacking. The present
experiment expands upon the existing work and explores
three potential mechanisms by which inattention may impede
learning: 1) inattention may disrupt encoding of the individual
features of the stimulus, 2) inattention may impede children
from binding the features together, or 3) inattention may
disrupt both feature encoding and binding.
Keywords:
Behavior

Learning;

Attention;

Encoding;

Off-Task

Introduction
Attention is a factor widely believed to be important to
learning. As stated by Oakes and colleagues (2002), “if
attention were constantly reoriented to every new event, it
would be difficult ... to learn about any single object or
event” (p.1644). The association between attention and
learning has been examined in the laboratory (e.g., Fisher,
Godwin & Seltman, 2014; Godwin & Fisher, 2014; Yu &
Smith, 2012; Cowan, Fristoe, Elliot, Brunner, & Saults,
2006; Choudhury & Gorman, 2000; Craik, Govoni, NavehBenjamin, & Anderson, 1996; DeMarie-Dreblow & Miller,
1988; Healey & Miyake, 2009) and in relation to academic
outcomes (e.g., Commodari, 2012; Duncan et al. 2007;
Howse, Lange, Farran, & Boyles, 2003; NICHD, 2003).
However, the mechanisms underlying this effect have not
been fully explicated.
The present study aims to examine the relationship
between selective sustained attention and young children’s
learning outcomes by experimentally inducing lower or
higher levels of selective sustained attention. Selective
sustained attention was manipulated by introducing or
removing visual distractions (e.g., educational displays
irrelevant to the learning task) and observing the
consequences on children’s ability to encode the individual
features of the stimuli (i.e., auditory and visual features) as
well as their ability to bind this information together.

Encoding and binding
Inattention, or off-task behavior, is problematic as
selective sustained attention is hypothesized to be important
for general cognitive processes (see Choudhury & Gorman,
2000). In the present work we focus on two cognitive
processes, feature encoding and binding - where binding
refers to the process in which individual features that have
been encoded are combined to form coherent integrated
representations (e.g., Treisman, 1998; Ueno, Mate, Allen,
Hitch, & Baddeley, 2011). Successfully encoding and
binding features together are important cognitive processes
that support learning. For example, in order to learn to
associate a novel label to a novel visual stimulus,
individuals must encode the features of the stimulus (e.g.,
the label and the image) and bind these two features
together.

Selective sustained attention
Selective sustained attention is defined as: “a state of
engagement that involves narrowed selectivity and
increased commitment of energy and resources on the

806

In a recent experiment, Godwin and Fisher (2014) gave
kindergarten children a computerized paired-associates
learning task in which levels of selective sustained attention
were experimentally manipulated by introducing or
removing visual distractions. Godwin and Fisher found that
low levels of selective sustained attention impeded
children’s recall accuracy. However, from this single study
the mechanisms by which inattention disrupts learning
cannot be explicated, as there are multiple reasons that
retrieval may have failed (e.g., encoding issues,
interference). The present experiment expands upon this
work by examining what information or characteristics of
the stimuli have been encoded in the presence of
environmental distractions and whether learning decrements
are a result of disrupted attention preventing binding or
result from partial encoding of the individual features of a
stimulus (i.e., the auditory and visual features). Specifically,
we explore three potential mechanisms by which inattention
may impede learning: 1) inattention may disrupt encoding
of the individual features, 2) inattention may impede
children from binding the features together, or 3) inattention
may disrupt both feature encoding and binding.
In the present experiment we are interested in examining
the role of selective sustained attention on young children’s
feature encoding and binding during an explicit learning
task in which individuals learn to pair a novel label with a
novel image. Children’s accuracy for the individual features
(i.e., the image and the label) as well feature binding will be
assessed. Thus, the goal of present experiment is two fold:
(1) examine whether disrupting selective sustained attention
hinders children’s learning outcomes, (2) examine the
mechanisms by which disrupting selective sustained
attention may impede children’s learning.

presentation of the conditions was interleaved across testing
sessions (i.e., HVD-LVD-HVD-LVD or LVD-HVD-LVDHVD). The version of the Paired-Associates Learning Task
(Fish, Plants and Flowers, Fruit, and Exotic Mammals) was
also counterbalanced across conditions.
(A)

(B)

Figure 1. Photographs of the visual environment in each
experimental condition: panel A shows the laboratory in the High
Visual Distraction Condition and panel B shows the laboratory in
the Low Visual Distraction condition.

The dependent variable was children’s accuracy on the
learning task in the HVD and LVD conditions (i.e.,
proportion of correct responses). The amount of time
children spent off-task was calculated as a measure of
children’s selective sustained attention. A within-subject
design was utilized to ensure any learning differences
obtained were a result of the experimental manipulation
rather than variability across groups of children.

Procedure
Children participated in 4 testing sessions. Each testing
session lasted approximately 15 minutes. In each session,
children completed a Paired-Associates Learning task in
either the HVD or LVD conditions according to their
condition assignments. Thus, all children completed a total
of 4 Paired-Associates Learning tasks, 2 tasks in each
condition. These sessions were videotaped for coding
purposes in order to calculate the proportion of time
children spent off-task.
Learning Task. The Paired-Associates Learning (PAL)
task is a computer-based learning task. The PAL task
consists of three phases: pre-test, learning phase, and posttest. In the pre-test, children were asked to identify the
object labeled by the experimenter from 3 pictorial response
options. The pre-test included 18 trials, which consisted of 9
novel test items and 9 familiar items which served as fillers.
Two presentation orders were created. In Order 1 the test
items were randomized with the constraint that the pre-test
began and ended with a familiar item. For Order 2 the
presentation order utilized in Order 1 was simply reversed.
The pre-test was administered in order to ensure that the
PAL content was novel to the children.
In the learning phase, children were presented with the 9
novel natural kinds encountered during the pre-test and
taught the corresponding label for each object. Each item
was presented three times during the learning phase for a
total of 27 trials. Two presentation orders were created. For
Order 1 items were blocked and randomized within each

Method
Participants
The sample consisted of 23 kindergarten children (Mage
= 5.60 years, SD = 0.26 years, 9 females, 14 males). All
participants attended a laboratory school at a private
university in Pennsylvania. Children were tested
individually in a quiet room adjacent to their classroom by
the first author of this paper.

Design
The present study utilized a within-subject design. The
visual environment was the within-subject factor (presence
or absence of environmental distractions). There were two
experimental conditions: (1) High Visual Distraction (HVD)
condition and (2) Low Visual Distraction (LVD) condition.
In the HVD condition the environmental distractions
consisted of educational displays common in elementary
school classrooms (i.e., solar system replica, model tornado,
bulletin board, basket of supplies, etc.). In the LVD
condition the environmental distractions were removed or
obscured behind a curtain; See Figure 1.
Presentation order of the conditions (HVD first or LVD
first) was counterbalanced across participants and the

807

block (i.e., 3 blocks each containing the 9 novel items). For
Order 2 the presentation order utilized in Order 1 was
simply reversed.
The learning phase was designed to approximate ‘seatwork,’ an independent learning activity common in
elementary school classrooms. During seat-work the teacher
typically circulates throughout the classroom assisting
individual students as needed. As a result, the amount of
direct supervision that a particular child receives during
seat-work is typically minimal as the teacher’s attention is
being
distributed
across
the
entire
classroom.
Consequently, in the present study the experimenter stood in
the hallway while the child completed the learning phase of
the PAL task independently.
The post-test consisted of 3 basic question types: visual
questions, auditory questions, and binding questions
(recognition and recall questions); See Figure 2. The posttest phase included 36 test items, 9 items per question type.
Two presentation orders were created. For Order 1 question
type was blocked (Block 1: visual, Block 2: auditory, Block
3: recognition, and Block 4: recall) and the items were
randomized within each block. For Order 2 the blocking
sequence was held constant; however, the presentation order
of the items within each block was reversed. Question type
was blocked as the binding questions provided children with
information they could utilize to answer the feature
encoding questions (i.e., visual and auditory questions).
Consequently, the feature encoding questions were always
presented before the binding questions. Four versions of the
PAL task were created in which children learned about
different types of natural kinds: Fish, Plants and Flowers,
Fruit, and Exotic Mammals. A brief overview of each
question type (visual, auditory, and binding questions) is
provided below.
For visual questions, children were asked to point to the
picture they saw during the game from among 3 response
options (1 target and 2 novel lures); See Figure 2. For
auditory questions children were asked to identify the name
of the item they heard during the learning phase, see Figure
2. The response options included the target and two lures
that were matched as closely as possible to the target for
syllable length.
Children also completed two types of binding questions:
recognition and recall items; See Figure 2. Recognition
items required children to identify a particular item they
learned about during the game from 3 pictorial response
options (e.g., “Point to the Platy”). The response options
included the target object and 2 lures (a novel lure and a
familiar lure – another item children learned about during
the task). For recall items, children were shown a picture of
an object they saw during the game and asked to recall the
name of the item.
Children completed the PAL tasks under two conditions:
(1) under the presence of environmental distractions (HVD)
and (2) without environmental distractions present (LVD).
Presentation order (HVD first or LVD first) was
counterbalanced across participants. PAL version (Fish,

Plants and Flowers, Fruit, and Exotic Mammals) was also
counterbalanced across conditions. Duration of children’s
off-task behavior as well as PAL accuracy was compared
across conditions (HVD vs. LVD).
(A)

Q: “Point to the fish you
saw during the game”

(C)

Q: “Point to the Platy”

(B)

Q: “Which of these 3 fish
names did you hear during the
game?”
Computer: “Pike, Gar, Cod”

(D)

Q: “What was the name
of this fish?”

Figure 2. Sample assessment items from the Fish paired-associates
learning task. Panel A provides an example visual test item, Panel
B an example auditory test item, Panel C an example recognition
test item, and Panel D an example recall test item.

Coding. PAL sessions were videotaped for coding
purposes. Children’s behavior was coded at the second-bysecond level in order to calculate the proportion of time
children spent off-task. Coders were taught to classify the
child’s behavior as on- or off-task. On-task behavior was
operationalized as engagement with the learning materials
(i.e., the computer). Engagement was determined by the
direction of children’s gaze which is a common measure of
visual attention (see Henderson & Ferreira, 2004; Just &
Carpenter, 1976).
For each instance of off-task behavior, the coders marked
the timing of its onset and cessation. Utilizing time off-task
as a measure of selective sustained attention allows for a
more precise examination of the extent to which children are
attending to the learning task. All coders were trained by the
first author of this paper. Training consisted of extensive
practice coding videotapes. A subset of the data (25%) is
currently being re-coded to ensure good inter-rater
reliability. All coders are hypothesis-blind. The duration of
children’s off-task behavior as well as PAL accuracy were
compared across conditions (HVD vs. LVD).

808

Results

that disrupting attention during encoding negatively impacts
children’s ability to encode the individual features of the
stimuli.
Pair-wise comparisons were also conducted to examine
children’s performance on the visual and auditory questions
independently; see Figure 3. A similar pattern of results was
obtained for both visual and auditory questions. For the
visual questions children obtained higher scores in the LVD
condition (MLVD = 0.94, SD = 0.08) compared to the HVD
condition (MHVD = 0.88, SD = 0.16); however this difference
was only marginally significant; t(22) =1.70, p = 0.10,
Cohen’s d = 0.47. Additionally, children’s performance was
significantly above chance (0.33) in both conditions (single
sample ts ≥ 15.99 ps < 0.0001). Nevertheless this pattern of
results provides some preliminary evidence that disrupting
attention with visual distractions during a learning task can
result in decrements in encoding of the visual components
of the stimuli.
Next, pair-wise comparisons were conducted to examine
children’s performance on the auditory questions in the
HVD and LVD conditions. Children obtained higher scores
in the LVD condition (MLVD = 0.75, SD = 0.16) compared to
the HVD condition (MHVD = 0.70, SD = 0.22); this difference
was also marginally significant; t(22) = 1.95, p = 0.06;
Cohen’s d = 0.26. Additionally, children’s performance was
significantly above chance (0.33) in both conditions (single
sample ts ≥ 8.18, ps < 0.0001). Taken together these
findings suggest that disrupting attention during a learning
task reduces encoding of the visual and auditory
characteristics of the stimuli.

Off-Task Behavior
The total proportion of time spent off-task was measured,
and group means were compared in each condition. The
overall proportion of time spent off-task was significantly
greater in the HVD condition (M = 35%, SD = 22%)
compared to the LVD condition (M =13%, SD = 10%),
paired-sample t(22) = 5.59, p < 0.0001, Cohen’s d = 1.29.
This finding suggests the experimental manipulation of the
visual environment was effective in inducing lower or
higher levels of selective sustained attention during the
learning task.

Learning Outcomes
Pre-test. Pair-wise comparisons were conducted to
examine children’s performance on the pre-test in the HVD
and LVD conditions. The analysis revealed no significant
difference across conditions at pre-test (MHVD = 0.30, SD =
0.12; MLVD = 0.31, SD = 0.10), suggesting that the
counterbalancing procedure was effective; t(22) = 0.22, p =
0.83. Additionally, the test stimuli were novel to the
children as performance on the pre-test was not significantly
different from chance (0.33); single sample ts ≤ 1.32, both
ps ≥ 0.20.
Post-Test.   It is important to note that the difficulty level
of the binding questions is higher than the difficulty level of
the feature encoding questions, as children are able to
answer the feature encoding questions based on familiarity
alone (i.e., recognizing the familiar test item from among
two novel lures). In contrast, for binding questions children
must recognize the correct target from among one familiar
lure and one novel lure in the case of recognition questions
and for recall questions children must generate the object
label when supplied with the image. Due to differences in
the difficulty level of the post-test questions (e.g., feature
encoding vs. binding questions) it is not very informative to
compare effects of inattention across question types.
However, by looking at the effect of condition within each
question type, it is possible to determine whether inattention
disrupts feature encoding and/or binding.
A composite score, Feature Encoding, was created by
averaging together the mean performance on auditory and
visual questions for each child in order to evaluate how
accurately children encoded the features of the stimuli.
Composite scores were calculated separately for each visual
distraction condition. Children obtained relatively high
feature encoding accuracy scores suggesting that in both
conditions children were able to encode the individual
features of the stimuli (MLVD = 0.85, SD = 0.10; MHVD =
0.79, SD = 0.16). Pair-wise comparisons were then
conducted to examine children’s feature encoding
performance in the HVD and LVD conditions. Performance
did vary as a function of condition with children exhibiting
significantly higher feature encoding scores in the LVD
condition compared to the HVD condition; t(22) = 2.45, p =
0.023, Cohen’s d = 0.45. Thus, supporting the hypothesis

+	  

Accuracy	  

1	  

*	  

*	  

0.8	  

LVD	  
HVD	  

+	  

*	  

*	  

0.6	  
0.4	  

Chance	  

0.2	  

*	  =	  p<.05	  
+	  =	  p<	  0.10	  

0	  
Visual	  	  

Auditory	  

Figure 3. Mean encoding accuracy for visual and auditory features
of the PAL stimuli. Error bars represent the standard errors of the
means. Line indicates chance performance (0.33).

A composite score, Binding, was created by averaging
together the mean performance on recognition and recall
questions for each child in order to evaluate how accurately
children were able to pair the label and image together.
Binding performance (MLVD = 0.41, SD = 0.16; MHVD = 0.39,
SD = 0.17) was significantly lower than children’s ability to
encode the stimuli features (MLVD = 0.85, SD = 0.10; MHVD =
0.79, SD = 0.16); paired sample ts ≥ 11.68, ps < 0.0001.
This result is not surprising as noted previously the binding
questions are more difficult than the feature encoding
questions, as children are able to answer the feature

809

encoding questions based on familiarity alone where as
binding questions require recollection. Condition
differences in binding accuracy as a function of the LVD or
HVD condition were not significant in the present
experiment; Paired sample t(22) = 0.77, p = 0.45 ns. We
return to this issue in the discussion section. Pair-wise
comparisons were also conducted to examine condition
differences on the PAL post-test for both recognition and
recall subscales separately. For both recognition and recall
scores there was no significant effect of condition; paired
sample ts ≤ 1.08, ps ≥ 0.29.

in fact predictive of children’s feature encoding accuracy
and corroborates the results obtained in prior work (Fisher,
Godwin, & Seltman, 2014; Godwin & Fisher, 2014)
suggesting the importance of selective sustained attention,
among other individual difference factors, on children’s
learning outcomes.

Discussion
The results from the present study suggest that the
experimental manipulation of the visual environment was
effective in inducing lower or higher levels of selective
sustained attention during the learning task. Additionally,
these findings serve to replicate our previous work (Fisher,
Godwin & Seltman, 2014; Godwin & Fisher, 2014)
indicating that the visual environment can in principle
impact children’s attention allocation as evidenced by the
increase in children’s off-task behavior in the HVD
condition compared to the LVD condition.
Children’s patterns of attention allocation were also found
to impact children’s learning outcomes. Specifically,
Children’s PAL Feature Encoding scores were significantly
higher in the LVD condition compared to the HVD
condition providing supporting evidence that disrupting
attention during encoding negatively impacts children’s
ability to encode the individual features of the stimuli.
Furthermore, Total Time Off-task was found to be a
significant predictor of children’s Feature Encoding scores
and accounted for 27% of the variability in children’s
performance.
Prior work (Godwin & Fisher, 2014) utilizing a
computerized paired-associates learning task found that
disrupting attention hampers recall accuracy. The present
experiment expanded upon this work by examining whether
learning decrements result from partial encoding of the
individual features of a stimulus (i.e., the auditory and
visual features) and/or disrupted binding. The results
support the partial encoding hypothesis and indicate that
disrupting attention negatively impacts feature encoding as
evidenced by children’s lower feature encoding scores in the
HVD condition compared to the LVD condition. However,
it is currently an open question as to whether inattention
also negatively affects binding accuracy due to the
inconsistency of this effect across studies. Thus, additional
research is needed to determine whether binding is
unaffected by disrupted attention or alternatively if
disrupted attention impedes binding. One possible
alternative explanation for why binding accuracy was not
affected in the present experiment pertains to specific design
features employed in the experiment. For example, binding
questions were administered as the last block of the post-test
due to reasons discussed in the Method section. It is
possible that the representations that children are creating
are quite fragile. Consequently the added delay of
administering two blocks of questions (auditory and visual
questions) at post-test prior to the binding questions might
have masked any condition differences that may have
emerged. Additional research is needed to determine

Predicting Children’s Learning Outcomes

Total	  Time	  Off-­‐Task	  

A significant difference in children’s feature encoding
performance was found as a function of the manipulation to
the visual environment. Consequently, the following set of
analyses were conducted in order to examine whether
children’s pattern of selective sustained attention is in fact
predictive of their feature encoding accuracy.
Total time off-task (pooled across both the LVD and
HVD conditions was found to be significantly correlated
with children’s Total Feature Encoding Scores (pooled
across both the LVD and HVD conditions); see Figure 4.
Thus, the more time children spent off-task the lower their
learning scores; r = -0.552, p = 0.006. This effect was
consistent in its direction across both conditions; however,
the association was only significant in the HVD condition (r
= -0.63, p = 0.001) and was not significant in the LVD
condition (r = -0.34, p = 0.12). The observed pattern of
results may be due to the truncated range in off-task
behavior observed in the LVD condition (Range: 0%-36%)
compared to the HVD condition (Range: 2%-81%). The
limited variability in the proportion of time spent off-task in
the LVD condition makes it more difficult to detect an
association with children’s learning outcomes.

0.60	  
0.50	  
0.40	  
0.30	  
0.20	  
0.10	  
0.00	  
0.00	  

r	  =	  -­‐0.552	  
p	  =	  .006	  

0.20	   0.40	   0.60	   0.80	  
Total	  Feature	  Encoding	  

1.00	  

Figure 4. Scatterplot of the total amount of time children spent offtask (mean proportion of time off-task pooled across the HVD and
LVD conditions) and children’s total feature encoding score (mean
accuracy for identifying the visual and auditory features of the
PAL stimuli pooled across the HVD and LVD conditions).

When entered in a linear regression Total Time Off-task
was a significant predictor of children’s Feature Encoding
scores (F(1,21) = 9.23, p = 0.006) and accounted for 27%
(adjusted R2) of the variability in children’s performance.
These findings indicate that selective sustained attention is

810

whether binding is truly unaffected by inattention or if the
aforementioned delay hypothesis is able to account for this
result. Future research can begin to explore this possibility
by manipulating the length of the delay between the learning
phase and post-test.
Understanding the nuanced relationship between attention
and learning is an important area of research with potential
practical implications for education. This line of work will
ultimately help create a more comprehensive understanding
of the relationship between attention and learning and its
underlying mechanisms.

Fisher, A.V., & Kloos, H. (in press). Development of
selective sustained attention: The Role of executive
functions. In L. Freund, P. McCardle, and J. Griffin
(Eds.), Executive function in preschool age children:
Integrating
measurement,
neurodevelopment
and
translational research. APA Press.
Godwin, K. E. & Fisher, A.V. (2014). Selective sustained
attention, the visual environment, and learning in
kindergarten-age children: Preliminary results of an
individual difference study. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M.
McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
541-546). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Healey, M. K. & Miyake, A. (2009). The role of attention
during retrieval in working-memory span: A dual-task
study. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62(4), 733-745.
Henderson, J., & Ferreira, F. (2004). In The interface of
language, vision, and action: Eye movements and the
visual world. New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Howse, R. B., Lange, G., Farran, D. C., Boyles, C. D.
(2003). Motivation and self-regulation as predictors of
achievement in economically disadvantaged young
children. The Journal of Experimental Education, 71(2),
151-174.
Just, M., and Carpenter, P. (1976). Eye fixations and
cognitive processes. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 441–480.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2003). Do
children’s attention processes mediate the link between
family predictors and school readiness. Developmental
Psychology, 39(3), 581-593.
Oakes, L., Kannass, K.N., & Shaddy, D.J. (2002).
Developmental changes in endogenous control of
attention: The role of target familiarity on infants'
distraction latency. Child Development, 73, 1644-1655.
Ruff, H. A. & Capozzoli, M. C. (2003). Development of
attention and distractibility in the first 4 years of life.
Developmental Psychology, 39(5), 877 - 890.
Ruff, H. A. & Rothbart, M. K. (1996). Attention in early
development: Themes and variations. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Setliff, A. E., & Courage, M. L. (2011). Background
television and infants allocation of their attention during
toy play. Infancy, 16(6), 611-639.
Treisman, A. (1998). Feature binding, attention and object
perception. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, 353, 1295-1306.
Ueno, T., Mate, J., Allen, R. J., Hitch, G. J., & Baddeley, A.
D. (2011). What goes through the gate? Exploring
interference
with
visual
feature
binding.
Neuropsychologia, 49, 1597-1604.
White, S. (1970). Some general outlines of the matrix of
developmental changes between 5 and 7 years. Bulletin of
the Orton Society, 20, 41-57.
Yu, C., & Smith, L.B. (2012). Embodied attention and word
learning by toddlers. Cognition, 125(2), 244–262.

Acknowledgements
We thank Jessica Meeks, Manon Sohn, Jae-Won Kim, and
Lindsay Gorby for their help coding data. We thank the
children, parents, and teachers for making this work
possible. This work was supported in part by a Graduate
Training Grant awarded to Carnegie Mellon University by
the Department of Education (R305B090023).

References
Bary, R. J. (2009). Habituation of the orienting reflex and
the development of the preliminary process theory.
Neurobiology of Leaning & Memory, 92(2), 235-242.
Bartgis, J. Thomas, D. G., Lefler, E. K., & Hartung, C. M.
(2008). The development of attention and response
inhibition in early childhood. Infant and Child
Development, 17, 491-502.
Choudhury, N. & Gorman, K. S. (2000). The relationship
between sustained attention and cognitive performance in
17-24 month old toddlers. Infant and Child Development,
9, 127-146.
Commodari, E. (2012) Attention skills and risk of
developing learning difficulties. Current Psychology, 31,
17-34.
Cowan, N., Fristoe, N. M., Elliot, E. M., Brunner, R. P., &
Saults, J. S. (2006). Scope of attention, control of
attention, and intelligence in children and adults. Memory
& Cognition, 34(8), 1754-1768.
Craik, F. I. M., Govoni, R., Naveh-Benjamin, M., &
Anderson, N. D. (1996). The effects of divided attention
on encoding and retrieval processes in human memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 125(2), 159 - 180.
DeMarie-Dreblow, D. & Miler, P. H. (1988). The
development of children’s strategies for selective
attention: Evidence for a transitional period. Child
Development, 59, 1504-1513.
Duncan, G. J., Dowsett, C. J., Claessens, A., Magnuson, K.,
Huston, A. C., Klebanov, P., Pagani, L.S., Feinstein, L.,
Engel, M., Brooks-Gunn, J., Sexton, H., Duckworth, K.,
& Japel, C. (2007). School readiness and later
achievement. Developmental Psychology, 43(6), 14281446.
Fisher, A. V., Godwin, K. E., & Seltman, H. (2014). Visual
environment, attention allocation, and learning: When too
much of a good thing may be bad. Psychological Science,
25(7), 1362-1370.

811

