The special status of color in pragmatic reasoning: evidence from a language game
Peter Baumann (baumann@u.northwestern.edu)
Department of Linguistics
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
Abstract

mal’ and that instead speakers make use of overspecification,
i.e. saying more than is strictly necessary (e.g. Pechmann,
1989; Gatt, Krahmer, van Gompel, & van Deemter, 2013;
Baumann, Clark, & Kaufmann, 2014). Which properties of
a referent are prone to being used in a referring expression
even when they do not help to identify it, is assumed to be related to a property’s inherent salience: while some properties,
most notably a referent’s color, are expressed more often than
required, other properties, such as size, tend to be used only
when necessary to identify a referent (e.g. Gatt, van Gompel,
Krahmer, & van Deemter, 2011).
While the inherent salience of referent properties has been
shown to influence the production of referring expressions, it
remains open if and to what extent it also plays a role in comprehension. In this paper, we provide evidence that the inherent salience of different referent properties, namely color and
size, influences the comprehension of referring expressions.
More specifically, we show in a referential language game
experiment that listeners do not seem to perform much pragmatic reasoning when the referring expression only expresses
color, but instead follow a simple salience-based heuristic.
When the referring expression expresses size, on the other
hand, pragmatic reasoning is more involved and more in line
with the predictions of models of pragmatic reasoning.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we first
introduce referential language games as an empirical method
to study reference. We then review some relevant prior research on pragmatic reasoning and content selection and finally present two experiments, a production and a comprehension experiment whose results are compared to the predictions of a Bayesian model of pragmatic reasoning.

In current approaches to pragmatic reasoning the comprehension and production of referring expressions is modeled as a
result of the interlocutors’ mutual perspective-taking. While
such models of pragmatic reasoning have been empirically validated in referential language games experiments, empirical
(and computational) work on the generation of referring expressions has shown that speakers do not always take the listener’s perspective into account, but instead produce referring
expressions according to their own preferences. One particularly well studied example is color: speakers often include
color terms in their referring expressions even if they do not
help identify the intended referent. We show that like speakers, listeners treat color differently from other properties like
e.g. size. Our results suggest that listeners do not seem to
perform much pragmatic reasoning when the referring expression only expresses color, but instead follow a simple saliencebased heuristic.
Keywords: Referring Expressions; Pragmatics; Language
games; Language Production; Language Comprehension

Introduction
Reference and referring expressions are central to human
communication: in order to refer to an object or person in
the world, a speaker needs to produce an appropriate referring expression so that a listener will be able to identify that
referent given the expression and the context. A number of
attempts have been made to provide a more quantitative understanding of the production and comprehension of referring
expressions. In an overly simplifying manner, these attempts
may be grouped into models of pragmatic reasoning and models of content selection.
Focusing primarily on comprehension, models of pragmatic reasoning, such as game-theoretic models (e.g. Benz
& Van Rooij, 2007; Jäger, 2011) or Bayesian models
(e.g. Frank & Goodman, 2012), assume that the speaker
and hearer reason about each other’s perspectives: the hearer
is assumed to interpret a speaker’s expression as referring to
the referent for which the expression is ‘optimal’ under the
perspective of the speaker, who in turn chooses the referring
expression to be ‘optimal’ under the hearer’s perspective, etc.
A trivial solution to this recursive reasoning process is for
the speaker to choose a referring expression that explicitly
mentions all features of the intended referent and is thus absolutely unambiguous in the given context. Since such an
expression can hardly qualify as efficient, however, the above
models make the crucial additional assumption that speakers
have a preference for the most economic (i.e. shortest and
least effortful) expression.
Focusing primarily on production, models of content selection or the generation of referring expressions (Dale &
Reiter, 1995) start from the observation that referring expressions produced by actual speakers are not always ‘opti-

Referential Language Games
Referential language games (Wittgenstein, 1959; Lewis,
1969) have been used to empirically test pragmatic reasoning
about referents and referring expressions in (simple) visual
contexts. As an example, consider the situation sketched in
Figure 1. If in this context, a speaker said My friend is the one
wearing sunglasses, a listener could infer that she is referring
to the person wearing sunglasses and no hat. This follows under the assumption that if the speaker had wanted to refer to
the person wearing a hat and sunglasses, she could have used
an expression like My friend is the one wearing a hat, which
unambiguously identifies the intended referent (Grice, 1975).
It has been shown that (adult) listeners can easily perform this
kind of pragmatic reasoning (e.g. Stiller, Goodman, & Frank,
2011; Degen & Franke, 2012).
In the general form of a language game, speakers and listeners see a visual display of several potential referents, from

178

Frank and Goodman (2012) tested this model in a simple
referential language game, in which human participants provided probability judgments for the three terms in Equation 1.
Participants saw an array of three objects varying along two
of the three following property dimensions: shape, color and
texture. They were then asked to place bets on
Figure 1: Example of the visual context of a language game.

which the speaker picks (or is given) a referent to talk about,
while the listener does not know the referent. The speaker
then chooses a referring expression, based on which the listener must identify the intended referent.
Language games are particularly suitable for the study of
pragmatic reasoning as they allow for an easy manipulation of
the depth of (recursive) pragmatic reasoning required for successful communication by changing the distribution of features across the different referents. In Figure 1, the target referent (middle), shares one feature with each of its two competitors: like the competitor to its right, the target is wearing
sunglasses, and like the competitor to its left, it is not wearing a hat. So upon hearing a sentence like the one wearing
sunglasses, the hearer must employ pragmatic reasoning and
strengthen the heard utterance to mean the one wearing sunglasses, but no hat.

1. which object a speaker is talking about given that she used
one of the two words (P (r|w), listener)
2. which object a speaker is talking about given that she used
an unknown word (P (r), salience)
3. which (of the two possible) word they would use to refer to
a given object (P (w|r), speaker).
Given these estimates, Frank and Goodman (2012) observed
a very strong correlation between both the estimated and predicted speaker likelihoods P (w|r) (according to Equation 2)
and the estimated and predicted listener probabilities P (r|w)
obtained from Equation 1 with P (w|r) according to Equation 2 and the estimated P (r).
Critically, participants were given a probabilistic forcedchoice task, as they had to place bets on their answers. However, in the speaker condition, there was no clear option for
overspecification, i.e. for using both properties to refer to the
given referent. While this design choice of Frank and Goodman (2012) is in line with other experiments on pragmatic
reasoning (e.g. Degen & Franke, 2012), it has been shown
that when given an a free choice, speakers do make use of
overspecification in similar experimental settings (Gatt, van
Gompel, van Deemter, & Krahmer, 2013; Baumann et al.,
2014).

Related Work
In this section, we present one Bayesian model of pragmatic
reasoning about referring expressions and then briefly review
some relevant studies from the vast literature on the generation of referring expressions.

Overspecification in the Generation of Referring
Expressions

Models of Pragmatic Reasoning

The fact that speakers have the option for overspecification and often make use of it has become a well-established
fact in the psycholinguistic literature on referring expressions
(e.g. Pechmann, 1989; Engelhardt, Bailey, & Ferreira, 2006;
Koolen, Gatt, Goudbeek, & Krahmer, 2011). Numerous studies have shown that the properties of referents form preference hierarchies according to their inherent salience and that
properties listed high on these hierarchies, such as color, tend
to be used by speakers even if they are not necessary to identify an intended referent (Koolen et al., 2011) or if they provide less discriminatory power than a property lower on the
hierarchy (Gatt, Krahmer, et al., 2013).
While some of these studies involve rather complex visual
contexts from which a specific referent is to be identified,
Gatt et al. (2011) report an experiment that closely resembles
the design of language games used to test models of pragmatic reasoning: their visual display consisted of three objects, which differed along the two feature dimensions color
and size (see Figure 2), and participants were given an open
prompt to answer. The results showed that participants made
significant use of overspecification, especially if the redundant feature was color. However, the authors of this study

Models of pragmatic reasoning are based on the assumption
that the speaker and hearer reason about each other’s perspectives. A Bayesian approach to model a two-level pragmatic reasoning process was proposed by Frank and Goodman (2012): in their model, a listener uses Bayesian inference
to infer a speaker’s intended referent r given that the speaker
used a particular word w:
P (w|r)P (r)
P (r|w) = P0
0
0
r P (w|r )P (r )

(1)

The likelihood P (w|r) of a speaker uttering word w given an
intended referent r is assumed to reflect the utility or informativeness of a word used to refer to a particular referent and
thus takes the form
|w|−1
0 −1
w0 ∈W |w |

P (w|r) = P

(2)

where |w| denotes the number of referents for which word w
is true and W is the set of all words w0 that could be used to
describe the referent r.

179

Experiment 1: Production
Experiment 1 is a production experiment in which
we compare speakers referring expressions for referents
in‘pragmatic’ contexts like in Figure 3 with ‘simple’ contexts,
in which the referent has a unique property.
Materials and Design We designed two sets of arrays of
three pictures (light bulbs and dinosaurs), like the one in Figure 3. The individual pictures differed in two properties: size
and color
The pictures in the arrays were assembled according to
three conditions: a pragmatic condition (Figure 3) and two
simple conditions. In the two simple conditions, the target
picture (indicated by a grey frame) had a unique property,
either color or size (Figure 2), by which it could easily be
referred to (e.g. small light bulb).
In the pragmatic condition, the target picture shared one
property with each of its two competitors: e.g. in Figure 3, it
has the same size as the competitor to its right and the same
color as the one to its left. As illustrated above, if speakers were producing pragmatically ‘optimal’ referring expressions, Figure 3 could be referred to as either green light bulb
or large light bulb.
We employed a two-shot between-subject design: each
participant completed only two trials (cf. Frank and Goodman (2012), who also used single trial experiments): one in
the pragmatic condition and one in one of the simple conditions. The properties and array sets were counter-balanced
across participants and the order of the three pictures was randomized within the array.

Figure 2: Example of a simple visual context of a language
game with size and color. Size is sufficient to identify the
target.

Figure 3: Example of a pragmatic visual context of a language game with size and color.

were primarily interested in the differential effects of color
and size on the degree of overspecification, and so the experiment consisted only of conditions in which either color or
size or both were unique features of the target object. Crucially, there was no ‘pragmatic’ condition, in which the target
did not have a unique property in context, but a single property could still suffice to identify a referent through pragmatic
reasoning.

Participants and Procedure Using Amazon Mechanical
Turk, 96 participants were recruited for the experiment. All
participants were naive to the purpose of the experiment and
reported to be native speakers of English.
The two trials were presented on a single web page.
Each trial consisted of a three-picture array with one picture
marked by a grey frame as in Figure 3. Under the picture
array there was a text line with the words Pick the followed
by an open prompt and a period. The participants’ task was
to fill in the blank so that another person could identify the
target picture with the grey frame.
Participants were instructed to imagine that they were communicating with another person over an instant messaging or
chat system and that they wanted their partner to pick the picture with the grey frame out of the three pictures in the array.
They were told to imagine that their partner saw the same
three pictures, but without the frame and in a possibly different order. This instruction was emphasized by the fact that
the target picture appeared in a randomized position within
each trial. In addition, participants were asked to complete
the initial two words into a correct sentence of English.

Experiments
Our experiments add such an ‘pragmatic’ condition to the one
reported by Gatt et al. (2011). More importantly, we also
investigate how listeners understand pragmatically ‘optimal’
utterances in the context of such pragmatic contexts involving
properties of different inherent saliences.
As an example of a pragmatic context, consider a visual
display like in Figure 3. Here the target referent (middle)
shares one property with each of its competitors: it has the
same size as the competitor to its right and the same color as
the one to its left. Like in the case of the smileys in Figure 1,
the target can be identified by referring to only one of its two
properties through pragmatic reasoning: if a speaker chooses
to refer to the target just by its size (the large light bulb), a
listener can infer that speaker is more likely to be referring
to the large green light bulb than to the small one, since for
referring to the latter one she could have used the unique expression the small light bulb. By the same line of reasoning
the target could also be identified by just referring to its color
(the green light bulb). So unlike in the smiley case of Figure 1, the array of light bulbs in Figure 3 is symmetrical, i.e.
assuming a pragmatic listener, a speaker could refer to the
target by either of its two properties.

Results The individual answers were manually assessed for
correctness, i.e. whether or not it was possible to identify the
intended referent from the answer. Out of 192 responses, only
2 (≈ 1.0%) did not allow for a unique identification of the

180

1.0

one given a sentence containing to only one of the referent’s
two properties. While our comprehension experiment is very
similar to the ones reported by Frank and Goodman (2012) together with the model in Equation 1, there are four critical differences: first, Frank and Goodman (2012) asked their participants to place bets on each referent, which were then directly
interpreted as (prior or posterior) probabilities for these referents. While this procedure may easily be interpreted as measuring a listener’s belief about the likelihood of those three
referents, ultimately the listener has to make a decision in order to interpret a given referring expression. We thus opted
for a forced-choice task. Second, in line with the previous
argument we included the referring expression in a sentence
frame. Third, we focused on visual contexts like Figure 3
which require pragmatic reasoning. And fourth, we chose the
two properties color and size instead of color, shape and texture used by Frank and Goodman (2012), because for color
and size clear differences have been observed in production
experiments. In addition, color and size are both typically
realized as pre-nominal adjectives, which makes the two corresponding referring expressions only minimally different.

Properties expressed

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

color and size
only color
only size

0.0

Proportions of Properties used in Referring Expression

target picture and were excluded. For the remaining 190 trials, we manually annotated which properties were explicitly
mentioned in the response. Figure 4 shows the proportion of
properties used in referring expressions by condition. It can
be seen that in the pragmatic and simple-size condition both
color and size were used in the vast majority of produced referring expressions, while in the simple-color condition only
34% of the referring expressions also contained size.

Pragmatic

Simple Size

Materials and Design We used the visual stimuli of the
pragmatic condition from Experiment 1 (Figure 3), where the
target picture shares one property with each of its two competitors: e.g. in Figure 3, it has the same size as the competitor to its right and the same color as the one to its left.
We crossed the two properties of the target referent with
the property expressed in the referring expression, yielding a
2x2x2 factorial design of size (small vs. large) x color (red
vs. green) x referred property (size vs. color).
We employed a single-shot between-subject design: each
participant completed only one trial (cf. Frank & Goodman, 2012). The properties and referring expressions were
counter-balanced across participants and the order of the three
pictures was randomized within the array.

Simple Color

Condition

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 1: Proportions of properties
expressed in referring expression by condition.
While the difference between the simple-size and simplecolor condition has been reported in earlier studies (e.g. Gatt
et al., 2011), we observed that in the pragmatic condition
speakers use the property color even more often than in
simple-size condition (98.9% vs. 89.6%). A logistic regression fit to an indicator of whether color was realized in answers in the pragmatic and simple-size conditions revealed
that this difference was significant (p < .05).

Participants and Procedure Using Amazon Mechanical
Turk, 227 participants were recruited for the experiment. All
participants were naive to the purpose of the experiment and
reported to be native speakers of English.
The experiment was presented on a web page and consisted
of the picture array and a sentence like Pick the large light
bulb. Participants were asked to select the ‘best’ picture given
the sentence and made their selection by clicking on a radio
button under one of the pictures. Like in Experiment 1, participants were instructed to imagine that they are communicating with another person over an instant messaging or chat
system and that they both saw the same three pictures, however in possibly different orders, and that they wanted to identify the picture their partner was referring to by the given sentence.

Discussion These results show that in the production of referring expressions, people tend to express color even if it is
not necessary for a successful identification of the intended
referent, like in our simple-size and pragmatic conditions.
Less salient properties, like size, on the other hand, are used
less often if they are not necessary to identify a referent, like
in our simple-color condition. These results are a full replication of earlier studies on overspecification in the production
of referring expressions (e.g. Gatt et al., 2011). More importanly, we found that in a ‘pragmatic’ visual context, which
would allow for the identification of a referent with just one
property through pragmatic reasoning, all but one participant
chose to express the property color.

Results All 227 participants selected a picture compatible
with the given referring expression. The proportions of listeners’ choosing the target referent following from pargmatic
reasoning is shown in Figure 5.

Experiment 2: Comprehension
Experiment 2 is a comprehension experiment, in which listeners are asked to decide which of the possible referents from
the pragmatic condition Figure 3 is most likely the intended

181

Comparison with Bayesian model

It can be seen that if the referred property is size, target
choices are fairly similar across all target property conditions,
while if the referred property color there is a huge difference
in target choices depending on the size of the target: if the
target is large, participants mainly selected the target, while
for small targets participants had a strong preference for the
(large) distractor of the same color. This pattern was confirmed by a logistic regression with the three experimental
factors and all their interactions as predictors, which revealed
main effects of referred property (p < .001) and target size
(p < .001), and a significant interaction of referred property
and target size (p < .001).

In order to compare our results from Experiment 2 with the
predictions of the Bayesian model in Equation 1, we estimated the salience prior P (r) for the three referents in our
visual scenes.
Participants, Materials, Design and Procedure 116 participants were recruited for the experiment over Mechanical
Turk. The visual stimuli are the same as in Experiment 2,
but instead of reading a sentence with areferring expression,
participants were told that a speaker had said a sentence they
could not understand and were asked to select the picture the
speaker was most likely referring to. Like in Experiment 2,
we employed a single-shot between-subject design.
Results & Discussion Participants’ responses in the
salience experiment were used to calculate the prior probabilities P (r). These were combined with the speaker likelihoods from Equation 2 to obtain predictions of the Bayesian
model by (Frank & Goodman, 2012). Figure 6 shows the
results from Experiment 2 plotted over these model predictions. It can be seen that the model predictions are closer
to the observed target choices if the referred property is size
than when it is color. This corroborates the speculation that
listeners may not perform much pragmatic reasoning when
the only property in the referring expression is color.

1.0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Large red
Large green
Small red
Small green

0.0

Proportion of target choices

Target Properties

size

color
size

●

0.8

●

●
●

0.0

Discussion We observed that if the referred property is
color, the likelihood of target choice depends strongly on the
size of the target (and the size of the distractor of the same
color): if the target is large, participants mainly selected the
target, while for small targets participants had a strong preference for the (large) distractor of the same color. For size as
the referred property, on the other hand, no such difference
was observed.

●

0.6

Figure 5: Results of Experiment 2: Proportions of target
choices by condition.

Referred property

0.4

Proportions of target choices

1.0

Referred property

0.2

color

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Model predictions

From the perspective of models of pragmatic reasoning,
these results are unexpected, as the the visual scenes are symmetric in both properties (i.e. the target shares one property
with either of its competitors) and either property should allow target identification through pragmatic reasoning. Instead
our results suggest that listeners do not perform much pragmatic reasoning when the referred property is color, but instead follow a simple perceptual heuristic by choosing the
most salient referent of that color, i.e. the larger one. This
possibility may be accounted for by the salience prior P (r)
in the model of Frank and Goodman (2012). In the following section we therefore compare our empirical results to the
predictions of this model.

Figure 6: Empirical results over Baysian model predictions
by property used in the referring expression. Error bars are
standard errors.

General Discussion
The main findings of this paper are the results of Experiment
2: in a language game involving simple pragmatic reasoning,
listeners behave differently if the referring property is color
from when it is size. In the case of color, target choice is
strongly determined by the size of the target: if the target is
large, participants mainly selected the target, while for small

182

targets participants had a strong preference for the (large) distractor of the same color. In the case of size, on the other
hand, no such difference was observed. One way to interpret
our results is to assume that for referring expressions involving color, listeners do not perform much pragmatic reasoning,
but instead follow a simple perceptual heuristic by choosing
the most salient referent of that color, i.e. the larger one.

35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin: Cognitive Science Society.
Gatt, A., van Gompel, R., Krahmer, E., & van Deemter,
K. (2011). Non-deterministic attribute selection in
reference production. In K. van Deemter, A. Gatt,
R. van Gompel, & E. Krahmer (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Workshop on Production of Referring Expressions
(PRE-CogSci’11). Boston.
Gatt, A., van Gompel, R., van Deemter, K., & Krahmer, E.
(2013). Are we Bayesian referring expression generators? In A. Gatt, R. van Gompel, E. G. Bard,
E. Krahmer, & K. van Deemter (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Workshop on Production of Referring Expressions
(PRE-CogSci’13). Berlin.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole &
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Speech Acts. Academic Press.
Jäger, G. (2011). Game-theoretical pragmatics. In J. van
Benthem & A. ter Meulen (Eds.), Handbook of Logic
and Language (p. 467-491). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Koolen, R., Gatt, A., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2011).
Factors causing overspecification in definite descriptions. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(13), 3231–3250.
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention: A Philosophical Study. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27(1), 89–110.
Stiller, A., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2011). Ad-hoc
scalar implicature in adults and children. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2134–2139). Boston.
Wittgenstein, L. (1959). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.

From the perspective of models of pragmatic reasoning,
these results are unexpected, even when the salience (prior)
of each referent in the context is taken into account, as shown
in the preceding section. From the perspective of models of
content selection, on the other hand, these results seem rather
plausible: as we showed in Experiment 1, speakers often use
color to refer to referents, which cannot be further identified
by color. While this preference is already very strong if there
is a uniquely identifying referent property of lower salience, it
is nearly categorical if no such unique property exists and producing a single-property referring expression would involve
pragmatic reasoning. As a consequence, listeners may take
this speaker preference into account when reasoning about
referring expressions. In particular, since color is often used
without contributing any discriminatory power, it may be a
rational strategy to ignore color as a cue for pragmatic reasoning and instead rely on a simple perceptual heuristic.

References
Baumann, P., Clark, B., & Kaufmann, S. (2014). Overspecification and the cost of pragmatic reasoning about referring expressions. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane,
& B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1898–
1903). Austin: Cognitive Science Society.
Benz, A., & Van Rooij, R. (2007). Optimal assertions, and
what they implicate: A uniform game theoretic approach. Topoi, 26(1), 63–78.
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational interpretations
of the Gricean maxims in the generation of referring
expressions. Cognitive Science, 19(2), 233–263.
Degen, J., & Franke, M. (2012). Optimal reasoning
about referential expressions. In S. Brown-Schmidt,
J. Ginzburg, & S. Larsson (Eds.), Proceedings of the
16th Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (pp. 2–11). Paris.
Engelhardt, P. E., Bailey, K. G., & Ferreira, F. (2006). Do
speakers and listeners observe the Gricean Maxim of
Quantity? Journal of Memory and Language, 54(4),
554–573.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting
pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science,
336(6084), 998–998.
Gatt, A., Krahmer, E., van Gompel, R., & van Deemter, K.
(2013). Production of referring expressions: Preference trumps discrimination. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen,
N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the

183

