The number of times a motion repeats influences sentence processing.
Lucy Kyoungsook Kim (kyoungsk@usc.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of Southern California
3601 Watt Way, GFS 301, Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA

Elsi Kaiser (emkaiser@usc.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of Southern California
3601 Watt Way, GFS 301, Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA

Abstract
We investigated how the semantic properties of verbs
influence the way in which language users process sentences
and how well they remember the verb. In particular, our study
focused on the frequency of motion repetition, that is, how
many times actions generally repeat in a row. The
experimental sentences contained action verbs, such as
sneezing, knocking on a door, clapping, and bouncing a ball.
Half of the target sentences contained verbs that refer to
actions that generally repeat once or twice in a row in the real
world (determined by norming), such as sneezing, coughing,
and knocking on a door. The other half contained verbs
referring to actions that typically repeat many times in row,
such as hiccupping, clapping, and bouncing a ball. Native
Korean speakers performed a sensicality judgment task where
they decided whether given Korean sentences were sensical
or not. We also tested how well participants remember the
verbs in target sentences. The results show an effect of action
repetition frequency: Participants judged sentences with low
repetition frequency verbs more accurately than sentences
containing high repetition frequency verbs. We propose that
verbs describing multiple repetitions may place a greater
processing load than verbs involving fewer repetitions.
Keywords: lexical semantics, action repetition frequency,
sentence processing, sensicality judgment, memory retention

Introduction
Understanding language requires a number of different
processes. As part of language use, comprehenders need to
retrieve the meanings of individual words from their mental
lexicon (Federmeier & Kutas, 1999; Ferreira & Yoshita,
2003; Pinker, 1994; Rappaport, Levin, & Laughren, 1993;
Slevc, 2011; Ullman, 2001; Ullman et al., 1997). They also
need to understand the structural relationships between
phrases to compute the intended meaning using syntactic
representations (Chomsky, 1995; Ferreira & Yoshita, 2003;
Gibson, 1998; Rappaport, Levin, & Laughren, 1993; Slevc,
2011; Ullman, 2001). Our focus is on the first component,
in particular the lexical semantics of words.
Research has shown that comprehenders’ linguistic
behaviors are sensitive to words’ lexical semantics. For
example, Fecica and O’Neill (2010) showed that four to six
year-olds’ comprehension is influenced by the speed of a
movement conveyed by verbs (e.g. walking vs. driving).
When children listened to a story where the protagonist was
described as walking to a place, their processing of
subsequently related sentences was slower than when the
character was described as being driven to the place. Fecica

and O’Neill concluded that children, like adults, build
mental representations of the actions based on their world
knowledge, and their mental representations influence how
they process subsequent information. See also Martin &
Chao (2001) for related work.
Lindsay et al. (2013) conducted an eye-tracking with
adults on how the speed of an action conveyed by the verb
(e.g. mope vs. sprint) influences what comprehenders pay
attention to in a visual scene and how much time they spend
scanning the scene. Participants spent more time looking
along the path when listening to sentences containing slow
verbs (e.g. The hiker will mope along the trail to the cottage)
compared to fast verbs (e.g. The hiker will sprint along the
trail to the cottage). Participants also looked at the goal
earlier when listening to sentences containing fast verbs.
Related work by Matlock (2004) found that people spent
more time reading sentences depicting a longer physical
distance (‘The road runs through the valley’) compared to a
shorter distance (‘The cord runs along the wall’).
Further data regarding effects of motion speed on
language processing comes from Yao and Scheepers (2011)
and Stites, Luke, and Christianson (2013). Yao and
Scheepers investigated whether comprehenders’ reading
rates would differ depending on how fast the protagonist
was implied to be speaking. In the ‘fast’ condition, readers
were given stories in which the protagonist was implied to
be speaking at a fast rate (e.g. a boy who is nervous and
shaking). In the ‘slow’ condition, participants were given
stories where the character was implied to be speaking at a
slow rate (e.g. an old man on his deathbed). The results
showed a significant context effect on reading rates:
Participants read direct quotations faster when the
protagonist was implied to be speaking fast than when the
protagonist was implied to be speaking slowly.
As a whole, these studies demonstrate that words’
semantic information influences the behaviors of language
comprehenders, such as visual scanning of a scene, reading
speed, and comprehension rates. Verb semantics can differ
in many aspects: (i) action-related verbs vs. abstract verbs
(e.g. to scrub vs. to trouble, Innocenti et al., 2014); (ii)
bodily orientation (e.g. face-related verbs vs. non-facerelated verbs, to talk vs. to walk, e.g. Pulvermüller et al.,
2001); and (iii) speed of motion (e.g. to walk vs. to run, e.g.
Fecica & O’Neill, 2010; Lindsay et al., 2013).
Another aspect of verb semantics has to do with the
frequency of motion repetition. We use the term ‘frequency

1093

of repetition’ to refer to the number of times an action
generally repeats in a row. In the world, we observe and
perform actions all the time. We knock on doors, clap
hands, bounce balls, or watch others do these things. These
actions repeat in succession, but some repeat more
frequently than others. E.g., clapping is prototypically
thought to involve several ‘hand claps’, whereas the act of
ringing a door bell does not involve as many ringing hand
motions. Similarly, while people generally sneeze once or
twice in a row, they hiccup multiple times in a row.
Though there are ample studies that reveal both
behavioural and neurological consequences of different
aspects of verb semantics, we are not aware of any prior
research on how frequency of motion repetitions could
influence language processing. To address this, we tested
whether
verbs’
repetition
frequencies
influence
comprehenders’ sensicality judgments and their ability to
recall verb information. The study was done in Korean.

Method
Norming Study
A norming study was done to see how many times Korean
speakers typically think certain actions generally take place
in a row. Forty native Korean speakers participated in a
web-based survey (done with Qualtrics software, Qualtrics
2010). Participants were given 36 action verbs and were
asked to indicate (in an open-ended task) how many times
each of the actions generally takes place in a row. For
example, ‘On average, how many times would one blow
his/her nose in a row?’ The norming study was in Korean.
Based on the norming results, we identified a set of 24
verbs that we divided into two frequency conditions: (i) a
High Expected Frequency condition and (ii) a Low
Expected Frequency condition. Each condition included 12
target actions. Some example actions in the High Expected
Frequency condition are: 박수를 치다, 딸국질을 하다. 공을 뜅기다,
손을 흔들다 (English: clapping, hiccupping, bouncing a ball,
and waving hands 1 ). In the High Expected Frequency
condition, the average number of repetitions per action (how
many times the action takes place in a row) was 10.7 times
(ranging from 3.6 times to 36 times, SD = 6.66) 2 . Some
example actions in the Low Expected Frequency condition
are: 재채기를 하다, 기침을 하다, 초인종을 누르다, 노크를 하다 (English:
sneezing, coughing, ringing a door bell, and knocking on a
1

Some of the target verb phrases included the verb itself
combined with ‘do’ (e.g. 재채기-를 (sneeze-object marker) + 하다
(to do). However, other verb phrases included a direct object (e.g.
공을 뜅기다 (bouncing a ball); 문을 두드리다 (knocking on a door)).
2
Three verbs in the High Expected Frequency group had
average frequencies higher than the other actions in that group:
윗몸일으키기를 하다, 팔굽혀펴기를 하다, 물장구를 치다 doing sit-ups,
doing push-ups, paddling one’s feet in water (average frequencies
36, 19, 19, respectively). The average repetition of the High
Expected Frequency without these three items is 5.6 (S.D. 2.27).
Thus, even without these verbs, High Frequency verbs are higher
than Low Frequency verbs.

door). The average number of repetitions per action in the
Low Expected Frequency condition was 2.2 (ranging from
1.5 times to 2.9 times, SD = .8).

Main Experiment
Participants A new group of 32 native Korean speakers
recruited in Korea participated in the main experiment. They
were paid $10 for their participation.
Stimuli Participants took part in three tasks in this order: (i)
a sensicality judgment task, (ii) a distractor math task, and
(iii) a probe-verb recognition task. The sensicality judgment
task included 24 target and 60 filler sentences written in
Korean. Every target sentence included a proper name as the
grammatical subject, an action verb (in the past tense), and a
number adverbial (e.g. 규진이가 기침을 두 번 했다. Kyujin twice
coughed ‘Kyujin coughed twice’). See Table 1 for more
example sentences. The action verbs used in the target
sentences were either Expected High Frequency or Expected
Low Frequency verbs, as determined in the initial norming
study reported above. Thus, verbs’ inherent (or expected)
frequency (i.e. whether a verb typically has a high or low
frequency of repetition) served as one of two variables in
the experiment. Twelve target sentences contained actions
that generally repeat multiple times in row, and another 12
sentences contained actions that usually repeat once or twice
in a row. The number of Korean characters in the target
sentences ranged from 12.8 to 14.5. The average number of
characters in the High Expected Frequency condition was
14. The average number of characters in the Low Expected
Frequency condition was 13.
In addition to verbs’ expected frequency, we manipulated
the number adverbial present in the sentence. Including
these two factors made it possible to test whether
participants’ performance is influenced by verb inherent
semantics, explicit number expressions, or their interaction.
The number adverbial had two levels: Low Frequency
(e.g. once or twice) and High Frequency (five times or six
times). In the verb-adverb frequency match condition, the
target verbs were used with a number adverbial that
matched their expected frequency. For example, sneezing
was used with the adverbial once or twice in the match
condition (e.g. 규진이가 기침을 한 번/두 번 했다 Kyujin coughed
once/twice). In this item, the expected verb frequency and
the adverbial matched in number because sneezing generally
repeats once or twice in a row. In the same way, the verb
clapping was used with five times or six times to match its
expected frequency (e.g. 규진이가 손벽을 다섯 번/여섯 번 쳤다
Kyujin clapped five/six times). In the verb-adverb frequency
mismatch condition, the verbs were used with an adverbial
that mismatched their expected frequency. For example,
coughing, which generally repeats once or twice in a row,
was used with five/six times (e.g. Kyujin coughed five/six
times), and clapping was used with once/twice (e.g. Kyujin
clapped once/twice). This two by two design yielded the
four conditions presented in Table 1.

1094

‘yes’ and ‘F’ key for ‘no’. All target verbs proved required a
‘Yes’ response. Fourteen out the 24 filler verbs required a
‘No’ response. Therefore, 34 probe verbs required a ‘yes’
response (24 from the targets and 10 from fillers), and 14
probe verbs required a ‘no’ response.

Table 1. Sample targets in each condition
condition
Expected HighAdverb High
Expected HighAdverb Low
Expected LowAdverb High
Expected LowAdverb Low

sample target sentence
아람이가 박수를 다섯 번 쳤다.

Aaram clapped five times.
아람이가 박수를 한 번 쳤다.

(1) Sample target verbs in the probe-verb recognition task
a. 노크를 하다
to knock on the door
b. 기침을 하다
to cough
c. 딸국질을 하다
to hiccup
d. 박수를 치다
to clap

Aaram clapped once.
규진이가 기침을 여섯 번 했다.

Kyujin coughed six times.
규진이가 기침을 두 번 했다.

Kyujin coughed twice.

Predictions
To summarize, there were 24 target verbs: 12 verbs whose
expected repetition frequency was low and 12 verbs whose
expected repetition frequency was high. Of the 12 verbs in
the Low Expected Frequency condition, half (6) were paired
with a number adverb that matched their expected low
frequency. The other six verbs in this condition were paired
with a number adverb that mismatched their expected low
frequency. This design was reserved for the 12 verbs in the
High Expected Frequency condition.
Sensicality Judgment Task The sensicality judgment task
was conducted using Paradigm software (Perception
Research Systems). The sentences were presented on a
computer screen one at a time. Participants were instructed
to read the sentences as they would naturally and to decide
at the end of each sentence whether it was a sensical or
meaningful expression in Korean. Participants pressed the
‘J’ key on the keyboard for ‘yes’ (makes sense) and ‘F’ key
for ‘no’ (does not make sense). We used the sensicality
judgment paradigm because identifying the sensicality of
sentences has been shown to be a sensitive measure of
conceptual processing and interpretation of linguistic items
(e.g. Bambini & Schumacher, 2012; Klein & Murphy, 2001;
Murphy, 1991). All target sentences were sensical
sentences, requiring a ‘yes’ response. Some fillers included
nonsensical sentences, such as 준수가 김치찌개에 건물을 탔다
‘Joonsu put a building in a kimchi stew’). The number of
expected sensical and nonsensical sentences over the course
of the full experiment (targets and fillers) were balanced.
All participants completed this task within 20 minutes.
Distractor Task After finishing all the targets and fillers in
the sensicality judgment task, participants completed a
calculation test as a distractor task. They were given 14
arithmetic problems to solve. The time allotted for the
distracter task was three minutes and thirty seconds.
Probe-verb Recognition Task After the distractor task,
participants completed a probe-verb recognition task. On the
same computer, participants saw 48 verbs, 24 from all target
sentences and 24 from filler sentences. The verbs were
presented as infinitivals (ex.1), without the number
adverbials. Participants were asked to indicate whether they
had seen the expressions in the previous sensicality
judgment task. They were instructed to press the ‘J’ key for

It was predicted that participants’ sensicality judgment and
recognition of verbs would differ depending on the inherent
frequency semantics that the verbs express. Specifically, we
predicted that low inherent repetition frequency would
result in easier processing and therefore yield higher
sensicality judgment accuracy. Although all target sentences
are sensical, we speculated that people would be more
accurate judging the sensicality of the sentences containing
actions which generally repeat once or twice in a row (e.g.
coughing, sneezing). In contrast, participants’ judgment
accuracy might decrease when the sentences are about
actions that repeat multiple times in a row (e.g. hiccupping,
clapping). This hypothesis was formulated on the basis of
the evidence suggesting that physical information depicted
in sentences influences linguistic processing. E.g.,
comprehenders take longer to read sentences depicting a
long distance than reading sentences depicting a short
distance (Matlock, 2004). Additionally, speed of an action
has also been shown to influence linguistic behaviors. Both
child and adult comprehenders spend more time reading or
understanding sentences if the verb in the sentence refers to
a slow movement (e.g. to walk) than if the verb refers to a
fast movement (e.g. to run). Furthermore, Moody and
Gennari (2010) showed that brain activation levels differ
depending on the degree of physical effort implied by nouns.
They found higher activation in the sensory-motor regions
when people read sentences describing greater physical
effort (e.g. ‘The delivery man is pushing the piano.’) than
when they read sentences describing relatively less physical
effort (e.g. ‘The delivery man is pushing the chair.’).
We predicted that processing sentences with low motion
frequency verbs might involve a lighter processing load than
processing sentences that contain high motion frequency
verbs. Participants’ sensicality judgement and verb
recognition accuracy might be better for the sentences with
low-repetition verbs than high-repetition verbs because
processing high-repetition verbs might place more of a
burden in the processing system than low-repetition verbs.
(For related work on off-line measures reflecting processing
load, see Hofmeister et al. (2013) on syntactic complexity
and acceptability judgments.)
Concerning the number adverbials, we predicted that the
explicit number expression might interact with the verb’s
expected frequency semantics. Specifically, we expected

1095

higher sensicality accuracy when the number adverbial
matches the verb’s expected frequency (e.g. coughing
occurs generally once or twice in a row, not five/six times).
When the explicit number expression clashes with the
expected frequency of the action (e.g. clapping just once or
twice when it is expected to repeat multiple times), the
sensicality judgment accuracy was expected to be low.
Response accuracy is a common indicator of comprehension
difficulty (Mitchell et al., 2010). Low response accuracy is
often an indicator of greater processing load.

We measured how accurately people responded that the
target sentences were sensical (response accuracy), and how
accurately they recalled having seen the verbs (recognition
accuracy)3.

This effect is significant in the by-subjects analysis but not
in the by-items analysis.4
On the whole, participants responded more accurately to
sentences containing inherently low frequency actions,
which generally repeat once or twice in a row (e.g.
coughing, sneezing), than sentences containing inherently
high frequency actions that typically repeat multiple times
in a row (e.g. clapping, hiccupping). There was no main
effect of number adverbial on the sensicality judgment
accuracy; F1(1, 31) = .104, p = .749, F2(1, 44) = .000, p =
.988. Sensicality judgments did not differ whether the
number adverbial used in the sentence matched or
mismatched the verb’s expected frequency. There was also
no interaction between verbs’ inherent frequency and the
match/mismatch status of the number adverbial; F1(1, 31) =
.008, p = .929, F2(1, 44) = .006, p = .937.

Sensicality Judgment Accuracy Results

Probe-verb Recognition Accuracy Results

As Figure 1 shows, the sensicality judgment accuracy rates
were high overall (above 90% in all conditions). The high
accuracy rates confirm that the target sentences were indeed
sensical and sounded natural to participants. Though
participants were highly accurate, there still were distinct
patterns between the frequency conditions. The accuracy
rates of the two conditions in the Expected High Frequency
were in the low 90’s (91% and 90%), and the accuracy rates
of the two conditions in the Expected Low Frequency were
in the high 90’s (98% each). The high and low number
adverbials (once/twice vs. five/six times) did not seem to
influence the accuracy patterns.

Figure 2 shows the percentage of correct recognition of the
verbs. Verb recognition accuracy across the four conditions
ranged from 64% to 77%. The lowest accuracy rate of 64%
was in the Expected High-Adverb High condition where the
verb’s repetition frequency and the adverbial were both
high. This indicates that participants found it difficult to
correctly recognize the high repetition verbs which they had
initially seen with a matching high adverbial (e.g. Aaram
clapped five times). The accuracy rates from the other three
conditions were higher (i.e. 76% and 77%).

Results

Probe-verb recognition accuracy
76%

80%

Sensicality judgment accuracy
98%

100%
95%

91%

70%
98%

77%

76%

64%

60%
50%

90%

90%

40%

85%

30%

80%
20%
75%

Expected High- Expected High- Expected Low- Expected LowAdv. High
Adv. Low
Adv. Low
Adv. High

70%

Expected High- Expected High- Expected Low- Expected LowAdv. High
Adv. Low
Adv. Low
Adv. High

Figure 2. Probe-verb recognition accuracy rates
As in the sensicality judgment accuracy, a repeated
measures ANOVA test revealed a significant main effect of

Figure 1. Sensicality judgment accuracy rates
Repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted on
participants’ accuracy responses to test the effects of (i)
verbs’ inherent frequency, (ii) number adverbial, and (iii)
their interaction. A significant main effect of verbs’ inherent
frequency was found on the sensicality judgment accuracy;
F1(1, 31) = 37.933, p < .0001, F2(1, 44) = 2.431, p = .126.
3
The software also recorded response times, but RT patterns did
not reach significance (ps > .071).

4
The item analyses (F2) were conducted using Two-Way
‘Between Items’ ANOVAs with verbs’ inherent frequency and
number adverbial as two factors. This was done because low and
high frequency verbs are different lexical items (e.g. coughing and
hiccupping), so it was not possible to rotate a given verb through
all four conditions. That is, half of the verbs (12 out of 24) were in
the ‘Expected-High’ condition, and the other half were in the
‘Expected-Low’ condition. The subjects analyses (F1) used withinsubjects ANOVAs.

1096

verbs’ inherent frequency on verb recognition accuracy;
F1(1, 31) = 4.399, p = .044, F2(1, 44) = 2.720, p = .106. The
recall accuracy in the two Expected Low Frequency
conditions is higher than that of the Expected High
Frequency conditions. That is, remembering verbs that refer
to inherently low repetition actions (e.g. sneezing, coughing)
is easier than remembering verbs that refer to inherently
high repetition actions (e.g. hiccupping, clapping). There
was also a significant main effect of number adverbial on
verb recognition; F1(1, 31) = 5.246, p = .029, F2(1, 44) =
2.907, p = .095. Participants recognized the verbs better
when they appeared with low frequency adverbials
(once/twice) than high frequency adverbials (five/six times).
The interaction between verbs’ inherent frequency and
number adverbial on verb recognition was not significant;
F1(1, 31) = 2.828, p = .103, F2(1, 44) = 2.278, p = .138.
Although the interaction did not reach significance, the
p-values were relatively low. We thus conducted planned
comparisons comparing the Expected High-Adverb High
condition to the Expected High-Adverb Low condition (the
left two bars in Figure 2). We also compared the Expected
Low-Adverb Low condition to the Expected Low-Adverb
High condition (the right two bars in Figure 2). Verb
recognition accuracy in the Expected High-Adverb High
condition is significantly lower than that of Expected HighAdverb Low condition; t1(31) = -2.623, p = .013; t2(11) = 2.733, p = .019. That is, when the expected high frequency
verbs (e.g. clapping, bouncing a ball) appeared with their
matching high frequency adverbial (five/six times), verb
recognition accuracy decreased (as the far left bar in Figure
2 shows) than when the expected high frequency verbs
occurred with low adverbial. This shows that when the
adverbial was of low frequency (although the verb was a
high frequency action), participants’ recall of the verbs
improved. The number adverbial did not change the verb
recall behavior in the Expected Low conditions.

Discussion
The present study explored the effect of a semantic property
of action verbs on sentence processing. In particular, we
wanted to see whether the number of times an action
typically repeats in a row would influence the way in which
comprehenders process sentences and recall sentential
information. We manipulated action-verbs’ expected
repetition frequency as determined by a norming study. We
tested Expected High Frequency verbs, referring to actions
which typically repeat multiple times is a row (e.g.
hiccupping, clapping, bouncing a ball). We also tested
Expected Low Frequency verbs denoting actions which
generally repeat once or twice in a row (e.g. sneezing,
coughing, ringing a doorbell).
In addition to verbs’ inherent frequency, we also
manipulated the number adverbial referring to the specific
frequency expression used in the sentence: (i) low frequency
adverbials (i.e. once and twice) and (ii) high frequency
adverbials (i.e. five times and six times). The target action
verbs appeared in the sentence either with a number

adverbial that matched its expected frequency (e.g. ringing
a door bell once/twice; clapping five/six times) or that did
not match its expected frequency (e.g. ringing a door bell
five/six times; clapping once/twice). The adverbials were
included so as to test whether the effect of motion repetition
on sentence processing is modulated by the specific number
expressions used in the sentence.
It was hypothesized that participants would be better at
processing sentences that contain verbs of inherently fewer
movement repetitions than verbs of many repetitions (e.g.
sneezing over hiccupping). We predicted that the mental
representations involved in the depiction of low repetition
actions would be reduced compared to the mental
representations involved in high repetition actions. We
predicted that sentence processing would be easier when the
verb’s expected frequency matches the number adverbial
than when they mismatch. Participants completed a sentence
sensicality judgment task and a probe-verb recognition task.
The results from both tasks revealed a significant effect
of verbs’ inherent frequency. In the sensicality judgment
task, people accepted sentences containing low frequency
actions more accurately (e.g. Kyujin coughed twice/six
times) compared to sentences containing high frequency
actions (e.g. Kyujin hiccupped twice/six times). Further,
verbs referring to low frequency actions were remembered
better than verbs referring to high frequency actions.
Strikingly, there was no significant effect of whether or
not the number adverbial matches or mismatches the verb’s
typical frequency. Participants’ sensicality judgment did not
differ between Kyujin coughed six times and Kyujin
coughed twice or Aaram clapped five times and Aaram
clapped once. We also found no interaction between verbs’
inherent frequency and number adverbials. The lack of the
match/mismatch effect may indicate the importance of verb
semantics in overall sentence comprehension. The verb
might have played a central role in individuals’
comprehension of the sentence, and the number adverbial
could have been supplementary to the overall meaning. The
verb itself might have provided strong enough of a cue for
building the mental representation of the action described.
Let us consider a possible alternative interpretation for
our results. Could it be that accuracy rates were lower for
high frequency actions because such actions usually do not
appear with number adverbials (i.e. adverbials seem ‘odd’)?
We think this is unlikely for two main reasons. First, the
fact that there was no significant effect of number adverbial
speaks against the oddness explanation. If participants found
the sentences in which high frequency actions occur with
number adverbials unnatural, then those sentences should
have been judged non-sensical. However, the sentences of
high frequency actions were still judged sensical 90% of the
time. Second, the literature on sentence processing and
memory speaks also against this oddness explanation.
Comprehenders tend to remember expressions that are
noticeable. If participants found those sentences odd in
which high frequency actions were described with specific
number adverbials, this unusual expression might have

1097

stood out, and the high frequency action-verbs should have
been recognized better than the low frequency verbs.
Future research using self-paced reading or eye-trackingduring-reading might help us clarify this issue further. If
comprehenders find it unnatural to use certain verbs with
number adverbials, then we might observe slowdown in
reading time when encountering those expressions.
Additionally, a follow-up experiment might also investigate
comprehenders’ processing behaviors for sentences with
high or low repetition verbs without number adverbials.
Eliminating the number adverbials can zero in on the verb
semantics and may help validate the current findings.
Our results, which demonstrate that motion repetitions
influence sensicality judgment and verb recall, are in line
with other research. Language users’ comprehension
behaviors have been shown to be affected by verb semantics
including the speed of a motion (mope vs. sprint) and the
duration of a motion (traveling a long distance vs. traveling
a short distance). Our findings show that the frequency of
motion repetition also influences sentence comprehension
and recall of information. Comprehenders’ sensicality
judgment was more accurate when the sentence was about
actions that repeat once or twice in a row than when the
sentence was about actions that repeat many times in a row.
People also remembered verbs of low frequency actions
more accurately than verbs of high frequency actions.
Processing sentences with low-repetition verbs might
have been easier because they require simpler mental
representations than sentences with high-repetition verbs.
Building a mental representation of a motion that typically
repeats multiple times may require more processing
resources. This burden might have exhausted the processing
capacity to accurately recognize the verbs later on.
Broadly speaking, our results extend prior work on
sensitivity to verb semantics to lexical information
regarding action repetition rates.

References
Bambini, V., Ghio, M., & Schumacher, P. B. (2012).
Acceptability differences between metaphor, metonymy
and approximation. Quaderni del Laboratoria di
Linguistica, 11.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The minimalist program. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Fecica, A. & O’Neill, D. (2010). A step at a time: Preliterate
children’s simulation of narrative movement during story
comprehension. Cognition, 116(3), 368-381.
Federmeier, K., & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other
name: Long-term memory structure and sentence
processing. JML, 41(4), 469-495.
Ferreira, V. S., & Yoshita, H. (2003). Given-new ordering
effects on the production of scrambled sentences in
Japanese. JPR, 32(6), 669-692.
Hofmeister, P., Jaeger, T. F., Arnon, I., Sag, I. A., & Snider,
N. (2013). The source ambiguity problem:
Distinguishing the effects of grammar and processing on

acceptability judgments. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 28(1-2), 48-87.
Innocenti, A., De Stefani, E., Sestito, M., & Gentilucci, M.
(2014). Understanding of action-related and abstract
verbs in comparison: a behavioral and TMS study.
Cognitive Processing, 15(1), 85-92.
Klein, D. E., & Murphy, G. L. (2001). The representation of
polysemous words. JML, 45(2), 259-282.
Lindsay, S., Scheepers, C., & Kamide, Y. (2013). To dash
or to dawdle: Verb-associated speed of motion
influences eye movements during spoken sentence
comprehension. PloS one, 8(6), e67187.
Martin, A., & Chao, L. L. (2001). Semantic memory and the
brain: structure and processes. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 11(2), 194-201.
Matlock, T. (2004). Fictive motion as cognitive simulation.
Memory & Cognition, 32, 1389–1400.
Mitchell, J., Lapata, M., Demberg, V., & Keller, F. (2010).
Syntactic and semantic factors in processing difﬁculty:
An integrated measure. Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 196–206.
Moody, C. L., & Gennari, S. P. (2010). Effects of implied
physical effort in sensory-motor and pre-frontal cortex
during language comprehension. Neuroimage, 49(1),
782-793.
Murphy, G. L. (1991). Meanings and concepts. In P.
Schwanenflugel (Ed.), The psychology of word
meanings (pp. 11–35). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct. New York:
William Morrow.
Pulvermüller, F., Härle, M., & Hummel, F. (2001). Walking
or talking?: Behavioral and neurophysiological
correlates of action verb processing. Brain and
Language, 78(2), 143-168.
Rappaport, M., Levin, B., & Laughren, M. (1993). Levels of
lexical representation (pp. 37-54). Springer Netherlands.
Slevc, L. R. (2011). Saying what's on your mind: Working
memory effects on sentence production. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37(6), 1503.
Stites, M. C., Luke, S. G., & Christianson, K. (2013). The
psychologist said quickly, “Dialogue descriptions
modulate reading speed!”. Memory & cognition, 41(1),
137-151.
Ullman, M. T. (2001). A neurocognitive perspective on
language: The declarative/procedural model. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 2(10), 717-726.
Yao, B., & Scheepers, C. (2011). Contextual modulation of
reading rate for direct versus indirect speech
quotations. Cognition, 121(3), 447-453.

1098

