The reliability of testimony and perception: connecting epistemology and
linguistic evidentiality
Claire Lesage (clairelesage@cmail.carleton.ca)
School of Linguistics and Language Studies, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Nalini Ramlakhan (naliniramlakhan@cmail.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Ida Toivonen (idatoivonen@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Chris Wildman (chriswildman@cmail.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada
Abstract
Epistemologists have argued that there are three basic sources
of belief: perception, testimony and inference. These three
belief sources correspond directly to the way in which many
languages mark statements morphologically for sources of evidence for the statements (evidentiality). In this paper, we connect generalizations from the fields of epistemology and evidentiality. We also introduce a new method for investigating
how reliable people find different types of evidence to be. A
study based on this method indicates that speakers of English
rank different sources of evidence according to the same criteria that govern the use of grammaticalized evidential marking.
Keywords: epistemology, evidentiality, language, testimony,
perception

Introduction
paper1

This
investigates how people evaluate different
sources of evidence. We connect insights from epistemology
(philosophy) with evidence from grammaticalized evidentiality (linguistics) and a novel experimental study in order to
shed some light on evidential sources.

Epistemology
Epistemologists have argued that we form our beliefs based
on sources of evidence that can be broadly categorized as perception (what we have directly perceived), testimony (what
we have heard or read), or inference (what we conclude based
on other evidence). This tripartite distinction of evidence in
epistemology is carefully discussed in Davies and Matheson
(2012). Testimony is considered especially important epistemologically. Hume took testimony very seriously, for example: “[T]here is no species of reasoning more common,
more useful, and more necessary to human life, than that
which is derived from the testimony of men, and the reports of
eye-witnesses and spectators” (Hume, 1748). Coady (1992)
also argues that testimony plays an especially significant role,
1 The

authors of this paper contributed equally and are listed in
purely alphabetical order.

and that it influences perception and inference. Davies and
Matheson (2012) propose that the special status of testimony
in epistemology may be due to the relative representational
power of testimony. In other words, what we learn from
testimony is greater in scope than what we learn from other
sources of evidence.
Although testimony has perhaps been granted special status as a belief source in the philosophical literature, the directness and reliability of perception has also been acknowledged
(McCready, 2015; Millar, 2011; Davies & Matheson, 2012),
even though much focus has also been placed on inaccurate
perceptions, such as illusions, hallucinations and dreams; see
Hinton (1967); Martin (2002), and also Plato’s Theaetetus.
The scholarship on epistemology is old, rich and large, and
it raises many questions about how people perceive and internalize different kinds of evidence to form beliefs. We turn
next to a natural language phenomenon that we believe can
shed some light on one of the many issues that are discussed
in epistemology: How do people naturally classify and evaluate different types of evidence?

Evidentiality
In about a quarter of the world’s languages, every statement
is overtly marked for the type of evidence that statement is
based on (Aikhenvald, 2004). This marking is called evidentiality marking. Evidentiality marking is illustrated in (1-4)
with examples from the Northwest Amazonian Language Tariana (Aikhenvald, 2003):
1. tSinu niwahãka dina
‘The dog bit him (we have seen it).’
2. tSinu niwahãmahka dina
‘The dog bit him (we have heard the noise).’
3. tSinu niwahãsika dina
‘The dog bit him (he has a scar and I can make an inference).’

1302

4. tSinu niwahãpidaka dina
‘The dog bit him (someone told me).’

7. Visual evidence outranks non-visual sensory evidence.

The word beginning with niwahã- is the verb. The form of
the verbs (the verb ending) indicates past tense as well as the
source of the evidence for the statement that the verb heads:
-ka marks visual evidence, -mahka marks non-visual sensory
evidence, -sika marks inferred evidence, and -pidaka marks
reportative evidence (evidence based on testimony). Hinuq
(Forker, 2014), Quechua (Faller, 2002a, 2002b), Tuyuca
(Barnes, 1984) and Kashaya (Oswald, 1986) are other examples of languages with grammatical evidentials. The literature
on evidentials is intricate and valuable, but so far relatively
modest in scope. This is perhaps due to the fact that many
of the languages that have grammaticalized evidentiality are
relatively understudied compared to the large European languages, for example.
What can evidentiality marking tell us about how humans
categorize types of evidence? It turns out there are strong
cross-linguistic tendencies in how languages distinguish between different information sources (see Willett, 1988; Haan,
1999; Faller, 2002a; Aikhenvald, 2003, 2004; Matthewson,
2014, and many others). As illustrated in (1–4), Tariana distinguishes between visual evidence (perception), non-visual
sensory evidence (perception), indirect evidence (inference),
and reportative evidence (testimony). These are fairly typical
evidential categories cross-linguistically, and they mirror the
epistemological literature on sources of beliefs.
Evidentiality marking often distinguishes between direct
and indirect evidence: a direct evidential is either visual or
otherwise sensory, whereas an indirect evidential is used for
inference, report, or logical assumption (Aikhenvald, 2004).
It is also possible to receive indirect visual information, as in
example (3) above. Visual sensory evidence seems to have a
special status: in the typology it is often distinguished from
other types of sensory information (Willett, 1988; Aikhenvald, 2003; Speas, 2004).
It has been suggested that speakers mark the most reliable
source of information if more than one type of evidence is
available (see, e.g., Faller, 2002a). For example, if a speaker
has seen something happen, but someone has also told them
that it happened, then they use the perceptual/visual marker,
as that is the most direct, reliable evidence. In cases of indirect visual evidence and reportative evidence, the speaker
makes a judgement based on (a) how convincing the visual
evidence is and (b) the general reliability (trustworthiness) of
the person who gave the report.
Let us assume that conventions regarding grammaticalized
evidentiality marking tells us something about how people
rank sources of evidence upon which they form beliefs. We
then arrive at the following conclusions:
5. Direct perceptual evidence outranks reportative evidence.
6. Direct perceptual evidence outranks indirect perceptual evidence.

On our interpretation of Faller (2002a); Aikhenvald (2004)
and others, grammatical marking of evidentiality can tell us
something about how humans evaluate different types of evidence (see also, e.g., McCready, 2015). For example, morphological marking for direct visual evidence outranks morphological marking for indirect visual evidence because direct visual evidence is considered more reliable than indirect
visual evidence. However, this conclusion does not follow directly from evidentiality marking. The conventions for how
evidentiality markers are used could be based on some kind
of historical accident of linguistic innovation and change. An
argument against that is that there seem to be strong crosslinguistic tendencies, but this is perhaps not a strong argument
since evidentiality morphology and languages that mark evidentiality remain relatively under-explored.

Experiment: Perception verbs and reportative
verbs in English
Methods
We wanted to explore whether it was possible to find evidence
for the generalizations in (5–7) in a language without grammaticalized evidentiality marking. We therefore performed
an on-line survey where speakers were asked to judge how
likely they thought it was that specific statements were true,
given a single-sentence context.
The survey consisted of context-target sentence pairs and
each context sentence contained one of the following: a reportative predicate (say, tell), a direct perception predicate
(see, hear), or an indirect perception verb (look like, sound
like, smell like, taste like).2 For example, given the context
Beth saw John coming home, how likely is it that John came
home is true? Or, given the context Sam said that John came
home, how likely is it that John came home is true? Or, given
the context It smells like there is cumin in the stew, how likely
is it that There is cumin in the stew is true? No examples included that-clause complements to see or hear, as those can
denote indirect perception. For example, Tom saw that the
vase broke can be used even when Tom did not actually witness the vase breaking. He might simply be seeing the broken vase. This reading is not possible with a sentence like
Tom saw the vase break. Similarly, Jenna heard that the vase
broke does not necessarily mean that Jenna heard the vase
break. Jenna could instead have heard a report that the vase
broke.
The use of look, sound, taste and smell as indirect perception verbs has been discussed by (Rogers, 1971, 1972, 1973;
Asudeh & Toivonen, 2007, 2012) and others. Compare Beth
saw the pipe leaking water to It looks like the pipe is leaking
water. Both see and look like refer to visual perception. However, there is an important difference in meaning. The former
sentence can be paraphrased as Beth saw a pipe, and the pipe
is leaking water. The latter sentence is instead paraphrased as
2 The

1303

study does not include tactile perception.

There is some visual evidence that the pipe is leaking water.
The evidence can be direct (i.e., the leaking pipe itself), but
it can also be indirect; for example, a wet floor, or a moldy
spot in the ceiling. See Asudeh and Toivonen (2012) for a
semantic representation of indirect perception verbs.

tive speakers of English. Of the 203 participants, 142 selfidentified as native speakers of English and 61 as non-native
speakers. We have so far only analyzed the native speakers
but we look forward to comparing these results with the results of the non-native speakers.

The stimuli were divided into four separate surveys so that
each survey contained two stimulus pairs with see, hear, say,
and tell. The surveys also contained four stimulus pairs each
with look like, sound like, smell like and taste like. However,
these verbs were of two types: two examples per verb and survey had an expletive subject it and two had a “copy-raised”
subject (see, e.g, Rogers, 1971 and Asudeh & Toivonen, 2012
for copy-raising). An expletive example would be It looks
like the movie has started and a copy-raising example would
be Grant looks like he’s been crying. So there were two examples per verb and survey if we consider it looks like and
(subject) looks like to be different. When deciding on what
words to use with the different verbs, we considered two factors: (1) We tried to pick sentences that sounded natural. For
example, for the complement of smell, we tried to pick something with a distinctive smell, such as It smells like the roast is
ready. (2) We wanted different combinations of words across
surveys. For example, if Survey A contained It looks like
Grant has been crying, then Survey B would not contain the
same example, but instead Nathan heard Grant crying. We
hoped that this design would minimize effects that might be
due to specific word choices, while still allowing comparison
of sentences that are minimally different. There is a tension
between considerations (1) and (2). For example, it is natural for a stew to taste salty, but not to smell, look or sound
salty. It therefore would not make sense to combine “salty
stew” with taste in one questionnaire and smell in another, although it would in principle be desirable to compare stimuli
that differ only in verb of perception. Each survey contained
24 target stimuli (sentence pairs) in total. In addition, each
survey contained 50 filler sentence pairs.

Results

The data were collected electronically using SurveyMonkey (www.surveymonkey.com). Participants were recruited
by email lists and social media. Participation was voluntary
and anonymous. The participants received no compensation.
The participants were given the following instructions:
“Assume that the first sentence is true, and judge the likelihood of the second sentence using a 5 point scale (where 1
= “I have no idea” and 5 = “It is true”). Here’s an example
pair of sentences: Sam is coughing. Sam is sick. You will rate
how likely you think it is that “Sam is sick” (given that “Sam
is coughing” is true), using the scale from 1 to 5. The scale is
explained in a bit more detail here: 1. I have no idea whether
the second sentence is true. 2. It is somewhat likely that the
second sentence is true. 3. The second sentence is probably
true. 4. The second sentence is almost certainly true. 5. The
second statement is true.”
A total of 203 participants completed the questionnaire. As
the only demographic question included in the survey, we
asked participants to identify whether or not they were na-

We ran separate paired t-tests to test if the judgments from the
English survey study were consistent with the generalizations
from grammaticalized evidentiality listed in (5–7).
Direct perception verbs and reportative verbs The likelihood judgements of examples where the source of evidence
was given as direct perception (see, hear) were compared to
the likelihood judgments of examples where the source of evidence was given as a report (say, tell). For example, given
Annie heard Cassie open the door or Annie said that Cassie
opened the door, how likely is it that Cassie opened the door
is true? The participants gave significantly higher judgements
when the source of evidence was given as direct perception
than when it was given as an oral report. The results are
shown in Figure 1. There is a significant difference in the

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Direct Perception

Reportative

Figure 1: Direct perception vs. reports
scores for perception verb examples (M=4.05, SD=0.72) and
reportative verb examples (M=3.26, SD=0.91); t(138)=1.66,
p<.001. This result is consistent with the cross-linguistic
generalization about evidentiality marking: direct perception
is considered more reliable than reported evidence.
Direct perception and indirect perception Next, the likelihood judgements of examples where the source of evidence
was given as direct perception (see, hear) were compared to
the likelihood judgments of examples where the source of evidence was given as indirect perception look like, sound like,
taste like, smell like. Here is a direct perception example: if
Sam saw Cassie open the door is true, how likely is it that
Cassie opened the door is true? As already mentioned above,
the indirect perception sentences were given either with an
expletive subject It looked like Cassie opened the door, or
with a copy-raising example Cassie looked like she opened

1304

the door. Again, given such a sentence, participants were
asked to judge how likely they found it that Cassie opened
the door was true. The results are shown in Figure 2.

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5

There was a significant difference in the scores for visual
perception verb examples (M=3.26, SD=0.75) and non-visual
sensory verb examples (M=3.16, SD=0.66); t(139)=1.66,
p=.02. This again mirrors the pattern found in grammatical
evidentials (although the effect here appears to be small).
For direct perception, only visual and auditory perception
verbs (see, hear) were included in the study. No examples involving direct gustatory or olfactory sensory perception were
included in the survey. In other words, no examples of the
form Sue tasted honey in the tea or Sue smelled soap in the
bathroom were included. The only non-visual direct perception verb included in the analyses here is thus hear. The likelihood judgements of visual see and non-visual hear direct
perception examples are given in Figure 4.

1
0.5
5

0
Direct Perception

4.5

Indirect Perception

4

Figure 2: Direct perceptual evidence vs. indirect perceptual
evidence

3.5
3
2.5

There is a significant difference in the scores for direct
perception verb examples (M=4.05, SD=0.72) and indirect
perception verb examples (M=3.18, SD=0.66); t(138)=14.30,
p<.001. This tendency again echoes the findings from the research on cross-linguistic evidentiality: direct perceptual evidence is considered more reliable than indirect perceptual
evidence.

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
See

Visual perception and non-visual perception The likelihood judgments where the evidence was either visual perception or non-visual perception were also compared. The direct
perception verbs and indirect perception verbs were analyzed
separately. In the indirect perception class, the look like examples were compared to the sound like, taste like and smell
like examples. The results are given in Figure 3.

5

Hear

Figure 4: Visual perception vs. non-visual perception (direct)
The difference between visual and non-visual perception
was greater in direct perception verbs (Figure 4) than in
indirect perception verbs (Figure 3). The difference in
scores between the see examples (M=4.20; SD=0.83) and
the hear examples (M=3.89; SD=0.81) was highly significant
t(138)=5.25, p<.001.

Discussion

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Visual Perception

Non-visual Perception

Figure 3: Visual perception vs. non-visual perception (indirect)

Our research questions concerned the validity of different
types of evidence. We conducted four analyses based on the
survey data. Participants were given sentences which encode
perceptual (direct and indirect) and reportative sources of evidence. The first analysis compared direct perception verbs
to reportative verbs, and found that participants ranked direct
perception as more reliable. The second analysis compared
direct perceptual evidence to indirect perceptual evidence,
and found that participants ranked direct perceptual evidence
as more reliable. The third and the fourth analysis compared
visual sensory perception to non-visual sensory perception,
and found that participants ranked visual perception as more
reliable. All results were significant.
We are focusing here on the distinctions between the denotations of the verbs. Of course, the stimuli are all presented

1305

to the participants as written texts, which is in itself a form of
testimony. Also, in reading the stimulus sentences, the participants also perceive the words on the computer screen. This
means that all stimuli are, in a sense, both testimonial and
perceptual. We set these issues aside, as they are constant
across all the items.
Comparing the different classes of verbs considered here,
it is worth noting that only see and hear, the direct perception verbs, entail their complement. This is not the case for
the indirect perception verbs, nor is it true for the reportative
verbs. For example, John saw Mary open the door entails
Mary opened the door, but It looked like Mary opened the
door does not, and neither does John said that Mary opened
the door. In fact, see and hear not only entail their complement, they also presuppose it (see Karttunen, 1973 for a
discussion of verbs according to their presuppositional properties). For example, saying no, that’s false to John saw Mary
open the door only challenges John’s seeing, but it tacitly accepts Mary’s having opened the door (the same is true for
John didn’t see Mary open the door; see, e.g., Beaver, 2001).
The judgements reported in this study thus directly connect
reliability of evidence with the study of presupposition and
entailment in semantics and pragmatics.

Conclusion
Evidentiality marking is sometimes described as “the grammar of knowledge” (Aikhenvald, 2014), or naturally occurring epistemology (Chafe & Nichols, 1986). Grammaticalized evidential marking mirrors the classes of evidence (or
“sources of belief”) that philosophers have argued for. For
example, Tariana marks perceptual evidence (divided into visual and non-visual sensory evidence), inference and reported
evidence (testimony), as illustrated in (1–4). Despite the obvious parallels between the categories discussed in epistemology and evidentiality markers, Aikhenvald (2014) warns that
there is not necessarily a straightforward relationship between
between grammatical evidentiality, on the one hand, and
truth, the validity of a statement, and the speaker’s responsibility, on the other. Evidentiality is grammaticalized differently across languages, and the mapping to non-linguistic
concepts such as evidence and truth is intricate and subtle.
However, McCready (2015) suggests that it might be mutually beneficial for epistemologists and linguists specializing
in evidentiality to collaborate, and we agree.
Findings from the fields of epistemology and evidentiality
suggest several generalizations on how people rank evidence
in terms of reliability: Direct perceptual evidence outranks
evidence based on reports, and also evidence based on indirect perception. In addition, visual evidence outranks nonvisual perceptual evidence.
We wanted to learn whether it was possible to find further
support for these generalizations in a population that does
not speak a language with grammaticalized evidentiality. We
therefore devised a simple method intended to gauge how
people judge different sources according to reliability.

The survey directly asks for likelihood judgments: How
likely is it that X is true? However, the design indirectly allows access to judgements of the reliability of different types
of evidence, since participants are asked to give judgements
in the context of a given statement, for example Linda said X
or Linda saw X. We assume that different judgements of likelihood of X reflect judgements of reliability of the context.
Our survey directly supports the generalizations derived
from philosophy and linguistics. In essence, direct visual
evidence is deemed to be more reliable than other types of
evidence.

References
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2003). A grammar of Tariana, from Northwest Amazonia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2004). Evidentiality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2014). The grammar of knowledge: A
cross-linguistic view of evidentials and the expression of
information source. In A. Y. Aikhenvald & R. W. Dixon
(Eds.), The grammar of knowledge (pp. 1–51). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Asudeh, A., & Toivonen, I. (2007). Copy raising and its consequences for perception reports. In A. Zaenen, J. Simpson,
T. H. King, J. Grimshaw, J. Maling, & C. Manning (Eds.),
Architectures, rules, and preferences: Variations on themes
by Joan Bresnan. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Asudeh, A., & Toivonen, I. (2012). Copy raising and perception. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 30(2),
321–380.
Barnes, J. (1984). Evidentials in the Tuyuca verb. International Journal of American Linguistics, 50, 255–71.
Beaver, D. (2001). Presupposition and assertion in dynamic
semantics. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Chafe, W., & Nichols, J. (1986). Evidentiality: the linguistic
encoding of epistemology. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing
Corporation.
Coady, C. A. D. (1992). Testimony: A philosophical study.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Davies, J., & Matheson, D. (2012). The cognitive importance of testimony. Principia: The International Journal
of Epistemology, 16(2), 297–318.
Faller, M. (2002a). Remarks on evidential hierarchies. In
D. I. Beaver, L. D. C. Martnez, B. Z. Clark, & S. Kaufmann (Eds.), The construction of meaning (pp. 89–111).
Stanford: CSLI Pulications.
Faller, M. (2002b). Semantics and pragmatics of evidentials in Cuzco Quechua (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Stanford University.
Forker, D. (2014). The grammar of knowledge in hinuq. In
A. Y. Aikhenvald & R. W. Dixon (Eds.), The grammar of
knowledge (pp. 1–51). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Haan, F. D. (1999). Evidentiality and epistemic modality:
setting boundaries. Southwest Journal of Linguistics, 18,
83–101.

1306

Hinton, J. M. (1967). Visual experiences. Mind, 76, 217–
227.
Hume, D. (1748). An enquiry concerning human understanding. 1977 edition, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company.
Karttunen, L. (1973). Presuppositions of compound sentences. Linguistic Inquiry, 4, 167-193.
Martin, M. G. F. (2002). The transparency of experience.
Mind and Language, 17, 376–425.
Matthewson, L. (2014). Evidence type, evidence location, evidence strength. University of British Columbia.
(Manuscript)
McCready, E. (2015). Reliability in pragmatics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Millar, A. (2011). How visual perception yields reasons for
belief. Philosophical Issues, 21(1), 332–351.
Oswald, R. (1986). The evidential system of Kashaya. In
W. Chafe & J. Nichols (Eds.), Evidentiality: The linguistic coding of epistemology (pp. 29–45). Norwood: Ablex
Publishing Corporation.
Rogers, A. (1971). Three kinds of physical perception verbs.
In Papers from the seventh regional meeting of the Chicago
Linguistic Society (pp. 206–222).
Rogers, A. (1972). Another look at flip perception verbs.
In Papers from the eighth regional meeting of the Chicago
Linguistic Society (pp. 303–315).
Rogers, A. (1973). Physical perception verbs in English: A
study in lexical relatedness (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). UCLA.
Speas, M. (2004). Evidentiality, logophoricity and the syntactic representation of pragmatic features. Lingua, 114,
255–76.
Willett, T. (1988). A cross-linguistic survey of the grammaticization of evidentiality. Studies in Language, 12, 51–97.

1307

