The better part of not knowing: Virtuous ignorance
Jonathan F. Kominsky (jonathan.kominsky@yale.edu), Philip Langthorne (p.langthorne@gmail.com) &
Frank C. Keil (frank.keil@yale.edu)
Yale University Department of Psychology, 2 Hillhouse Ave.
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Abstract
For cases in which precise information is practically or
actually unknowable, certainty and precision can indicate a
lack of competence, while expressions of ignorance may
indicate greater expertise. In two experiments, we
investigated whether children and adults are able to use this
“virtuous ignorance” as a cue to expertise. Experiment 1
found that adults and children older than 9 years selected
confident informants for knowable information and ignorant
informants for unknowable information. However, 5-7-yearolds overwhelmingly favored a confident informant, even
when such precision was completely implausible. In
Experiment 2, we demonstrated that 5-8-year-olds and adults
are both able to distinguish between knowable and
unknowable items when asked how difficult the information
would be to acquire, but those same children still failed to
reject the precise and confident informant for unknowable
items. We suggest that children have difficulty integrating
information about the knowability of particular facts into their
evaluations of expertise.
Keywords: cognitive development; credibility; informants;
confidence; epistemological beliefs

Introduction
Sometimes the most impressive intellectual achievement
can be recognizing the boundaries of one’s own knowledge,
or knowledge more generally. Indeed, this idea is a classic
philosophical theme across a wide range of cultures,
whether it be Socrates ("…I am wiser than he is to this small
extent, that I do not think I know what I do not know"[Plato,
Apology 21d, tr. Tredennick, 1954]), or Confucius (“Real
knowledge is to know the extent of one’s ignorance.”[from
Dunning, Johnson, Erlinger, & Kruger, 2003]).
Knowing what one does not know may require
considerable sophistication. More than just knowing what
portion of available knowledge one possesses, one must
have some sense of the full extent of what is available and
potentially knowable as well as what may never be
knowable but still relevant. More knowledgeable individuals
usually have more accurate senses of their abilities and
limitations, including of their knowledge and explanatory
understandings, while less knowledgeable individuals tend
to be miscalibrated and overconfident (Dunning, 2012;
Dunning et al. 2003). Children are particularly severely
miscalibrated about their own understanding of various
phenomena (Mills & Keil, 2005).
Here, we turn to a different, but closely related, problem:
Identifying when others are overconfident about their own
knowledge. In particular, we ask whether children and

adults are capable of recognizing when an informant who
says that they do not know the answer to a question is
actually more knowledgeable than one who provides a
confident and precise answer. The literature on selfassessment suggests that claims of detailed knowledge are
not invariably signs of expertise, and in some cases may be
signs of incompetence or ignorance. In fact, under some
circumstances claims of ignorance may indicate expertise
and knowledge, and in these cases we can distinguish mere
ignorance from “virtuous ignorance,” or admitting that
certain knowledge cannot be possessed. For some questions
or problems, the more expert individual may better
understand how certain forms of information are
unknowable. For example, a novice might feel quite
confident that one can know both the exact position and
exact velocity vector of a particle at a given point in time,
but an expert familiar with Heisenberg’s Uncertainty
Principle would freely admit that they could not know both
precisely, and recognize any claims that one did as
indicating ignorance rather than knowledge.
We expect that adults can identify many of these cases in
which virtuous ignorance is a marker of greater expertise. In
many instances, to know that one does not know (or cannot
know) a specific piece of information arises from a
sophisticated understanding of the physical world and how
uncertainty, chaotic systems, or causal complexity make
certain forms of precision or predictions highly implausible,
if not impossible. Thus, one can evaluate the credibility of
another’s testimony in terms of how it meshes with one’s
own understanding of the plausibility of actually being able
to attain the attested knowledge. In such cases, an informant
might seem to have especially low credibility if that
individual expresses great certainty about information for
which certainty is highly inappropriate. This facet of
assessing confidence has been largely neglected in empirical
studies with adults, but in extreme cases, it seems intuitively
clear that adults will reject confident declarations about
logistically unknowable things. Thus, most adults would
discount the confident individual who claims to know
something with implausible precision and prefer a
virtuously ignorant informant. For example, it makes no
sense for someone to claim that they know exactly how
many leaves there are in all the trees in a large national park,
and anyone who makes such claim with confidence should
be regarded with great skepticism.
Children, however, may have great difficulty rejecting a
confident and precise answer, even when that answer is
highly implausible. There are two key challenges that

1165

children must master. The first is an epistemological
challenge: Children must recognize that the information is
implausible or impossible to possess. To know that it is not
feasible to have a precise number for all the leaves in
Yellowstone Park, one needs to have a sense of the
immensity of the number, of the challenges of getting a
snapshot of all leaves at a moment in time, and even of the
ambiguities of when a budding or decaying leaf becomes or
is no longer a leaf. Therefore, one way in which children
might fail to recognize virtuous ignorance as a cue to
expertise is by not realizing that the ignorance is in fact
virtuous. Rather, they might favor whatever information
they are given, no matter how absurd it would sound to an
adult. However, there are presumably at least a few domains
in which children would recognize that some knowledge is
impossible to possess.
The second challenge is that even in domains where
children could recognize that possessing some knowledge is
implausible or impossible, children may not be able to reject
a confident informant. That is not to suggest that children
simply accept everything they are told. On the contrary, the
extensive literature on testimony reveals that even
preschoolers take evaluative stances towards claims made
by others and will take into account many source
characteristics. These attributes can include: a source’s past
record of accuracy, a source’s departure from consensus
view, a source’s current mental states and access to
information, and a source’s apparent dependency on other
sources (for a review of this literature, see Robinson &
Einav, 2014). In short, well before the start of formal
schooling children appreciate that different sources should
be trusted to different extents (Buschbaum et al., 2014;
Harris, 2012).
That said, young children might over-value confidence
early on as a marker of source information quality, perhaps
at the expense of other factors. A sensitivity to confidence in
demonstrations of object use emerges early in development.
Young speakers are sensitive to linguistic indicators of
certainty and confidence (Matsui, 2014), and by the time
they enter the early school years, they are quite
sophisticated evaluators of certainty-related expressions
(Moore, Bryant, & Furrow, 1989).
In particular, five and six year olds are heavily influenced
by a person’s confidence but have difficulty, relative to
older children and adults, in calibrating informants, i.e.
taking into account the relationship between an informant’s
accuracy and confidence (e.g., is a person’s confidence
diagnostic of their credibility?). Two recent studies have
provided evidence that children’s difficulties with such
calibrations are due to executive processing limitations.
Tenney, Small, Kondrad, Jaswal, & Spellman (2011) found
that children would not reject poorly calibrated informants
while adults would, but when adults were placed under
significant cognitive load, they performed as children did. In
addition, Jaswal et al. (2014) demonstrated that some
children will often accept obviously false adult testimony
about an event that the child themself witnessed, but the

likelihood of rejecting the testimony was positively
correlated with performance on a spatial inhibitory control
task.

Predictions
Based on these observations, we can make an overarching
prediction: Young children will favor an implausibly
confident informant over a virtuously ignorant one.
Further predictions emerge from the two challenges that
could lead children to fail at this task: epistemological
challenges and challenges integrating epistemology with
expressions of confidence. These two accounts are not
contradictory. In some domains children may fail to
understand the implausibility of certainty; but we suggest
that even when they do, the draw of confidence may be too
strong to overcome. We make three specific predictions:
First, a simple certainty/confidence heuristic will be the
first available strategy used by a child because they tend to
focus on individual-centered markers of credibility more
than the information itself, and because doubting certainty
often requires detailed understandings of the world.
Second, older children and adults will favor virtuous
ignorance over certainty, based on their understanding of the
plausibility of precision in particular contexts.
Finally, the relationship between limited executive
processing and the certainty bias in young children (Tenney
et al., 2011; Jaswal et al., 2014) may be so strong that even
when young children know that it is implausible to attain a
certain piece of knowledge, they will still favor an
implausibly certain informant. Thus even if children of a
certain age can grasp that it might be extremely difficult or
impossible to have a certain level of numerical precision
about a given topic, they cannot inhibit their tendency to
believe a confident informant. Indeed, given that inhibitory
control improves radically between the ages of 5 and 10
(Williams, Ponesse, Schachar, Logan, & Tannock, 1999),
these challenges may extend well into middle childhood.
We test these predictions with two experiments. In
Experiment 1, we demonstrate that young children do
indeed favor an implausibly confident informant, while
older children and adults will favor a “virtuously ignorant”
informant. In Experiment 2, we ask children and adults to
evaluate how difficult it would be to possess certain types of
knowledge, and demonstrate that even when children
recognize the difficulty of knowing of specific pieces of
information, they favor certainty over virtuous ignorance.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined how children and adults evaluate
implausible claims of precise numerical certainty. Two sets
of questions were constructed: those for which it was
implausible or impossible to make claims of numerical
precision (e.g., the number of leaves in Yellowstone
National Park) and those for which claims of certainty about
precise numbers were plausible (e.g., the number of keys on
a piano). We selected participants between ages five and ten
years, expecting significant developmental shifts during that

1166

period, including in inhibitory control (Williams et al.,
1999).

Methods
Participants 105 children aged 5 to 10 years were divided
into 4 grade clusters. Specifically, 26 children in
Kindergarten (M = 67.1 mos., SD = 5.57 mos., 14 females),
27 children in first grade (M = 77.67 mos., SD = 4.38 mos.,
14 females), 20 children in grades 2 and 3 (M = 98.5 mos.,
SD = 8.9 mos., 9 females), and 41 children in grades 4, 5
and 6 (M = 126.5 mos., SD = 8.9 mos., 17 females)
participated in Experiment 1. Children were recruited in
three ways: from regional schools, from regional science
museums, and through visits into the experimenters’
laboratory. All age groups were recruited by all three
methods. In addition, 53 adults were recruited on Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk system (M = 38.6 years, SD = 14 years, 41
females).
Materials We created sixteen stimulus items, eight
knowable and eight unknowable. The stimuli were
presented to children on iPads, one at a time, with images to
help them track the claims, along with two silhouettes
representing the informants. Items were presented in a
random order. The overall effect was to create a storybook
appearance for each stimulus page. At the bottom of each
page was a small button to advance to the next item.
For each item, one of the two silhouetted respondents
answered the question at the top of the page with the word
“exactly” and a precise integer, and the other responded, “I
don’t know because it is not possible to answer that question
precisely.” Participants were asked to identify which of the
two respondents, who had both claimed to be “experts”
when we questioned them, was actually a better expert than
the other. An example display and complete list of items can
be found at http://goo.gl/NoyqSs
Procedure Adult participants viewed the stimuli through a
web browser from their home computers and responded by
clicking on the silhouette preferred. All child participants
viewed the stimuli on Apple iPads and touched the screen to
endorse a specific response. Children in grades K-3 had the
text read aloud to them by the experimenter across all of the
trials, whereas children in fourth grade and above were read
aloud the instructions and the first item by the experimenter,
who then allowed the children to read and advance through
the remaining items themselves.
The experimenter explained to the child participants that
they were about to play a detective game involving experts,
and asked if they knew what the word “expert” meant. The
experimenter then defined the word for children who did not
know it, or redirected the definition provided by children
who were able to generate one, to be someone who
“understood something really, really well,” and made clear
that this new definition was the one to be used for the game.
Children were then asked if they understood something

Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1. Error bars
represent 95% CIs. Performance improved with age
for both item types, but to a greater degree for
unknowable items.
really well and so could be an expert in that thing, to ensure
comprehension. Next, the rules of the game were explained:
the experimenter claimed to have had a list of questions and
found people who said that they were experts about the
topics, but that the experimenter suspected that some of the
“experts” might really be better than others. The participants
were told, “You’re going to see a bunch of questions and
answers from different expert, and I want you to help me
decide who was really the better expert for each question.”
Adults, participating online, read the experiment
instructions on a page after answering age and sex
demographics questions and before the first item, and did
not complete the interactive comprehension check of
identifying something in which they could be experts and
receiving feedback.
Invalid trials (missing data or stray clicks outside of the
target regions covering the figures and their responses) were
recorded as null responses for each item. (This was
infrequent and only occurred on 3.5% of all trials.) Finally,
any participant who had no responses recorded for either
category was excluded from analysis.

Results
We calculated an “accuracy” score for all the implausible
and plausible numerical items, based on the “correct” choice
(more accurately, the expected adult response) of either the
expert who gave a precise response for the knowable items
or an “I don’t know” response for the unknowable items.
These scores were computed as the proportion of valid
responses for each item type that were “correct”. Fig. 2
shows the results of Experiment 1 by item type and age
group. There was a main effect of item type, with much
higher accuracy overall for knowable (M = .90, SD = .16)
than unknowable items (M = .60, SD = .42), F(1,163) =
108.67, p < .001, ηp2 = .400. This main effect was qualified
by a significant interaction between age group and item
type, F(4,163) = 10.592, p < .001, ηp2 = .206.
Further analyses revealed a main effect of age group for
unknowable items, F(4, 163) = 25.063, p < .001, ηp2 = .381.
Adults (M = .90, SD = .27) were significantly more likely to
choose the “I don’t know” expert than kindergarteners (M =
.28, SD = .30), first graders (M = .27, SD = .37), and second

1167

and third graders (M = .47, SD = .43), all ps < .001. (All pvalues reported for pairwise comparisons use Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons.) Adults did not differ
from children in grades four through six (M = .74, SD =
.36), p = .28. Among the younger age groups, there were
significant differences between children in grades four
through six and kindergarteners (p < .001), children in first
grade (p < .001), and children in 2nd-3rd grade (p = .039).
There was also an effect of age group for knowable items,
F(4, 163) = 8.80, p < .001, ηp2 = .178 Follow-up analyses
indicated a slight developmental improvement in accuracy
on knowable items, but a much smaller and less consistent
improvement than was found for unknowable items
(notably, 2nd-3rd graders were as accurate as adults).
Furthermore, all age groups were well above chance
accuracy for knowable items, ps < .001.

Discussion
As predicted, all ages favored confident informants over
ignorant ones when the information provided was plausibly
knowable, but when the information provided was
implausibly precise, older children and adults selected the
virtuously ignorant informant, while younger children
continued to favor the confident informant.
The question remains as to the extent to which younger
children are completely unaware of such patterns of
“knowability” or whether they simply weigh them
differently and let poor knowability be trumped by the
trappings of precision and confidence. In other words, could
children who show a strong bias to pick the confident expert
in all conditions nonetheless be aware of the (im)plausibility
of such answers? Further examination of the results of
Experiment 1 provides some indication of this: One can reanalyze the responses in terms of how frequently the certain
expert was chosen, and ask whether there is a difference in
this frequency based on item type. These post-hoc analyses
found that kindergarteners in Experiment 1 were marginally
less likely to select the certain expert for unknowable items
than knowable (p = .06) and first graders were significantly
less likely to choose the certain expert for unknowable items
(p = .01), despite their overall poor accuracy on unknowable
items. This suggests some awareness of knowability, but an
inability to inhibit a bias to believe a confident informant
until around age 10, which aligns well with developments in
inhibitory control (Williams et al., 1999).

Experiment 2
To test for a trumping influence of confidence even when
information is seen as difficult or impossible to possess by
younger children, in Experiment 2, we constructed the
strongest possible contrast, in which we first asked children
how difficult it would be to know particular things, and then
immediately afterwards had them do the same task as
Experiment 1 with items closely related to the ones that they

had just rated. We changed the unknowable items in a very
minor way by expanding the scope (e.g., counting the
number of blades of grass in Central Park vs. in New York
State) so that they were not pure repetitions, but still close
enough that a judgment of implausibility for one would
entail implausibility for the other, and making sure that the
initial judgment was always a narrower scope of entities.
We validated these stimuli with adult piloting in MTurk, to
verify that participants felt the rating items were comparable
but of narrower scope. We predicted that young children
would identify some types of knowledge as unknowable,
but still be drawn to pick a confident expert.

Methods
Participants 31 children age 5-6 (M = 69.7 mos., SD = 14.0
mos., 17 females), 24 children age 7-8 (M = 95.8 mos., SD =
7.5 mos., 12 females) and 40 adult participants from MTurk
(M = 31.8 years, SD = 10.1 years, 16 females) participated
in Experiment 2. Children were recruited by the same
methods as Experiment 1, and had a similar demographic
profile, but none had participated in Experiment 1.
Materials & Procedure The procedure for Experiment 2
was similar to the procedure used in Experiment 1, but with
fewer forced choice items and preceded by a difficulty
rating task. Participants first completed four training items
in which they learned to use the rating scale by rating the
size of four animals (squirrel, cat, cow, and horse) on a scale
that went from “SMALL” to “BIG.” All participants gave
higher ratings for the cow and horse than squirrel and cat,
indicating proficiency with the response method.
Participants then saw a series of six items which depicted a
person climbing a set of very low steps on the left side with
the word “EASY” and another climbing up a very steep cliff
on the right side with the word “HARD”. The six screens
presented training items that had been adapted from the
results of Experiment 1, as the items on which participants
in all age groups performed the most consistently. However,
instead of presenting the exact item from Experiment 1
(e.g., 'How many windows are on the White House'), the
item's scope was narrowed to represent a subset of the
original (e.g., 'How many windows are on the President's
office in the White House'). An image was presented along
with each question, as in Experiment 1.
For these rating items, participants were told to touch the
screen on the blue line, just as before, to indicate whether it
would be easy, hard, or somewhere in between to find out
the answer to the question presented. The six rating screens
eliciting a hard or easy judgment were presented in a
random order to every participant. The second part of the
experiment was identical to the procedure from Experiment
1 (including training), but only using the six items from
Experiment 1 that corresponded with the rating items. The
order of presentation was independently randomized and not
tied to the presentation of the rating items.

1168

Table 1: Difficulty ratings for unknowable and knowable
items in Experiment 2.

Results
We analyzed the difficulty ratings in terms of the absolute
x-coordinate of the recorded mouse-click or touch (within a
constrained y-coordinate range), yielding a scale from 1 to
900 (pixels) with lower numbers representing “easier”
responses. For difficulty ratings, there was a main effect of
item type, F(1, 92) = 322.7, p < .001, ηp2 = .778, as well as
a significant interaction between item type and age group,
F(2, 92) = 37.83, p < .001, ηp2 = .451. There was no
significant main effect of age group, F(2, 92) = 1.927, p =
.151. The average ratings by age group and item type can be
found in Table 1. All age groups gave higher ratings for
unknowable items (paired-sample t-tests, ps < .001),
indicating that even the youngest children were able to
distinguish “knowable” from “unknowable” information.
Further analyses showed main effects of age group for
both knowable and unknowable items, one-way ANOVAs,
ps < .001. For knowable items, adults gave lower ratings
than both 5-6-year-olds and 7-8-year-olds, Bonferronicorrected pairwise comparisons ps < .001, but the younger
age groups did not differ from each other, p > .9. For
unknowable items, there was significant developmental
improvements between every age group, ps <= .045,
indicating some developmental improvement in the ability
to recognize epistemological challenges. However, given
that younger children were able to distinguish knowable
from unknowable items, the question remains whether they
can use this information to reject overconfident experts.
For the expert evaluation task, there were also main
effects of item type, F(1, 92) = 50.30, p < .001, ηp2 = .353,
and age group, F(2, 92) =52.72, p < .001, ηp2 = .534, and a
significant interaction, F(2, 92) = 6.71, p < .001, ηp2 = .127.
As in Experiment 1 there were main effects of age group for
both knowable, F(2,92) = 5.33, p < .001, ηp2 = .104, and
unknowable items, F(2, 92) = 26.62, p < .001, ηp2 = .367.
As can be seen in Fig. 2, for unknowable items, adults (M =
.825, SD = .292) differed significantly from both 5-6-yearolds (M = .237, SD = .346) and 7-8-year-olds (M = .431, SD
= .423), ps < .001, but the younger age groups did not differ
from each other, p = .127. For knowable items, there was
again a much smaller small developmental improvement,
and all age groups performed significantly better than
chance (ps < .001). Thus, even though children distinguish
knowable and unknowable items in their difficulty ratings,
they seem unable to use this information to reject an
overconfident expert.
An alternative interpretation might be that, even though
5-6-year-olds gave higher difficulty ratings for unknowable
items, their ratings are still below some threshold of
“implausibility,” but if any individual children recognized
this implausibility, they would be able to reject the
confident expert. This account predicts that, if difficulty
ratings for unknowable items and age group were pitted
against each other as predictors of performance on the
expert evaluation task, age group should be a weaker
predictor than difficulty rating. However, this is not the
case. In a stepwise regression of performance on

Age Group

Unknowable

Knowable

5-6-year-olds

556.5 (163.7)

371.4 (129.9)

7-8-year-olds

648.2 (137.7)

342.6 (125.2)

Adults

733.5 (100.6)

172.2 (102.5)

NOTE: numbers in parentheses are standard deviations.
unknowable items in the expert evaluation task with age
group, difficulty ratings of unknowable items, and an
interaction term as predictors, only age group emerges as a
significant predictor (β = .601, p < .001). Thus,
developmental improvements in endorsing virtuous
ignorance are independent of the ability to assess the
unknowability of information.

Discussion
Experiment 2 demonstrated that even the youngest
children easily distinguished between knowable and
unknowable items in their difficulty ratings. However,
despite this, children were unable to reject the confident
expert. While there are developmental improvements in the
ability to recognize the difficulty of certain types of
knowledge, they were unrelated to the ability to reject the
confident expert. This suggests that the key developmental
shift is not just in assessing epistemic challenges, but also in
a growing ability to integrate information about knowability
and confidence when evaluating experts.

General Discussion
Children have difficulty using their epistemological
knowledge to recognize when a person who speaks with
confidence might not know what he or she is talking about.
Children have an early-developing sensitivity to expressions
of confidence and certainty, and can use these expressions
to evaluate statements. Here we have shown that younger
children are so swayed by certainty that they do not take
into account those cases where professed ignorance is
actually the stronger indicator of expertise or, equivalently,
confidence and precision are indicators of incompetence.
Experiment 1 showed that young school children choose

1169

Figure 2: Results of the forced-choice task in
Experiment 2. Error bars represent 95% CIs.

experts who claimed to have implausibly precise numerical
knowledge whereas older children and adults clearly
recognized the absurdity of such claims and chose the expert
who professed ignorance and/or uncertainty. Experiment 2
showed that, even when children recognize the
implausibility of certain types of knowledge, they are unable
to integrate it with expressions of confidence to recognize
that an informant is miscalibrated.
This inability may be due to a failure of executive
processing, such that cues to confidence cannot be
integrated with an understanding of the implausibility of
possessing such information. This account is similar to
accounts of how children fail to appropriately calibrate the
confidence and accuracy of an expert over repeated trials
(Tenney et al., 2011; Jaswal et al., 2014). Indeed, the
underlying process may be nearly identical, merely differing
in what information is being integrated with confidence.
Rather than observed accuracy, in this case children must
integrate plausible accuracy with confidence to determine if
an expert is appropriately calibrated.
Despite these failures of integration, it is impressive that
even five-year-olds in Experiment 2 distinguished between
knowable and unknowable information. This early ability
suggests that, with some assistance integrating the
information they already possess, these children might learn
the value of virtuously ignorant informants. However, there
may still be epistemological challenges, even for adults.
Adults could also easily be seduced by an inappropriately
confident informant if they did not understand that such
confidence was implausible. For example, recalling the
example from the introduction, an adult who did not know
that it was impossible to know both the position and
velocity vector of a particle might favor a confident and
precise expert. In the reported experiments we validated our
stimuli with adults to ensure that the selected items were
recognized as implausible to be certain about, but in day-today life it is unclear how well adults can actually identify
the plausibility of knowing something.
This problem is compounded if we consider how such
plausibility information might be learned. Given the
intricate web of deference needed to successfully navigate a
complex world (Keil, Stein, Webb, Billings, & Rozenblit,
2008), a lay sense of knowability may often come from the
very experts that we are trying to evaluate. For example, of
the readers of this paper who knew of Heisenberg’s
Uncertainty Principle, it is unlikely that any of them have
direct evidence for it or proved it themselves. Indeed, the
authors themselves only know it through deference to
physics experts. If there were an equal population of experts
that claimed that such information was plausibly knowable
with precision, how would we be able to evaluate whether a
confident, precise response was appropriate?
It is also worth noting that our “virtuously ignorant”
informants did not simply say “I don’t know.” They
provided a specific reason for their ignorance, i.e., that the
information could not be known. It is not necessarily a cue
of expertise to merely express ignorance, even when

something is in fact unknowable. One could claim ignorance
because one is not an expert, as easily as one could claim
ignorance because one is an expert. It would be somewhat
surprising if someone who merely expressed ignorance
without providing further information would ever be seen as
an expert. While not specifically tested in these
experiments, we would expect that the additional statement
that specific information is unknowable is important for
identifying a virtuously ignorant expert over someone who
simply knows nothing.

References
Buchsbaum, D., Bridgers, S., Whalen, A., Seiver, E.,
Griffiths, T. L., & Gopnik, A. (2012). Do I know that you
know what you know? Modeling testimony in causal
inference. In Proceedings of the 34th annual conference
of the cognitive science society.
Dunning, D. (2012). Self-insight: Roadblocks and detours
on the path to knowing thyself. Psychology Press.
Dunning, D., Johnson, K., Ehrlinger, J., & Kruger, J.
(2003). Why people fail to recognize their own
incompetence. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 12(3), 83-87.
Harris, P. L. (2012). Trusting what you’re told: How
children learn from others. Cambridge; Harvard
University Press
Jaswal, V. K., Pérez-Edgar, K., Kondrad, R. L., Palmquist,
C. M., Cole, C. A., & Cole, C. E. (2014). Can't stop
believing: Inhibitory control and resistance to misleading
testimony. Developmental Science, Online First.
Keil, F. C., Stein, C., Webb, L., Billings, V. D., &
Rozenblit, L. (2008). Discerning the division of cognitive
labor: An emerging understanding of how knowledge is
clustered in other minds. Cognitive Science, 32(2), 259300.
Matsui, T. (2014). Children’s understanding of linguistic
expressions of certainty and evidentiality. Pragmatic
Development in First Language Acquisition, 10, 295.
Mills, C. M., & Keil, F. C. (2005). The development of
cynicism. Psychological Science, 16, 385-390
Moore, C., Bryant, D., & Furrow, D. (1989). Mental terms
and the development of certainty. Child Development, 60,
167–171.
Plato, & Tredennick, H. (1954). The Last Days of Socrates.
The Apology, Crito, Phaedo. Translated and with an
Introduction by Hugh Tredennick. Penguin Books.
Robinson, E. J., & Einav, S. (Eds.). (2014). Trust and
skepticism: Children's selective learning from testimony.
Psychology Press.
Tenney, E. R., Small, J. E., Kondrad, R. L., Jaswal, V. K., &
Spellman, B. A. (2011). Accuracy, confidence, and
calibration: How young children and adults assess
credibility. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1065-1077.
Williams, B. R., Ponesse, J. S., Schachar, R. J., Logan, G.
D., & Tannock, R. (1999). Development of inhibitory
control across the life span. Developmental Psychology,
35(1), 205-213.

1170

