The suggestible nature of apparent motion perception
Nicolas Davidenko1 (ndaviden@ucsc.edu)1
Yeram Cheong1,2 (ycheo001@ucr.edu)
Jacob Smith1 (jakesmeeth11@gmail.com)
University of California, Santa Cruz, Department of Psychology
1156 High Street, Social Sciences 2, Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA
University of California, Riverside, Department of Psychology
900 University Ave., Riverside, CA 92521 USA

Abstract

(rather than four asynchronously flashing dots). The
direction of motion, however, is ambiguous: depending on
how we attend to the display, the dots may appear to move
vertically or horizontally. Research has shown that such bistable percepts can be resolved by attention (Ramachandran
& Anstis, 1986; Lu & Sperling, 1995; Hsieh et al., 2005).
Intriguingly, if we are presented with a collection of such
motion quartets across our visual field, how we resolve an
ambiguity at the fovea spreads to the rest of our visual field
(Anstis & Kim, 2011). Thus, attentional mechanisms may
serve to create coherent percepts of motion in otherwise
ambiguous scenes.

We introduce a novel class of visual illusion -- motion
pareidolia -- in which sequential presentations of random
textures can trigger percepts of coherent apparent motion. In
two experiments we presented observers with sequences of
random 140x140 pixel arrays refreshing at 2.5Hz. In
Experiment 1, observers were primed with a coherent motion
pattern, such as fixed texture shifting up-and-down across
frames. After 8 priming frames, the textures became
completely random from frame to frame. Participants were
instructed to indicate when they could no longer perceive the
primed motion pattern. Participants' responses were delayed
by an average of 6 frames (or 2.4 seconds). In Experiment 2,
observers detected motion patterns in 6-frame sequences
under different noise levels and falsely identified coherent
motion in 39% of the purely random sequences. To account
for this phenomenon, we propose a selective visual attention
process that is biased to detect expected motion.
Keywords: apparent motion, visual illusions

Background
We tend to think of ourselves as expert pattern
recognizers, but our visual system often detects patterns
where they do not exist. Pareidolia refers to the tendency to
detect familiar shapes or patterns in otherwise random
stimuli. Famous examples include seeing a face on the
surface of Mars (Fig. 1A) or religious figures on toast (Fig.
1B). But even purely random textures, when properly cued,
can elicit familiar percepts. For example, it is not difficult to
find a hidden face among the pixels of Fig. 1C (even though
the pixels were generated randomly). In general, pareidolia
tends to be idiosyncratic and is influenced by an observer's
suggestibility and sense of control (Whitson & Galinsky,
2008). Here we report a phenomenon we term motion
pareidolia, in which the sequential presentation of randomly
changing textures, such as the one in Fig. 1C, gives rise to
illusory percepts of coherent apparent motion. Unlike
regular pareidolia, motion pareidolia is experienced by
nearly all observers and can be manipulated by suggestion.
Apparent motion is the percept created by two or more
sequentially presented images in which one or more salient
features shift position across frames (Wertheimer, 1912;
Ramachandran & Anstis, 1986). For example, when the two
frames in Fig. 1D are presented in alternation at about twice
a second, they give rise to a percept of two moving dots

Figure 1: (A) An image of the Cydonia region of Mars taken by
the Viking 1 orbiter; (B) a piece of toast; (C) an array of randomly
generated pixels. (D) A: Two static images that give rise to
directionally ambiguous apparent motion when shown
sequentially. (E) Apparent motion is perceived even without lowlevel feature correspondence across frames.

Moreover, coherent motion can be perceived even when
there is no strict correspondence between salient features
across frames. Lu & Sperling (2001) delineated three
mechanisms for apparent motion perception: a first-order
luminance-dependent mechanism, a second-order contrastsensitive mechanism, and third-order processes that track
salient features over time and is sensitive to attention. In
third-order motion perception, even if the salient features in
a display change in contrast, size, and shape between
successive frames, apparent motion will still be readily
perceived (see Fig. 1E).
If apparent motion is influenced by attention and is
invariant to low-level feature properties, what (if any) are
the constraints for a sequence of random images to be

513

interpreted as coherent motion? Here we present evidence
that people systematically perceive coherent apparent
motion in the complete absence of coherence between
successive images. Specifically, we show that when
sequences of random textures (like the one shown in Fig.
1c) are refreshed around twice a second, they consistently
elicit illusory percepts of coherent apparent motion. In two
experiments, we quantify this phenomenon by measuring
persistence (the tendency to keep perceiving an entrained
motion pattern in random noise) and false identification (the
tendency to falsely identify a repetitive motion pattern in
random noise).

Results
Strikingly, only 12% of responses occurred during the
predicted time window; the vast majority of responses
(86%) occurred well after the end of the motion prime (Fig.
3A). In fact, the median response occurred during frame 14,
a full 6 frames (or 2.4 seconds) after the end of the motion
prime. Taking into consideration the reaction time to
produce a response, the data suggests participants typically
perceived between 4 and 6 frames of illusory motion in each
trial before they realized the motion had stopped. There was
substantial variability in participants' susceptibility to this
illusion. To quantify this, we defined an individual measure
of median persistence as a person's median response lag,
measured in frames from the end of the prime. The
distribution of median persistence across participants is
shown in Fig. 3B. As the distribution shows, some 24% of
participants showed little persistence (3 or fewer frames),
while another 28% of participants had a median persistence
of above 7 frames.

Experiment 1: Persistence
Methods
Participants were 46 UC Santa Cruz undergraduates (76%
female, ages 18-21) who gave written consent and received
course credit for completing the study. Participants
completed 160 trials in which they observed sequences of
up to 33 frames of random pixel arrays refreshing at a frame
rate of 2.5Hz. The initial 8 frames served to entrain one of 4
repetitive motion patterns: up-down, right-left, up-up, or
right-right motion. We generated these motion patterns by
shifting a single random pixel array by 4 pixels along one of
the cardinal axes across subsequent frames (see Fig. 2-top).
The level of noise during these 8 priming frames was set to
20%; that is, in each frame, 20% of pixels were randomized,
producing a hazy, but still clearly discernable motion
pattern. Beyond the 8th frame, the noise level increased to
100%; all pixels were randomized from frame to frame,
until the end of the trial (Fig. 2-bottom). Participants were
instructed to fixate on a central cross and press a button
when they could no longer perceive the primed motion
pattern, at which point the trial ended. In the absence of any
illusory perception, we would expect most responses to
occur during frames 9 and 10, allowing up to 800ms for
individuals to produce the required motor response.

Figure 3: (A) Results of Experiment 1. The distribution of
responses averaged over 46 participants, indicating when the
primed motion could no longer be perceived. The actual motion
pattern ended at the onset of frame 9, but the median response
occurred during frame 14. Error bars denote SEM across subjects.
(B) The distribution of median persistence scores across
participants, measured in frames beyond the end of primed motion.

Figure 2: Example frames from a trial of Experiment 1, shown at
a resolution of 30x30 pixels for clarity (the actual experimental
stimuli were 140x140 pixels). Top row: 8 frames depicting updown motion as indicated by the arrows, with 20% noise. Bottom
row: subsequent 25 frames are purely random, with 100% noise.

514

These results demonstrate that simple motion patterns,
such as up-down or right-right motion, can be entrained and
subsequently perceived in randomly changing textures. We
modeled persistence as an exponential decay function, with
a fixed probability P of persistence from one frame to the
next. The best-fit parameter was P=0.85, indicating that
when observers expect to see motion from one random
frame to the next, they will indeed see the expected motion
85% of the time. In Experiment 2, we designed a motion
identification task to measure motion pareidolia in a more
objective task and test whether illusory motion percepts can
arise spontaneously, without entrainment.

Experiment 2: False Identification
Methods
Participants were 46 UC Santa Cruz undergraduates (61%
female, ages 18-22) who gave written consent and received
course credit for completing the study. Participants
completed 192 motion identification trials in which they
were shown 6-frame sequences of random pixel textures
refreshing at 2.5Hz, similar to the stimuli in Experiment 1.
After each sequence, participants were instructed to click on
one of 5 buttons on the screen to indicate whether the
sequence depicted one of 4 motion patterns (again, updown, right-left, up-up, or right-right) or whether the
sequence was "random". Across trials, we manipulated the
noise level present in each frame, from 0% (pure motion),
33%, 67%, to 100% (pure noise). We measured
performance in the motion identification task and the
distribution of responses as a function of noise.
Figure 4: Results of Experiment 2. (A) Distribution of responses
across noise levels. Gray bars indicate the proportion of "motion"
responses (summed across the 4 types of motion) and white bars
indicate the proportion of "random" responses. The proportion of
motion responses remains relatively high (.39) even during 100%noise trials. Error bars indicate SEM across subjects. (B) The
distribution participants' false identification rates (i.e. the
proportion of 100%-noise trials reported as one of the 4 motion
patterns).

Results
As expected, average performance on the 5-AFC task
decreased as a function of noise level: proportion correct
(±SEM) was .93 (0.01) at 0% noise, .61 (.02) at 33% noise,
and .15 (.01) at 67% noise. But the distribution of responses
revealed a more intriguing result. Fig. 4A shows the
proportion of "motion" responses (summed across the 4
motion patterns) versus "random" responses, as a function
of noise level. Even though participants were nearly perfect
(.99) at detecting pure-motion trials as motion, they were
only .61 correct at detecting pure-noise trials as random. In
other words, participants falsely identified 39% of purenoise sequences as one of the four motion patterns. As with
Experiment 1, there was considerable variability in
participants' propensity to falsely identify motion patterns.
To quantify this, we defined an individual measure of false
identification rate, as the proportion of pure-noise trials
falsely identified as depicting a motion pattern. As shown
in Fig. 4B, there was a wide range of false identification
rates across participants, with 11% of participants rarely
reporting illusory motion and some 30% of participants
reporting motion in the majority of pure-noise trials.

General Discussion
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrate that
sequential presentations of random textures can give rise to
illusory percepts of coherent apparent motion. The specific
motion pattern that is perceived by an individual can be
entrained with a motion prime, or it can arise spontaneously
when the observer expects to see certain motion patterns.
The phenomenon is robust, experienced by most naive
observers across two very different experimental paradigms,
and the illusion was vivid. In fact, many of our participants
were incredulous that they had been experiencing illusory
motion until we demonstrated to them that they the direction
of the perceived motion during the random frames could be
changed by instruction, or even by volition. What
mechanisms might explain motion pareidolia, and what
functions might it serve?

515

We argue that motion pareidolia cannot be explained as a
type of motion adaptation. Normally, adapting to motion in
one direction produces illusory motion aftereffects in the
opposite direction (for example, watching a waterfall for 30
seconds will cause a stationary scene to appear to move
upward; see Culham et al. 2000). Instead, the illusory
motion percepts reported in the current studies were always
in the same direction (or following the same alternating
pattern) as the primed motion patterns. If motion adaptation
were driving these illusory percepts, being primed with upup motion would have led to perception of downward
motion, rather than persistence of upward motion.
Another possibility is that motion pareidolia could result
from local resolutions of ambiguous motion cues at the
center of the visual field. For example, when focusing on a
small cluster of pixels, one might interpret a white pixel
changing into a black pixel as consistent with motion in
some direction. An attention-driven ambiguity resolution at
the fovea might spread into a global percept of motion
(Anstis & Kim, 2011). To test this possibility, we conducted
a follow-up to Experiment 1 with 65 new participants, in
which a static gray disc masked the central 7 degrees around
fixation throughout the experiment. The pattern of results
was nearly identical to Experiment 1 (median persistence =
6 frames; P=0.86), indicating that motion pareidolia can
operate entirely in the visual periphery, without input from
the fovea.
We propose that motion pareidolia is best characterized as
a top-down process in which visual attention is biased to
confirm expectations of motion. When an observer
anticipates seeing upward motion from frame 1 to frame 2,
visual attention is drawn to regions of frame 2 that are
consistent with upward motion from frame 1. Previous work
has shown that attentional processes can resolve ambiguous
correspondences in apparent motion (e.g., Lu & Sperling,
1995). Our displays, which were entirely random, provided
statistically equivalent evidence for (or against) any type of
motion across subsequent frames. By attending to pixel
clusters that appear to shift in the predicted direction (while
ignoring pixel clusters that do not), our visual system tricks
itself into seeing the motion we are expecting to see. Further
work is needed to test the predictive power of this selective
attention model.
Many properties and constraints of motion pareidolia
remain to be explored. For example, our experiments used
140x140 pixel displays refreshing at 2.5Hz, as these
parameters produced strong effects in pilot studies. Reports
of illusory motion were weaker with much bigger or smaller
pixel arrays (regardless of the visual angle they subtended)
or when the frame rate was faster than 4Hz or slower than
1Hz. It is still unclear exactly how motion pareidolia is
affected by frame rate and display resolution, or whether
these factors interact. In our experiments, we entrained
simple motion patterns, such as up-down or right-right
motion, with a repetition cycle of at most two frames.
Future studies may investigate the complexity of motion
patterns that can be entrained and subsequently maintained.

Finally, our data indicated large individual variability in
the propensity to report illusory motion, with some
individuals rarely reporting it and others reporting it in the
majority of trials. What are individual factors that
distinguish high-perceivers from low-perceivers? Past
research in static pareidolia (Whitson & Galinsky, 2008)
implicates a role of suggestibility and sense of control (or
lack thereof). Given the spatiotemporal nature of apparent
motion processing, predictors of motion pareidolia may also
include individuals' visual attention and short-term visual
memory capacity.

Conclusion
Motion pareidolia can be thought of as the propensity to see
expected motion patterns in random noise, or alternatively
as the failure to detect randomness when expecting motion.
Whichever way it is construed, motion pareidolia
demonstrates a remarkable bias in our apparent motion
perception system to see motion when there is none there.
One can speculate about whether over-interpreting visual
noise as coherent motion may serve an adaptive purpose.
Carl Sagan once suggested that there may be an
evolutionary advantage to over-interpret ambiguous patterns
as faces: "Those infants who a million years ago were
unable to recognize a face smiled back less, were less likely
to win the hearts of their parents, and less likely to prosper.
These days, nearly every infant is quick to identify a human
face, and to respond with a goony grin" (Berenbaum, 2009).
In the case of motion pareidolia, it may be safer to assume
that a random flicker behind a bush indicates the movement
of a potential predator and be wrong, than the other way
around.
Regardless of its origins and potential functions, motion
pareidolia may provide a useful tool for neuroscientists
studying top-down mechanisms of vision. It is known that
apparent motion recruits similar cortical mechanisms as
smooth motion (Goebel et al., 1998) and that signals in
these cortical regions are directionally sensitive (Muckli et
al., 2005). Since motion pareidolia is driven by the
expectations of the observer (rather than by image
properties), neural correlates of motion pareidolia will likely
reflect top-down mechanisms initiated by our high-level
expectations.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the members of the UCSC
Perception Lab for their help with data collection, and in
particular Jack Rogers, Daniel Walder, and Jennifer Day for
their useful suggestions throughout the project.

References
Anstis, S., & Kim, J. (2011). Local versus global perception
of ambiguous motion displays. Journal of Vision,
11(3):13, 1–12, www.journalofvision.org/content/11/3/13,
doi:10.1167/11.3.13.

516

Culham, J. C., Verstraten, F. A., Ashida, H., & Cavanagh,
P. (2000). Independent aftereffects of attention and
motion. Neuron, 28(2), 607-615.
Goebel, R., Khorram‐Sefat, D., Muckli, L., Hacker, H., &
Singer, W. (1998). The constructive nature of vision:
direct evidence from functional magnetic resonance
imaging studies of apparent motion and motion imagery.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 10(5), 1563-1573.
Hsieh, P. J., Caplovitz, G. P., & Tse, P. U. (2005). Illusory
rebound motion and the motion continuity heuristic.
Vision Research, 45(23), 2972-2985.
Lu, Z. L., & Sperling, G. (1995). Attention-generated
apparent motion. Nature, 377(6546), 237-239.
Lu, Z. L., & Sperling, G. (2001). Three-systems theory of
human visual motion perception: review and update.
JOSA A, 18(9), 2331-2370.
Muckli, L., Kohler, A., Kriegeskorte, N., & Singer, W.
(2005). Primary visual cortex activity along the apparentmotion trace reflects illusory perception. PLoS biology,
3(8), e265.
Ramachandran VS, Anstis SM (1986) The perception of
apparent motion. Scientific American 254:102–109.
Tse, P., Cavanagh, P., & Nakayama, K. (1998). The role of
parsing in high-level motion processing. In T. Watanabe
(Ed.), High-level Motion Processing (pp. 249–266).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sagan, Carl. quoted in Berenbaum, M. (2009). The Earwig's
Tail: A Modern Bestiary of Multi-legged Legends.
Harvard University Press.
Whitson, J. A., & Galinsky, A. D. (2008). Lacking control
increases illusory pattern perception. Science, 322(5898),
115-117.
Wertheimer, M. (1912). Experimentelle Studien über das
Sehen von Bewegung. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 61,
161–265.

517

