The perceptual foundation of linguistic context
Francis Mollica (fmollica@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall, Box
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

Steven T. Piantadosi (spiantadosi@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall, Box
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall, Box
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract
Context plays a ubiquitous role in language processing. For
the most part, work in language processing investigates the
effects of context without investigating questions about what
determines a context. For example, interpretation of any referential expression must take into account the notion of a referential domain. Here we investigate the influence of perceptual
cues in establishing a referential domain, or linguistic context.
We demonstrate that people use perceptual cues to establish a
linguistic context; the influence of perceptual cues is gradient
with respect to cue magnitude; and the contribution of a perceptual cue in constructing a linguistic context is not an effect
of attention or salience. We provide these results as a first step
toward developing a formal model for the establishment of linguistic context.
Keywords: language processing; reference resolution; linguistic context

Introduction
Context plays a ubiquitous role in language processing. One
relatively well understood case is the role that a referential domain plays in generating and understanding definite referring
expressions. Definite referring expressions are commonly understood as picking out a uniquely identifiable referent. As
an example, consider the interpretation of a request such as,
“Can you pass me the red wine?” uttered at a small table
in a crowded NYC restaurant. If there were carafes of the
house wines at the table, one red and one white, then “the
red wine” would clearly be intended, and understood, to refer
to the carafe of red at the table. However, in a NYC restaurant, there would likely be numerous carafes of the house red
at the table; there might even be a carafe of red wine that is
at an adjacent table closer to one of your dinner companions
than your own carafe.
Why are these carafes not potential referents, and why is
the use of a definite article felicitous when there is clearly
more than one carafe of red? The answer is that any referring
expression must be interpretable with respect to a relevant
referential domain, the context that defines the set of available referents. There is a body of research that seeks to establish what constrains referential domains, investigating the
role of general world knowledge (e.g., our table versus someone elses table), goal-specific constraints—including actionbased affordances (Chambers, Tanenhaus, Eberhard, Filip, &

Carlson, 2002; Chambers, Tanenhaus, & Magnuson, 2004),
and the common ground that is shared between interlocutors
because of community membership, physical co-presence
and linguistic co-presence—i.e., the history of the discourse
(Clark & Marshall, 1978).
Some aspects of what constitutes a likely referential domain might, however, be based upon much simpler, basic
perceptual foundations. These basic perceptual effects might
serve as the substrate upon which more complex contexts are
built. A hint that this might be the case comes from a study by
Klein, Gegg-Harrison, Carlson, and Tanenhaus (2013). Klein
et al. (2013) were examining different types of referring expressions: regular definite noun-phrases, such as “the concert” and weak definite noun phrases, such as “the hospital”.
Unlike regular noun-phrases, weak definite noun phrases do
not need to uniquely refer. For example, one cannot say John
went to the concert and so did Sally when they each went
to different concerts; however, one can say John went to the
hospital and so did Sally when they each go to different hospitals. In Klein et al. (2013)’s study, a magnet board was
implicitly divided into two regions by painting one half of the
board blue and the other half yellow. In an act-out task, John
and Sally were on separate colors. After acting out John went
to the concert, participants were reluctant to have Sally go
to the same concert, if it meant crossing the implicit boundary. They noted that participants were reluctant to cross the
boundary even when they were explicitly told that they could
and were given practice and filler trials that required them to
cross the boundary.
Here we directly test the hypothesis that abstract perceptual
cues can structure the referential domains used in reference
resolution with ambiguous referential terms. Given an ambiguous referential expression, listeners were asked to choose
between two identical possible referents, one of which was
perceptually grouped with a previously mentioned entity. To
group referents on the basis of perceptual cues, we appealed
to the Gestalt principles, such as proximity, common background, etc. (Wertheimer, 1938). In the current experiments,
we ask three questions: First, will participants use perceptual
grouping to create referential domains, or linguistic contexts?
Second, if they do so, are these linguistic contexts defined by

1613

Figure 1: Stimuli used in Experiment One. Left to right: Common Background, Proximity, Boundary Region
the presence of or as a function of the perceptual cues? Third,
do these referential domains really reflect perceptual grouping or can they be reduced to attentional factors, such as such
as cognitive status (Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 1993),
salience (Ariel, 1990), and attentional state (Gordon, Grosz,
& Gilliom, 1993), which are often posited as primitives that
determine referential domains?

Experiment One
To investigate the role of perceptual cues in establishing a
linguistic context, we presented participants with a visual array containing three squares, one smaller than the other two.
The small square was perceptually grouped with one of the
other squares. Participants were first instructed to click on the
small square. If the perceptual cue is used to construct a linguistic context, we expect the linguistic context, or referential
domain, will narrow to only include items in that perceptual
grouping. We predicted that if the next referential expression
is ambiguous between a perceptually grouped referent and an
ungrouped referent, participants will resolve the ambiguity by
selecting the referent within the narrowed context.
Given that linguistic contexts permit listeners to make rich
pragmatic inferences, we predicted that the ambiguous referential expression would differentially influence reference
resolution. If the ambiguous referential expression is nonspecific toward any aspect of the object (e.g., “the other
one”), we expected participants to select the object in the perceptually established context. On the other hand, if the next
referential domain is over-informative (e.g., “the big one”),
people will use the over-informativeness to pragmatically infer that the intended referent is outside of the narrowed referential domain.

Methods

ulated within subjects.
On each of the six critical trials, participants were presented with an image that contained three squares arranged
on the vertices of an equilateral triangle (see Figure 1). The
square on the top of the triangle was always slightly smaller
than than the other two. On each critical trial, the small square
was perceptually grouped with one of the bottom squares according to one of the following grouping factors: Common
Background, Proximity1 or Region Boundary. The orientation (right vs. left) of the grouping factor was counterbalanced across trials. An additional six filler trials were constructed to ensure that the participants were attending to the
task. On these trials, a circle, a star and a triangle were randomly arranged along the vertices of the equilateral triangle.
All of the instructions were recorded by a male speaker of
Standard North American English.
Procedure The experiment was presented online using psiTurk (McDonnell et al., 2012). Before the experiment began,
participants answered a demographic questionnaire and completed a sound check task (i.e. type what you hear). Sixty
participants were randomly assigned to each of the referential expression conditions. On each trial, participants were
presented with an image. On critical trials, participants heard
the instructions, “Click on the small square.” When participants clicked on an object in the image, their choice was
recorded and the object disappeared. Participants were then
instructed, “Now click on...” followed by the referential expression assigned to them. When the participant clicked on
an object, their response was recorded. The image was then
removed and the next trial began after 1 s. On filler trials, participants were instructed to first click on the circle and then
click on the star. Their responses were recorded to ensure
active participation in the task.

Results and Discussion

Participants 180 participants were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk and paid for their participation, which lasted
approximately 3 minutes. All participants passed a sound
check task to ensure their speaker system was functional.
Materials and Design Referential expression (“the big
one” vs. “the big square” vs. “the other one”) was manipulated between subjects. Perceptual grouping factor (Common
Background vs. Proximity vs. Region Boundary) was manip-

All participants had accuracy scores on filler trials greater
than 90%. Data for each referential expression were analyzed using a mixed effect logistic regression with subject and
item intercepts. As seen in Figure 2, participants assigned
1 For the Proximity manipulation, the small square was placed
midway along the edge it would usually share with the square it is
grouped with.

1614

Figure 2: Results of Experiment One. Error lines represent 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals. Stars represent p values
comparing mean to chance, 50% (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001)
“the other one” as their ambiguous referential expression
were more likely to choose the perceptually grouped square.
This suggests that the perceptual grouping cues established
a potential linguistic context and when placed in that context via the initial referential expression (i.e., “Click on the
small square”), participants will remain in the context even
though there is an identical referent visually available outside
the context.
Participants assigned “the big one” as their ambiguous referential expression preferred the ungrouped square. One possible explanation for selecting the ungrouped square is that
participants drew a pragmatic inference about the speaker’s
intended referent. If the speaker had intended to refer to the
grouped object, there is no need to be over-informative. This
is Grice’s maxim of quantity (Grice, 1975). On the other
hand, if a speaker was attempting to refer to the ungrouped
object, they could flout the maxim by being over-informative.
Participants assigned “the big square” were at chance between choosing the perceptually grouped and the ungrouped
square for the Proximity and Region Boundary grouping factor. One possible explanation for these results is that participants were torn between two interpretations of the referential expression. At face value, a participant entering the perceptually induced context might label the objects “the small
square” and “the big square.” In this case, the referential
expression is unambiguous and the participant should select
the grouped square. If the participant does not initially label
both objects in the context, the referential expression might
be considered over-informative and, thus, warrant the same
pragmatic inference as seen with participants presented “the
big one.” In this scenario, the participants average response
might reflect two different interpretations of the referential
expression that cancel any effect out.
Taken together, these results are consistent with the notion
that perceptual cues guide the establishment of context and
further suggest that the inclusion of a non-informative contrast pushes the listener outside of a previously established
linguistic context. Interestingly, these results were not completely consistent across grouping factors; participants as-

signed to “the big square” condition significantly preferred
the ungrouped square when the perceptual grouping cue was
Common Background and participants assigned to “the big
one” condition did not show a preference when the perceptual
grouping cue was Region Boundary. We hypothesized that
these anomalies might be due to the varying magnitude of the
grouping cues. Common Background is a strong grouping
cue, which might have hindered participants from considering both squares as part of the referential domain. Compared
to Common Background, Region Boundary might not have
been a strong enough grouping factor to construct a linguistic
context. As a first step following up on this interpretation, we
tested whether the strength of a grouping cue influenced the
construction of a linguistic context.

Experiment Two
We disentangled whether the presence of a grouping cue is
sufficient to establish a linguistic context or if the effectiveness of the grouping cue depends on its magnitude by presenting participants with trials manipulating the strength of
the Region Boundary grouping cue. If the construction of a
linguistic context depends on the magnitude of the grouping
cue, we predict that as the magnitude increases, more participants will use the cue to create a context and resolve the
ambiguous referential expression (i.e., “the other one”) by
selecting the perceptually grouped item. Whereas if the construction of a linguistic context only requires the presence of
a grouping factor, we expect that across all magnitudes participants will construct a linguistic context and resolve the
ambiguity with the object in that context.

Methods
Participants An additional 60 participants were recruited
via Amazon Mechanical Turk and paid for their participation, which lasted approximately 3 minutes. All participants
passed a sound check task to ensure their speaker system was
functional.

1615

Figure 3: Stimuli used in Experiment Two.
tic regression with subject and item intercepts. Replicating
Experiment One, participants preferred to select the perceptually grouped square (see Figure 4). Moreover, as the strength
of the perceptual cue decreased, participants were less likely
to use the perceptual cue to establish a linguistic context, reflecting a gradient effect in subject averages. Future work will
examine this effect in individuals.

Experiment Three

Figure 4: Results of Experiment Two. Error lines represent
95% bootstrapped confidence intervals. Stars represent p values comparing mean to chance, 50% (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001)

Materials Similar to Experiment One experimental trials
contained squares located on the vertices of an equilateral triangle. The top square was grouped with one of the otherwise
identical bottom squares using the Region Boundary grouping cue at three different magnitudes (see Figure 3). At the
strongest magnitude, the line separating the two squares bisects the screen. At medium strength, the line separating the
two squares spans the length of the square encompassing the
equilateral triangle. At the weakest magnitude, the line separating the two squares spans its length within the equilateral
triangle. The orientation of the grouping factor (left vs. right)
was counterbalanced across trials. The same filler trials as
Experiment One were included to assess participant’s attentiveness to the task. The same instructions from Experiment
One were used.
Procedure The same procedure as Experiment One was
used with one exception: all participants heard the ambiguous referential expression, “the other one”.

Having now provided evidence for the role of perceptual cues
in establishing linguistic context, it is important to distinguish the contribution of perceptual cues from the contribution of previously appealed to non-linguistic concepts such
as salience (Ariel, 1990) or attentional state (Gordon et al.,
1993). The previous appeals to salience nested within linguistic mention accounts do not focus on the narrowing of
the referential domain but rather frame the problem as certain objects in the visual array attracting more attention as
compared to the other objects in the array. One possible interpretation of the results of the previous two experiments is
that the perceptual grouping factor increased the salience of
the grouped object and participants selected the most salient
object in the visual input. To demonstrate that our result is
not an effect of salience, we conducted a variant of Experiment One in which the perceptually ungrouped square was
cued before the trial. Cueing the location of the ungrouped
square should increase its salience compared to the perceptually grouped square. Therefore, if participants resolve the
ambiguity using perceptual cues, they should select the perceptually grouped object. Whereas, if participants resolve the
ambiguity by selecting the most salient thing in the visual input, they should select the ungrouped object.

Methods

Results and Discussion

Participants An additional 60 participants were recruited
via Amazon Mechanical Turk and paid for their participation, which lasted approximately 5 minutes. All participants
passed a sound check task to ensure their speaker system was
functional.

All participants had accuracy scores on filler trials greater
than 90%. Data were analyzed using a mixed effect logis-

Materials and Design The same images and recordings
from Experiment One were used.

1616

Figure 5: Sample trial from Experiment Three. All three grouping factors were used (only Common Background is illustrated).
sented with the Proximity grouping factor were at chance between selecting the salient object and selecting the perceptually grouped object. In light of Experiment Two, one possible explanation for the lack of an effect is that the Proximity
grouping factor was not strong enough to establish a linguistic context.

General Discussion

Figure 6: Results of Experiment Three. Error lines represent
95% bootstrapped confidence intervals. Stars represent p values comparing mean to chance, 50% (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001)
Procedure The same procedure as Experiment One was
adopted with two exceptions: 1) the only referential expression used was “the other one” and 2) before all experimental
trials, an arrow pointing toward the location of the ungrouped
item appeared in the middle of the equilateral triangle for 1 s
(see Figure 5).

Results and Discussion
All participants had accuracy scores on filler trials greater
than 90%. Data were analyzed using a mixed effect logistic
regression with subject and item intercepts. As can be seen
in Figure 6, participants presented with the Common Background or Region Boundary grouping factor significantly preferred to resolve the ambiguity with the perceptually grouped
object, suggesting the effect of perceptual cues on linguistic context is not an effect of salience2 . Participants pre2 In an unpublished experiment, we attempted to group the
squares with Common Motion. Participants were at chance in selecting grouped and ungrouped squares, which further suggests at-

As people listen to speech, they develop rich contextual representations that allow them to draw pragmatic inferences. In
Experiment One, we showed that participants can use perceptual cues to establish a linguistic context. When moved into a
linguistic context, they will resolve ambiguities locally unless
the referential expression prompts the listener to pragmatically infer that the intended referent is not in the local context
(via being over-informative). Experiment Two replicated the
finding of Experiment One, that listeners use perceptual cues
to establish linguistic contexts, and further demonstrated that
a perceptual cue’s ability to establish a linguistic context is
gradient with respect to its magnitude. By explicitly drawing attention to objects outside the perceptual grouping, Experiment Three showed that the establishment of linguistic
context was not due to the salience of perceptually grouped
objects or attentional effects. These results serve as a first
step toward developing a formal model for the establishment
of linguistic context.
Ambiguity abounds in both printed language and in communicative encounters, yet we are remarkably quick at processing language and resolving ambiguities at all levels of
processing. Explanations of how ambiguity is resolved often appeal to context without specifying what that context is
and how it was established. Once we have a formal model
of context construction, we can begin to explore the exact
mechanisms of ambiguity resolution including how context
and other components of online sentence processing (e.g., attentional factors) interact.
For example, recent research in discourse processing has
disentangled the independent contributions of linguistic mententional salience does not influence the establishment of context.

1617

tion and the presence of items in the visual array to the
construction of the referential domain using the contrastive
adjective effect (Sedivy, Tanenhaus, Chambers, & Carlson,
1999). When listeners hear a definite nominal phrase modified by a pre-nominal scalar adjective (e.g., the big...), they
infer that the speaker is referring to something in the context,
or referential domain, that varies along the adjective’s contrast dimension. As a result, the referential domain narrows
to entities within the contrastive set (i.e., the set of things in
the context that vary along that dimension). One limitation of
the original visual world experiments is that a contrastive set
is always visually present. Therefore, results could not dissociate whether the narrowing of the referential domain was due
to the visual context including a contrast set or simply a product of linguistic mention. By manipulating the availability
of contrastive referents in the visual array, Wolter, Gorman,
and Tanenhaus (2011) demonstrated that the narrowing of the
referential domain is actually due to the linguistic mention
alone. Further support for an independent effect of linguistic
mention comes from work by Kim, Gunlogson, Tanenhaus,
and Runner (2015) showing that focus operators introduce
referential expressions to the referential domain.
While most research indirectly contributes to the definition
of linguistic context by appealing to specific factors thought
to be encompassed by the linguistic context, our work and the
aforementioned work on linguistic mention demonstrates that
by exploiting the ability of these factors to influence contexts,
we can directly and empirically work toward a formal model
of linguistic context. The key to this approach is to select an
ambiguity such that the factor of interest is independent of the
resolution of that ambiguity. Here we have demonstrated the
approach with low level perceptual factors. Past research has
applied this approach to linguistic mention. Future research
should extend this approach to other factors relevant to the
construction of linguistic contexts.

Conclusion
In conclusion, listeners construct rich contextual representations that support pragmatic inferences using perceptual cues
within the visual input. The effectiveness of the perceptual
cues in establishing linguistic context depends on the magnitude of the cue, and the use of perceptual cues in establishing linguistic context is independent from the effects of
salience in reference resolution. These results serve as a first
step toward developing a formal model for the establishment
of linguistic context by identifying the influence of perceptual
cues.

Chambers, C. G., Tanenhaus, M. K., Eberhard, K. M., Filip,
H., & Carlson, G. N. (2002). Circumscribing referential
domains during real-time language comprehension. Journal of memory and language, 47(1), 30–49.
Chambers, C. G., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Magnuson, J. S.
(2004). Actions and affordances in syntactic ambiguity
resolution. Journal of experimental psychology: Learning,
memory, and cognition, 30(3), 687.
Clark, H. H., & Marshall, C. (1978). Reference diaries. In
Proceedings of the 1978 workshop on theoretical issues in
natural language processing (pp. 57–63).
Gordon, P. C., Grosz, B. J., & Gilliom, L. A. (1993). Pronouns, names, and the centering of attention in discourse.
Cognitive science, 17(3), 311–347.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics. New York: Academic
Press.
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993). Cognitive status and the form of referring expressions in discourse. language, 274–307.
Kim, C. S., Gunlogson, C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Runner, J. T.
(2015). Context-driven expectations about focus alternatives. Cognition, 139, 28–49.
Klein, N. M., Gegg-Harrison, W. M., Carlson, G. N., &
Tanenhaus, M. K. (2013). Experimental investigations of
weak definite and weak indefinite noun phrases. Cognition,
128(2), 187–213.
McDonnell, J., Martin, J., Markant, D., Coenen, A., Rich, A.,
& Gureckis, T. (2012). psiturk (version 1.02)[software].
new york, ny: New york university.
Sedivy, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., Chambers, C. G., & Carlson,
G. N. (1999). Achieving incremental semantic interpretation through contextual representation. Cognition, 71(2),
109–147.
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Laws of organization in perceptual
forms. A source book of Gestalt psychology, 71–88.
Wolter, L., Gorman, K. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2011).
Scalar reference, contrast and discourse: Separating effects of linguistic discourse from availability of the referent. Journal of memory and language, 65(3), 299–317.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a NICHD grant HD27206
(MKT).

References
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents (rle
linguistics b: Grammar). Routledge.

1618

