Time after Time in Words: Chronology through Language Statistics
Max M. Louwerse (mlouwerse@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Center for Cognition and Communication, Warandelaan 2
5037 AB Tilburg, The Netherlands

Susanne Raisig (susanne.raisig@hu-berlin.de)
Institute of Psychology, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Rudower Chaussee 18,
12489 Berlin, Germany

Rick Tillman (R.N.Tillman@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Center for Cognition and Communication, Warandelaan 2
5037 AB Tilburg, The Netherlands

Sterling Hutchinson (S.C.Hutchinson@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Center for Cognition and Communication, Warandelaan 2
5037 AB Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract
Previous research has shown that perceptual relations, social
affiliations, and geographical locations can be predicted using
distributional semantics. We investigated whether this extends
to chronological relations. In several computational studies
we demonstrated that the chronological order of days,
months, years, and the chronological sequence of historical
figures can be predicted using language statistics. In fact, both
the leaders of the Soviet Union and the presidents of the
United States can be ordered chronologically based on the cooccurrences of their names in language. An experiment also
showed that the bigram frequency of US president names
predicted the response time of participants in their evaluation
of the chronology of these presidents. These findings are
explained by the Symbol Interdependency Hypothesis which
predicts that as a function of language use, language encodes
relations in the world around us. Language users can then use
language as a cognitive short-cut for mental representations.
Keywords: chronology; language statistics; distributional
semantics; embodied cognition; symbol interdependency

Introduction
Veni, vidi, vici. Caesar’s tricolon demonstrates that temporal
relations can be extracted from language. It is because of the
order of the verbs that chronology can be determined, which
makes the tricolon vidi, vici, veni a common linguistic joke.
The non-arbitrary order of event verbs presented in the Latin
tricolon can also be found in modern languages. Even
though one could say after and before, the past (e.g., before)
typically precedes the presence or the future (e.g., after)
(Benor & Levi, 2006; Cooper & Ross, 1975). Indeed,
binomials such as before and after, in the past and the
future, long ago and recently, perhaps in 2014 and 2015, are
more common than their achronological counterparts (e.g,
after and before). This suggests that language encodes
temporal relations, over and above the linguistic temporal
markers that help to identify relations in time (Louwerse,
2001).

We have previously explained the presence of linguistic
and perceptual effects in language processing in terms of the
Symbol Interdependency Hypothesis (Louwerse & Benesh,
2012; Louwerse & Connell, 2011; Louwerse, 2007; 2008;
2011). For instance, when we encounter a word, a rough
meaning is generated from its linguistic neighbors (e.g.,
chair would more often accompany table than bird,
therefore chairs and tables can be assumed to have a closer
relationship). However, if we need a more precise
association, we then can perceptually simulate the features
of that concept represented by the word. In short, we do not
always rely on perceptual simulation, as in many cases we
can process words by the presence of their word neighbors
as well as the order in which they appear.
The goal of the present paper was to determine whether
chronological information can be extracted through
distributional semantics. In other words, we investigated
whether the temporality of concepts could be retrieved from
the way these concepts co-occur in language.
It is generally assumed that temporal relations and, more
specifically, the temporal order of event concepts, is stored
in memory along a temporal dimension. Crucially, this
temporal dimension is considered directional (Freyd, 1992)
in order to preserve the events’ temporality. That is,
chronological order is preferred upon recall and retrieval
from memory (e.g., Raisig, Welke, Hagendorf, & van der
Meer, 2010; Raisig, Hagendorf, & van der Meer, 2012).
Freyd (1992) as well as Barsalou (2008) assume that this
directionality is due to the perceptual and experiential input
that is preserved in the conceptual representation: events are
experienced and perceived chronologically, which is then
stored in the conceptual representation. However, findings
suggest that a chronological temporality may develop before
the actual experience. Children as young as 3-8 years report
events in their naturally occurring chronological order even
when they have not yet experienced these events themselves
(Nelson and Gruendel, 1986; Hudson & Nelson, 1986). This
finding was supported by Raisig et al. (2009) who showed

1428

that students were able to report events in chronological
order that belonged to an activity they had not experienced
themselves (e.g., going scuba diving). The question that
arises is how is temporality developed in these cases? One
hypothesis is that language may play a role in this task
(Louwerse, 2008; Louwerse & Zwaan, 2009).
Little is known about the nature of temporal
representations. There appear to be some similarities
between spatial and temporal representations (Friedman &
Brudos, 1988). They both consist of elements that form
relations with each other. Knowing from past research that
spatial relations can be predicted from distributional
semantics, the question can be raised whether language
statistics also allows for temporal relations to be extracted.
In a series of studies, we have previously demonstrated
that perceptual information can be extracted from language
statistics. For instance, geographical locations can be
predicted on the basis of co-occurrences of city names,
following the idea that “cities that are located together, are
mentioned together” (Louwerse & Zwaan, 2009). That is,
Pasadena and Los Angeles are mentioned together more
frequently than Pasadena and Boston, simply because their
geographical locations are close. Conversely, the relative
geographical locations from cities can be extracted on the
basis of distributional semantics. Louwerse and Zwaan
(2009) took the 50 largest cities of the United States and
computed their co-occurrence frequencies in the English
language. The frequency matrix was submitted to a
multidimensional scaling algorithm. The loadings of the city
names on a two-dimensional plane correlated with the
longitude and latitude of the cities. Along the same line,
Louwerse and Benesh (2012) showed that the same
computational linguistic method applied to the city names in
the Lord of the Rings trilogy allows for retrieving the
longitude and latitude of cities in Middle Earth. Finally,
Louwerse, Hutchinson, and Cai (2012) demonstrated that
these findings are not confined to the English language, but
can be replicated using Chinese and Arabic.
Given the similarities between spatial and temporal
representations (Friedman & Brudos, 1988), the question
can be raised whether the computational linguistic technique
used to retrieve the geographical relations between cities
can be used to estimate the temporal relations between
concepts. We conducted a series of computational studies to
determine whether distributional semantics can be used to
predict chronological relations. These computational studies
were followed by an experiment to determine whether
language users might utilize these language statistical cues.

Computational studies
In the computational studies we used first-order and higherorder co-occurrences as dependent variables. For the firstorder co-occurrence frequencies the Web 1T 5-gram corpus
(Brants & Franz, 2006) was used. The corpus consists of
unigrams, bigrams, trigrams, 4- and 5-grams of information
from the Google database. It consists of 1 trillion word
tokens (13,588,391 word types) from 95,119,665,584

sentences. The log frequency was computed for all
combinations of words in a 5-gram window. That is, if the
analysis was conducted for the days of the week, 7 x 7 firstorder co-occurrence frequencies were computed for Monday
Friday, Monday w1 Friday, Monday w1 w2 Friday, and
Monday w1 w2 w3 Friday, whereby w1-w3 is any word in
between the target words.
The higher-order co-occurrence frequencies were
calculated using Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) from the
Touchstone Applied Science Associates (TASA) corpus. To
begin we created a large term X document where if there
were m terms in n paragraphs, a matrix of A = (f ij x G(j) x
L(i,j)) m x n was obtained. A function that represents the
number of times a term i appears in document j is
represented by fij and G(j) is the global weighting for the
document j. L(i; j) is a local weighting of term of the word i
appearing in document j. These weighting functions are
used to reflect knowledge that is beyond the collection of
the documents. As in most LSA studies (Landauer &
Dumais, 1997; Martin & Berry, 2007), the natural log was
used as the local weight and the log entropy was used as the
global weight. We then used Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) to decompose the matrix A into three matrices A =
UΣV’, with one square term x term matrix represented by U,
one square paragraph by paragraph matrix represented by V,
and diagonal one term by paragraph with singular values on
the diagonal being represented by Σ. Removing dimensions
corresponding to smaller singular values and keeping the
dimensions corresponding to larger singular values results
in a low dimensional vector for each word. Although the
new matrices for the words are no longer orthogonal, each
word becomes a weighted vector on a standard 300
dimensions (Landauer & Dumais, 1997). The semantic
relationship between words is then estimated by calculating
the cosine between two vectors. With LSA the semantic
relatedness is not only determined by the relation between
words, but also by the words that accompany a word
(Landauer & Dumais, 1997).

Time words
Days of the week The log frequency of the first-order cooccurrences of the seven days of the week were computed.
The 7 x 7 log frequency matrix was submitted to a
multidimensional scaling analysis. The multidimensional
scaling (MDS) analysis was run using the ALSCAL
algorithm (SPSS 15.0.1 MDS procedure). Default MDS
criteria were used with an S-stress convergence of .001, a
minimum stress value of .005, and a maximum of 30
iterations. The fitting on one dimension was moderate,
Stress = .47, R2 = .42. When the loadings of the days of the
week on one dimension were compared with the actual
ordering of the days of the week, a significant correlation
was obtained, Spearman r = .96, p < .01. By comparison, a
Monte Carlo simulation with 50 randomized orderings
yielded an average correlation of r = .001, p > .05 (SD =
.35), indicating that the results were not obtained by chance.

1429

We also fitted the frequency matrix on a two-dimensional
plane, unsurprisingly resulting in a better fitting, Stress =
.09, R2 = .98. The first dimension correlated with the order
of the days of the week, r = .96, p < .01. The second
dimension divided the days of the week into working days
(Monday to Thursday) and (start of the) weekend days
(Friday to Sunday).
The LSA cosine matrix yielded similar results. The fitting
on one dimension was moderate, Stress = .41, R2 = .79, with
a significant correlation between the loadings of the days of
the week on one dimension and the actual ordering of the
days of the week, Spearman r = .89, p < .01. Fitting on a
two-dimensional plane, Stress = .21, R2 =.88, resulted in the
first dimension correlating with order, Spearman r = .82, p
=.02, with the second dimension again separating Monday
to Thursday from Friday to Sunday.
Months of the year The same first-order co-occurence
analysis was conducted for the 12 months of the year. The
log frequencies of the 12 x 12 combinations of word pairs
were computed and submitted to an MDS. The fitting of the
data was moderate, Stress = .42, R2 = .65. A correlation
between the MDS loadings of the months and their rank
ordering yielded a significant correlation, r = .92, p < .01.
Again, a Monte Carlo simulation with 100 randomized
orderings yielded an average correlation of r = .0002, p >
.05 (SD = .28).
A fitting of the log frequency matrix on a twodimensional plane explained almost all of the variance,
Stress = .09, R2 = .99. The first dimension correlated with
the order, r = .90, p < .01. This was not the case for the
second dimension, r = .04, p > .05. Instead, the second
dimension distinguished the colder months of the year,
October, November, December, January, February, and
March, versus the warmer months of the year, April, May,
June, July, August, and September. Note that the reverse
could be argued for the southern hemisphere, but the lion’s
share of the corpus consists of American English.
The MDS fitting of the 12 x 12 LSA cosine matrix
yielded similar results, Stress =.45, R2 = .98, and a
significant correlation with the actual order of the months, r
= .67, p = .02. A two-dimensional fitting, Stress = .25, R2 =
.93, also yielded a correlation with the order of the months
on the first dimension, r = 62, p = .03. Contrary to the firstorder co-occurrence data, the second dimension separated
May from the other months. The most likely explanation for
this plotting lies in the ambiguity of the month’s name, as a
frequent modal verb.
Years This phenomenon of clustering days of the week and
months of the year was extended to years. The frequencies
of all combinations of 1901-2000 were computed, resulting
in a 100 x 100 matrix of log frequencies, which was again
submitted to an MDS algorithm. Fitting of the data on a
one-dimensional scale was good, Stress = .38, R2= .81. The
loadings significantly correlated with the order, r = .99, p <
.01. A Monte Carlo simulation with 1000 randomized
ordering yielded an average r = .001, p > .05 (SD = .09).

As before, the LSA cosines for the years were also
submitted to an MDS analysis. Three years, 1992, 1996, and
1998 were not present in the TASA corpus on which the
LSA space was trained, leaving a 97 x 97 cosine matrix that
resulted in a one dimensional loading of the 97 years with
Stress = .41, R2 = .67. Correlation with the actual years was
high, r = .90, p < .01.
The correlation between the ‘words’ 1901-2000 and their
chronology might however not indicate a chronology, but
simply a numerical order (cf. Hutchinson & Louwerse,
2013). A two-dimensional MDS solution, however, showed
that 1901-2000 should indeed be interpreted as years (Stress
= .18, R2 = .95). The first of the two-dimensional loadings
correlated with the chronology (or order). The second
dimension clustered the 100 years in what could be seen as
historical periods: 1901-1945, 1946-1985 and 1986-2000,
making these numerical data more likely to be years than
numbers.
These findings show that both the order of time words in
language (through first-order co-occurrences) as well as the
semantic distribution of those words in language (higherorder co-occurrences) allow for extracting chronological
information. The question, however, is whether these
findings for temporal words can be extended to words that
are non-temporal in meaning.

Leaders and presidents
In the first study, we investigated whether the order of the
days of the week, the months of the year, and the years of a
century can be retrieved using first-order and higher-order
co-occurrences. In the second study, we investigated
whether these findings from the first study could be
extended to concepts that are not always temporally explicit,
such as the names of presidents of the United States. Brown
and Siegler (1991), for example, used US presidents to
investigate their temporal organization in memory. They
found that the 39 US presidents were subjectively organized
into three categories: the Founding Fathers (Washington
through John Quincy Adams), non-contemporary presidents
(Jackson through Franklin D. Roosevelt), and post-WWII
presidents (Truman through Reagan). To note, the names
extracted from the large corpus are often not explicitly listed
chronologically. The corpus used here spans a wide array of
sources. These categories were accessed when making
temporal judgments about which of two presented
presidents was in office earlier. They concluded that there
exists some sort of temporal classification in long-term
memory which is accessed in order to make temporal
judgments which also influences learning new president
lists. The question we can try to answer is whether this
temporal classification is encoded in language. We answer
this question using the names of the leaders of the former
Soviet Union, as well as the names of the presidents of the
United States.

1430

Soviet Union leaders The names of the eight leaders of the
Soviet Union – Lenin, Stalin, Malenkov, Khrushchev,
Brezhnev, Andropov, Chernenko, and Gorbachev – were
compared using first-order and higher-order co-occurrences.
The 8 x 8 matrix of log frequencies was submitted to an
MDS analysis, using the same default criteria as in previous
analyses. The fitting was good, Stress = .32, R2 = .91.
Loadings of the eight names correlated with their
chronological order of being in power, r = .74, p = .04.
Next, the LSA cosines were computed for all 8 x 8
combinations. Again, the MDS fitting for these data was
good, Stress =.25, R2 = .94. The loadings of the names
correlated with the chronological order of the Soviet Union
leaders, r = .75, p = .04.
United States Presidents The names of all 44 presidents of
the United States were considered. The current president,
Obama, was not included in the analysis, as the corpus from
which data were derived did not include the name.
Moreover, there are a number of presidents with the same
name: Adams, Bush, Harrison, Johnson, and Roosevelt.
Duplicate names were removed by only using the name that
occurred first in the list (e.g., Roosevelt was considered to
be in the position of Theodore Roosevelt (26th actual
presidency) rather than the position of Franklin D.
Roosevelt (32nd presidency).
As before, we computed the log frequency of the
combinations of president names and submitted this matrix
to an MDS analysis. The fitting was good, Stress = .46
R2 = .67. Loadings of the eight names moderately correlated
with their chronological order, r = .37 p = .02. Next, we
computed the LSA cosines of the 37 x 37 combination of
president names. The MDS analysis showed a good fitting,
Stress = .46, R2 = .56. As with the previous analyses, the
loadings of the names correlated with the chronological
order of the presidents, r = .78, p < .001.
These findings demonstrate that both the names of
Russian leaders as well as the names of United States
presidents can be ordered chronologically, based on firstand higher-order co-occurrences. These findings replicate
the findings for the time words (days of the week, months of
the year, and years). However, even though these findings
allow for the opportunity that language users utilize these
cognitive shortcuts, they do not provide evidence that
language users are sensitive to language statistics of names
when they evaluate president names. This question was
investigated next in a response time experiment.

Experiment
A response time experiment was conducted to determine
whether participants were affected by the language statistics
when presented with two names, including the names of US
presidents in their chronological order or the reverse
chronological order (e.g. Jefferson – Reagan vs. Reagan –
Jefferson).

Methods
Participants Forty University of Memphis undergraduate
students participated in this experiment for course credit. All
were native English speakers.
1. Washington
2. Adams
3. Jefferson
4. Madison
5. Monroe
6. Jackson
7. Van Buren
8. Harrison
9. Tyler
10. Polk
11. Taylor
12. Fillmore
13. Pierce
14. Buchanan

15. Lincoln
16. Johnson
17. Grant
18. Hayes
19. Garfield
20. Arthur
21. Cleveland
22. McKinley
23. Roosevelt
24. Taft
25. Wilson
26. Harding
27. Coolidge
28. Hoover

29. Truman
30. Eisenhower
31. Kennedy
32. Nixon
33. Ford
34. Carter
35. Reagan
36. Bush
37. Clinton

Table 1. Names of the presidents of the United with
duplicates removed.
Materials and Design All 37 non-ambiguous names of
presidents of the United States were used in the experiment.
Each president name was combined with all of the other
president names resulting in a complete paired comparison.
Subjects were instructed to indicate as quickly and
accurately as possible whether both were US presidents. In
50% of the trials this was the case which required a yesresponse. In the remaining 50% of the trials one name of the
pair was a well-known actor. Theses trials served as
distracters that required a no-response. Hence, there was an
even number of targets and distracters. Because of the large
number of possible president-president combinations
including the same amount of president-actor trials, 10 lists
were created. Each list contained 198 different presidentpresident combinations. No matter which critical item list a
participant received, the distracters used were the same.
Each participant performed in two experiments.
President-president and president-actor names were
presented either horizontally (i.e., next to each other) or
vertically (i.e., one above the other). In each experiment, the
critical manipulation of the targets was the temporal order of
the presidents. They were either presented in the correct
temporal order, that is, in the order of their successive
presidencies (chronological condition). Or they were
presented in the reverse direction, where a later president
was presented before/above an earlier president (reverse
chronological condition).
Procedure Participants were seated in front of a computer
screen and were asked to respond as quickly and as
accurately as possible whether the two words were
presidents or not. Names were presented in two
configurations, either one above the other (vertical
condition) or one next to each other (horizontal condition).
The reason we opted for both configurations is to avoid that
the effect of linguistic frequencies of names on response

1431

times could simply be explained by configuration
(Louwerse, 2008). The order of the two configurations was
counterbalanced between participants. Each participant
randomly received one of the 10 lists. Targets and
distracters were presented in a randomized order.

Results
The log frequency of the president names was computed
using the first-order co-occurrence technique in the
computational studies above.
Erroneous responses were identified as those responses
where subjects answered having seen president names,
while actor names were (also) included, or answered having
not seen president names while those names were presented.
These erroneous responses were excluded from the analyses
of reaction times. Response times (RTs) that were greater
than +2 SD or less than –2 SD from each participant’s
condition mean were considered outliers and were removed
from the analysis.
A mixed effects model was used on the response times,
with the log frequency of president name pairs as the fixed
factor and subjects and items as random factor. Analyses
were conducted for the two configurations (horizontal and
vertical) separately.
As we have found in other studies (e.g., Hutchinson &
Louwerse, 2014; Louwerse, 2008) log frequency of the two
word combinations significantly predicted RTs in both the
horizontal and vertical presentation of the president names,
F(1, 488.61) = 30.04, p < .001 and F(1, 528.72) = 26.94, p <
.001 respectively.
These findings indicate that in making judgments about
individuals, linguistic frequency of the combinations of
names affects those judgements. Moreover, given that the
chronological order of presidents can be derived from
linguistic frequencies, it is feasible that language users
utilize these linguistic cues in their chronological estimates.

General Discussion
In this paper we have added to previous findings that
support predictability based on linguistic frequency.
Specifically, the findings presented here demonstrated that
temporal relations are encoded in language. That is, on the
basis of the language statistics the chronology of the days of
the week, months of the year, years of a century, as well as
the language statistics of names of country leaders can be
extracted. Moreover, language users are sensitive to these
linguistic frequencies, as we have shown in a response time
experiments in which participants evaluated the names of
presidents of the United States.
The fact that language encodes time is not surprising, as
language contains many temporal markers that help us to
order events (Louwerse, 2001). However, the fact that
temporal relations can be extracted from distributional
semantics (i.e., first- and higher-order co-occurrences) is
less obvious. However, perhaps that finding is not very
surprising either, given the evidence that geographical
information, social relations, valence, modalities, and

perceptual relations can be estimated using language
statistics. Prelinguistic conceptual knowledge used when
speakers formulate utterances gets translated into linguistic
conceptualizations, so that as a function of language use,
embodied relations are encoded in language (Louwerse,
2008).
It could be possible that the participants in the experiment
knew the exact order of the U.S. presidents and that heavily
influenced their responses. While unlikely, this is not
necessarily the important factor as we have previously
shown that people were more able to accurately locate cities
in Middle Earth (in The Lord of the Rings Trilogy) when
they read the text, rather than studied a map or watched the
film (Louwerse & Benesh, 2012). More importantly, the
results found were independent of whether or not the
participant was familiar with the films.
This is the central idea behind the Symbol
Interdependency Hypothesis (Louwerse, 2011): language
encodes perceptual information, so that language users can
utilize the language statistics cues in their cognitive
processing. With very limited symbol grounding, meaning
can thus be bootstrapped through distributional semantics.
According to the Symbol Interdependency Hypothesis,
whether language users rely more on language statistics or
perceptual factors in conceptual processing, depends on a
variety of factors, including the nature of the stimulus and
the cognitive task, individual differences, and the time
course of processing.
Language has evolved to become a communicative
shortcut for language users, so that with limited grounding
they can bootstrap meaning. The data presented here
suggests that approximately 60% of the temporal relations
could be retrieved through language statistics. Whether
language users in fact rely on language statistics in making
estimates about chronology may not yet be clear, however,
the computational studies demonstrate they can, and the
experiment reported here shows that they are at least
sensitive to these patterns.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Benor, S. B., & Levy, R. (2006). The chicken or the egg? A
probabilistic analysis of English binomials. Language,
82, 233-278.
Brants, T., & Franz, A. (2006). Web 1T 5-gram Version 1.
Philadelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Cooper, W. E., & Ross, J. R. (1975). World order. In R. E.
Grossman, L. J. San, & T. J. Vance (Eds.), Papers from
the parasession on functionalism (pp. 63-111). Chicago:
Chicago Linguistic Society.
Freyd, J. J. (1992). Dynamic representations guiding
adaptive behavior. In F. Macar, V. Pouthas, & W. J.
Friedman (Eds.), Time, action, and cognition: Towards
bridging the gap (pp. 309-323). Dordrecht: Kluwer.

1432

Friedman, W. & Brudos, S.L. (1988). On routes and
routines: The early development of spatial and temporal
representations, Cognitive Development, 3, 167-182.
Hudson, J. A., & Nelson, K. (1986). Repeated encounters of
a similar kind: Effects of familiarity on children’s
autobiographical memory. Cognitive Development, 1,
253-271.
Hutchinson, S., & Louwerse, M. M. (2014). Language
statistics explains spatial-numerical association of
response codes. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21,
470-478.
Landauer, T., & Dumais, S. (1997). A solution to Plato’s
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Louwerse, M.M. (2001). An analytic and cognitive
parameterization of coherence relations. Cognitive
Linguistics, 12, 291–315.
Louwerse, M. M. (2008). Embodied relations are encoded in
language. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 838–844.
Louwerse, M. M. (2011). Symbol interdependency in
symbolic and embodied cognition. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3, 273–302.
Louwerse, M. M., & Benesh, N. (2012). Representing
structure through maps and language: Lord of the Rings
encodes the spatial structure of Middle Earth. Cognitive
Science, 36, 1556-1569.
Louwerse, M. M., & Zwaan, R. A. (2009). Language
encodes geographical information. Cognitive Science,
33, 51-73.
Louwerse, M. M., Hutchinson, S., & Cai, Z. (2012). The
Chinese route argument: Predicting the longitude and
latitude of cities in China and the Middle East using
statistical linguistic frequencies. In N. Miyake, D.,
Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
695-700). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Martin, D., & Berry, M. (2007). Mathematical foundations
behind latent semantic analysis. In T. Landauer, D.
McNamara, S. Dennis, W. Kintsch (Eds.), Handbook of
Latent Semantic Analysis (35-55). Mahwah, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Gruendel, J. (1986). Event knowledge: Structure and
function in development. K. Nelson (Ed.). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Raisig, S., Hagendorf, H., & Van der Meer, E. (2012). The
role of temporal properties on the detection of temporal
violations: insights from pupillometry.Cognitive
processing, 13(1), 83-91.
Raisig, S., Welke, T., Hagendorf, H., van der Meer, E.
(2009). Insights into knowledge representation: The
influence of amodal and perceptual variables on event
knowledge retrieval from memory. Cognitive Science,
33, 1252-1266.
Raisig, S., Welke, T., Hagendorf, H., & van der Meer, E.
(2010). I spy with my little eye: detection of temporal
violations in event sequences and the pupillary

1433

response. International
Psychophysiology, 76, 1-8.

Journal

of

