Time Course of Metaphor Comprehension in the Visual World
Seana Coulson (scoulson@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science (0515), 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Tristan Davenport (trdavenp@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Pia Knoeferle (knoeferl@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Cognitive Interaction Technology (CITEC), Room 2.036
D-33615 Bielefeld GERMANY

Sarah Creel (screel@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science (0515), 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Abstract

Existing studies, however, have provided little support for
this position. In a classic study, Glucksberg and colleagues
found that it took people longer to judge that metaphoric
statements such as Some jobs are jails were literally false
than to reject scrambled metaphors such as Some jails are
jobs, as if they were obligatorily accessing the sensible
metaphoric interpretation before the literal interpretation
required by the task (Glucksberg, Gildea, & Bookin, 1982).
Reading time studies have further revealed that, at least
when metaphors occurred in appropriate contexts, they were
read as fast as literal expressions (e.g., Gibbs, et al., 1997;
see also Frisson & Pickering, 1999 for related evidence on
metonymy), a finding that further undermines literal first
models of metaphor comprehension.

To investigate the real time processing of metaphoric
adjectives, we measured participants looking behavior as they
listened to sentences such as The little boy was shocked as a
result of the [electrical socket/report card] in the context of a
display with four images. Displays included two Unrelated
pictures, a Literal picture consistent with the literal
interpretation of the adjective (an electrical socket), and a
Metaphor picture consistent with the metaphorical
interpretation (a report card). Sentences were divided into
those with a preferred literal versus metaphorical reading of
the adjective based on a norming study involving sentence
fragments without the disambiguating information. Although
conducted with different participants, those preferences were
predictive of looking behavior during the eye tracking study.
During the 1s interval before the onset of the disambiguating
word, participants were more likely to fixate the image
consistent with the preferred interpretation of the adjective
than the unrelated pictures. That is, they were more likely to
fixate the Literal picture in Literal biased sentences, and the
Metaphor picture in Metaphor biased sentences. After the
disambiguating information, participants showed an increased
probability to fixate the actual target item, regardless of the
preferred reading of the adjective. Results argue against
models of metaphor comprehension that posit parallel
activation of literal and metaphoric meaning.

Parallel Activation
Another prominent approach to metaphor comprehension is
motivated by work in cognitive linguistics that suggests
metaphoric meanings arise via analogical extension from
literal ones (Coulson & Oakley, 2005; Lakoff & Johnson,
1999). Such approaches suggest the activation of concepts
from the source domain related to the literal meaning play a
key role in establishing the meaning of a metaphor (see,
e.g., Coulson & Matlock, 2001). Although not processing
models, these approaches imply that aspects of both a given
word’s literal and metaphorical meanings might be activated
in parallel in the course of real time language processing.
A popular alternative, the Career of Metaphor, proposes
that the analogical computation of metaphoric meaning
posited by cognitive linguists occurs exclusively for novel
metaphors; whereas the meanings of conventional
metaphors involve a categorization process (Gentner &
Bowdle, 2002). As most metaphoric language is highly
conventional (Steen, 2008), one might expect the
comprehension of metaphor to be affected by factors known

Keywords: eye tracking, figurative language, language
comprehension, metaphor, nonliteral meaning, visual world
paradigm

Introduction
A central question in research on metaphor comprehension
is whether and when literal meanings are activated in the
course of understanding metaphors. One long-standing view
is that metaphor comprehension differs fundamentally from
the processing of literal language, and that the computation
of a metaphoric interpretation occurs only after accessing
the literal meaning, and rejecting it (e.g., Grice, 1976).

465

to operate more generally in language comprehension, such
as meaning frequencies and contextual biases (e.g.,
MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994). This
prediction is tested in the present study.

sentences were divided into those that had a preferred literal
reading of the adjective, and those that had a preferred
metaphorical reading.

Methods

Metaphor Comprehension in the Visual World
Participants
While most existing studies have examined how metaphors
are processed in linguistic contexts, comparatively little is
known about metaphor processing in relevant visual
contexts, and how metaphor comprehension interacts with
visual processes. A notable exception is an eye-tracking
study by Richardson and Matlock (2007). In this study,
participants inspected scenes showing paths (roads, rivers,
and pipelines) while they listened to sentences involving
fictive motion (e.g., The road goes through the desert) or
literal controls (e.g., The road is in the desert). They found
that with fictive motion sentences, participants spent more
time inspecting the path in the image relative to control
sentences. Inspection time and eye movements on the path
increased even more when the terrain was first described as
difficult relative to when it was described as easy to
traverse. Richardson and Matlock (2007) interpreted this
finding as evidence for the view that figurative language
“can have an immediate effect on how we look at the world”
(2007, p. 136), because figurative language activates spatial
representations while the corresponding literal descriptions
do not.
The study by Richardson and Matlock (2007) made a first
important step in examining the interaction of visual
processes and figurative language. However, the measures
that Richardson and Matlock (2007) reported (total looking
time and total number of eye movements to a scene region
over the entire sentence) were non-incremental, thus leaving
open questions with respect to the time course of figurative
language processing. Crucially, their study did not address
whether literal or metaphoric meanings are accessed first, or
whether both of these meanings are accessed in parallel.
Moreover, extant work on whether literal and metaphoric
meanings are processed serially or in parallel has focused
almost exclusively on nouns. The present study will address
the activation of literal versus metaphoric meanings of
adjectives in sentences using the visual world paradigm
(monitoring a listener’s eye movements as s/he listens to
sentences that describe part of a visual scene, as in Altmann
& Kamide, 1999; Tanenhaus et al., 1995). This method
allows us to analyze eye movements time-locked to
individual words in a spoken sentence, thus providing a
window into the word-by-word processing of nonliteral
language in visual contexts.
Experimental sentences thus involved polysemous
adjectives with both literal and metaphorical readings, and
the activation of the different meanings was indexed by the
likelihood that participants fixated images compatible with
each of the meanings of the critical word. Moreover, to
determine the extent to which contextual factors modulate
the activation of literal versus metaphorical meanings,

Participants were 38 UC San Diego undergraduates who
received experiment participation credit for a cognitive
science, linguistics, or psychology course.

Materials
Experimental sentences were developed from 24 sentence
templates, each with 4 variations to produce a total of 96
sentences. Experimental items described an agent (e.g. “the
little boy”) with one of three types of adjectives, an
ambiguous adjective (e.g. “shocked”), compatible both with
a literal and a metaphoric reading, an unambiguous literal
adjective (e.g. “electrocuted”), and an unambiguous abstract
adjective related to the metaphoric interpretation (e.g.,
“surprised”). Critical sentences each concluded with a noun
phrase implying either the literal, concrete meaning of the
adjective (“as a result of the electrical socket,”) or the
abstract, metaphoric meaning (“as a result of the report
card,”). See table 1 for an example.
Four stimulus lists were constructed, each containing 24
experimental sentences (6 in each of the 4 conditions), so
that no individual participant heard more than one variant of
each experimental item. Each list also contained 48 filler
sentences. Filler items were more diverse, and contained a
variety of simple syntactic constructions (e.g. “The judge
had a powder-white wig,”).
Experimental sentences were each presented with 4 clip
art images, 2 targets, one designed to be congruent with
both the ambiguous literal and unambiguous literal
sentences, and one designed to be congruent with both the
ambiguous metaphor and unambiguous metaphor sentences,
along with 2 distractor images. Distractor images were taken
as a pair from a different target item, and thus involved one
image that was congruent with the literal reading of its
actual target, and one with the metaphoric reading. Each
image was thus presented twice, once as a target, and once
as a distractor. Further, while the literal and metaphor
images always appeared together as a pair of target items
and as a pair of distractor items, all four items appeared
together only once.
Table 1. Sample Quartet of Experimental Items.
Ambig.
Literal
Ambig.
Metaphor

466

The
little
boy
was
The
little
boy
was

shocked

as a
result
of the

electrical
socket.

shocked

as a
result
of the

report card.

huge because of the--”), and asked to finish the sentence
with the first sensible completion that came to mind.
Responses were subsequently coded as involving either a
literal or a metaphorical reading of the adjective. A median
split of items divided the ambiguous adjectives into those
deemed Literal Biased (77% of responses presumed a literal
interpretation; SD=26%) versus those deemed Metaphor
Biased (15% of responses presumed a literal interpretation;
SD=15%). The preferred reading may depend on the
relative frequencies of literal versus metaphorical meanings
of the adjectives in the language, and/or linguistic and extralinguistic knowledge regarding the combination of the
subject noun phrase and the critical word.

Unambig.
Literal

The
electrocuted
as a
electrical
little
result
socket
boy
of the
was
Unambig.
The
surprised
as a
report card.
Metaphor
little
result
boy
of the
was
Figure 1a, for example, shows the target image for the
Ambiguous and Unambiguous Literal sentences in Table 1
(“The little boy was shocked/electrocuted as a result of the
electrical socket,”), while Figure 1b shows the target image
for the Ambiguous and Unambiguous metaphor versions
(“The little boy was shocked/surprised as a result of the
report card,”). The relationship between sentences and the
visual images often required the listener to make inferential
connections, and this was the case for both literal and
metaphoric images.

Procedure
Participants were instructed to listen carefully to the
utterances, as there would be a memory test at the end of the
study. Other than listening to and looking at the stimuli, and
the memory test at the end, there was no task.
Participants’ eye movements were monitored using an
Eyelink table-mounted eye tracker, sampling at 500 Hz.
Images were presented on a 19-inch LCD flat screen
monitor at a resolution of 1280 x 1024 pixels while spoken
sentences were presented through a pair of headphones
worn by the participants. For each trial, the images appeared
1,000ms before sentence onset. Viewing was binocular, but
only one eye was tracked. Although head position was not
physically restricted, participants were encouraged to
minimize movements of the head.

Analysis
Analysis involved repeated measures ANOVAs on
empirical log odds of fixations in the one-second time
period prior to the onset of the disambiguating word (plus a
200-ms positive offset to allow time to plan and execute an
eye movement; see, e.g., Salverda, Kleinschmidt, and
Tanenhaus, 2014), that is, from -800 ms to +200 ms. Factors
were Picture Category (target, competitor, average of
unrelated pictures) x Preferred Reading (Literal, Metaphor)
x Sentence Completion (completed as literal, completed as
metaphorical). For Picture Category, we use “target” to refer
to the picture that is favored by the eventual sentence
completion, while “competitor” is the picture related to the
alternate interpretation. Thus, a literal target will have a
metaphorical competitor, and vice versa. For simplicity,
unambiguous control trials are not discussed in the
following analyses.

Figure 1a. Literal Target Picture

Figure 1b. Metaphor Target Picture

Results and Discussion

Literal versus Metaphor Biases in Materials

Before the Disambiguating Nouns

To determine whether the critical words were biased toward
either one or the other of the relevant interpretations, a
norming study was conducted with 48 new participants
drawn from the same pool as the main experiment. These
participants were given the initial sentence frame, ending
before the disambiguating phrase, (e.g., “The actress was

Initial analysis of the first interval revealed a significant
effect of Picture Category (F(2,74) = 9.04, p = .0003),
attributable to overall greater looks to targets (t(37) = 3.45,
p = .001) and competitor pictures (t(37) = 4.58, p < .0001)

467

than to unrelated pictures. However, looks to targets and
competitors did not differ from each other, as one might
expect if listeners entertain both the literal and the
metaphorical interpretations of the ambiguous adjectives.
However, the main effect of Picture Category was qualified
by a significant 3-way interaction with Preferred Reading
and Sentence Completion (F(2,74) = 7.54, p = .001). No
other effects or interactions reached significance.
To assess the nature of the three-way interaction, the
effects of Preferred Reading and Sentence Completion were
analyzed for each Picture Category. There were no
significant effects for unrelated pictures. By contrast,
competitor looks showed a Preferred Reading x Sentence
Completion effect (F(1,37) = 4.31, p = .04), as did target
looks (F(1,37) = 10.72, p = .002).
For competitor pictures, the interaction between Preferred
Reading and Sentence Completion resulted because there
were more looks to the metaphorical competitor on literal
trials when the adjectives’ preferred reading was
metaphorical than to the literal competitor on metaphorical
trials (t(37) = 3.09, p = .004), with a non-significant
tendency in the opposite direction for trials with a literal
preferred reading. The story was much the same for targets:
when the preferred reading was metaphorical, there were
more looks to metaphorical targets than to literal targets
(t(37) = 2.70, p = .01), but when the preferred reading was
literal, there were more looks to literal targets than to
metaphorical targets (t(37) = 2.55, p = .015).
The interaction can be seen more readily in Figure 2,
which shows the difference between the proportion of looks
to the target and looks to the competitor for each of the four
kinds of ambiguous items during the 1s interval
immediately preceding the onset of the disambiguating
information. Positive values on the difference scores
represent more looks to the target, while negative values
represent more looks to the competitor. The reliable
interaction between Preferred Reading and Sentence
Completion results because of a strong preference for the
metaphor pictures in the metaphor biased sentences, and a
somewhat weaker preference for the literal pictures in the
literal biased sentences.

These analyses of the interaction term suggest a slightly
different story than that of the simple, balanced competition
posited on a parallel activation account. Specifically, there
are strong effects of preferred reading, such that listeners
tend to fixate the literal target for literal preferred readings,
and the metaphorical target for metaphorical preferred
readings. They then appear to switch readings if the
disambiguating noun indicates the dispreferred alternative is
correct.

After the Disambiguating Nouns
Given that listeners did not make overt responses, it was
important to verify that they did eventually converge on the
intended interpretation of each sentence. Accordingly, we
conducted another ANOVA on empirical log odds of
fixations to pictures in the 1-second interval following the
onset of the disambiguating word. The ANOVA had the
same factors as above. Here, Picture was again significant
(F(2,74) = 136.6, p < .0001). Competitor looks again
outpaced unrelated looks (t(37) = 2.17, p = .03), and target
looks outpaced both overall (unrelated: t(37) = 12.37, p <
.0001; competitors; t(37) = 11.96, p < .0001). Greater target
than competitor looks implies that listeners were robustly
fixating intended target pictures after hearing the
disambiguating phrase.
However, as in the interval preceding the onset of the
disambiguating information, the main effect of Picture
Category was qualified by a significant three-way
interaction with Preferred Reading and Sentence
Completion (F(2,74) = 7.54, p = .001). Thus we cannot
conclude that targets necessarily outpaced competitors in all
four cells of Preferred Reading x Sentence Completion.
To assess this, we compared target looks and competitor
looks in each cell, finding substantially greater target looks
in all of them (preferred literal, literal completion: t(37) =
8.21, p < .0001; preferred literal, metaphoric completion:
t(37) = 5.31, p < .0001; preferred metaphoric, literal
completion: t(37) = 8.04, p < .0001; preferred metaphoric,
metaphoric completion: t(37) = 9.78, p < .0001). This
indicates that, in all conditions, listeners resolved the literal
or metaphorical interpretations as intended.

Figure 2.

Time Course of Adjective Interpretation
Figure 3 shows the proportion of looks to each of the
picture types as participants listened to sentences with a
preferred literal reading of the adjective. Time is aligned to
the onset of the disambiguating word, so that the graph
spans from 2 seconds before that point until 2 seconds after.
The top panel shows that for the literal biased items (“The
young woman was feeling sore”), looks to the literal target
pictures (e.g., woman climbing on a cliff) exceed looks to
the unrelated items before the onset of the disambiguating
information “climb” (upper left panel). Interestingly, looks
to the unbiased metaphorical competitor pictures (red line in
the upper left panel) also exceed looks to the unrelated
items, suggesting brief competition between the two
interpretations. After the disambiguating noun, looks to the

468

target rapidly increase, and looks to the competitor drop to
baseline.
The lower panel of Figure 3 shows looking behavior in
literal biased items that ended with a metaphorical
interpretation of the adjective. Here looks to the literal
competitor pictures (e.g., woman climbing on a cliff)
exceeded looks to the unrelated items before the onset of the
disambiguating information (“argument”), and dropped off
shortly thereafter. Likewise, looks to the unbiased
metaphorical targets (e.g., a couple arguing) did not exceed
looks to the unrelated targets until after the onset of the
disambiguating noun (“argument”).

The%young%woman%%
0.8"
%%%%%%was%feeling%sore%shortly%a=er%the%climb%
0.7"
target"
Looks%to%pictures%

0.6"
0.5"

time 0), and increased rapidly thereafter. In the case of the
metaphor biased items, participants initially adopted the
preferred interpretation of the ambiguous adjective, and
abandoned it only after they encountered inconsistent
information.

Looks%to%pictures%

The%lawyer%was%stunned%because%of%the%bea5ng%
0.8"
%
target"
0.7"
compe6tor"
unrelated"
0.6"

0.4"
0.3"

0.1"
0"
,2000"

compe6tor"
unrelated"

,1000"
0"
1000"
2000"
Time%aligned%to%disambigua5ng%word%onset%(ms)%

The%lawyer%was%stunned%because%of%the%verdict%
0.8"
0.7"

0.3"

0.6"
Looks%to%pictures%

0.2"
0.1"
,1000"
0"
1000"
2000"
Time%aligned%to%disambigua5ng%word%onset%(ms)%

The%young%woman%%
0.8"
%%%%%%was%feeling%sore%shortly%a=er%the%argument%
0.7"
target"
compe6tor"
0.6"
unrelated"
0.5"

Looks%to%pictures%

0.5"

0.2"

Literal%bias,%
literal%end%

0.4"

0"
,2000"

Metaphor%bias,%
literal%end%

target"
compe6tor"
unrelated"

Metaphor%bias,%
metaphor%end%

0.5"
0.4"
0.3"
0.2"

Literal%bias,%
metaphor%end%

0.1"
0"
,2000"

,1000"
0"
1000"
2000"
Time%aligned%to%disambigua5ng%word%onset%(ms)%

Figure 4.

0.4"

Overall, these data provide very little support for parallel
activation of literal and metaphorical interpretations of these
adjectives (with the exception of the literal bias, literal
ending items). Rather, participants initially adopt the
contextually biased interpretation, and shift to the dispreferred interpretation only after the advent of
disambiguating information.

0.3"
0.2"
0.1"
0"
,2000"

,1000"
0"
1000"
2000"
Time%aligned%to%disambigua5ng%word%onset%(ms)%

Figure 3.
Figure 4 shows looks to pictures as participants listened to
metaphor biased items, such as “The lawyer was stunned,”
with dispreferred targets in the top panel, and preferred
targets in the bottom panel. When the sentence ended with
the dispreferred literal interpretation (upper panel),
participants initially look at the metaphor competitor (a
judge’s gavel), and looks to the target picture (a bald man
wielding a stick) began to increase only after the onset of
the disambiguating information (“beating”). When the
sentence ended with the preferred metaphorical
interpretation, looks to the metaphorical target pictures (e.g.,
a judge’s gavel) exceed looks to unrelated items well before
the onset of the disambiguating information (“verdict” at

Models of Metaphor Comprehension
Below we briefly consider the degree of fit between data
from the present study and prominent models of metaphor
comprehension.
Literal First Models The present study provides little
support for Gricean models of metaphor comprehension in
which listeners initially retrieve the literal interpretation of
words, computing metaphoric interpretations only when
literal ones are found to be anomalous. While our
participants did show an early preference for the literal
interpretation of adjectives appearing in our literal biased
sentence contexts, their looking behavior during the
metaphor biased items suggested the metaphoric

469

References

interpretations were initially adopted, with no evidence that
participants ever activated the literal interpretation of
adjectives. Results of the present study are thus in keeping
with a large body of literature undermining these models
(see Gibbs, 1994 for a review).
Parallel Activation Models of metaphor comprehension
inspired by research in cognitive linguistics suggest that
literal meanings play a functional role in the interpretation
of metaphors, and thus predict that listeners should activate
both readings – at least briefly. As noted above, the present
study suggests participants commit to the preferred
interpretation relatively early, and show little evidence for
the activation of the dispreferred alternative until after the
onset of disambiguating information.
Graded Salience Given that we found evidence that
listeners commit to a single particular interpretation,
findings reported here are somewhat compatible with
versions of the graded salience model (GSM) that
incorporate a separate non-modular context-sensitive
mechanism (Giora, 2003). One wrinkle is that the GSM is
committed to the proposal that context-driven facilitation of
less salient meanings (as in the metaphors) cannot be done
at a cost to the access of salient (viz. literal) meanings, so
that our failure to find evidence for the activation of literal
meanings in metaphor biased contexts is difficult to
accommodate on this model.
Constraint Satisfaction Models Results of the present
study can be accommodated quite well by models
suggesting the computation of conventionalized metaphoric
meanings is subject to the same sorts of contextual factors
that impact the interpretation of literal meanings (e.g., Katz
& Ferretti, 2001; MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg,
1994). In constraint satisfaction models, different sources of
information (e.g., syntactic, lexical, conceptual) compete for
activation in parallel over time, and constraints interact to
provide probabilistic evidence for various potential
interpretations. Such models depend crucially on the
strength of the constraints, and consequently can account for
data that involve competition between multiple meanings as
well as data, like those reported here, in which some
potential interpretations are not activated at all. Observed
evidence for the early activation of preferred interpretations
is especially compatible with ‘maximally incremental’
models that employ predictive coding, continuously
combining linguistic and non-linguistic information in the
dynamic computation of meaning (e.g., Altmann &
Mirkovic, 2009).
Conclusion In summary, we show that listeners look at
images compatible with the contextually biased
interpretation of ambiguous adjectives, irrespective of
whether the preferred reading is literal or metaphorical,
contra metaphor comprehension models that posit the
obligatory activation of literal meanings.

Altmann, G. T., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73(3), 247-264.
Altmann, G., & Mirković, J. (2009). Incrementality and
prediction in human sentence processing. Cognitive Science,
33(4), 583-609.
Coulson, S., & Matlock, T. (2001). Metaphor and the space
structuring model. Metaphor and Symbol, 16(3-4), 295316.
Coulson, S., & Oakley, T. (2005). Blending and coded
meaning: Literal and figurative meaning in cognitive
semantics. Journal of Pragmatics, 37(10), 1510-1536.
Frisson & Pickering, 1999 Frisson, S., & Pickering, M. J.
(1999). The processing of metonymy: evidence from eye
movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(6), 1366.
Gibbs, R. W. (1994). The poetics of mind: Figurative
thought, language, and understanding. Cambridge
University Press.
Gibbs, R. W., Bogdanovich, J. M., Sykes, J. R., & Barr, D.
J. (1997). Metaphor in idiom comprehension. Journal of
memory and language, 37(2), 141-154.
Giora, R. (2003). On our mind: Salience, context and
figurative language. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Glucksberg, S., Gildea, P., & Bookin, H. B. (1982). On
understanding nonliteral speech: Can people ignore
metaphors?. Journal of verbal learning and verbal
behavior, 21(1), 85-98.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and Conversation'in P. Cole and
J. Morgan (eds.) Syntax and Semantics Volume 3: Speech
Acts.
Katz, A. N., & Ferretti, T. R. (2001). Moment-by-moment
reading of proverbs in literal and nonliteral contexts.
Metaphor and Symbol, 16(3-4), 193-221.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.
Basic books.
MacDonald Pearlmutter & Seidenberg (1994) MacDonald,
M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1994).
The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution.
Psychological review, 101(4), 676.
Richardson, D., & Matlock, T. (2007). The integration of
figurative language and static depictions: An eye
movement study of fictive motion. Cognition, 102(1),
129-138.
Salverda, A. P., Kleinschmidt, D., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(2014). Immediate effects of anticipatory coarticulation in
spoken-word recognition. Journal of memory and
language, 71(1), 145-163.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268(5217), 1632-1634.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Teresa Patty, William Ni, and Rachel Bristol for
help with data collection.

470

