Using a Task-Filled Delay During Discrimination Trials to Examine Different
Components of Learned Visual Categorical Perception
Joshua R. de Leeuw (jodeleeu@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Program in Cognitive Science
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN

Jan Andrews (andrewsj@vassar.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science
Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY
Abstract

category-irrelevant dimensions, regardless of whether or not
the stimuli are in different categories. Some researchers
apply the term “learned CP” only to the boundary specific
effects known as compression (reduced sensitivity to
differences among within-category stimuli) and expansion
(enhanced sensitivity to differences among betweencategory stimuli) (e.g., Folstein, Palmeri, & Gauthier, 2014).
Dimensional sensitivity changes that are not restricted to
the category boundary are often referred to as acquired
equivalence (reduced sensitivity to a category-irrelevant
dimension) and acquired distinctiveness (enhanced
sensitivity to a category-relevant dimension). In what
follows, we will take the term “learned CP” to include all of
these.
An important issue in learned CP research is the locus of
the learning effect: is it a perceptual effect – do people
actually see stimuli in different ways after learning to
categorize? – or is the effect post-perceptual? There is
mixed evidence as to whether CP is perceptual. We believe
the multifaceted nature of learned CP is complicating efforts
to understand the mechanism(s) underlying the
phenomenon. Part of the apparent controversy may simply
be that different studies of CP are isolating different kinds
of learning, such as boundary effects vs. dimension-wide
effects, which may differ in the level at which they occur.
For example, Goldstone and Hendrickson (2009) argue
that effects occur at multiple levels based on evidence from
studies using vastly different methodologies. For example,
studies of speakers of languages with distinct color terms
such as “blue” and “green” show faster discrimination of
boundary-straddling stimuli than speakers of languages that
lack distinct terms, but the fact that these effects appear to
be strongest when stimuli are presented to the right visual
field/left hemisphere and are disrupted by verbal
interference suggests that the effects are not deeply
perceptual. On the other hand, evidence that objects in the
same category are judged to be more similar not only to
each other but also to a neutral, non-categorized object
suggests a representational change that is not label-based
(Goldstone et al., 2001). In addition, Notman, Sowden, and
Özgen (2005) showed that a strong expansion effect
observed for participants who learned to categorize oriented
line gratings did not transfer to stimuli of varying
orientations, suggesting that the learned CP effect occurred

The evidence concerning the level at which learned CP
effects occur is complex. The goal of this study was to use
a different approach to this question by manipulating the
abstractness of the information available for distinguishing
pairs of items in an XAB task, and the presence or absence
of a short task-filled delay between X and AB. Participants
engaged in XAB trials containing a mixture of trials with
and without the delay task before and after standard training
to classify visual texture stimuli into two categories.
Training improved discrimination of pairs differing on the
category-relevant dimension whether within- or betweencategory, but not on pairs differing only on non-category
relevant low level features. In addition, only successful
learners in the post-training trials avoided decreased
discrimination accuracy due to the delay task, suggesting
that they formed more stable representations. However, this
effect was not limited to pairs varying in category-relevant
ways.
Keywords:
Categorization;
categorical
perception;
compression; expansion; learning; discrimination; bottom-up;
top-down; dimensions; interference.

Introduction
Learning to place objects into novel categories affects the
way those objects are judged and how well they can be
discriminated from one another. These so-called learned
categorical perception (CP) effects are well established
(e.g., Goldstone, 1994; Livingston, Andrews, & Harnad,
1998), but there are several major unresolved issues
concerning their fundamental nature. For example, learned
CP effects always involve better sensitivity to variations in
items that are from different categories than variations in
items that are from the same category. However, there are
several distinct patterns of learning that result in the relative
advantage for between-category pairs. The changes in
sensitivity could be localized to the boundary between
categories, resulting in heightened sensitivity to variations
that cross a category boundary or decreased sensitivity to
variations that do not cross a boundary. Or the changes
could be at the level of perceptual dimensions, with
increased sensitivity to any changes along category-relevant
dimensions and/or decreased sensitivity to changes along

536

Figure 1: Example stimuli. The proportion of each microfeature is shown below the stimulus. The relative proportion of
microfeature 3 to microfeature 4 (the category relevant dimension) increases from left to right. The two leftmost stimuli were
categorized as being created by Jennifer, while the rightmost stimuli were created by Nancy.

relatively early in visual processing. Yet Roberson, Hanley,
and Pak (2008) found no evidence of greater sensitivity in
terms of absolute discrimination thresholds for JNDs at
color category boundaries for groups demonstrating
category boundary CP effects.
This issue has been framed in a variety of ways: auditory
vs. phonetic (category-based) processing in speech CP (e.g.,
Gerrits & Schouten, 2004), visual vs. verbal/categorical
codes in color CP (e.g., Hu, Hanley, Zhang, Liu, &
Roberson, 2014), strategic judgment bias vs. altered object
description (Goldstone, Lippa, & Shiffrin, 2001), bottom-up
vs. top-down effects of category knowledge, and so on. As
suggested above, a great deal of empirical evidence can be
found to support both sides of this opposition, but it is rarely
definitive for a number of different reasons. For example, if
top-down effects are extremely rapid, they may be very
difficult to distinguish behaviorally at least from bottom-up
effects, and if both types of process are occurring
simultaneously, they may be difficult to disentangle.
Effects found with known categories may not occur in the
process of learning new ones.
It seems likely that one variable of importance in
producing learned CP at different levels is the type of
stimulus variation that occurs. This study represents a
preliminary attempt to clarify the role of different types of
information in learned CP by distinguishing among different
levels of variation within the stimuli themselves and
measuring how sensitivity to these kinds of variations
changes as a result of category learning. At least three
levels can be identified: low-level (essentially random)
details completely unrelated to category membership;
abstracted perceptual dimensions that may or may not be
related to category membership; and category membership
itself. These form a hierarchy of abstractness, with each
level incorporating the one(s) below it; for example, items
differing in category membership will also differ both
dimensionally and in their randomly varying low-level
details. The low-level details depend most heavily on
bottom-up processing and category labels are most clearly a
top-down information source, while abstracted perceptual
dimensions fall somewhere in between. Changes at the

levels of perceptual dimensions and category membership
could produce learned CP, but the underlying mechanism of
learning might look different in each case. Learning based
solely on category membership might produce categoryboundary-specific effects, while changes in the salience of a
perceptual dimension would result in an acquired
distinctiveness effect. Our stimulus set allows both kinds of
learning to take place. Whether both kinds of learning
actually happen is an empirical question.
To further bolster the ability of the experiment to
distinguish between different components of learned CP, we
sometimes use a task-filled delay during the discrimination
task used to test for effects of category learning. The
rationale for this is that the delay manipulation should
interfere most with remembering bottom-up information and
least with remembering category-level variation. If learned
CP is the result of acquiring strictly category-level
information, then the delay should not affect trials where
category-level information varies, but should affect other
trials. If learned CP involves changes in perceptual
representations of the stimuli, performance after training on
trials with category-relevant feature variation should be less
sensitive to the delay. An early demonstration of this sort
was provided by Pisoni (1973), who showed that withincategory vowel discrimination accuracy was inversely
related to the length of a delay of up to 2 seconds, while
between-category accuracy was unaffected, because the
former relied on auditory short-term memory while the
latter relied on phonetic categories. More recently, Pilling,
Wiggett, Özgen, and Davies (2003) tested color CP effects
using a 5 second delay during discrimination trials that
contained no task, a visual interference task, or a verbal
interference task and found that only verbal interference
ever disrupted CP for between-category comparisons, and
then only if different delay conditions were blocked. Pilling
et al. took their results to support the view that
linguistic/categorical codes caused the observed CP effects.

537

Method
Participants
We recruited 59 undergraduate students to participate in the
experiment in exchange for course credit.

Materials
Stimulus materials were modeled on those used by Pevtzow
and Harnad (1997). Each stimulus consisted of 1600
microfeatures arranged in a 40 x 40 grid. The total size is
320 x 320 pixels. Each microfeature is an 8 x 8 image, with
30 pixels (out of 64) colored black. Each colored pixel is
adjacent to at least one other colored pixel. A total of four
different microfeatures were used (see Figure 1). For each
stimulus, half of the microfeatures consisted of equal
numbers of microfeatures 1 and 2 (so 400 of each, or 25%
and 25% of the total). Two categories of stimuli were
created by varying the proportions of microfeatures 3 and 4
in each stimulus as follows: for category 1 (art by Jennifer),
10%/40% or 20%/30%; for category 2 (art by Nancy),
30%/20% or 40%/10%. Thus category 1 stimuli contained
fewer instances of microfeature 3 and more of microfeature
4 than category 2 stimuli. See Figure 1 for sample items
from each category.
The location of the microfeatures varied from
presentation to presentation and was random except for the
top 3 and bottom 3 rows, which were kept identical in all
stimuli to discourage fixation strategies. Each feature was
equally represented in these 6 rows and the particular
pattern of the six rows was randomly generated for each
individual subject but consistent within a particular subject.
Due to the nature of the stimulus features in relation to the
categories, items can differ from one another in up to three
different ways: (1) low level only (“L”), i.e., specific
location of all microfeatures, which is not relevant to the
category distinction in any way; (2) value on the categoryrelevant dimension (“L+D”), which is the relative
proportions of microfeatures 3 and 4, and (3) category
membership (“L+D+M”). Note that all items differ on the
irrelevant variation (hence the “L” in all the pair type
names) and only between-category pairs differ on all three
types of variation.

Figure 2: Classification accuracy of learners and nonlearners over the course of training.
training design was used, with pre- and post-training
consisting of XAB trials, half of which were standard (i.e.,
exactly as described above) and half of which contained a 6
s delay between X and AB. During the delay the participant
was asked to track the location of a dot in a 5 x 5 grid and
click on the last square in which it appeared.
Pre-training consisted of 3 blocks of 24 XAB trials, where
each block contained equal numbers of three pair types
defined according to the types of variation described above:
pairs differing only on irrelevant variation (L), pairs
differing also on the category relevant dimension (L+D),
and between-category pairs (L+D+M). For each of those
pair types, there were equal numbers of trials with and
without a task-filled delay, presented intermixed in a
random order.
To facilitate learning the categories, participants were
initially shown 5 different pairs of stimuli described as
artwork by two different artists, Nancy and Jennifer, to
familiarize them with the category-relevant and irrelevant
variation among the stimuli. This was followed by 200
training trials, divided into 10 blocks of 20 trials each, with
each of the 4 values of the category-relevant dimension
(10%/40%, 20%/30%, 30%/20%, 40%/10%) represented 5
times and the 20 items presented in a random order. On
each trial, a stimulus was presented until the participant
responded by pressing one of two keys on a computer
keyboard to indicate if the artist was Nancy or Jennifer.
Feedback was provided on each trial and at the end of each
block.
At the conclusion of training, the post-test was conducted
with a procedure identical to that of the pre-test and using
the exact same item pairs randomly reshuffled.

Procedure
The experiment was created using the jsPsych platform (de
Leeuw, 2015). Subjects completed the experiment using the
Chrome web browser in a laboratory setting. The browser
was displayed in full-screen mode so that only experimentrelevant material was on the display.
The task used to assess learned CP effects consisted of
displaying one stimulus (X) for 1500 ms followed by a pair
of stimuli (AB) side by side, one of which was identical to
X. The position of the stimulus that was identical to X
varied randomly. AB was shown until the participant
responded.
Participants were told that they would be viewing and
judging pieces of digital art. A pre-training, training, post-

538

Results
Category Learning
There was substantial variability in performance on the
category-learning task. Some subjects learned the correct
categorization almost immediately, presumably from the
examples shown immediately before the first block of
training. Some subjects never learned to categorize the items
correctly, and remained at chance levels of performance
throughout the entire training session. Some subjects
showed low initial performance, but improved throughout
the training and were competent categorizers by the end of
training.
Because the presence of CP effects depends on successful
category learning, we divided the subjects into a learning
group and a non-learning group. The criterion for being in
the learning group was an overall accuracy of 80% or above
on the last two blocks of the categorization training. There
were 24 subjects in the learning group (mean accuracy =
85.4%, SD = 4.5%), and 33 subjects in the non-learning
group (mean accuracy = 60.2%, SD = 11.4%); see Figure 2.

Delay Task
Accuracy on the intermediate delay task was quite high
overall (M = 92.7%, SD = 11.7%). Two subjects had an
accuracy level below 80% (65.3% and 18.1%). These
subjects were removed from the subsequent analysis.

Figure 3: Discrimination accuracy as a function of pair type
both pre and post category training.

CP Effects and Effects of Delay

category training. However, this was true regardless of pair
type as the four-way interaction was not significant.

Using the dependent variable of proportion correct on XAB
trials, a 2 (learner/non-learner) X 3 (pair type:
L/L+D/L+D+M) X 2 (pre/post) X 2 (delay task/no delay
task) ANOVA was conducted:, with repeated measures on
all but the first factor. This yielded main effects of learning,
F(1, 55) = 8.966, p = .004, ηp2 = .140, with learners being
more accurate (M = .671, SD = .098) than non-learners (M =
.593, SD = .098); pair type, F(2, 110) = 3.855, p = .024, ηp2
= .065, with L+D+M pairs more accurate (M = .651, SD =
.121) than L+D pairs which were more accurate (M = .633,
SD = .113) than L pairs (M = .612, SD = .113); and delay,
F(1, 55) = 17.107, p < .001, ηp2 = .237), with delay causing
lower accuracy (M = .608, SD = .098) than no delay (M =
.656, SD = .121).
Of greater interest were two interactions that were
obtained: Pair type interacted with pre/post, F(2, 110) =
3.746, p = .027, ηp2 = .064). As shown in Figure 3,
discrimination performance after category training was
higher on L+D+M and L+D pairs but not L pairs, a pattern
consistent with expansion and/or acquired distinctiveness
learned CP effects.
In addition, there was a significant three-way interaction
between learning, pre/post, and delay, F(1, 55) = 4.283, p =
.043, ηp2 = .072). As shown in Figure 4, relative to no
delay, the delay lowered discrimination accuracy for nonlearners both before and after category training, but only
lowered discrimination accuracy for learners before

Discussion
This study was designed to provide evidence on two
questions: First, how does category training change
people’s sensitivity to different kinds of features, i.e.,
features at different levels of abstraction and categoryrelatedness? And second, are people better at remembering
different kinds of features after category training
(suggesting that they formed more stable strategies for
encoding these aspects of the stimuli)? The three kinds of
features examined here were hierarchically nested and
consisted of low-level details (L), the category-relevant
dimension (L+D), and category membership (L+D+M).
On the first question, category training led to improved
discrimination performance on L+D and L+D+M pairs but
not L pairs, suggesting greater reliance on higher level than
purely bottom up information in the stimuli. This isn’t
surprising since the low level information wasn’t relevant to
the categories, but does show that experience with that low
level information, which is relevant to the XAB task, does
not lead to improvement based on its use alone. In addition,
this effect was obtained irrespective of category learning
success. Also, the fact that both L+D and L+D+M pairs
showed improvement to about the same extent may mean
that sensitization to the category-relevant dimension, rather
than the use of category-level information per se such as the
label, was driving the improved performance because the
additional feature of category membership did not improve

539

part of the category-relevant dimension. This new condition
would allow us to distinguish between the learning of
different low-level features depending on whether or not
those features are related to the category-relevant variation.
The main puzzle posed by the results is that category
training seems to result in an overall boost in the
discriminability of pairs that vary along the categoryrelevant dimension but not pairs that vary in only categoryirrelevant ways, yet learners show an overall increase across
all pair types in discriminability with the delay task. One
explanation is that the distinction between learners and nonlearners is inexact; any arbitrary cutoff between learners and
non-learners will be noisy. It’s likely that there are a nontrivial number of people who learned some aspect of the
category structure in the non-learning group. This, coupled
with the fact that the effect sizes for changes related to
specific kinds of variation were relatively small, could
partially explain why there was no interaction between
successful learning and improvement on each of the types of
variation.
While we found evidence that successful category
learning altered the way that individual stimuli are
remembered, the mechanism for this change remains
unclear in light of the non-interaction between the delay task
and the type of variation of the XAB pairs (L vs. L+D vs.
L+D+M). In addition to the idea of introducing another kind
of pair type variation, two other aspects of our methodology
could be easily modified to further probe this pattern of
results: the task during the delay and the sequence of XAB
trials.
The task used in this study during the delay was a visual
task; the role of labeling in category-trained performance on
the XAB task could be addressed by using a verbal task
during the delay. Pilling et al. (2003) showed that verbal
but not visual interference during discrimination trials
removed the between-category advantage. However, they
also showed that this was only true if the different types of
interference were blocked; when they were intermixed, the
learned CP effect remained. This suggests that people are
strategic in their use of category information. When they
have expectations that category labels will be challenging to
remember, they opt for using the non-verbal aspects of the
stimulus to do the discrimination task. As Pilling et al. note,
however, non-verbal does not necessarily mean low level, a
point that receives support from studies showing that
categories can be learned, and CP effects produced, in the
absence of verbal labels (e.g., Andrews, Livingston, Sturm,
Bliss, & Hawthorne, 2011; Wolff & Holmes, 2012.)
We can manipulate potential strategic uses in our study by
altering the sequence of XAB trials. In our design, trials
with the visual task were intermixed with trials having no
delay, and this may have influenced the strategies
participants used. If trials were blocked, participants might
develop strategies specifically suited to immediate versus
delayed discrimination. If participants know that they will
have to remember the stimulus during a delay task, they
may choose to focus more on easily compressible aspects of

Figure 4: Discrimination accuracy as a function of presence
or absence of a delay task for learners and non-learners both
pre and post category training.
learning more than just the variation along the category
relevant dimension.
On the second question, the data suggested that learners
formed more stable representations than non-learners,
resulting in no effect of the delay task on XAB performance
in the post-category training test for learners. Yet this effect
did not differ according to pair type, occurring equally for
L, L+D, and L+D+M pairs. We originally expected that the
delay would interfere most directly with the discrimination
of L pairs given the previous findings that a delay interfered
most with lower-level information (Pisoni, 1973).
However, it’s possible that successful category learning
also enhanced sensitivity to the low-level irrelevant
variations, perhaps because they overlap with the categoryrelevant dimension, in such a way as to allow for a more
effective means of remembering the stimuli during the XAB
task. One hypothesis along these lines is that learners may
have learned to selectively attend to the microfeatures that
define the category relevant dimension, making it easier to
encode the low-level variation of the stimulus by reducing
the number of microfeatures that were encoded. This would
suggest that learners did not simply encode the abstract
category-relevant dimension, but rather encoded perceptual
features of the stimulus that were directly relevant to the
category-relevant dimension. This hypothesis could be
tested by creating additional pairs for the XAB task that
varied only in the location of the microfeatures that are not

540

the stimulus, such as higher-level category features.
Conversely, if they expect to be able to make their judgment
immediately, they may focus on more concrete perceptual
details (especially since category-level information is more
inferential and easier to get wrong).

perception: Evidence from a priming study.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21, 1214-1223.
Livingston, K. R., & Andrews, J. K. (2005). Evidence for an
age-independent process in category learning.
Developmental Science, 8(4), 319–25.
Livingston, K. R., Andrews, J. K., & Harnad, S. (1998).
Categorical perception effects induced by category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24(3), 732–753.
Notman, L., Sowden, P. T., & Özgen, E. (2005). The nature
of learned categorical perception effects: a
psychophysical approach. Cognition, 95(2), B1–14.
Pevtzow, R., & Harnad, S. (1997). Warping similarity space
in category learning by human subjects: The role of
task difficulty. In M. Ramscar, U. Hahn, E.
Cambouropolos, & H. Pain (Eds.), Proceedings of
SimCat 1997: Interdisciplinary Workshop on Similarity
and Categorization (pp. 189–195). Department of
Artificial Intelligence, Edinburgh University.
Pilling, M., Wiggett, A., Özgen, E., & Davies, I. (2003). Is
color “categorical perception” really categorical?
Memory & Cognition, 31(4), 538-551.
Pisoni, D. (1973). Auditory and phonetic memory codes in
the discrimination of consonants and vowels.
Perception & Psychophysics, 13(2), 253-260.
Roberson, D., Hanley, J.R., & Pak, H.S. (2009). Thresholds
for color discrimination in English and Korean
speakers. Cognition, 112, 482-487.

Acknowledgments
This material is based on work supported by the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant No. DGE-1342962. We thank Tom Murphy and Nick
Boyd for assistance with data collection.

References
Andrews, J., Livingston, K., Sturm, J., Bliss, D., &
Hawthorne, D. (2011). Category learning research in
the interactive online environment Second Life. In T.
Pinelli (Ed.), Selected Papers and Presentations
Presented at MODSIM World 2010 Conference &
Expo. NASA.
de Leeuw, J. R. (2015). jsPsych: A JavaScript library for
creating behavioral experiments in a Web browser.
Behavior
Research
Methods,
47(1),
1-12.
doi:10.3758/s13428-014-0458-y
de Leeuw, Andrews, & Livingston. (2014). Learned visual
categorical perception effects depend on method of
assessment and stimulus discriminability. In P. Bello,
M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 391-396). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Folstein, J., Palmeri, T., & Gauthier, I. (2014). Perceptual
advantage for category-relevant perceptual dimensions:
The case of shape and motion.
Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 1394.
Gerrits, E., & Schouten, M. E. H. (2004). Categorical
perception depends on the discrimination task.
Perception & Psychophysics, 66(3), 363–76.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Influences of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123(2), 178–200.
Goldstone, R. L., & Hendrickson, A. T. (2009). Categorical
perception.
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive
Science, 1, 69-78.
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2001).
Altering object representations through category
learning. Cognition, 78(1), 27–43.
Hanley, J.R. & Roberson, D. (2011) Categorical perception
effects reflect differences in typicality on withincategory trials. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18(2),
355-363.
Holmes, K., & Wolff, P. (2012). Does categorical
perception in the left hemisphere depend on language?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141,
439-443.
Hu, Z., Hanley, J.R., Zhang, R., Liu, Q, & Roberson, D.
(2014). A conflict-based model of color categorical

541

