Visual Working Memory as Decision Making:
Compensation for Memory Uncertainty in Reach Planning
Rachel A. Lerch

Chris R. Sims

(rachel.lerch@drexel.edu)

(chris.sims@drexel.edu)

Applied Cognitive & Brain Sciences, Department of Psychology
Drexel University
Abstract
Limitations in visual working memory (VWM) have been extensively studied in psychophysical tasks, but not well understood in terms of how memory limits translate to performance
in more natural domains. For example, in reaching to grasp an
object based on a spatial memory representation, overshooting
the intended target may be more costly than undershooting,
such as when reaching for a cup of hot coffee. The current
body of literature lacks a detailed account of how the physical consequences and costs of memory error influence what
we encode in visual memory, and how we act on the basis of
remembered information. Here, we study whether externallyimposed monetary costs influence behavior in a task that involves motor planning based on information recalled from
VWM. Our results indicate that subjects accounted for the uncertainty in their visual memory, showing a significant difference in their motor planning when monetary costs were imposed for memory errors. However, our findings indicate that
subjects’ memory representations per se were not biased by
the imposed costs, but rather subjects adopted a near-optimal
post-mnemonic decision strategy.
Keywords: Visual working memory; decision making; motor
planning

Introduction
Visual working memory (VWM) can be defined as a system
that actively maintains visual information to serve the needs
of ongoing tasks (Luck & Vogel, 2013). The limitations of
this system have been the subject of numerous psychophysical studies, with particular interest in understanding possible
limits in the number of items that can be sustained in memory,
as well as the quality or precision of recalled representations,
particularly as the set size increases (Luck & Vogel, 2013;
Ma, Husain, & Bays, 2014). Building on a substantial body
of behavioral results, recent work has also focused on the development of computational models that explain and predict
limits in memory performance, on the basis of information
theory (Sims, Jacobs, & Knill, 2012; Orhan, Sims, Jacobs, &
Knill, 2014; Sims, 2015) or theories based on limits in neural coding (Franconeri, Alvarez, & Cavanagh, 2013; Bays,
2014).
Limits in visual memory, though extensively studied, are
not equally well understood in terms of how they influence
behavior in ecological tasks, such as in motor planning and
execution. What we are still largely left asking is the following: How is VWM used in natural tasks, and how might the
costs of misremembering influence how and what we remember?
Hollingworh, Richard, and Luck (2008) demonstrated that
visual working memory is important for a range of natural tasks, including gaze correction following saccadic error.

Brouwer and Knill (2007, 2009) demonstrated that VWM is
similarly critical for online movement control, even when
reaching for targets that are currently visible. This paper
builds on the close connection between VWM and motor control, and examines how imposed monetary costs on VWM errors affect an individual’s movement planning. We therefore
examine motor planning and visual working memory from
the perspective of decision theory (Körding, 2007).
One intuitive example that illustrates how errors in VWM
can translate into relevant behavioral costs is the so-called
‘wine-glass problem’. You might imagine yourself on a dinner date, and maintaining eye contact with your date while
simultaneously reaching to pick up your glass of wine. In this
example there are two sources of information available to the
brain regarding the location of your wine glass: information
from the visual periphery present at the time of planning, and
remembered information from previous fixations on the glass.
However, both sources of information are of limited fidelity
(Brouwer & Knill, 2007, 2009), and in this situation memory
error may lead to significant social costs. If you misremember
the location of the wine glass as being further from you than
it really is, you might overshoot and knock over the glass. In
this case, it is less costly to misremember the target as being
closer to you than it really is, since this would result in undershooting and having to make a slight additional reaching
movement to adjust for your mistake (example adapted from
Trommershäuser, Maloney, & Landy, 2008).
From this perspective, the study of VWM can be approached as a form of decision making under risk. This builds
on other research which examines motor planning as a form
of decision making (Trommershäuser et al., 2008; Wolpert
& Landy, 2012) and which similarly asks: How do the costs
of motor error influence motor planning? We add to this research by studying how imposed costs affect visual spatial
memory as well as the planning of hand movements on the
basis of remembered information.
An important and closely related question is whether external costs bias the contents of visual memory, or rather,
whether costs influence how people act on the basis of uncertain memory information. Previous research in categorical perception (Goldstone & Hendrickson, 2010) has demonstrated that the categorical structure of visual information influences our ability to discriminate between objects. Categorical perception effects raise the possibility that the costs of
memory error may similarly bias the contents of visual working memory. In the context of remembering spatial informa-

1296

tion, the sensitivity of VWM to the costs of memory error
might lead to biases in the recall of spatial locations. This
possibility is further bolstered by a number of findings which
show that VWM is sensitive to the statistical structure of the
visual environment (Orhan et al., 2014).
To explore this idea, we developed a task that required participants to remember an array of colored targets, and then
after the stimuli were removed, touch the remembered location of a cued target using a stylus (Figure 1). In different
conditions, monetary penalties were associated with different
kinds of memory errors: overshooting vs. undershooting the
intended target. Successfully touching a target (hitting anywhere within the target boundary) always earned the participant money, but depending on condition, either overshooting
or undershooting the target could decrease the participant’s
total earnings.
We hypothesized the following: (1) Memory precision
should deteriorate with increasing set size (the number of
items stored in memory). This expectation is well supported
in the body of previous research (Ma et al., 2014). (2) Mean
aim point should differ between conditions, that is people will
undershoot when there are costs for overshooting and vice
versa. (3) If people are sensitive to the uncertainty in their
memory then they should aim further away from penalty regions in the large set size conditions where memory uncertainty is greater. Thus a strategy of under- or overshooting
the target may not represent a simple and fixed heuristic, but
rather may be more intricately tied to the cost structure of
the task and to the level of uncertainty in memory. (4) The
contents of memory may also be biased by the costs associated with memory error. This latter hypothesis requires distinguishing between biases in memory representations, and
participants adopting a post-mnemonic decision strategy.

(a) Stimulus presentation

1500 ms

Retention interval

1000 ms

Odd/even judgment task

7

Odd

Even

Hit the start cross

(b) Recall Trial

(c) Discrimination Trial
Farther

Closer
[Cue to hit the orange target]

Figure 1: Sequence of events in the task. (a) Targets (one or
three annular sectors) were presented for 1,500ms, followed
by a blank retention interval. Subjects then completed an
odd/even digit judgment task, and touched a start cross. Depending on the trial, subjects were then instructed to either (b)
touch one of the targets, cued by the color of the start cross
(recall trial), or else (c) complete a memory discrimination
task and judge whether a probe stimulus was presented closer
or farther than the original item.

Methods
Participants
Twelve individuals (8 female) participated in the experiment
(age range 18 to 35 years, mean 22.42). All participants
reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no diagnosed motor impairments. Participants completed two experimental sessions, and were compensated a minimum of $20
with additional monetary incentives based on performance.
All subjects provided informed consent according to procedures approved by the Drexel University institutional review
board.

Apparatus
Stimuli were presented on a custom built “smart table”, consisting of a glass surface (101x64cm) backed by rear projection film (Figure 2). A digital projector and mirror mounted
below the glass were used to render stimuli onto the surface. The table height was 105cm. Participants held a stylus
(shown resting on the tabletop) in their dominant hand for indicating responses. The stylus had reflective markers attached
to the end; these markers were tracked by a motion capture

system (NaturalPoint OptiTrack) that recorded the spatial position of the tip of the stylus in real-time at 120Hz.

Stimuli
The memory stimuli consisted of one or three colored targets
(colors chosen randomly from the set blue, green, purple, and
orange) that varied in angle and distance from the participant
(see Figure 1). Each target was an annular sector (i.e., a section of a ring), with angular width = 10 degrees, and radial
thickness = 6.35 cm. The target locations were defined in polar coordinates (angle and radial distance from the subject),
with the angle to the target center sampled from the range
(-45◦ , 45◦ ), where 0◦ indicates straight in front of the subject. The radial distance to the targets varied from 12.7cm to
41.28cm. Target locations were randomly sampled on each
trial subject to the constraint that targets did not overlap in
angle.
The targets were rendered on top of a “white noise” pixel
background. The pixel noise masked reflections on the glass
table surface that could otherwise potentially be used to aid in

1297

(a)

(b)
–$0.20

Cued target
location

‘Penalize undershoot’
condition
–$0.20

‘Penalize overshoot’
condition

Figure 2: The apparatus used for the experiment. See text for
description.

the localization of stimuli. Each trial began by having the subject touch a ‘start cross’ located at the proximal edge of the
table. Stimuli were then presented for 1,500ms, followed by
a 1,000ms retention interval. After the retention interval, subjects then completed an odd/even digit judgment task, where
they were asked to indicate whether a single digit (randomly
chosen from the set 1–9) was odd or even. The odd/even
judgment task forced participants to make eye movements,
and hence prevent using visual gaze as an ‘external memory’.
Then, subjects once again touched the start cross. Depending
on the trial, subjects were cued to either complete a memory recall trial (Figure 1b) or a memory discrimination trial
(Figure 1c). During recall trials, subjects were instructed to
attempt to touch the location where the cued target had previously been displayed. After touching the display, subjects
received visual feedback on whether they hit or missed the
target, and whether it resulted in a monetary payoff or penalty
(depending on condition, described in the Procedure section).
During the discrimination trials, participants were asked to
judge whether a probe stimulus was presented closer or farther than the original item. No feedback was given during
discrimination trials.

Procedure
Each participant completed two experimental sessions, conducted on separate days. Each session consisted of two blocks
that varied in terms of set size—the number of targets that
needed to be remembered. In one of the blocks, subjects were
shown a single target on each trial (set size = 1), and in the
other block three targets were displayed (set size = 3). The
order of the blocks was counterbalanced across participants.
Each block consisted of 100 recall trials, and 50 discrimination trials. The two trial types were randomly interleaved, and
subjects could not distinguish between the two trial types at
the start of each trial. During recall trials, subjects gained or
lost money depending on whether they successfully ‘hit’ the

Figure 3: Recall trials incorporated monetary penalties, depending on the condition. (a) In the ‘penalize overshoot’ condition, touching an area in the red region (overshooting the
target) resulted in a monetary penalty of $0.20. (b) The ‘penalize undershoot condition. Touching an area in the white
region had no penalty.

cued target. In particular, successfully hitting a target earned
the participant 10 cents, in addition to a base pay of $5.00
for each block. The two experimental sessions differed in
terms of the monetary penalty associated with missing a target (illustrated in Figure 3). In one of the sessions, ‘overshoot errors’—touching a location farther than the target—
cost the participant 20 cents (Figure 3a). In the other session,
‘undershoot errors’—touching a location closer to the participant than the actual target—cost 20 cents (Figure 3b). Undershooting in the penalize overshoot condition resulted in zero
cents (neither gain nor penalty), and vice versa for the penalize undershoot condition. Subjects were instructed at the
start of each session on the relevant payouts and penalties for
that condition. The order of the two penalty conditions was
counterbalanced across participants.
During discrimination trials, a probe stimulus was displayed that differed from the location of one of the original
stimulus items in terms of its radial distance. The participant completed a 2-alternative forced choice, deciding if the
probe stimulus was closer or farther than the original target
(Figure 1c). The distance of the probe stimulus relative to
the true stimulus location was controlled using a one-up/onedown adaptive staircase procedure (Lu & Dosher, 2014), using two interleaved staircases. Thus, the discrimination trials
were designed to determine the participants psychophysical
threshold: the probe distance that was indistinguishable from
the remembered location of the original target. This enabled
a measure of whether memory for target distance was biased
by the penalty condition.
To summarize, the experiment utilized a 2 × 2 withinsubject design, manipulating set size (one or three items) and
penalty condition (penalize undershoot vs. penalize overshoot). During each session, the penalty condition was held
constant, but the two within-session blocks varied the set size.
In total, each subject completed 400 recall trials, and 200 discrimination trials.

1298

2

Table 1: Mean payoff in each condition of the experiment.
Standard deviations given in parentheses.

1

Set Size 3
$6.12 (2.97)
$6.19 (2.29)

Penalize Overshoot
Penalize Undershoot

●

−1

Results

●

−2

On average, participants earned $38.08 across the two sessions of the experiment (highest earning participant = $44.70;
lowest = $23.10). Average payoff for each condition is reported in Table 1. It is immediately apparent that participants
found the task much harder in the set size = 3 condition, earning approximately half as much as they did in the set size = 1
condition.
Unlike most psychophysical studies of VWM, this experiment offered the possibility for participants to mitigate the
negative consequences of memory error. In particular, we hypothesized that participants would exhibit a tendency to overshoot the target in the penalize undershoot condition, and vice
versa.
To test this hypothesis, we computed the relative aiming
position on each recall trial as the difference between the radial distance of the participant’s response, and the radial distance to the center of the cued target. According to this measure, positive values indicate overshooting the center of the
target, and negative values indicate undershooting. Mean relative aim is plotted in Figure 4.
A 2 × 2 within-subjects ANOVA was conducted on mean
relative aim, with set size and penalty condition as factors.
The results indicated that mean relative aim significantly
differed between penalty conditions, F(1, 11) = 19.62, p =
0.001, generalized η2 = 0.44. The interaction between set
size and penalty condition aslo reached statistical significance, F(1, 11) = 10.15, p = 0.009, generalized η2 = 0.120.
Hence, subjects significantly shifted their mean aim location
away from the penalty region, and the magnitude of this shift
was larger in the set size = 3 condition.
Performance in the four conditions differed not just in the
mean aim point, but also in the variability in aiming distance.
The distributions of aim points are shown in Figure 5. This
figure illustrates both the shift in mean aim point (as shown
in Figure 4), as well as a substantial increase in variability in
the set size = 3 conditions.
Given the observed shift in aim point between the two
penalty conditions, we were interested in distinguishing between two possible explanations. One possibility is that prolonged exposure in each penalty condition resulted in a bias in
the contents of VWM. That is to say, subjects’ VWM systems
consistently remembered the targets as closer than they really
were in the penalty overshoot condition. An alternative explanation is that the memory representations were not biased;
rather, subjects adopted a post-mnemonic decision strategy to
shift their aim away from the penalty regions.

0

Set Size 1
$12.70 (2.09)
$13.08 (1.22)

Mean aim (cm)

Condition
Penalize Undershoot
Penalize Overshoot

●

1

Set size

3

Figure 4: Mean aim point (averaged across subjects) for each
penalty and set size condition. Aim point is defined as the radial distance of the participant’s response relative to the center of the target. A value of zero indicates hitting the center
of the target, positive values are representative of overshooting the target center, negative values indicate undershooting
the target center. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals
(computed across subjects).

The data from the discrimination trials allowed us to distinguish between these two possibilities. We fit a simple psychometric function (a Gaussian cumulative distribution) to
the discrimination trials from each participant, using maximum likelihood estimation. The threshold parameter of the
psychometric curve, µ, indicates the probe stimulus distance
such that the subject was not able to reliably detect whether it
was farther or closer than the true stimulus location. Hence,
positive values of µ indicate that memory was biased towards
remembering targets as further away than they really were,
while values of µ close to zero indicate an absence of memory bias. Note that there were no monetary incentives for the
discrimination trials, and no performance feedback was given
on these trials. Hence, subjects had no incentive to apply a
post-mnemonic decision strategy to the discrimination trials.
The remaining parameter of the psychometric curve, σ, controlling the slope of the curve, offers an independent measure
of memory uncertainty in each condition.
The mean parameter estimates from each condition are reported in Table 2. A 2 × 2 ANOVA was conducted on the parameter estimates from the psychometric curves. The results
did not reveal any significant shift in µ across penalty conditions, F(1, 11) = 1.38, p = 0.27, generalized η2 = 0.020.
Hence, given the current data, the observed shift in mean
aim point during the recall trials (illustrated in Figure 4) is
most parsimoniously explained as an adaptive decision strategy, rather than a bias in memory per se. Consistent with this

1299

10
5
0

Relative payoff

−10
−6

0.20

Penalize Undershoot,
Set size = 1

−5

10
5
0

Relative payoff

−5
−10

0.25

0.30

−4

−2

0

2

4

6

−6

−4

0.15

Offset (cm)

5

10

Table 2: Mean parameters of the psychometric curve fit to the
discrimination trials from each condition (SD in parentheses).
Set Size
1
1
3
3

Penalty Cond.
Undershoot
Overshoot
Undershoot
Overshoot

µ
.018 (.042)
.009 (.030)
.045 (.044)
.031 (.042)

σ
.052 (.030)
.070 (.034)
.106 (.052)
.126 (.042)

interpretation, we also conducted a post-experiment survey
with each participant. The survey indicated that 9/12 subjects
reported adopting a deliberate strategy of aiming away from
the penalty regions.
A separate ANOVA on the parameter σ from the psychometric curve found that the main effect of set size was significant, F(1, 11) = 32.06, p < 0.01, generalized η2 = 0.340.
This result simply confirms that memory discriminability was
poorer in the larger set size conditions.
Were subjects optimal or sub-optimal in their motor planning? The answer to this question is potentially informative
as it may place constraints on the class of mechanisms offered
as an explanation for performance. In particular, if subjects
performed at a near-optimal level, it would suggest their decision strategies were adaptive to the actual costs of memory error defined by the task, and their level of memory uncertainty,

5
0

Relative payoff
−4

−2

0

2

Offset (cm)

Figure 5: Distribution of responses on recall trials across all
subjects and trials, relative to the center of the cued target.
Continuous distributions were obtained using a kernel density
estimate. In the penalize overshoot conditions, the response
distributions are shifted towards negative values (undershooting the target) and vice versa in the penalize undershoot conditions.

6

−10
−6

Relative aim point (cm)

4

10

10
5
0

Relative payoff

−10

0

2

Penalize Undershoot,
Set size = 3

−5

0.05
0.00

−5

0

Offset (cm)

Penalize Overshoot,
Set size = 3

−10

−2

−5

0.35

Penalize Overshoot
Penalize Undershoot

0.10

Probability Density

Penalize Overshoot,
Set size = 1

4

6

−6

−4

−2

0

2

4

6

Offset (cm)

Figure 6: Predicted payoff as a function of mean offset—
how much the subject attempts to undershoot or overshoot the
targets. Each red curve shows the utility function for a given
magnitude of offset, based on the distribution of aim points in
the combined empirical data. The peak of the curve indicates
the optimal magnitude of offset. The vertical black line in
each figure indicates the empirically observed magnitude of
offset in each condition, averaged across subjects.

rather than reflecting an invariant or approximate heuristic.
To answer this question, we examined how greater or
smaller shifts in the distribution of responses (as shown in
Figure 5) would influence expected payoff. There are several
ways of approaching this analyis, such as fitting models of
response variability to each participant. For the present paper
we adopted perhaps the simplest approach: We subtracted the
mean from the response distribution in each condition (centering all four distributions in Figure 5 around zero), and computed the predicted payoff as varying amounts of response
bias were added back in. We performed the analysis on the
aggregate data from all participants.
Figure 6 shows the resulting utility curves for each condition. The red curves show the predicted payoff as a function
of the shift towards overshooting or undershooting the center
of the target. The peak of these curves represent the optimal
magnitude of offset. The vertical black lines show the empirical data—the mean offset actually observed in each condition.
The results in Figure 6 show that, in aggregate, participants
achieved close to optimal performance in the task. The empirical offset was nearly indistinguishable from the optimal
offset for the set size one condition. Although the analysis
suggests that subjects should have increased the magnitude
of their offset in the set size three conditions, the net increase
in payoff would be minimal. On the basis of these results,

1300

we argue that performance in the task does not simply reflect
a fixed heuristic (e.g., ‘aim away from the penalty regions’),
but rather shows that motor planning was sensitive to both
external costs and intrinsic memory uncertainty.

integral part of a larger adaptive biological control system.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Elizabeth Ellman for her assistance with data collection.

Discussion
The study of visual working memory has mostly focused on
measuring capacity limits and studying its psychophysical
properties. Largely lacking in the literature, however, are approaches that consider how these limitations translate to ecologically relevant tasks.
In this paper we sought to investigate how resource limitations and memory error influence the use of visual memory in motor planning. We developed an experimental
paradigm that captured an important property of natural tasks,
where memory errors may result in negative consequences or
costs. We found that subjects—whether subconsciously or
deliberately—offset their aim relative to penalty areas. This
suggests that motor planning is sensitive to both the limitations of encoding visuospatial information, as well as the
costs of memory error.
As hypothesized and supported by previous studies, memory precision deteriorated with increased set sizes. More interesting, subjects adaptively compensated for their memory
uncertainty and the costs of memory error, by shifting their
aim away from task-defined penalty regions. In aggregate,
the mean direction and magnitude of shift in motor planning
was near-optimal; this suggests that the observed overshooting and undershooting strategies are not fixed heuristics, but
are rather more intricately linked to the cost structure of the
task and to the level of uncertainty in memory.
We hypothesized that externally imposed costs might influence not only motor planning, but also the manner in which
information is encoded in memory. However, we did not find
a significant difference in performance across the discrimination trials from the two penalty conditions. The results of this
study thus best attribute the significant difference in mean aim
to an adaptive post-mnemonic decision strategy, rather than a
bias in the participants’ memory of target locations. This remains an area of interest for future studies, as the body of literature examining categorical perception shows that learned
categories can exert a top-down influence on visual perception (Goldstone & Hendrickson, 2010). In the current study,
we failed to observe a similar ‘categorical memory’ effect.
Lastly, the present results need to be integrated with existing work in developing computational models of visual working memory (Sims et al., 2012; Orhan et al., 2014; Sims,
2015). Existing computational models have largely focused
on predicting the limits of VWM, but have not adequately
addressed how visual working memory is used in natural
tasks. Our results demonstrate that motor planning has access to both the contents of spatial information in VWM, but
also the uncertainty or reliability of remembered information.
This uncertain information is appropriately combined with
the costs of memory error, demonstrating that VWM is an

References
Bays, P. M. (2014). Noise in neural populations accounts for
errors in working memory. The Journal of Neuroscience,
34(10), 3632–3645.
Brouwer, A.-M., & Knill, D. C. (2007). The role of memory
in visually guided reaching. Journal of Vision, 7(5), 6.
Brouwer, A.-M., & Knill, D. C. (2009). Humans use visual
and remembered information about object location to plan
pointing movements. Journal of vision, 9(1), 24.
Franconeri, S. L., Alvarez, G. A., & Cavanagh, P. (2013).
Flexible cognitive resources: competitive content maps for
attention and memory. Trends in cognitive sciences, 17(3),
134–141.
Goldstone, R. L., & Hendrickson, A. T. (2010). Categorical perception. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive
Science, 1(1), 69–78.
Hollingworth, A., Richard, A. M., & Luck, S. J. (2008).
Understanding the function of visual short-term memory:
transsaccadic memory, object correspondence, and gaze
correction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
137(1), 163.
Körding, K. (2007). Decision theory: what “should” the
nervous system do? Science, 318(5850), 606–610.
Lu, Z.-L., & Dosher, B. (2014). Visual psychophysics: From
laboratory to theory. MIT Press.
Luck, S. J., & Vogel, E. K. (2013). Visual working memory capacity: From psychophysics and neurobiology to individual differences. Trends in cognitive sciences, 17(8),
391–400.
Ma, W. J., Husain, M., & Bays, P. M. (2014). Changing
concepts of working memory. Nature neuroscience, 17(3),
347–356.
Orhan, A. E., Sims, C. R., Jacobs, R. A., & Knill, D. C.
(2014). The adaptive nature of visual working memory.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23(3), 164–
170.
Sims, C. R. (2015). The cost of misremembering: Inferring
the loss function in visual working memory. Journal of
Vision, 15(3), 1–27.
Sims, C. R., Jacobs, R. A., & Knill, D. C. (2012). An ideal
observer analysis of visual working memory. Psychological review, 119(4), 807.
Trommershäuser, J., Maloney, L. T., & Landy, M. S. (2008).
Decision making, movement planning and statistical decision theory. Trends in cognitive sciences, 12(8), 291–297.
Wolpert, D. M., & Landy, M. S. (2012). Motor control is
decision-making. Current opinion in neurobiology, 22(6),
996–1003.

1301

