Watch out! - An instruction raising students’ epistemic vigilance augments their
sourcing activities
Marc Stadtler (marc.stadtler@uni-muenster.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstrasse 21,
48149 Münster, Germany

Johanna Paul (johanna.paul@uni-muenster.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstrasse 21,
48149 Münster, Germany

Silke Globoschütz (silke.globoschuetz@uni-duesseldorf.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Düsseldorf, Universitätsstrasse 1,
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany

Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstrasse 21,
48149 Münster, Germany

Abstract
Most students profit from the easy accessibility of online
information, but specific competencies for successful reading on
the internet are seldom taught during class. Therefore, students
might not be able to choose credible information autonomously.
Empirical evidence suggests that high school students hardly
evaluate the credibility of sources (“sourcing”) when reading
multiple documents. Consequently, effective interventions which
foster sourcing skills are needed. This study evaluates the effects
of a written instruction designed to augment sourcing activities in a
multiple document reading task by inducing epistemic vigilance.
The written instruction introduces the concept of the division of
cognitive labor and informs about low editorial control on the
internet. In comparison to a control group, students receiving the
instruction prior to completing an internet research task showed
more attention to, evaluation of, and memory for sources.
Keywords: learning from multiple documents; instructional
design; source evaluation, division of cognitive labor

Introduction
The internet offers a unique opportunity for accessing a
virtually infinite amount of information in a short period of
time. Learning from online information offers various
conveniences. All over Europe 85% of 9 to 16 year old
students draw on the internet for school related tasks
(Haddon, Livingston & the EU kids Online network, 2012).
Learning from online sources increases with age
(Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverband Südwest, 2014)
so that students in middle-school often face the task of
choosing their information independently, without teachers
providing preselected materials. Besides many advantages,
reading online may also pose certain difficulties for readers.
The freedom in online publication leaves the internet as a
melting pot of information. Until now, online content does
not mostly have to overcome the hurdles of editorial control.
Therefore, the information spectrum on the web provides
undisputed knowledge as well as controversial debates and

information that is outright false. Similarly, information on
the internet largely differs in term of its credibility, since not
every author online is an expert on the topic or has the
intention to give unbiased information. Therefore, strategies
for evaluating source credibility should be a topic
specifically addressed in class. Providing teachers with
feasible teaching techniques dealing with students’ source
evaluation skills is an important step to address the gap
between students’ intense use of online information and the
low amount of instruction for critical online reading.

Theoretical background
Sourcing as a Strategy for Validity Judgments
The variable quality of online information suggests that
internet users frequently encounter conflicting propositions.
According to the content-source-integration (CSI) model
(Stadtler & Bromme, 2014) readers undergo three
processing steps when confronted with conflicting
information: detecting the conflict, regulating their
understanding of the conflict, and finally resolving the
conflict by evaluating the validity of competing claims.
Regarding the final step, Bromme, Kienhues and Porsch
(2010) distinguish between two strategies for successful
validity evaluation: first-hand (“what to believe”) and
second-hand evaluations (“whom to believe?”). For firsthand evaluations, readers evaluate arguments based on their
prior knowledge, and for second-hand evaluations, they
process source features rather than the content itself.
However, when researching information on complex
scientific issues (e.g., medical information), the complexity
of the content may soon exceed the readers’ capabilities,
suggesting that first-hand evaluations may be of limited
value in the case of low prior knowledge. Readers might

2278

then be well advised to defer to experts and engage in
second-hand evaluations instead.
Two factors that have been found to influence whether
individuals trust a source are its perceived expertise and its
perceived benevolence (Mayer, Davis & Schoorman, 1995).
The crucial role of expertise is rooted in the division of
cognitive labor, meaning that knowledge is distributed
unevenly among the members of our society (Keil, Stein,
Webb, Billings, & Rozenblit, 2008). Since the whole extent
of world knowledge exceeds the capacities of a single
person, individuals stay laypersons in many domains, but
may gain expertise (e.g., by academic training) in selected
fields. Consequently, each individual can only arrive at a
bounded understanding in most domains and needs to
identify competent sources when it comes to knowledge
beyond his or her areas of expertise (Bromme & Goldman,
2014). This may be done by reflecting on source parameters
while reading online, such as the author’s affiliation or
professional background.
The importance of benevolence is rooted in the manifold
functions of the internet, which serves as a platform for
information, entertainment, communication and commerce.
Therefore, authors pursue various goals, such as informing,
entertaining, convincing and selling. Consequently, not
every author is benevolent (i.e. has the reader’s interest in
mind), but he or she may present information in a way that
supports his or her own vested interests. Again, readers may
scrutinize source parameters, such as the author’s affiliation
to make inferences about the level of benevolence.

Do Students Use Sourcing Strategies while
Searching the Internet?
Despite the importance of sourcing, empirical studies find
that readers at varying age levels hardly pay attention to
source features and often do not construct source-contentlinks (e.g., Britt & Aglinskas, 2002; Stadtler & Bromme,
2007; 2008). Even when the topic’s complexity exceeds
students’ prior knowledge and when the information across
sources is conflicting, they hardly cite or highlight source
parameters (Kobayashi, 2014). For example, Stadtler,
Babiel, Rouet, and Bromme (2014) found that students
hardly visit imprint pages (i.e. pages containing source
information) while reading a series of web documents. This
lack of sourcing behavior seems especially striking when
compared with small children’s early sourcing
competencies. In face-to-face situations, children do not
blindly trust an informant, but evaluate an informant’s
expertise and benevolence when deciding whom to trust
(Harris, 2012). In a similar vein, Stadtler et al. (2014)
demonstrated that when reading short texts and receiving
explicit instructions, ninth graders show good sourcing
skills, such as identifying sources, rating authors’ expertise
and intentions and choosing appropriate links. These
findings suggest that students do not lack crucial
competencies for sourcing, but might have problems to put
their competencies into action spontaneously. A similar
conclusion could be drawn from intervention studies, which

improve sourcing activities short term, but do not lead to
significant transfer (Walraven, Brand-Gruwel, & Boshuizen,
2013). Furthermore, past attempts to improve students’
sourcing skills often focused on prompts to evaluate sources
(Stadtler & Bromme, 2007; 2008), instead of explaining the
general scope of the importance of sourcing.
The present research examines whether the missing link
between adolescents’ fundamental sourcing skills and their
spontaneous application might lie in the motivation to be
epistemically vigilant (Sperber, Clément, Heintz, Mascaro,
Mercier, & Origgi, 2010). Readers might not put their
sourcing competencies into action unless they do not have
good reasons to believe that they run the risk of receiving
invalid information. That said, introducing secondary-school
students to the division of cognitive labor and the
publication principles on the internet might raise epistemic
vigilance.

The Present Study
This study sets out to evaluate the effect of a written
instruction, providing students with reasons for why they
should be epistemically vigilant whilst answering a question
based on online information. More precisely, we
investigated if the students’ choice of evaluation strategies
(“what to believe” vs. “whom to believe”) in the final stage
of processing conflicting information (i.e. conflict
resolution) can be influenced by a written instruction
elaborating on the division of cognitive labor and the low
editorial control on the internet (hereafter referred to as
“vigilance instruction”). We hypothesized that the vigilance
instruction would lead the students to question the validity
of the content, as well as their own capability of evaluating
the arguments based solely on their prior knowledge.
Therefore, the intervention group, receiving the vigilance
instruction, should show more sourcing activities when
evaluating the validity of the information compared to a
control group. This use of sources should be reflected in
three outcomes.
First (H1), we assumed that a vigilance instruction
increases students’ attention to sources. Consequently,
students in the intervention group should show more
attention to sources during a multiple document reading
task. This should be reflected in more visits of and longer
dwell times on imprint pages containing source information.
Additionally, students in the intervention group should
spend less time on content pages.
Secondly (H2), we hypothesized that the vigilance
instruction augments students’ consideration of sources in
an argumentative essay that requires students to take a
stance on the topic. Therefore, we expected students who
receive a vigilance instruction to cite more sources and to
make more evaluative comments on sources when justifying
their decisions. In addition, we expected students in the
intervention group to be more likely to adapt the stance of a
source high in expertise and benevolence.
Finally (H3), we assumed that students in the intervention
group would construct more source-content-links (Perfetti,

2279

Rouet & Britt, 1999), indicated by better memory for
sources.

Method
Participants and Design
The study was conducted using a between-participant
design. Participants were randomly assigned to a control or
an intervention group. A total of 120 middle school students
from a German “Gymnasium” (i.e., a school track in the
German educational system leading to graduation which
qualifies for university access) participated in this study.
Due to technical error, the data from eight students had to be
excluded. This left us with 112 participants (70% female;
mean age = 14.73 years, SD = .54). 48,2% of the students
reported using the internet at least several times a week or
more for searching information for school, which is
comparable to a representative German sample (48% of 1219 year-olds) (Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverband
Südwest, 2013).

source. Text difficulty and argument credibility were held
constant so that processing the content alone did not offer a
clear-cut conclusion about the harmfulness of aspartame.
Source information was presented on imprint pages that
could be accessed via hyperlinks starting from the
respective content page. Authors differed in expertise and
intention, which could be inferred from their occupations
and affiliations. For instance, a benevolent expert source
was the spokesman of an independent governmental
organization, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)
providing information on an official website. An example of
a malevolent lay-source was the website of a farmer, who
has a vested interest in pronouncing the hazardous effects of
aspartame as his business sells aspartame-free sodas.
Source information was designed to lead students to the
conclusion that aspartame is not harmful (e.g., claimed by
the benevolent expert-source and contradicted by the
malevolent lay-source). Students who process source
information therefore should arrive at the conclusion that
aspartame is not health damaging.

Covariates

Materials
Reading Instruction Both groups received an instruction to
conduct an internet search on a controversial medical topic.
This instruction asked students to imagine that their school’s
cafeteria sold drinks containing aspartame and that lately
many discussions about the potential negative side effects of
aspartame had arisen. Students were tasked to find out
whether the consumption of the artificial sweetener
aspartame has adverse health effects.
The intervention group received an additional text (221
words) on the same page, explaining the uneven distribution
of knowledge in the society and the phenomenon of low
editorial control on the internet (“Besides experts who are
knowledgeable about aspartame, also authors who hardly
know anything about aspartame comment on the topic.”).
It was explained how these two factors make readers
dependent on the sources’ competence and good intentions
(“…it is possible that information about aspartame is
presented one-sided or in a biased way”). It was argued that
evaluating source information can protect readers from
being misinformed (“… it is not sufficient to understand
what the text says. You additionally have to find out who
provides the information.”). Finally, students were advised
to check for source information on every website they visit
(“Ask yourself on every website: Does the author have
enough expertise about the topic?”).
Reading Materials Readers were presented with six
websites providing information about the topic aspartame
(M = 144.7 words, SD = 25.4). These were accessible via a
link list that resembled a standard search engine result page.
Three articles provided arguments supporting the claim that
aspartame is not health damaging, whereas three sources
claimed the opposite. Each argument was only provided
once, so that arguments found in the students’
argumentative essays could be traced back to its respective

Several covariates1 were included in order to control for
their respective influence on the dependent variables.
Self-reported Prior Knowledge and Topic Interest Selfreported prior knowledge was measured with three items
(e.g., “I know a lot about aspartame”). Topic interest was
measured with two items (e.g., “I am interested in the topic
of food ingredients”). Students rated all items on 1 to 5
point Likert-scales and mean value for prior knowledge and
interest were calculated.
General Reading Capabilities Students’ general reading
capability was measured using a standardized test inventory
in German language (LGVT 6-12; Schneider, Schlagmüller,
& Ennemoser, 2007). Students have four minutes to read a
text of 1,727 words. The text follows a cloze procedure
which repeatedly requires students to choose the correct
word from a list of three options. The individual coefficients
of reading speed and reading comprehension are calculated
from the number of words read within the given time limit
and the number of words correctly selected.

Dependent Measures
Attention to Sources For measuring students’ attention to
sources, their navigation patterns were recorded and two
main measures were extracted: number of visits to imprint
and content pages and dwell times on imprint and content
pages (in seconds).

1
Please note that we collected further data on individual
differences in source identification and source evaluation skills in
the present sample. Because this data falls out of the scope of the
present contribution, it is not reported in this paper.

2280

Consideration of Sources when Justifying an Own
Stance After reading, students were tasked to express their
own stance on the controversy and provide reasons for their
decision in a written essay. The students’ essays were
content-analyzed in terms of their consideration of sources.
More precisely, we analyzed (1) the number of source
references, (2) the number of evaluative statements about
sources and (3) the sources of the arguments provided by
the students. As (1) source references, we counted all
references that made clear which source was being referred
to (e.g. names, affiliations, occupations). (2) Evaluative
statements were coded if students’ answers referred in any
way to the benevolence, expertise or general credibility of a
specific source (e.g., knowledge about the topic, financial
interest, trustworthiness). As an indirect measure of
sourcing, argument use (3) was coded: arguments were
traced back to their sources in order to analyze which
sources the students relied on when justifying their decision.
Additionally, students were asked to indicate their decision
by marking their choice (“aspartame is health damaging” vs.
“aspartame is not health damaging”). Two independent
raters coded 40 essays. Inter-rater reliability was medium to
high, Cohen’s Kappa ranging from .79 to 1.
Memory for Sources To measure the memory for sources,
students were presented six paraphrases of arguments that
were used in the texts. Using a multiple-choice format,
students had to indicate the correct source for each
statement from a list of six options. To prevent students
from guessing, they could also select a “don’t know”option. A score of correct answers (0 to 6) was calculated
from students’ answers (Cronbach’s α = .64).

Procedure
First, all students completed the items measuring selfreported prior knowledge and topic interest. Next, students
were divided randomly into group A and group B due to a
limited number of available computers. Group A completed
the LGVT and questionnaires measuring the covariates,
whereas group B started to work on the reading task.
Students completed the task individually and were not
allowed to take notes. Reading time was limited to ten
minutes.
In the following, group A and group B switched rooms
and tasks. Finally, students were thanked, debriefed and
rewarded with sweets. The whole session lasted
approximately 90 minutes (= 2 lessons).

Results
Means and standard deviations of the dependent variables
are listed in Table 1.

Covariates
Self-reported Prior Knowledge and Topic Interest
Students’ self-reported knowledge on aspartame was rather
low (M = 1.09, SD = .34) and their self-reported personal
relevance moderate (M = 2.85, SD = 1.00). Both groups did

not differ in their prior knowledge, F(1,110) = .21, ns) or
topic interest, F(1,110) = .14, ns) concerning aspartame.
Furthermore, the two variables did not show significant
bivariate correlations with the dependent measures and
therefore were not included as covariates in the following
analyses.
General Reading Capabilities Students demonstrated
average reading comprehension (T- Values: M = 49.63, SD=
9.10) and reading speed scores (T- Values: M = 50.12, SD =
8.52). Intervention and control group did not differ in
reading comprehension, F(1, 110) = 2.13, ns, or reading
speed, F(1, 110) = 2.20, ns. Reading speed scores showed a
significant negative bivariate correlation with dwell times
on content pages (r = -.315, p < .001) and reading
comprehension was correlated negatively (r = -.251, p =
.008) with the number of different sources students drew
arguments from. Therefore, reading speed and
comprehension were included as covariates in the
corresponding analyses. For the other dependent variables,
no significant bivariate correlations were found.

Dependent Measures
Attention to Sources In line with H1, students in
intervention group visited more imprint pages than students
in the control group, F(1,110) = 31.23, p < .001, ɳ² = .221.
Regarding dwell times on imprint pages, students in the
intervention group spent more time on imprint pages than
students in the control group, F(1,110) = 36.81, p < .001, ɳ²
= .251. An ANCOVA including reading speed as a covariate
showed that students in the control group spent more time
on content pages than students in the control group,
F(2,109) = 6.04, p = .016, ɳ² = .052. In sum, log file data
suggest that the vigilance instruction increased students’
attention to sources and averted their attention from the
content itself.
Table 1: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of
the collected dependent measures for control group (CG)
and intervention group (IG).
condition
CG
Attention to
sources
Visits IP
Time on CP (sec.)
Time on IP (sec.)
Consideration of
sources
References
Evaluations
Arguments
Source memory

.71 (1.82)
441.48 (80.93)
7.14 (19.90)

3.30 (2.95)
411.80 (91.25)
51.31 (50.71)

.09 (.48)
.09 (.48)
2.5 (1.40)
1.89 (1.56)

.79 (1.22)
.59 (1.11)
2.04 (1.53)
2.66 (1.72)

IP = imprint pages; CP = content pages

2281

IG

Consideration of Sources Students in the intervention
group cited significantly more sources, F(1,110) = 16.00, p
< .001, ɳ² = .126, and included more evaluative comments
on sources, F(1,110) = 9.61, p = .002, ɳ² = .080 than
students in the control group. An ANCOVA controlling for
reading comprehension revealed that the essays of students
in the control group contained arguments from a higher
number of different sources than students in the intervention
group F(2,109) = 4.58, p = .035, ɳ² = .040. The overall
stronger consideration of sources was also reflected in the
students’ decisions on the controversy. Students in the
intervention group were more likely to adopt the stance
proposed by the benevolent expert-source, that aspartame is
not health damaging (χ² = 10.54, p = .001).
Memory for Sources Regarding memory for sourcecontent links, students in the intervention group showed a
better memory performance than students in the control
group, F(1,109) = 6.14, p = .015, ɳ² = .053. In line with H3,
results suggest that the vigilance instruction supported the
construction of source-content-links.

Discussion
This study evaluated the effects of a written instruction
aiming to increase readers’ epistemic vigilance on attention
to, consideration of and memory for sources in a multiple
document reading task. In line with our expectations,
students receiving written input on the division of cognitive
labor and on the lack of editorial control on the internet
engaged more frequently in sourcing strategies in order to
determine the validity of the provided information, than
students not receiving any input. Students in the intervention
group visited imprint pages more frequently and spent more
time on these pages (H1). They also cited more sources in
an argumentative essay, commented more often on source
credibility and were more likely to adopt the stance of the
benevolent expert-source. Analysis of student statements
also revealed that students in the control group borrowed
arguments from a larger variety of available sources,
whereas students in the intervention group seemed to select
their arguments more thoroughly. The latter do not mention
arguments from many different sources, but justify their
decisions with fewer arguments chose to underpin their
decisions with source information (H2). In doing so,
students from the intervention group drew on their memory
for source information, which proved to be better than
among students from the control group (H3).
Interestingly, general reading abilities were not associated
with students’ sourcing behavior. From this we derive that
sourcing might not be a facet of general reading ability and
is not automatically applied by good readers. On the
contrary, sourcing needs to be motivated with the help of
explicit instructions. Our study suggests that a written
instruction inducing epistemic vigilance is a potential tool
for improving students’ sourcing activities in a multiple
document task containing conflicting information.

Since our intervention did not teach any technical
sourcing skills (e.g., how to rate expertise and intentions)
our results support the findings by Stadtler et al. (2014),
who claim that students do not lack general sourcing skills
per se, but may not be aware of when the application of their
skills is needed. Therefore, an instruction raising their
epistemic vigilance during online research enables them to
put their sourcing competencies into action. Our results also
offer an explanation why intervention studies promoting
sourcing often fail to promote transfer (Walraven et al.,
2013). If students are not aware of the fact that every search
on the internet holds a high risk of being misinformed they
do not apply their newly acquired skills autonomously to
every online activity, but may exclusively apply them when
requested to do so.
As an educational implication we suggest that informing
students about the division of cognitive labor in society
combined with explications about publication mechanisms
on the web will raise students’ considerations of sources
during their internet research. We suggest that sourcing
should be taught as an additional approach to judging
validity of information and the need to evaluate both,
arguments and sources, should be promoted during class.
A limitation of this study lies in the instruction’s
combination of informing students about online publication
principles and prompting them to source at the same time.
Currently, we cannot rule out the possibility that students’
enhanced sourcing can be attributed to their obedience to the
sourcing request instead of their deeper understanding of the
reasons for sourcing. However, previous research showed
that simple instructions to attend to sources did not raise the
level of source attention to a notable extent (e.g., Britt &
Aglinskas, 2002; Gerjets, Kammerer & Werner, 2011).
Nevertheless, future studies need to disentangle the effects
of prompting and providing reasons for sourcing. To this
end, we shall conduct a slightly modified replication of our
study, which adds a “prompting-only” condition to the
experimental design. In addition, data on transfer of the
acquired skills is needed to determine whether students are
able to apply their sourcing skills spontaneously and in a
variety of tasks and reading contexts. Additionally, in order
to examine actual learning, transfer should be measured in
long-term studies, revealing if the intervention’s effects on
sourcing are maintained over time. Only if transfer over task
and time is achieved, students will be able to apply their
skills when they are searching for information without
guidance, as for example at home for schoolwork.
Future intervention studies could build on the present
findings and teach knowledge about the division of
cognitive labor and editorial control on the web. If a short
written instruction leads to enhanced sourcing, a more
elaborate lesson and practice might yield even greater
success and prove as an effective tool to close the gap
between students’ autonomous search for information and
their autonomous sourcing behavior.

2282

Acknowledgments
We thank all the participating schools for their support. This
research
was
supported
by
the
Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), grant STA 1291/1-1

References
Britt, M. A. & Aglinskas, C. (2002). Improving Students'
Ability to Identify and Use Source Information. Cognition
and
Instruction,
20,
485-522.
doi:
10.1207/s1532690xci2004_2
Bromme, R. & Goldman, S. (2014). The Public's Bounded
Understanding of Science. Educational Psychologist, 49,
59-69. doi: 10.1080/00461520.2014.921572
Bromme, R., Kienhues, D., & Porsch, T. (2010). Who
knows what and who can we believe? Epistemological
beliefs are beliefs about knowledge (mostly) attained from
others. in L. D. Bendixen, & F. C. Feucht (Eds.), Personal
Epistemology in the Classroom: Theory, Research, and
Implications for Practice (pp. 163-193). Cambridge:
Cambridge
University
Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511691904.006
Gerjets, P., Kammerer, Y., & Werner, B. (2011). Measuring
spontaneous and instructed evaluation processes during
Web search: Integrating concurrent thinking-aloud
protocols and eye-tracking data. Learning and Instruction,
21, 220-231. doi: 10.1016/j.learninstruc.2010.02.005
Haddon, L., Livingstone, S. & the EU Kids online network
(2012). EU Kids Online: National perspectives.
Retrieved from: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/46878/
Harris, P. L. (2012). Trusting what you’re told: How
children learn from others. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap
Press/Harvard University Press.
doi:10.4159/harvard.9780674065192
Keil, F.C., Stein, C., Webb, L., Billings V.D., & Rozenblit,
L. (2008). Discerning the division of cognitive labor: An
emerging understanding of how knowledge is clustered in
other minds. Cognitive Science, 32, 259-300. doi:
10.1080/03640210701863339
Kobayashi, K. (2014). Students’ consideration of source
information during the reading of multiple texts and its
effect on intertextual conflict resolution. Instructional
Science. doi: 10.1007/s11251-013-9276-3
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An
integrative model of organizational trust. Academy of
management
review.
20,
709-734.
doi:
10.5465/AMR.1995.9508080335
Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverband Südwest (2013).
KIM-Studie 2012. Kinder + Medien, Computer +
Internet. Basisuntersuchung zum Medienumgang 6- bis
13-Jähriger. Retrieved from:
http://www.mpfs.de/fileadmin/KIM-pdf12/KIM_2012.pdf
Perfetti, C. A., Rouet, J.-F., & Britt, M. A. (1999). Toward a
theory of documents representation. In H. van Oostendorp
& S. R. Goldman (Eds.), The construction of mental
representations during reading (pp. 99–122). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Sperber, D., Clément, F., Heintz, C., Mascaro, O., Mercier,
H., & Origgi, G. (2010). Epistemic vigilance. Mind and
Language,
25,
359-393.
doi:
10.1111/j.14680017.2010.01394.x
Schneider, W., Schlagmüller, M., & Ennemoser, M. (2007).
Lesegeschwindigkeits-und-verständnistest für die Klassen
6-12: LGVT 6-12. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Stadtler, M., Babiel, S., Rouet, J.-F., & Bromme, R. (2014,
April). Ninth-grade students possess good sourcing skills,
but do not apply them spontaneously while reading. Paper
presented for the Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, Philadelphia, USA.
Stadtler, M., & Bromme, R. (2007). Dealing with multiple
documents on the WWW: The role of metacognition in
the formation of documents models. International Journal
of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 191210. doi: 10.1007/s11412-007-9015-3
Stadtler, M., & Bromme, R. (2008). Effects of the
metacognitive computer-tool met.a.ware on the web
search of laypersons. Computers in Human Behavior, 24,
716-737. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2007.01.023
Stadtler, M., & Bromme, R. (2014). The content–source
integration model: A taxonomic description of how
readers comprehend conflicting scientific information. In
D. N. Rapp & J. Braasch (Eds.), Processing Inaccurate
Information: Theoretical and Applied Perspectives from
Cognitive Science and the Educational Sciences (pp. 379402). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Walraven, A., Brand-Gruwel, S., & Boshuizen, H. P. A.
(2013). Fostering students' evaluation behaviour while
searching the internet. Instructional Science, 41, 125-146.

2283

