Wayfinding and restructuring in a novel city: an insight problem solving task
Judit Pétervári (j.petervari@qmul.ac.uk)
School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, 327 Mile End Road
London, E1 4NS United Kingdom

Amory H. Danek (amory.danek@lmu.de)
Department Biology II, 2 Großhaderner Straße
Planegg-Martinsried, D-82152 Germany

Virginia L. Flanagin (vflanagin@lrz.uni-muenchen.de)
Department of Neurology, 23 Marchionini Straße
Munich, D-81377 Germany

Abstract
Navigating in a novel environment can serve as an applied
insight problem solving task, since many people gain a
sudden, clear understanding (Aha-moment) of the spatial
relations after being lost. With a unique design, we
transformed the city center of a medieval German city into a
virtual maze. The aim of the study was to test whether a
spatial decision making task simulating real navigation would
be feasible for investigating insight problem solving.
Participants learned two pathways which they subsequently
had to restructure to find their way to the navigation targets.
We found evidence for the restructuring of participants’ prior
knowledge during the solution attempts. 73% of all problem
solvers reported an Aha-moment and there was an error drop
at the critical intersection by those who had insight. The slope
of the learning curve was established as a measurement of
insightful experiences.
Keywords: navigation; insight; virtual reality; restructuring

Introduction
In wayfinding, some people perform well effortlessly, while
other people struggle tremendously. For the ones that
struggle, the navigation in a novel environment is an applied
insight problem-solving task: although they possess the
same information as their proficient peers, they still cannot
find out how to establish an accurate mental representation
of the spatial relations. The Representational Change
Theory (RCT) (Ohlsson, 1984, 1992) explains how an
abrupt realization about the right path may occur. Initially,
navigators have a misleading or incomplete mental
representation about the spatial relations, which is
misleading and thereby obstructs their solution attempts (i.e.
finding the navigation target). After taking detours, people
feel stuck at the problem and lost in space. The state of
impasse may be resolved by cognitive changes, which evoke
the sudden appearance of a fully crystallized solution idea.
This ‘Aha-moment’ is an "abrupt change in mental
perspective that leads one to the solution of an otherwise
intractable problem" (Luo, Niki, & Phillips, 2004, p. 2013).
Most of the problems may be dealt with using trial-and-error
strategy as well; however, insightful solutions alleviate the
solving process as they are elegant and sparse.

Critically, it must be understood how the cognitive
change in the mental representation is achieved. Participants
already possess the crucial information about the solution;
nonetheless, the real difficulty lies in organizing the
information in an efficient way, e.g. constructing an
overarching map from separately learned routes. In the
present study, an Aha-moment may occur while recognizing
the spatial relationship of two trained routes and/or
detecting a hidden rule for getting to the navigation targets.
Experiencing an Aha-moment would mean that one has an
understanding about the underlying structure, thus does not
have to guess or contemplate about the answer anymore. If
the participant has no or only minor insight, we predict the
task to be rated subjectively difficult and a performance
with high error rate. Whilst if participants reach a higher
stage of understanding, their performance would peak, i.e.
they would commit hardly any errors and they would rate
the task being easy. Thus we expect participants' error rates
to drop to (almost) zero after an Aha-moment and also to
have significantly lower reaction times in selecting the
proper navigation direction than the non-Aha group.
There are multiple ways of organizing the available
information in a more advantageous form. One of them is
restructuring, which helps to “see the problem in a new
light” (Jung-Beeman, Bowden, Haberman, Frymiare,
Arambel-Liu, Greenblatt, & Kounios, 2004, p. e97).
Examples of restructuring include directing the attention to
different knowledge segments as before, organizing the
information in a different order, or stumbling upon new
relations over the already established ones (Knoblich,
Ohlsson, Haider, & Rhenius, 1999; Knoblich, Ohlsson, &
Raney, 2001; Ohlsson, 1992). Applying the RCT to the
spatial navigation domain, an Aha-moment may also occur
if someone comes to an intersection that they know already
from another angle. When they restructure and possibly
extend their representation about the place, they realize that
the two partial representations match and are fractions of the
same view. This surprise can cause the reorganization of the
spatial exploratory behavior.
In spatial exploratory behavior, the way how people
mentally represent the external world shapes how efficient
they can find their way and what kind of knowledge they

1871

form. They can memorize an algorithm of turns or
landmarks to orient themselves, sometimes even establish a
cognitive map filled with precise distance and direction
estimations. Since pioneering work on cognitive maps
(Tolman, 1948), which is an understanding of the spatial
structure of the environment accessible from multiple
orientations, a vast body of literature has been written on
how spatial information is stored in the mind and what the
neural background of navigation proficiency is. Navigation
can be defined as coordinated and goal-directed movement
through the environment, which consists of wayfinding and
locomotion (Montello, 2005). In the present study, we
controlled for locomotion in order to test wayfinding-related
behavior and determine how it can be transformed into an
insight task.
Ohlsson (1992) defined an insight task as a problem
which provokes the essential representation for solving it
with a low probability. It is really hard to determine the
threshold of low probability, since there are massive
individual differences with regard to the perception and
representation of a given problem. There have been a few
attempts of dividing insight from non-insight problems
(Gilhooly, & Murphy, 2005; Weisberg, 1995). This process
moved towards spotting the necessary demarcation line;
still, some “insight problems” are only justified to be of that
kind by the personal judgment of the researcher using them
(Bowden, & Jung-Beeman, 2007). Determining whether a
problem can be considered as an insight task depends on
both the researcher and the problem solver. As a rule of
thumb, one must always ask for some kind of self-report
about the actual Aha-moment, since an Aha-experience has
no behavioral marker (Danek, Fraps, von Müller, Grothe, &
Öllinger, 2014). Luo & Knoblich (2007) defined several
requirements for credible insight neuroimaging studies.
Ideally, a good insight paradigm elicits restructuring and
enables manipulations for hypothesis testing, the insight
events can be iterated and are precisely time locked, and
appropriate reference states can be defined to contrast the
baseline and the target state, along with being able to test
both internally and externally triggered insights. A paradigm
which would satisfy all of these criteria is yet to be
established.
To the best of our knowledge, no paper has been
previously published about using human mazes as insight
problems. We wanted to model how complex mental
representations about spatial information are developed and
organized on a higher cognitive level. A new environment,
regardless of being an artificial maze or an unknown city,
qualifies well as an insight problem solving task: depending
on its complexity, the likelihood to reach the goal state
during navigation may be quite low. Limiting free
exploration and determining which parts of the surroundings
become known by the navigators are likely to trigger a state
of impasse. There is a need to restructure their mental map
and/or realize a hidden rule in turns at the decision points to
perform the task successfully. We created an ill-defined
problem where there are discoverable rules with varying

degrees of difficulty. Solving such a task informs us about
the interplay between navigational strategy use and the
restructuring of spatial information. By extending and reinterpreting the initially learned routes, one can see the
relations in a new way and navigators can find an optimal
solution to the task.

Methods
Participants
28 individuals living in Munich, Germany participated for a
monetary reward (25€). Participants were aged between 21
and 27 years (M=24.66, SD=1.49, 12 females) with normal
or corrected-to-normal visual acuity. The first 2 participants
were excluded due to a change in the experimental
paradigm. This resulted in an n=26 final sample size. All
subjects were healthy and naive to the purpose of the
experiment, 24 of them were right-handed. The study was
approved by the Ethics Committee of the LudwigMaximilians University and conducted in accordance with
the principles described in the Declaration of Helsinki. All
subjects gave their informed written consent prior to the
study.

The virtual environment
A photorealistic replica of the medieval city center of
Tuebingen, Germany, a place not known by our participants,
was used as a maze. We modeled everyday navigation as
naturally as possible. Although artificial mazes are more
controllable, wayfinding in a real-world city has a larger
ecological validity (e.g. Spiers & Maguire, 2006).
Nevertheless, in a complex, realistic environment, spatial
learning remains poorer in the virtual as compared to a real,
open-air setting (Richardson et al., 1999).
The virtual reality (VR) environment was created previously
by Tobias Meilinger (Meilinger, Franz, & Bülthoff, 2008)
with virtual reality modeling language. In the present study,
it was implemented using Vizard 3.0 (Vizard Virtual Reality
Software Toolkit, Worldviz, USA). The VR environment
depicted the city center to the smallest details: streets,
houses and intersections as well as shop signs, flower beds
and the graffiti tags on the walls were all rendered into the
model. Two main routes were configured (see Figure 1).
Participants navigated on ground-level from route
perspective (Tversky, 1991) with a first person view.
However, we restricted free navigation (1) to avoid spatial
anxiety induced by getting lost, (2) because time boundaries
are needed for designing a functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) paradigm and (3) to prevent participants
from wandering without orientation cues or reaching
familiar locations. Thus a “semi-free navigation” procedure
was applied, which reduced the navigation task to its most
essential element: choosing how to turn at the intersections.
Navigators traversed passively on pre-recorded route
segments and actively had to make a choice at each turning
point. We did not let anyone get lost; participants were
forced to move on a pre-assigned "optimal route". If they

1872

did not select this optimal route, they did not move, but had
to try again to make a better decision. Therefore, error rates
and reaction times in the decision have been analyzed.
Since an actual city is only quasi-controllable as a maze, we
specified the segregated routes according to the following
criteria: (1) the two basic routes must be as parallel as
possible (2) the connections between them (“bridges”)
should only be 1-2 intersections away (3) a hidden rule must
be fulfilled, i.e. participants should be able to recognize that
their movement pattern on the optimal route is fixed, they
are always traversing with a zigzag-like pattern from one
route to the other.

recorded the data in an fMRI scanner, we only expected to
observe the neural correlates of spatial navigation strategies,
memory recollection and the processing of contradicting
information. There is no agreement yet on the neural
correlate of insight (see Dietrich, & Kanso, 2010 for a
review), therefore we did not hypothesized about neural
correlates of insight at this stage of developing a new
paradigm. We relied on verbal reports to verify that the task
elicits Aha-moments and used neuroimaging to investigate
spatial orienting and decision making behavior. From this
perspective, the study is a behavioral experiment recorded in
supine position.
Due to length restrictions, we only report the results
regarding our insight problem solving paradigm and omit
the technical details of the fMRI equipment. Visual stimuli
were projected via a LCD display projector (Christie Digital
Systems, Germany) and responses were collected by 2 twobutton Lumina Response Pads (MR-compatible LU400PAIR by Cedrus Corporation, USA). System times, as well
as the selected path, reaction times and error numbers from
the answers were recorded in a virtual log file.

Procedure
Figure 1 – structure of the maze; g and r stand for the
respective stops of the two basic routes (green and red
routes) and blue dashed lines sign the bridges.
The basic routes are not perfectly straight but they fulfill the
3 aforementioned criteria. 10 bridges were established (five
connections, approached from two directions).
During the main experiment, an optimal navigation route
was followed, consisting of a fixed pattern of four
consecutive intersections. Thus between the starting point
and the navigation target, a recurring pattern of task-related
activities were carried out. The first intersection was already
known by the observers. Therefore, choosing how to
proceed was a simple recall: they have already seen the
same location from the same angle during the training.
Subsequently, they traveled this one stop on the previously
learned route and arrived to the second intersection. The
second one was the critical intersection where we expected
the Aha-moment, since participants here always had to
alternate from the path and look for a novel passage. From
this passage, a “bridge” opened between the green and the
red routes, thus after this stop, participants arrived to a
known yet unknown place – to a location which they have
already learned but have only seen from a different angle
before. Hence they could only realize, if it even occurred to
them, during or after arriving to the final intersection (which
is also an already known location) that they were in fact
coming from a stop of an already known route.

Apparatus
The present experiment is part of a bigger study
investigating both navigation strategies and insightful
moments linked to mental restructuring. Although we

The procedure followed a within-subject design. Trials were
randomized to control for sequence effects. Before
attempting any of the tasks, subjects had to rate themselves
on the Way-Finding Strategy Scale and the Spatial Anxiety
Scale, both constructed by Lawton (1994).
Training Two basic routes were trained. Participants
were explicitly instructed to establish a mental map of the
environment. The routes did not cross or intersect. Each
route consisted of 10 intersections, i.e. subjects had to make
decisions how to turn 8 times when walking along the path.
Each route was learned separately. First, the subjects were
passively guided throughout the relevant part of the
environment once. Locomotion was constant (running
speed). They had to observe the path carefully in order to
reproduce the steps themselves afterwards. During the
reproduction phase, they were asked at each intersection
which direction they need to go to continue along the route.
It was possible to turn left, right or go straight, but not
backwards. If they selected the right direction, they were
passively moved to the next intersection. If they did not
select the correct turn, they received a short feedback
message stating “It’s not the optimal route!” and they could
try again. They went through both routes until making no
errors.
Main experiment Participants had to search for 10
objects (non-native animals in the city) in the VR
environment while lying in supine position. The arbitrarily
selected animals were free online models loaded into the
virtual city; they floated above the streets and revolved
around their own vertical axis to enhance their saliency
(Figure 2). Subjects had to collect each animal 3 times
across 30 trials (20+10), which were separated by an
anatomical scan. They were navigating via responding to
direction questions appearing on the screen. Each

1873

presentation of an intersection question was jittered between
1 and 2.25 s with a step of 0.25 s.

Results
Evaluation of the paradigm
First, we looked at the subjective difficulty of our paradigm.
Participants rated the task to be rather easy (M=4.87,
SD=2.26 on a 10-point Likert scale, where 1 stands for
extremely easy and 10 for impossible). A Pearsoncorrelation between the average numbers of errors
committed at intersections (M=0.68, SD=0.32) and the selfreport difficulty ratings were not related significantly (r=.34,
ns.).

Insight
Figure 2 - A typical navigation target: an animal (giraffe)
floating above the street, turning around its own center.
Participants started out at any intersection along the
learned routes and were asked to find an animal using the
optimal route. Unlike in the training, participants have not
seen what the optimal route is but they had to figure out by
themselves. The animal always appeared at the end of the
route, at a stable position. We were interested in (1) how
many attempts participants needed to find the bridges
between the pre-defined routes and (2) whether they would
realize the hidden rule of the pathway. To obtain an
indication about the participants' current orientation, each
trial began with two questions: “Do you know where you
are?” and “Do you know which direction you would go to
continue along the learned route?”. We assumed that the
answers may differ to these two questions, and also
expected to get more yes answers with increasing the
familiarity with the city.
Following these two questions, participants attempted
locating the animal announced on the screen by choosing a
direction at each intersection. Through trial-and-error, they
learned the location of each animal. After having known the
animal locations, we provided a limited number of choices
in finding the correct direction to avoid guessing. If
navigators made more than one error per intersection, they
were informed on the screen they have exceeded the error
limit and had to repeat the trial. The repetition aided the
consolidation of the correct route, as well as it deterred from
guessing because of the tediousness of repetitions.
Participants could not see the animal earlier than their last
movement decision. Finally, they had to respond to the
exact same two questions as at the beginning of the trial in
order to register whether they noticed that they switched to
the other route. Once the desired object was found, they
proceeded to the next trial and were teleported to a new
location. Circa 50 minutes were spent in the scanner.
After participants finished the experiment, we interviewed
them shortly to learn more about their insight experience
and the navigation strategies they used. We examined their
route knowledge by asking to describe the spatial relations
between the pre-learned routes, as well as to draw the routes
on an outline map of the city center.

To see whether participants had a sudden, explicit
realization of any hidden rule, we looked at their reaction
times and error rates by each trial repetition. In addition, we
asked people whether they had any Aha-moment during the
completion of the task, and prompted to freely recall what
they realized. In a different question, we asked them to
indicate if they identified any hidden rules.
We split our participants into two groups: one group
consisted of the people who experienced any kind of
insights (n=19) and the other contained those who did not (n
=7). Then we looked at the differences in reaction times and
error rates of the two groups.
Reaction times After the outlier correction (n=5; cut-off
value=20s), a 3 (trial repetition) x 2 (insight) one-way
repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted. It revealed a
main effect of repetition [F(2,46)=63.2, p<.001,
η2partial=.733], as there was a large drop in the reaction times
(shown in Figure 3). It is a general learning effect, since the
difference between those who declared to have insight
(n=19) and those who did not report any Aha-moment (n=7)
was non-significant [F(1,23)=.052, ns.].

Figure 3 - average reaction times (in seconds) at each
repetition of a trial. Error bars express the standard error of
the mean. Aha: participants who have experienced Ahamoment(s); non-Aha: participants who have not reported
any Aha-moment.
Error rates A 3 (repetition) x 3 (intersection) repeatedmeasure ANOVA with a between-subjects factor (reporting

1874

Aha-moment) was conducted to assess the overall effect of
the experimental manipulations in the error rates. The values
are Greenhouse-Geisser corrected. We obtained main effects
by the factor repetition [F(1.95, 445.6) = 27.66, p < .001,
η2partial = .108] and intersection [F(1.9, 439.1) = 36.84, p <
.001, η2partial = .139], as well as by the interaction of
repetition and intersection [F(3.4, 779) = 16.51, p < .001,
η2partial = .067], thus the error rates have indeed dropped
significantly (see Figure 4). What is more, experiencing
insight yielded a tendency for showing significant difference
F(1,229)=3.6, p=0.59, η2partial=.015].

Figure 4 – average error rates by each intersection at each
repetition of a trial. The upper panel illustrates participants
who have experienced an Aha-moment, while the lower
panel shows data of those who have not reported any Ahamoment. Error bars depict the standard error of the mean.
A significant difference was found in the error rates between
the first and the second repetition [t(24)=7.32, p<.001, CI
95% [0.15, 0.26]], likewise between the first and the third
repetition [t(23)=8.1, p<.001, CI 95% [0.19, 0.33]]. Besides,
significant differences were observed among all of the
intersections [t1-2(24)=-11.9, p<.001, CI 95% [-0.64, -0.45];
t1-3(24)=-10.8, p<.001, CI 95% [-0.82, -0.56]; t2-3(24)=-3.8,
p<.001, CI 95% [-0.23, -0.07]].
The second intersection was the critical one for the
insight. An independent sample T-test showed a significant
difference between the Aha and non-Aha third repetition
errors at this intersection [t(88.4)=2.47, p=.016, Cohen's
d=0.53, CI 95% [0.03, 0.34]].

Discussion
The aim of this study was to test whether a spatial decision
making task simulating real navigation would be feasible for
an insight problem solving paradigm. We designed a
navigation task in a complex, naturalistic VR environment
and manipulated participants’ understanding about the
spatial relations. They were encouraged to restructure the
information available to them, e.g. convert the route
perspective into survey perspective, and thereby experience
an insight while getting to the navigation target. Participants
had to colligate segments of two routes into a new pathway
by discovering connections between them.
More than 70% of our participants reported to have
experienced insight during the course of the experiment.
Although we have not obtained a significant difference in
the reaction times between the two groups (people with and
without an Aha-moment), we have found a difference in
error rates in favor of the Aha-group. To avoid a floor effect
in task difficulty, we could increase the complexity of our
task. Enhancing the working memory load by introducing
more target objects or prolonging the optimal route with an
extra intersection would require more chance to get
disorientated while building the corresponding mental map.
In each trial, the second intersection was the stop where
participants had to leave the learned pathway and look for a
new direction in order to find the navigation target. There
has been a drop in error rates from the first to the second
repetition of the trial due to general learning effects.
However, by those who declared an Aha-moment, a further
decrease was noted in the error rates: the average number of
errors was reduced to zero or very close to zero. Moreover,
the error rates have increased from the second to the third
repetition by the group whose members have not
restructured their knowledge.
Notably, a disadvantage of the current design is that
participants cannot report their Aha-moments already in the
scanner. Any indication incorporated to the paradigm (e.g. a
button press) would only give an approximate measure,
since such reports are always delayed. However, we are
searching for tools to correct this delay. Here, we relied on
self-reports instead of any kind of online measurements to
discern the insightful incidents. Although Jäkel & Schreiber
(2013) argue for the importance of introspection data in
cognitive processes, we are not sure how much we can trust
the acquired self-reports. An online and direct measurement
of “Aha” would be desirable but hard to establish.
Since there are only very few problems which are
exclusively solvable with insight, if participants do not
report their experience, insightful and non-insightful
solutions get mixed together, which reduces the power of
the effects (Bowden, & Jung-Beeman, 2007). We
hypothesize that if the groups with and without Ahamoments would not be determined on a participant but on a
trial basis, the effects would get even more pronounced.
This is why we are developing the paradigm further to fulfill
all of the criteria outlined by Luo & Knoblich (2007). In
terms of restructuring, which was in the focus of our study,

1875

the task proved to be successful. It was absolutely necessary
to build new relations (the bridges) between the elements of
the problem, to re-interpret the learned segments of the
route and to assemble novel pathways from them (Ohlsson,
1992). The re-combination of the parts gave meaning to a
new “whole” (Wertheimer, 1959).
During the task, it was possible to experience multiple
insight events, but the number of Aha-moments is not
specified. The controlling for accurate onset times was the
weakest aspect of the paradigm. We could not secure the
occurrence of an insight.
In terms of hypothesis testing, we are confident that our
task can be modified in numerous ways to enable a more
fine-grained analysis of the involved brain regions as well
as to experimentally manipulate various factors and thereby
inform the underlying theories. What is more, when it
comes to the problem of reference states, it is favorable that
our task can be solved both with and without insight. If we
could segregate the insightful events accurately, we could
easily contrast them with the non-insightful solutions and
sort out the arising differences.
The paradigm models a natural way of obtaining insight.
Thus, it does well in internally provoking Aha-moments.
Nevertheless, in order to control for the exact onset time of
such a moment, we could complement our design with
external solution cues pointing to the relevant part of
recognition participants should make to achieve a deeper
understanding of the task.
All in all, in the present study the research fields of spatial
navigation and problem solving were connected to
demonstrate that simulating navigation behavior in a virtual
environment is an appropriate scanner task for investigating
insight problem solving. Inspecting wayfinding in a novel
city leads to both a more profound knowledge about the
interplay of spatial navigation strategies and their mental
representation and can contribute to the quest for the neural
correlate of insight.

Acknowledgements
We thank Joshua Yudice for programming the paradigm and
Anja Ries for helping with the data collection. This study
was supported by the LMU Munich’s Institutional Strategy
LMUexcellent within the framework of the German
Excellence Initiative.

References
Bowden, E. M., & Jung-Beeman, M. (2007). Methods for
investigating the neural components of insight. Methods,
42(1), 87-99.
Danek, A. H., Fraps, T., von Müller, A., Grothe, B., &
Öllinger, M. (2014). It's a kind of magic—what selfreports can reveal about the phenomenology of insight
problem solving. Frontiers in psychology, 5.
Dietrich, A., & Kanso, R. (2010). A review of EEG, ERP,
and neuroimaging studies of creativity and insight.
Psychological bulletin, 136(5), 822.

Gilhooly, K. J., & Murphy, P. (2005). Differentiating
insight from non-insight problems. Thinking &
Reasoning, 11(3), 279-302.
Jäkel, F., & Schreiber, C. (2013). Introspection in Problem
Solving. The Journal of Problem Solving, 6(1), 4.
Jung-Beeman, M., Bowden, E. M., Haberman, J., Frymiare,
J. L., Arambel-Liu, S., Greenblatt, R., & Kounios, J.
(2004). Neural activity when people solve verbal
problems with insight. PLoS biology, 2(4), E97.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in
insight problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(6),
1534.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G. E. (2001). An eye
movement study of insight problem solving. Memory &
Cognition, 29(7), 1000-1009.
Lawton, C. A. (1994). Gender differences in way-finding
strategies: Relationship to spatial ability and spatial
anxiety. Sex roles, 30(11-12), 765-779.
Luo, J., & Knoblich, G. (2007). Studying insight problem
solving with neuroscientific methods. Methods, 42(1), 7786.
Luo, J., Niki, K., & Phillips, S. (2004). Neural correlates of
the 'Aha! reaction'. Neuroreport, 15(13), 2013-2017.
Meilinger, T., Knauff, M., & Bülthoff, H. H. (2008).
Working memory in wayfinding—A dual task experiment
in a virtual city. Cognitive Science, 32(4), 755-770.
Montello, D. R. (2005). Navigation. In P. Shah & A.
Miyake (Eds.) The Cambridge handbook of visuospatial
thinking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ohlsson, S. (1984). Restructuring revisited: II. An
information processing theory of restructuring and
insight. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 25, 117–
129.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information-processing explanations of
insight and related phenomena. In M. Keane & K. J.
Gilhooly (Eds.) Advances in the psychology of thinking.
London: Harvester-Wheatsheaf.
Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., & Hegarty, M. (1999).
Spatial knowledge acquisition from maps and from
navigation in real and virtual environments. Memory &
cognition, 27(4), 741-750.
Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (2006). Thoughts,
behaviour, and brain dynamics during navigation in the
real world. Neuroimage, 31(4), 1826-1840.
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men.
Psychological Review, 55(4), 189-208.
Tversky, B. (1991). Spatial mental models. Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, 27, 109-145.
Weisberg, D. S., Keil, F. C., Goodstein, J., Rawson, E., &
Gray, J. R. (2008). The seductive allure of neuroscience
explanations. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(3),
470-477.
Wertheimer, M. (1959). Productive thinking. M.
Wertheimer (Ed.). New York: Harper & Row.

1876

