What the Baldwin Effect affects
Thomas J. H. Morgan (thomas.morgan@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
The Baldwin Effect is a proposed mechanism by which plasticity facilitates adaptive phenotypic and genetic evolution. In
particular it has been proposed to be involved in the evolution of language. Here we investigate three factors affecting
the extent to which plastic traits are fixed by selection: (i) the
difficulty with which traits can be acquired through plasticity,
(ii) the importance of traits to fitness, and (iii) the nature of
dependencies between different traits. We find that selection
preferentially fixes traits that are difficult to acquire through
plasticity, traits that have larger fitness benefits, and traits that
affect the acquisition of, or benefits from, other traits. We conclude by discussing the implications of these findings for the
evolution of language as well as non-human behaviors and reconsider the evolutionary significance of the Baldwin Effect.
Keywords: Baldwin effect; gene-culture co-evolution; language evolution.

the Baldwin Effect, what aspects of language should we expect to see under relatively strong genetic influence? We address this question by using evolutionary simulations to explore three factors that affect the extent to which selection
reduces the plasticity of traits in a stationary environment.
The factors we consider are: (i) the ease with which traits can
be acquired through plasticity, (ii) the fitness contributions
of traits, and (iii) dependencies concerning the acquisition of
plastic traits. We find that selection preferentially fixes traits
that are hard to acquire through plasticity, traits that are are
important to fitness, and traits upon which the acquisition of
other plastic traits depend. We also show that the extent of
fixation is negatively affected by the number of traits to be
fixed and the mutation rate.

Background

Introduction
The relationship between phenotypic and genetic change is
an outstanding question in evolution. While the typical view
is that phenotypic change is the result of genetic change, this
contrasts with observations of living organisms where plasticity (the capacity to respond to environmental inputs with
phenotypic change) often produces more rapid phenotypic
change than would be possible via genetic change (WestEberhard, 2003).
One proposal for how development and evolution can interact to shape the phenotype is the “Baldwin Effect”, a term
coined by G. G. Simpson in 1953 in reference to J. M. Baldwin’s 1896 publication “A New Factor in Evolution”. It refers
to the process by which selection reduces the plasticity of
traits that initially arose via plasticity. Models of the Baldwin
Effect have shown that plasticity can greatly accelerate both
phenotypic and genetic evolution (Hinton & Nowlan, 1987).
This is because plasticity can expose variation in the ability to
acquire a trait during development, where without such plasticity there would be no relevant variation.
The Baldwin Effect has also been invoked in theories of
the evolution of language (e.g., Deacon, 1997); language’s
universal distribution is intuitively suggestive of genetic influence, whilst the variation between languages and the time required to learn a language show it is also plastic. Whilst some
authors (Pinker & Bloom, 1990; Pinker, 2003) have used the
Baldwin Effect to argue for the evolution of a strong genetic
influence specific to language, other work suggests the Baldwin Effect is unlikely to produce such specific results (Chater
et al., 2009; Christiansen et al., 2011).
These differences highlight how, despite recent interest,
basic questions about the Baldwin Effect remain unanswered.
A key question concerns what kinds of traits the Baldwin Effect is likely to affect. If the evolution of language involved

19th

At the end of the
century, after the publication of The
Origin of Species (Darwin, 1859), but prior to the formation
of the Modern Synthesis, there was still considerable debate
over the mechanism of evolution (Larson, 2004). Lamarckian
proposals, involving the inheritance of acquired characteristics, were falling out of favor, due to the vigorous argumentation of August Weissmann (Haig, 2007), and also the failure
of Lamarckians to produce positive evidence of the inheritance of acquired characteristics (Larson, 2004). Meanwhile,
various developmentally inclined researchers proposed what
was then known as “organic selection”; the idea that developmental plasticity, by adaptively shaping phenotypic variation, directs, and thus predicts, genetic change without the
need for the inheritance of acquired characteristics (Baldwin,
1896; Depew, 2003; Osborne, 1896; Lloyd Morgan, 1896;
Godfrey-Smith, 2003). However, the implications of organic
selection were never established and an increasing focus on
genes meant that development was not included the Modern
Synthesis (Amundson, 2005). It was not until the 1950s that
organic selection was re-named the Baldwin Effect (Simpson,
1953), but the general conclusion was that, whilst possible,
the Baldwin Effect lacked any real importance. Soon after,
the Baldwin Effect, having become associated with Lamarckian ideas, was virtually abandoned (Mayr, 1963).
However, the past 30 years have seen a modest resurgence
of interest in the Baldwin Effect. This was, in part, due to theoretical work showing that learning can accelerate the evolution of difficult-to-find traits (Hinton & Nowlan, 1987). Hinton and Nowlan first considered a trait underpinned by multiple genetic loci, each of which could have two alleles: correct or incorrect. The only way for the organism to gain a
fitness benefit was to possess all correct alleles. As the number of loci increases, the odds of finding such a needle in

1643

a haystack diminish tremendously and populations are fated
to drift randomly amongst functionally equivalent genotypes
until the single effective genotype is stumbled upon. This was
contrasted with a scenario including a third, plastic, allele, ?.
Provided an organism’s genome contains only correct and ?
alleles, they at least have a chance at discovering the trait, an
outcome that is increasingly likely as the number of correct
alleles increases. The inclusion of plasticity greatly accelerated the evolution of the beneficial trait, due to two factors:
(i) there are now many possible genotypes capable of learning
the trait, not just one, ameliorating the needle-in-a-haystack
problem, and (ii) once an organism capable of learning the
trait evolves there is a continuous selection gradient towards
more effective learning by increasing numbers of correct alleles.
Several authors have implicated the Baldwin Effect in accounts of the evolution of language (Pinker & Bloom, 1990;
Pinker, 2003; Deacon, 1997). One such approach is the “cognitive niche” theory of human evolution (Pinker, 2010, 2003;
Pinker & Bloom, 1990; Barrett et al., 2007). In this account,
a genetic language capacity coevolved with other cognitive
abilities in the face of an environment that favored a complex and flexible “improvisational intelligence”. A difficulty,
however, lies in how genes supporting language could spread
from a single individual, given that their benefit is reliant on
them being widespread in a population. This problem is analogous to that considered by Hinton and Nowlan (1987), but
rather than coordinating multiple loci within one individual,
the problem is to coordinate the same locus across individuals. Furthermore, the cost of sustaining a brain capable of language would seemingly prevent the mutation from spreading
via drift. Pinker and Bloom (1990) argued that this problem
could be solved with the Baldwin Effect. If all individuals
have some capacity to learn language through plasticity, but
the mutation greatly enhances this capacity, when the mutation arises its bearer will be able to share language through
social interactions. This allows the mutation to increase fitness even if it is unique in the population and so it can spread
through natural selection. However, whilst plausible, the cognitive niche has been criticized for taking insufficient account
of the role of culture in the evolution of language (Boyd et al.,
2011; Whiten & Erdal, 2012; Heyes, 2012).
An alternative account, closer to late 19th century ideas of
plasticity not only accelerating, but also guiding evolution,
has been proposed by Deacon (1997). In this account, language was initially a product of cultural evolution, drawing
on more general cognitive abilities. The benefits from language, however, generated selection favoring organisms who
could learn the language more easily. Accordingly, selection
favored genetic change that enhanced the ability to acquire
the language, eventually resulting in modern human language
capabilities. This account fits well with theories such as
niche construction (Odling-Smee et al., 2003) which explores
the evolutionary consequences of organisms abilities to modify their selective environment, and gene-culture co-evolution

(Boyd & Richerson, 1985; Cavalli-Sforza & Feldman, 1981;
Lumsden & Wilson, 1981; Richerson & Boyd, 2005) which
studies interactions between genetic and cultural evolution.
Given the above theorizing, a small number of papers have
used mathematical models to explore the extent to which selection can fix plastic traits. Ancel (1999; 2000) found that
whilst plasticity can accelerate the initial appearance of a new
trait, it actually slows it’s fixation because, once the trait can
be reliably acquired, there is little selective advantage to its
fixation. Other work has argued that only highly stable plastic traits can be fixed (Chater et al., 2009) as otherwise the
traits will change before selection on genes can fix them. Initially Chater et al. (2009) suggested that language changes
too rapidly for fixation to be plausible, however, in later work
they suggest that the stable features shared across languages
could be subject to the Baldwin Effect, but emphasize that the
fixed traits may not be language specific (Christiansen et al.,
2011). Supporting this, other work has found that the Baldwin Effect can be prevented if the resulting changes would
result in cognitive constraints that decreased performance at
other tasks (Reali & Christiansen, 2009). The involvement of
the Baldwin Effect in the evolution of language thus remains
a real possibility, though the evolution of a language-specific
genetic capacity perhaps less so.
Whilst existing work reveals the circumstances under
which the Baldwin Effect can operate, an orthogonal set of
questions concern which traits are likely to be affected. In the
remainder of the paper we use a simulation approach to consider the fixation of a group of traits of different (i) difficulty
to acquire through plasticity, (ii) fitness importance and (iii)
interdependency. We find that selection preferentially fixes
difficult traits, traits that are significant to fitness and traits
upon which others depend. We also find that plasticity is most
prevalent when there are a large number of traits. The end
result is that complex behaviors consisting of multiple steps
can be performed with deceptive ease and effectiveness, despite still requiring learning. We relate these findings to the
evolution of language and other traits more generally.

The Simulation Framework
Our simulation framework is based on that of Hinton and
Nowlan (1987). We consider a population of N asexual, haploid organisms whose fitness is determined by the acquisition
of n fitness-relevant traits. The successful acquisition of the
tth trait by the ith individual is affected by a corresponding
genetic locus, Gi,t . Accordingly, each organism has n genetic
loci. Each locus contains one of two possible alleles: fixed
and plastic. A fixed allele means that the organism is guaranteed to acquire that trait, whilst a plastic allele means that it
is capable of acquiring the trait through plasticity with probability p. Hinton and Nowlan (1987) included a third allele
that prevented individuals from acquiring the relevant trait,
however, this was included to show that the existence of plastic alleles accelerates the rate at which the trait can be found.
Here our intent is to explore factors affecting the extent of fix-

1644

n

Fi = Fmin + ∑ φi,t fi,t

(2)

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7

Frequency of fixed allele

The fitness benefit to the ith individual from the tth trait is fi,t .
Accordingly, the fitness, F, of the ith organism is given by:

2 traits
5 traits
10 traits
20 traits

0.6

ation at different loci assuming that the traits can be acquired
with a non-zero probability, and so we do not include the third
allele. The probability that the ith individual acquires the tth
trait (whether through plasticity or fixation) is is given by φi,t ,
where:
(
1
if Gi,t = fixed
(1)
φi,t =
pi,t if Gi,t = plastic

Simulation 1: Difficulty
First, we explore how differences in the probability traits are
acquired through plasticity affect the extent to which they become fixed. To do this, we assume all behaviors give all individuals the same benefit (i.e., fi,t is the same for all i and all t)
and that all individuals are equally effective at acquiring traits
through plasticity (i.e., pi,t is the same for all i), but we do not
assume that all behaviors are equally easy to acquire through
plasticity (i.e., pi,t is not the same for all t). Specifically, we
considered the case where, for a given value of n, the probability that the tth trait is acquired through plasticity is given
by:
1 t − 12
pi,t = +
(3)
2
2n
This produces a range of values evenly spaced between 0.5
and 1, with lower values of t associated with lower values
of pi,t . For robustness, we carried out simulations with other
distributions of pi,t (including ranging from 0 to 1), but results
were always consistent.
The simulation results reveal that the more difficult a trait
is to acquire through plasticity, the greater the extent to which
selection fixes it (see Figure 1). Assuming q = 0.01, the easiest trait to acquire through plasticity is between 10 and 20%

0.4

where Fmin is a baseline value of fitness, assumed to come
from other fitness relevant traits (whilst Fmin simply serves
to avoid the floor effects of organisms having negative fitnesses, higher values of Fmin will also weaken selection).
Once fitness is calculated, organisms reproduce according to
the Wright-Fisher process where repeated sampling with replacement from the parental generation, weighted by fitness,
generates N offspring (Wright, 1931; Fisher, 1930). The offspring generation then replaces the parental generation. Every offspring inherits their parent’s genome subject to mutation. Each locus mutates, changing its allele, with probability
q.
Unless specified otherwise: pi,t = 0.75, fi,t = 1, Fmin = 1 and
N = 500. Simulations were carried out for values of n between
2 and 20 and values of q between 0.001 and 0.1 and starting
genotypes were a random assortment of fixed and plastic alleles.

0.5

t=1

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

Probability of learning plastic behavior

Figure 1: The extent to which selection fixes traits is affected
by how hard they are to acquire through plasticity (pi,t ). This
figure shows the fixation of each trait, for n = 2, 5 10 and
20. Each point shown is the average of 20 repeats of 500
generations, with N = 500 and q = 0.01.
more plastic than the most difficult trait. Average fitness is
higher for a given level of average plasticity than would be
expected if plasticity were evenly distributed across loci because the more plastic traits are relatively easy to acquire
through plasticity. The extent of fixation is reduced by increasing the number of traits; assuming q = 0.01 average fixation is ~85% for n = 2, but ~60% for n = 20. This is because,
as each locus has a chance of mutating independent of all
other loci, the expected number of mutations per offspring, q̂,
is given by:
q̂ = nq
(4)
Accordingly, the ability of selection to fix traits is reduced
when there are more traits to fix or when the probability of a
locus mutating is increased. To test robustness, further simulations were run with n = 50, 100 and 200 and the relationship between difficulty and fixation remained, although, as
expected, overall fixation was lower. It should be noted however, that the value of q we used is unrealistically high and
using more realistic values increases the extent of fixation.

Simulation 2: Importance
We now explore how differences in the fitness effects of traits
affect the extent to which they become fixed. To do this, we
assume that all individuals are equally effective at acquiring
traits through plasticity (i.e., pi,t is the same for all i) and that
all traits are equally easy to be acquired through plasticity

1645

1.0

is where the acquisition of the tth trait depends on the acquisition of traits 1 to (t-1). Taking this dependency into account,
the probability that the ith individual acquires the tth trait, φi,t ,
is:

0.9

2 traits
5 traits
10 traits
20 traits

0.8

if Gi,t = fixed
t

 pi,t ∏ φi,u

if Gi,t = plastic

(6)

u=1

0.7

Accordingly, the fitness of the ith individual is:
!
j

n

0.6

Fi = Fmin + ∑

fi, j ∏ φi,k

j=1

0.4
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

(7)

k=1

An alternative way to imagine this scenario is that the fitness
effect of acquiring the tth trait is contingent on the acquisition
of traits 1 to (t-1). Taking this dependency into account, the
probability that the ith individual acquires the tth trait, φi,t , is
given by equation 1, whilst the fitness effect of the tth trait to
the ith individual is:

0.5

Frequency of fixed allele

φi,t =


1

1.0

Fitness contribution of trait

t

fi,t0 = fi,t ∏ φi,u
Figure 2: Selection preferentially fixes important traits (those
with larger values of fi,t ). This figure shows the plasticity of
each trait for populations with 2, 5, 10 and 20 traits after 500
generations. Each point shown is the average of 20 repeats,
with N=500 and q=0.01. The probability of each trait being
acquired if plastic (pi,t ) is 0.75.

where fi,t is the fitness effect of trait acquisition, assuming
all traits upon which it depends have been acquired (either
through plasticity or fixation). In this case the fitness of the
ith individual is:
!
j

n

Fi = Fmin + ∑
(i.e., pi,t is the same for all t). However, we assume different
traits bring different fitness benefits (i.e. fi,t is the same for all
i, but not all t). Specifically we considered the case where,
for a given value of n, the fitness benefit of acquiring the tth
trait is given by:
t − 12
fi,t =
(5)
n
This produces a range of values evenly spaced between 0 and
1, with lower values of t associated with lower values of fi,t .
The results show that the more important a trait is to fitness,
the greater the extent to which it is fixed by selection (see Figure 2). Assuming q = 0.01, the trait with the greatest effect
on fitness is between 10 and 20% less plastic that the least
important trait. This is because fixing important traits brings
more fitness benefit than fixing less important traits and so
selection acts to genetically secure the more valuable traits,
whilst leaving the less valuable ones up to plasticity. As before, average fitness is greater than if plasticity were equally
distributed across loci and increasing the number of loci or
the mutation rate increases average plasticity.

Simulation 3: Dependence
Finally, we consider a case where the traits depend on each
other. Specifically, we assume that the tth trait depends on
traits 1 to (t-1). One way such dependence could be manifest

(8)

u=1

j=1

fi, j ∏ φi,k

(9)

k=1

Equations 7 and 9 are the same, and so both interpretations
will have the same evolutionary consequences and are interchangeable.
Note that, aside from effects of dependency, we assume
that all traits are equally difficult to acquire through plasticity
and bring the same fitness benefit (i.e., both pi,t and fi,t are the
same for all i and all t).
The results show that the larger the number of traits that
depend upon a particular trait, the greater the extent to which
selection fixes it (see Figure 3). Assuming q=0.01, the most
foundational trait is between 10 and 20% less plastic than
the most trivial trait. This is because of the influence foundational traits have on the acquisition/fitness effects of other
traits, their fixation brings larger increases to fitness. As before, average fitness is greater than if plasticity were equally
distributed across loci and increasing the number of loci or
the mutation rate increases average plasticity.

Discussion
We have shown that the genetic fixation of plastic traits – the
Baldwin Effect sensu Simpson (1953) – is not indiscriminate
and that selection preferentially fixes traits that are difficult
to acquire through plasticity, that come with larger benefits to
fitness, or that affect the probability of acquiring other traits

1646

0.8
0.7
0.6

2 traits
5 traits
10 traits
20 traits

0.4

0.5

Frequency of fixed allele

0.9

1.0

that culture greatly increases the importance of the Baldwin
Effect by bringing an increasing number of traits within the
scope of plasticity - something that Baldwin discusses as “social heredity” (Baldwin, 1896). Indeed, such a suggestion
can be seen in both Pinker and Bloom’s (1990) and Deacon’s
(1997) use of the Baldwin Effect to explain the evolution of
language. In both cases communication between individuals,
culturally transmitting the ability to engage in language, is
necessary for the genetic evolution of an increased language
capacity. The difference between the two is that for Pinker
and Bloom (1990) the emergent language is specified by a genetic language ability, whereas for Deacon (1997) the emergent language is a product of cultural evolution that becomes
genetically entrenched.

5

10

15

20

Trait

Figure 3: Selection preferentially fixes traits that are needed
to acquire other traits through plasticity or to gain the fitness
benefits from other traits. This figure shows the plasticity
of each trait for populations with 2, 5, 10 and 20 traits after
500 generations. The horizontal axis shows the indices of the
traits, where each trait can only be acquired via plasticity once
all traits with lower indices have been acquired. Accordingly,
for the simulations with only two traits, there are only two
points at indices 1 and 2. Each point shown is the average of
20 repeats, with N = 500, q = 0.01 and pbase = 0.75.

(or their fitness benefits). In all three simulations the equilibrium populations still show extensive plasticity, and individuals typically do not acquire all the traits, yet they acquire
more traits and have higher fitness than would be expected
if the plasticity were distributed evenly across traits. This
is because the acquisition of the difficult, important or integral traits has been enhanced by selection. Together with the
work of Chater et al. (2009) this identifies a potential feedback mechanism by which traits that are sufficiently stable to
be subject to the Baldwin Effect become even more stable as
their acquisition is made more reliable.
These findings are not examples of gene-culture coevolution or niche construction (unless plasticity itself is considered an example of niche construction) as there is no cultural transmission or external modification of selective environments within the models. Rather, they illustrate the interaction between developmental plasticity and selection. We do
not mean that cultural or niche constructing accounts of the
Baldwin Effect are misguided, just that the Baldwin Effect
is a more general process that also includes non-cultural and
non-niche constructing cases. Nonetheless, it remains likely

Our findings suggest that if a multi-faceted trait (such as
language) were subject to the Baldwin Effect, even at equilibrium, its acquisition should require learning and so errors in
acquisition will occur (because plasticity is not extinguished),
but, despite this, its complex aspects should be remarkably
easy to learn and its important or essential aspects should be
widespread. This offers a potential answer to the question
of how it is that language is so readily acquired by human
children: the acquisition of the (seemingly) difficult, important or foundational aspects may have been enhanced by the
Baldwin Effect. This raises the question of which aspects of
language these are. Whilst we can only provide a tentative
suggestion, features such as the existence of a grammar or
tenses (as opposed to a given language’s specific grammar or
tense system) are foundational to the use of language and so
satisfy our conditions for fixation (although how difficult they
were for our ancestors to acquire is hard to say), and in keeping with our findings they are also common across languages.
However, rather than aspects of language itself being fixed,
a prosocial motivation to engage with others and socially acquire information could have been subject to the Baldwin Effect and indirectly fostered the cultural evolution of language.
This is in line with work suggesting that any fixation would
tend to favor the acquisition of many behaviors, as opposed
to just language (Christiansen et al., 2011), and a tendency to
be motivated to learn from others seems in line with human
behavior which is dependent on culture to an unparalleled extent.
As plasticity is a ubiquitous feature of living organisms,
our findings may have implications for non-human evolution.
Two cases we will briefly discuss here are (i) the ability of
archerfish to shoot down flying insects with jets of water propelled from their mouth (Schuster et al., 2006), and (ii) the
singing ability of songbirds, such as zebra finches (Feher et
al., 2014). In both cases the behavior is complex and plastic,
yet both are performed readily and with a high degree of proficiency. In the case of archerfish an astounding level of performance can be achieved through a small number of observations of another individual and without practice (Schuster
et al., 2006). In the zebra finch, even playback of a youngster’s own initial attempts at song is sufficient for them to

1647

develop complex song typical of adults (Feher et al., 2014).
Such behaviors seem plausible cases of the Baldwin Effect
leading to the fixation of behaviors that once required much
more learning and future work could investigate this in more
detail.
Despite a mixed history, there is now a growing body of
evidence to suggest that the fixation of learnt behaviors can
occur and several factors have been identified that affect its
extent - here we propose difficulty, importance, and dependence as well as the number of loci. Given this there might
be reason to think that the Baldwin Effect could be valuable
after all, both explaining the evolution of traits that rely on
coordinating the behavior of multiple individuals, or complex
traits that are performed with high reliability. While we agree
that the Baldwin Effect does offer such a tool, we would say
that it is likely to be a much more general process. Even if
traits can be understood in terms of the accumulated effects
of mutations on the phenotype without the need for plasticity,
does such a process seem likely given how plastic organisms
are so many ways? From this perspective the Baldwin Effect
is not so much a “new factor” in evolution (Baldwin, 1896)
as it is simply the standard evolutionary process.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by grant number
BCS-1456709 from the National Science Foundation.

References
Amundson, R. (2005). The Changing Role of the Embryo in Evolutionary Thought. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ancel, L. W. (1999, January). A quantitative model of the SimpsonBaldwin Effect. Journal of theoretical biology, 196(2), 197–209.
Ancel, L. W. (2000, December). Undermining the Baldwin expediting effect: does phenotypic plasticity accelerate evolution?
Theoretical population biology, 58(4), 307–19.
Baldwin, J. (1896). A New Factor in Evolution. The American
Naturalist, 30(354), 441–451.
Barrett, H. C., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2007). The Hominid Entry into the Cognitive Niche. In S. W. Gangestad & J. A. Simpson
(Eds.), The evolution of mind: Fundamental questions and controversies (pp. 241–248). New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the Evolutionary
Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., & Henrich, J. (2011, June). The cultural
niche: why social learning is essential for human adaptation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108 Suppl, 10918–
25.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., & Feldman, M. W. (1981). Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Chater, N., Reali, F., & Christiansen, M. H. (2009, January). Restrictions on biological adaptation in language evolution. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106(4), 1015–20.
Christiansen, M. H., Reali, F., & Chater, N. (2011, April). Biological adaptations for functional features of language in the face of
cultural evolution. Human biology, 83(2), 247–59.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of species by means of natural
selection. London: Murray.
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The co-evolution of
language and the brain. New York, NY: W. W. Norton.
Depew, D. J. (2003). Baldwin and His Many Effects. In B. H. Weber
& D. J. Depew (Eds.), Evolution and learning: The baldwin effect
reconsidered. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.

Feher, O., Suzuki, K., Okanoya, K., Ljubicic, I., & Tchernichovski,
O. (2014). Birds tutored with their own developing song produce
wildtype-like song as adults. The Evolution of Language. Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on the Evolution
of Language, 433–434.
Fisher, R. (1930). The genetical theory of natural selection. Oxford:
Clarendon.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2003). Between Baldwin Skepticism and Baldwin Boosterism. In B. H. Weber & D. J. Depew (Eds.), Evolution
and learning: The baldwin effect reconsidered. Cambridge, MA:
MIT press.
Haig, D. (2007, December). Weismann Rules! OK? Epigenetics
and the Lamarckian temptation. Biology & Philosophy, 22(3),
415–428.
Heyes, C. (2012, August). New thinking: the evolution of human
cognition. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences, 367(1599), 2091–6.
Hinton, G., & Nowlan, S. (1987). How learning can guide evolution.
Complex systems, 1, 495–502.
Larson, E. J. (2004). Evolution: The Remarkable History of a Scientific Theory. New York: Modern Library.
Lloyd Morgan, C. (1896). On Modification and Descent. Science,
4(99), 733–739.
Lumsden, C. J., & Wilson, E. O. (1981). Genes, Mind, and Culture:
The Coevolutionary Process. Harvard University Press.
Mayr, E. (1963). Animal Species and Evolution. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Odling-Smee, J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W. (2003). Niche
Construction: The neglected process in evolution. Princeton University Press.
Osborne, H. F. (1896). A mode of evolution requiring neither natural
selection nor the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Transactions of the New York Academy of Science, 15, 141–148.
Pinker, S. (2003). Language as an adaptation to the cognitive niche.
In S. Kirby & M. H. Christiansen (Eds.), Language evolution:
States of the art. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pinker, S. (2010, May). The cognitive niche: coevolution of intelligence, sociality, and language. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107 Suppl,
8993–9.
Pinker, S., & Bloom, P. (1990). natural language and natural selection. Behavioral and brain sciences, 13, 707–784.
Reali, F., & Christiansen, M. H. (2009). Sequential learning and the
interaction between biological and linguistic adaptation in language evolution. Interaction Studies, 10(1), 5–30.
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2005). Not By Genes Alone: How
Culture Transformed Human Evolution. University Of Chicago
Press.
Schuster, S., Wöhl, S., Griebsch, M., & Klostermeier, I. (2006,
February). Animal cognition: how archer fish learn to down
rapidly moving targets. Current biology : CB, 16(4), 378–83.
Simpson, G. G. (1953). The Baldwin Effect. Evolution, 7(2), 110–
117.
West-Eberhard, M. J. (2003). Developmental Plasticity and Evolution. Oxford University Press.
Whiten, A., & Erdal, D. (2012). The human socio-cognitive niche
and its evolutionary origins. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London B, 367, 2119–2129.
Wright, S. (1931). Evolution in Mendelian populations. Genetics,
16, 97–159.

1648

