When killing the heavy man seems right
Making people utilitarian by simply adding options to moral dilemmas
Alex Wiegmann (alex.wiegmann@psych.uni-goettingen.de)
Karina Meyer (karina.meyer@stud.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, Gosslerstr. 14
University of Göttingen, Germany

nothing is done. The only possibility to save them
consists in pushing a heavy man from a bridge onto the
path of the trolley, thereby killing the heavy man and
stopping the trolley before it reaches the five people.
Philosophers have claimed, and empirical research in
moral psychology has shown (Waldmann, Nagel, &
Wiegmann, 2012), that most people consider killing the
heavy man as morally wrong. Hence, it does not come as
a surprise that supporters of utilitarianism argue against
the importance of intuitions on particular cases or try to
convince the other side that intuitions on cases like Push
are erroneous in some sense. One especially interesting
way to argue for the claim that intervening in Push is the
morally right thing to do comes from Unger (1996), then
arguing for consequentialist ethics. He argues that most
people’s intuitions on Push-like cases are misled, and that
this can be shown by adding more options to Push-like
cases. Unger considers a case labeled HeavySkater that
goes as follows:

Abstract
Trolley dilemmas are widely used to elicit moral intuitions.
Most people do not think it would be morally right to push
a heavy man from a bridge, thereby killing him, in order to
avoid the death of several other people. Here we
empirically tested a prediction by Unger (1996) who claims
that adding more options to this scenario would shift
people’s intuition from the normally preferred option of
doing nothing to the utilitarian option of killing the heavy
man. While not finding significant results with Unger’s
original materials, an experiment with adapted materials
confirmed the assumption that pushing one person is more
likely to be preferred to not intervening if certain additional
options are provided. Moreover, we found that moral
intuitions are transferred from several-option cases to twooption cases (and the other way around). We discuss some
possible psychological explanations for and normative
implications of these findings.

Keywords:
moral
judgment;
trolley dilemmas;
utilitarianism; several-option cases; framing effects,
transfer effects

By sheer accident, an empty trolley, nobody aboard, is
starting to roll down a certain track. Now, if you do nothing
about the situation, your first option, then, in a couple
of minutes, it will run over and kill six innocents who,
through no fault of their own, are trapped down the line
(just beyond an “elbow” in the track). (So, on your first
option, you’ll let the six die.) Regarding their plight, you
have one other option: Further up the track, near where the
trolley’s starting to move, there’s a path crossing the main
track and, on it, there’s a very heavy man on roller skates. If
you turn a remote control dial, you’ll start up the skates,
you’ll send him in front of the trolley, and he’ll be a trolleystopper. But, the man will be crushed to death by the trolley
he then stops. (So, on your second option, you’ll save six
lives and you’ll take one.)

Introduction
Moral intuitions play an important role in moral
philosophy as well as in moral psychology. When a
normative moral theory is evaluated one crucial criterion
is whether its application to concrete situations is in
accordance with our moral intuitions about these
situations. If a normative moral theory is applied to
particular cases and tells us to do something that stands in
sharp contrast to what we believe would be the right thing
to do, this mismatch counts strongly against this theory.
Utilitarianism, the ethical view that, roughly spoken, the
right act to perform is the one that leads to the best
outcome – impartially considered – is often criticized
because of its implication when applied to particular
cases. It is argued that because utilitarianism can imply
that an innocent person ought to be killed if this is the
only possibility to save more than one life, it cannot be
the right moral theory.
A prominent particular case that is often used to argue
against utilitarianism will be called Push in the following
(Thompson, 1985). In Push an out of control trolley is
heading towards five people and will run over them if

Unger thinks that most people consider redirecting the
heavy skater as morally wrong and doing nothing as the
morally right thing to do. This intuition, however, is not
robust, he argues, and changes when further options are
added as in the following case:
By sheer accident, an empty trolley, nobody aboard, is
starting to roll down a certain track. Now, if you do
nothing about the situation, your first option, then, in a
couple of minutes, it will run over and kill six innocents
who, through no fault of their own, are trapped down the
line. (So, on your first option, you’ll let the six die.)
Regarding their plight, you have three other options: On
your second option, if you push a remote control button,

2649

you’ll change the position of a switch-track, switch A,
and, before it gets to the six, the trolley will go onto
another line, on the left-hand side of switch A’s fork. On
that line, three other innocents are trapped and, if you
change switch A, the trolley will roll over them. (So, on
your second option, you’ll save six lives and you’ll take
three.) On your third option, you’ll flip a remote control
toggle and change the position of another switch, switch
B. Then, a very light trolley that’s rolling along another
track, the Feed Track, will shift onto B’s lower fork. As
two pretty heavy people are trapped in this light trolley,
after going down this lower fork the vehicle won’t only
collide with the onrushing empty trolley, but, owing to the
combined weight of its unwilling passengers, the collision
will derail the first trolley and both trolleys will go into an
uninhabited area. Still, the two trapped passengers will die
in the collision. On the other hand, if you don’t change
switch B, the lightweight trolley will go along B’s upper
fork and, then, it will bypass the empty trolley, and its two
passengers won’t die soon. (So, on your third option,
you’ll save six lives and you’ll take two.) Finally, you
have a fourth option: Further up the track, near where the
trolley’s starting to move, there’s a path crossing the main
track and, on it, there’s a very heavy man on roller skates.
If you turn a remote control dial, you’ll start up the skates,
you’ll send him in front of the trolley, and he’ll be a
trolley-stopper. But, the man will be crushed to death by
the trolley he then stops. (So, on your fourth option, you’ll
save six lives and you’ll take one.)

In this several-option case, which we will label 4Options,
we are more likely, Unger claims, to consider redirecting
the heavy man on skaters as morally superior to doing
nothing. People would then respond as they do to a case
we will label HandleSwitch. In HandleSwitch most people
think it is morally right to intervene. In Unger’s wording,
it goes as follows:
By sheer accident, an empty trolley, nobody aboard, is
starting to roll down a certain track. Now, if you do nothing
about the situation, your first option, then, very soon, it will
run over and kill six innocents who, through no fault of their
own, are trapped down the line. (They’ve been tied down by
a mustachioed villain.) So, on your first option, you’ll let the
six die. Still, you have precisely one other option: If you
push a remote control button, then you’ll change the position
of a certain switch-track and, before it gets to the six, the
trolley will roll onto another line. Now, on this other line,
there’s another who’s similarly trapped and, if switched, the
trolley will roll over her. So, on your second option, you’ll
save six lives and you’ll take one.

The claim that people consider redirecting the heavy man
on skaters as morally superior to doing nothing in
4Options and, therefore, favor intervening like they do in
HandleSwitch, has not been empirically tested yet.1 If
Unger’s claim turns out to be true, this finding would not
only be interesting for moral philosophers but also for
moral psychology because would reveal a new factor
influencing our moral intuitions. We will later discuss the
philosophical and psychological implications of our
findings.

Experiment 1
In this experiment we aimed to test Unger’s claim that
people are more likely to prefer redirecting the heavy man
on roller skates to doing nothing in 4Options than in
HeavySkater. To test this claim we used Unger’s original
wording and, whenever available, the corresponding
figures.

Method
Participants 300 subjects were recruited for a
compensation of £ 0.50 via an online database located in
the U.K. This way of recruiting subjects was the same in
all experiments.
Design, Materials, and Procedure The experiment was
conducted on the internet. Upon clicking on a link that
subjects received via e-mail they were redirected to a
website containing the experiment. Subjects first read
general instructions familiarizing them with the rating
scale, asking them to read the following scenario
carefully, and to take the task seriously. This initial
procedure was identical in all experiments. Afterwards,
subjects were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: HandleSwitch, HeavySkater or 4Options (see
Introduction for the exact wording). In 4Options the
description of the scenario was accompanied by Figure 1.

Figure 1: Original illustration of Unger’s 4Option case.

1

In the meantime we found out that Weijers and Sytsma (in
preparation) also started to test this claim empirically.

2650

After reading about each dilemma, participants were
asked which option they should choose. As the options
were described in the dilemma text, they were only
indicated by the corresponding numbers. While in
HandleSwitch and HeavySkater participants could choose
between two options (doing nothing or intervening), in
4Options they could either choose to do nothing or vote
for one of the three different intervening options. After
having indicated their judgments, participants were asked
some demographic questions, and given a simple logical
question to identify participants who did not pay
sufficient attention to the task.
Results 56 subjects dropped out because they did not
indicate their judgment, failed to solve the logical
question, or went through the whole survey in less than 40
seconds.
For practical purposes we call the option with the best
numerical outcome (number of saved lives minus number
of people killed) in each condition the utilitarian option,
meaning that in HandleSwitch and HeavySkater choosing
to intervene constitutes the utilitarian action, while in
4Options only the intervention in form of redirecting the
heavy skater is treated as the utilitarian option.
The results are summarized in Figure 2 and Table 1.

The difference between the proportion of participants who
chose the utilitarian option in HandleSwitch versus
HeavySkater did not reach statistical significance, χ21, 164 =
2.30, p = 0.13. In 4Options 75% chose the utilitarian
option in form of redirecting the heavy skater and only
7.5% chose to do nothing. Throwing Switch A was
chosen by 5% (thereby redirecting the empty trolley;
saving six people and killing three) and 12.5% went for
throwing Switch B (thereby redirecting a trolley with two
people onboard; saving six people and killing the two). If
only the utilitarian option and the “do nothing”-option are
taken into account, 91% chose the utilitarian option and
only 9% preferred the agent to do nothing.
Going back to our initial question, namely whether
people are more likely to judge redirecting the heavy man
on roller skates to be better than doing nothing in
4Options than in HeavySkater, we can observe that this
claim is descriptively true (91% vs. 83%) but that this
difference is statistically not significant, χ21, 150 = 1.84, p =
0.18. However, this difference not being significant might
be due to a ceiling effect, i. e. the fact that already the vast
majority of subjects in HeavySkater (83%) chose the
utilitarian option.
Table 1: Distribution of responses on the available options

100%
Option
Do
Nothing
7

Utilitarian
Option
73

Switch A
NA

Switch B
NA

Heavy Skater

14

70

NA

NA

4 Options

6

60

4

10

80%
60%

Condition
Switch

Do Nothing

40%
Utilitarian
Option

20%
0%
Switch

Experiment 2

Heavy 4 Options
Skater

The potential ceiling effect obtained in our first
experiment might be due to Unger’s wording that clearly
highlights the consequences of each action and, therefore,
favors the utilitarian option. In order to set up the
necessary preconditions to test Unger’s claim we used
other, familiar scenarios and corresponding wordings, for
which we knew that no ceiling effect occurs (cf.
Wiegmann, Okan, & Nagel,2012).
Design, Materials, and Procedure 300 subjects were
randomly assigned to one of three conditions: Switch,
Push or 6Options.

Figure 2: Percentage of subjects choosing the option to do
nothing relative to the utilitarian option in Experiment 1.
In all three conditions the utilitarian option was by far the
most chosen. 91% went for the utilitarian option in
HandleSwitch, while only 9% chose not to intervene. A
similar result pattern arose for HeavySkater in which 83%
chose the utilitarian option and only 17% not to intervene.

Figure 3: Illustration of the several-option case (6Options).

2651

Option 4: Carl could throw the Switch 2 and thereby
redirect an empty train from the upper parallel track
onto the main track. The speed-train would collide
with this train and be stopped before it reaches the
nine workers. On its way to the main track the empty
train would run over four workers (wearing the novel
hearing protection). The four workers would lose
their lives due to the collision.
Option 5: Carl could throw Switch 1 and thereby
redirect the speed-train from the main track onto a
parallel track before it reaches the nine workers. On
the parallel track the speed train would run over five
workers (wearing the novel hearing protection). The
five workers would lose their lives due to the
collision.
Option 6: Carl could do nothing. In this case the nine
workers will lose their lives in this accident.
The test question was the same in all scenarios, namely
“Which option should Carl choose?”, and the description
of each scenario was accompanied by a figure (see Figure
3 for the figure in 6Options). Which option was labeled
“Option 1” (and was described first) was counterbalanced
in Switch and Push. In 6Options there were also two
orders of options, one starting with the utilitarian option
and ending with the “least utilitarian” option (as described
above) and the other one starting with the least utilitarian
option and ending with the utilitarian option.
Results 39 subjects dropped out because they did not
indicate their judgment, failed to solve the logical
question, or went through the whole survey in less than 40
seconds.
The results are summarized in Figure 4 and Table 2.

The scenarios in Switch, Push and 6Options read as
follows:
On the test ground of a modern railroad property an
unmanned speed-train (that normally can be remotecontrolled) is out of control due to a technical defect.
This speed-train is heading towards nine railroad
workers that are maintaining the tracks. Since these
workers are wearing a new type hearing protection,
they would not notice the speed-train on time and
hence would be run over by it. Carl, an employee of
the rail track control center, recognizes the upcoming
accident. However, it is not possible to stop the train
on time any more.
It was then indicated that Carl could choose between
exactly two options (in Switch and Push) or six options
(6Options), respectively. The options in Switch were:
Option 1: Carl could throw the Switch and thereby
redirect the speed-train from the main track onto a
parallel track before it reaches the nine workers. On
the parallel track the speed train would run over five
workers (wearing the novel hearing protection). The
five workers would lose their lives due to the
collision.
Option 2: Carl could do nothing. In this case the nine
workers will lose their lives in this accident.
The options in Push were:
Option 1: Carl could run to a nearby bridge on which
a heavy worker is standing and push this worker from
the bridge. Thereby this worker would fall on the
tracks and collide with the speed-train. Due to the
collision with the heavy worker (Carl would not be
heavy enough to stop the train) the speed-train would
stop before it reaches the nine workers. The heavy
worker would lose his life due to the collision.
Option 2: Carl could do nothing. In this case the nine
workers will lose their lives in this accident.
And the options in 6Options go as follows:
Option 1: Carl could run to the nearby, left bridge on
which a heavy worker is standing and push this
worker from the bridge. Thereby this worker would
fall on the tracks and collide with the speed-train. Due
to the collision with the heavy worker (Carl would not
be heavy enough to stop the train) the speed-train
would stop before it reaches the nine workers. The
heavy worker would lose his life due to the collision.
Option 2: Carl could push a button that would open a
trap door and thereby causing two workers on top of
the right bridge to fall on the tracks. The speed-train
would collide with the two workers and be stopped
before it reaches the nine workers. The two workers
would lose their lives due to the collision.
Option 3: Carl could throw Switch 3 and thereby
redirect a train carrying three workers from the lower
parallel track onto the main track. The speed-train
would collide with this train and be stopped before it
reaches the nine workers. The three workers on the
train would lose their lives due to the collision.

100%
80%
Do Nothing

60%
40%

Utilitarian
Option

20%
0%
Switch

Push

6 Options

Figure 4: Percentage of subjects choosing the option to do
nothing relative to the utilitarian option in Experiment 2.
Again, the utilitarian option was the most chosen in all
three conditions, although in Push not by far as in the first
experiment in HeavySkater. In Switch, 86% went for the
utilitarian option, while only 14% chose not to intervene.
While in the first experiment the vast majority went for
the utilitarian option in HeavySkater, participants were
this time more skeptical of intervening in Push where
56% chose to intervene. The difference between the

2652

proportions of participants who chose the utilitarian
option in Switch versus Push did reach statistical
significance, χ21, 175 = 2.30, p < 0.001. Moreover, the
necessary preconditions for testing Unger’s claim were
given this time. In 6Options 52% chose the utilitarian
option in form of pushing the heavy man from the bridge
and 17% chose to do nothing (9% chose option 2, 7%
option 3, 8% option 4, and 6% option 5, options labeled
as in the case description). If only the utilitarian option
and the “do nothing”-option are taken into account in
6Options, 75% chose the utilitarian option and 25%
preferred the agent to do nothing. This difference was
statistically significant, χ21, 142 = 5.38, p = 0.02. Hence, in
accordance with Unger’s claim people were indeed more
likely to prefer the utilitarian option to doing nothing in
the many-option scenario (6Options) than in the twooption scenario (Push).

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

Utilitarian
Option
80

Opt 2

Opt 3

Opt 4

Opt 5

NA

NA

NA

NA

Push

36

46

NA

NA

NA

NA

6 Options

15

45

8

6

7

5

Second

First

Utilitarian
Option

6 Options

Figure 5: Percentage of subjects choosing the option to do
nothing relative to the utilitarian option in Experiment 3.
The effect of subjects being more likely to choose the
utilitarian option in 6Option, as compared to Push, could
not only be replicated but also be strengthened which is
likely to be a consequence of the slightly different test
question compared to Experiment 2. When Push was
shown first, the vast majority (71%) indicated that the
agent should not intervene. In contrast to this, the vast
majority did endorse the utilitarian option in 6Options
(82%) when it was shown first (taken only these two
options into account), χ21, 157 = 45.65, p < 0.001.
In both conditions we found a strong influence of the
first dilemma onto the second dilemma. When Push was
presented after 6Options significantly more subjects chose
the utilitarian option (74%), as compared to Push shown
first (29%), χ21, 169 = 33.34, p < 0.001. When 6Options
was presented after Push significantly less subjects
preferred the utilitarian option (56%) to doing nothing, as
compared to 6Options shown first (83%), χ21, 144 = 13.09,
p < 0.001. There was an asymmetry regarding the strength
of transfer between the first and the second dilemma with
a stronger influence of 6Options on Push than the other
way around. While the percentage of subjects preferring
the utilitarian option to doing nothing in 6Options (83%)
and Push (74%) did not differ when 6Options was
presented first, there was a significant difference (29% in
Push vs. 56% in 6Options) when Push was shown first,
χ21, 157 = 10.98, p < 0.001. In other words, intuitions for
6Options were more robust than for Push.

Experiment 3
This experiment pursued three aims. First, we wanted to
replicate the findings of Experiment 2. Second, we
wanted to see whether people’s intuition is transferred
from the several-option case to the two-option case and
the other way around. Third, we used a slightly changed
version of Push to see whether the again unusually high
percentage of subjects choosing the utilitarian option in
Push was due to the test question, which forced subjects
to choose between the two available options.2
Design, Materials, and Procedure 200 subjects were
randomly assigned to one of two conditions: They either
saw first Push and then 6Options or first 6Options and
then Push. Push differed only slightly from Push in
Experiment 2. Instead of explicitly stating the two options
subjects were told that there is only one possibility to save
the nine workers, namely pushing the heavy worker from
the bridge (same wording as Option 1 in Experiment 2).
The test question then was “Should Carl do the proposed
action?” with “no” and “yes” as possible answers.
Results 31 subjects dropped out because they did not
indicate their judgment, failed to solve the logical
question, or went through the whole survey in less than 40
seconds. The results are summarized in Figure 5 and
Table 3.

Second

First
Push

Table 2: Distribution of responses on the available options
in each condition (for options 2 to 5 see case description).
Option
Do
Condition Nothing
Switch
13

Do Nothing

Table 3: Distribution of responses on the available options
in each condition (for options 2 to 5 see case description).
Option
Do
Condition Nothing
Push first
60

Utilitarian
Option
25

Opt 2

Opt 3

Opt 4

Opt 5

NA

NA

NA

NA

Push second

22

62

NA

NA

NA

NA

6 Options
first

12

60

3

5

3

1

6 Options
second

32

40

5

5

3

0

2
Weijers, D., & Sytsma, J. (in preparation) obtained similarly
high ratings for intervening in Push with a similar setup. So our
results do not seem to be artificial.

2653

justify not choosing the option where the least people are
sacrificed.

Discussion
The Push case is considered an important objection to
utilitarian moral theories because most people strongly
disagree with the utilitarian option of pushing (and
thereby killing) a heavy man from a bridge in front of a
train, even if this is the only possibility to stop the train
from running over and killing several other people.
Inspired by work of Unger (1996) we investigated the
effects of adding further options to the Push case. We
found that the vast majority actually preferred the
utilitarian option to doing nothing in this several-option
version of Push (6Options). Recent studies about twooption cases and several-option cases conducted by
Weijers and Sytsma (in preparation) led to similar results,
indicating that our findings are not mere experimental
artefacts. Moreover, we observed transfer effects between
the two-option case and the several-option case. When
presented with Push first, the percentage of subjects not
endorsing the utilitarian option in 6Options increased
significantly. Transfer effects in the other direction, from
the several-option case to the two-option case, were even
stronger: The vast majority of subjects chose the
utilitarian option in Push when they considered 6Options
first.
Since most, if not all, existing descriptive moral
theories investigate the psychological mechanism
underlying our moral judgment by using two-option cases
(dilemmas) it seems unlikely that they can account for the
exceptionally strong effects we found. In the following
we sketch some potential explanations.
One reason for the dominance of utilitarian responses in
several-option cases could be that the varying number of
lives involved in each option highlights the different
consequences of each option. Of course, the provided
options did not only differ in the number of lives involved
but also in other features as, for example, the causal
structure of the provided option. However, such
differences are subtle and difficult to compare, requiring a
higher cognitive effort than comparing the numerical
outcomes.
Another possible explanation is derived from the
association of utilitarianism with rational, deliberate
decision making (Greene, 2013). Understanding a severaloption case and comparing its options requires more
cognitive effort than two-option cases in which it often
comes to a fast and automatic reaction regarding the only
option to intervene. This mode of thinking might in turn
promote utilitarian consideration.
A third way of understanding our findings could be
based on the need of justification that participants felt
when deciding which option to choose. The mere
numerical superiority of intervention options, as
compared to the one option of not intervening, might
make it seem likely that the right option to choose should
be among them. Then, once having decided to focus on
the intervention options, it will probably seem difficult to

Philosophical Implications
What do our findings imply for the discussion of
normative moral theories? Since the vast majority of
subjects chose the utilitarian option in the several-option
version of Push, it might seem obvious at first sight that
our findings support a utilitarian moral theory. However,
things are not so clear cut. Even if we neglect the is-ought
gap for a moment and assume for the sake of the
argument that being in accordance with the application of
a moral theory to particular cases speaks directly in favor
a moral theory, it all depends on the question of which
setting (two-option case vs. several-option case) is suited
to reveal valid moral intuitions. And the answer to this
question might in turn depend on which normative moral
theory is preferred. Utilitarians might want to argue that
the several-option case is rather suited for eliciting valid
moral intuitions, as compared to the, in their view, limited
two-option case. Non-consequentialists might argue that
the two-option case is the right setting and that the
several-option case corrupts our moral compass.
Therefore, even though Unger’s claim is supported by
empirical evidence this fact does not speak directly in
favor of utilitarianism. Anyway, supporters of
utilitarianism will probably like the finding that people’s
non-utilitarian intuition in Push does not seem to be as
robust as the psychological literature suggests.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG WA 621/21-2). We thank
Michael Waldmann and Jonas Nagel for valuable input.

References
Greene, J. (2013). Moral tribes: Emotion, reason, and the
gap between us and them. New York: Penguin Press.
Thomson, J. J. (1985). The trolley problem. Yale Law
Journal, 94, 1395-1415.
Unger, P. (1996). Living high and letting die. Our illusion
of innocence. New York: Oxford University Press.
Waldmann, M. R., Nagel, J., & Wiegmann, A. (2012).
Moral judgment. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison
(Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Thinking and
Reasoning. New York: Oxford University Press.
Weijers, D., & Sytsma, J. (in preparation): Trolley
problems reconsidered: Testing the method of several
options.
Wiegmann, A., Okan, Y., & Nagel, J. (2012). Order
effects in moral judgment. Philosophical Psychology,
25, 823-836.
Wiegmann, A., & Waldmann, M. R. (2014). Transfer
effects between moral dilemmas: A causal model
theory. Cognition, 131, 28-43.

2654

