When Less Can Be More: Dual Task Effects on Speech Fluency
Naomi Eichorn (neichorn@pace.edu)
Pace University, Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders
163 William Street, New York, NY 10016 USA

Klara Marton (kmarton@gc.cuny.edu)
The Graduate Center of the City University of NY, Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences
365 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10016 USA
Abstract

independent units, which is ultimately counterproductive for
skilled performers.
Consistent with this account, experienced athletes
(golfers, soccer players, baseball batters) perform more
poorly during experimental conditions requiring skillfocused attention (e.g., attending to timing of golf swing)
(Beilock & Gray, 2012; Beilock et al., 2002; Gray, 2004);
skilled typists become slower and less accurate when
attending to performance details (Snyder & Logan, 2013);
and rock climbers in high-anxiety conditions exhibit more
rigid movements, slower climbing, and longer grasped holds
(Pijpers, Oudejans, & Bakker, 2005). Collectively, these
findings indicate that situations involving pressure or that
call attention to processes underlying motor performance
negatively influence movement precision and fluidity.
Related studies have shown that suppressing explicit
processing resources in skilled performers and forcing them
to employ implicit control systems enhances the accuracy
and efficiency of motor outcomes (Beilock, et al., 2002;
Masters, 1992). This shift in control is typically achieved
through dual task paradigms in which participants perform a
primary motor task with a simultaneous secondary task that
continuously engages WM (e.g., Beilock et al., 2002;
Masters, 1992; Poolton et al., 2006). Similarly,
manipulating attention by instructing participants to focus
on movement effects (external focus) rather than on
movements themselves (internal focus) results in greater
automaticity. This effect has been replicated across a variety
of motor tasks, and as explained by the constrained action
hypothesis (CAH) (McNevin, Shea, & Wulf, 2003),
indicates that conscious attention to internal movements
constrains the movement system. Based on these findings,
the present study examined predictions of the CAH and
attention-performance interactions in relation to the process
of speech production. We anticipated that conditions in
which speakers were forced to rely on implicit modes of
processing (dual task conditions) would result in more
effortless speech production, as reflected by a reduction in
specific forms of speech disfluency.
We also considered whether effects would differ in
speakers who varied in the degree of attentional control they
typically exerted during speech production. Although
motoric aspects of speech production are normally effortless
for most adult speakers, numerous studies indicate that
speech (as well as nonspeech) processes are less
automatized for people who stutter (Saltuklaroglu, Teulings,

Minimizing cognitive resources while executing wellpracticed motor tasks has been shown to increase automaticity
and enhance performance (e.g., Beilock, Carr, Macmahon, &
Starkes, 2002). Based on this principle, we examined whether
more fluent speech production could be induced through a
dual task paradigm that engaged working memory (WM)
while speech was produced. We also considered whether
effects varied for speakers who differed in their habitual
degree of attentional control during speech production.
Twenty fluent adults and 19 adults who stutter performed (1)
a baseline speaking task, (2) a baseline WM task with
manipulations of domain, load, and inter-stimulus interval
(ISI), and (3) a series of dual tasks in which the speaking task
was combined with each unique set of WM conditions.
Results indicated a fluency benefit under dual task conditions,
which was specific to atypical forms of disfluency but
comparable across speaker types and manipulations of the
WM task. Findings suggest that WM is associated with
atypical forms of disfluency and that suppressing these
resources enhances speech fluency, although further research
is needed to specify the cognitive mechanism involved in this
effect and clarify the nature of this association.
Keywords: cognitive control; dual task; working memory;
speech production; fluency; stuttering

Introduction
Many studies demonstrate enhanced motor performance
when available attentional or WM resources are suppressed
(Beilock et al., 2002; Masters, 1992; Poolton, Maxwell,
Masters, & Raab, 2006). This effect is explained by the
principle that the amount of cognitive effort and optimal
mode of processing for a given task depends on the nature
of the task and skill level of the performer. Rule-based,
analytic tasks benefit from explicit forms of processing that
rely upon conscious awareness and WM. In contrast, motor
performance, particularly for expert performers, is better
served by implicit modes of processing that are experiencebased, involve content that is not available for
representation in WM, and are less vulnerable to stress or
distraction. In situations of pressure, many performers tend
to increase their attention to the internal process of
performance, resulting in a disruption of automaticity and
breakdown of skills, often referred to as choking or freezing
(Baumeister, 1984; Beilock & Gray, 2007). Inward focusing
results in explicit processing of proceduralized knowledge,
causing movement sequences to be dechunked into

626

& Robbins, 2009; Smits-Bandstra & Gracco, 2013). For
example, a dual task study involving simultaneous tracing
and production of choral speech (a condition which
normally yields spontaneous fluency) revealed more manual
disfluency on the tracing task in stuttering adults compared
to controls, even when stuttering was virtually eliminated
(Saltuklaroglu et al., 2009). These results indicate that
stuttering speakers may expend greater amounts of effort
when speaking, perhaps in response to, or in anticipation of,
stuttering. People who stutter also show limited practice
effects in trained motor sequences (Smits-Bandstra & De
Nil, 2013; Bauerly & De Nil, 2011; Smits-Bandstra & De
Nil, 2009), suggesting an association between stuttering and
difficulty achieving automaticity. Based on this literature,
the present study compared dual task effects on speech
fluency for speakers with different degrees of speech
automaticity. We predicted fluency benefits in all speakers,
but greater benefit for those who stutter, as these individuals
may be more dependent on explicit (vs. implicit)
representations of motor speech patterns.
Finally, we considered three critical factors related to dual
task interference patterns. Considerable evidence suggests
that concurrent tasks relying on similar processes result in
more interference than tasks involving different domains or
modalities (Allport, Antonis, & Reynolds, 1972; Cocchini,
Logie, Sala, MacPherson, & Baddeley, 2002; Duff & Logie,
2001; Leclercq, 2002). Tasks with a greater degree of
temporal overlap also result in greater interference, with the
extent of interference depending on how frequently each
task must access central resources (Dux, Ivanoff, Asplund,
& Marois, 2006; Pashler, 1992). A final factor influencing
dual task interference is the degree of automaticity
associated with each task (Pashler, 1999; Poldrack et al.,
2005). Performance is considered automatic when it
requires minimal capacity demands and is not affected by a
concurrent secondary task (Poldrack et al., 2005). As
discussed above, studies within the stuttering literature
indicate that adults who stutter perform more poorly than
controls on secondary tasks executed while speaking
(Saltuklaroglu et al., 2009; Smits-Bandstra & De Nil, 2009),
suggesting that speaking is less automatized for this group.
Thus, the present study combined a speaking task and
secondary WM task with manipulations of domain (verbal
vs. spatial), WM load, and inter-stimulus interval (ISI). Our
goal was to examine how interference associated with each
manipulation affected aspects of speech production in adult
speakers and whether this effect varied for speakers who
differed in their level of speech automaticity. We predicted
that speaking under dual task conditions would impact
fluency across participants with varying effects based on
speaker group, disfluency type, and dual task condition. We
expected that atypical disfluencies, generally associated
with stuttering (see Methods for details), would occur less
frequently under dual vs. baseline conditions, and that this
effect would be greater in adults who stutter compared to
fluent speakers. We further anticipated that dual task effects
on fluency would be stronger in secondary tasks involving

verbal compared to spatial WM (due to the similarity in
resources required for speaking and verbal WM tasks) and
in conditions with a higher WM load and shorter ISI.

Methods
Participants
Participants included 20 self-identified adults who stuttered
(AWS) and 20 adults who did not stutter (AWNS), all
between the ages of 18-35, with at least average nonverbal
intelligence (based on Test of Nonverbal Intelligence – 4th
Edition; TONI-4) and expressive vocabulary (based on
Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test – 4th edition;
EOWPVT), and no significant medical history, learning
disability, hearing loss, or head injury. Stuttering diagnosis
was confirmed for AWS based on two standardized
measures of stuttering severity (Stuttering Severity
Instrument - 4th Edition, Overall Assessment of the
Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering) and ranged from very
mild to severe. All participants spoke English as their
primary language. Computerized operation- and symmetryspan tasks (Unsworth, Heitz, Schrock, & Engle, 2005) were
administered to measure working memory capacity for
verbal and spatial stimuli. See Table 1 for participant
demographics, standardized scores on cognitive and
language measures, and span task results (absolute score).
Table 1: Participant characteristics. Mean (SD)
Age
Males/Females
Right-/Left-Handed
TONI-4
EOWPVT-4
Symmetry Span
Operation Span

AWNS
25.60 (4.58)
11/9
17/3
107.85 (12.90)
104.60 (9.81)
20.65 (7.04)
45.85 (16.16)

AWS
27.21 (4.18)
12/7
16/3
107.56 (12.54)
102.11 (12.45)
19.61 (12.52)
42.56 (17.39)

Procedures
Procedures included three sets of tasks, administered in the
same sequence to all participants: (1) three baseline tasks,
(2) two dual tasks, and (3) a final baseline speaking task.
Tasks within each set and trials within each task were
presented in a random order. All tasks were administered on
a desktop computer, with E-Prime 2.0 software. Spoken
output was recorded via an adjustable headworn
unidirectional microphone (Shure SM10A) connected to a
preamplifier (Switchcraft 308TR), with supplementary
video recordings during all speech production tasks.
Baseline Speaking Task In the baseline speaking task,
participants produced spontaneous speech over a 60-second
period for each of 4 topic prompts (e.g., Describe a recent
vacation). Prompts for each trial were presented in a set of
three, allowing participants to select topics based on
personal preferences and experiences. Once a prompt was
selected, it was not presented again on subsequent speaking

627

trials throughout the experiment. Spoken output for each
trial was automatically recorded by E-Prime, saved in
individual audio files, and subjected to extensive off-line
coding and analysis. The baseline task was administered
once at the beginning of the experiment and once at the end
(following dual task conditions) to help account for possible
order and practice effects.

in R was used to generate frequency counts of all spoken
syllables and counts of each disfluency type for individual
speaking trials.

Data Analysis
Data were analyzed to examine effects of experimental
manipulations and speaker types on speech fluency and
secondary task performance. Fluency variables consisted of
counts of typical and atypical disfluencies; performance on
the WM task was scored as correct (1) or incorrect (0) for
each trial. A coding scheme was developed to examine six
contrasts of interest based on a priori hypotheses. These
included: (1) Disfluency type (typical vs. atypical); (2) Task
type (baseline vs. dual); (3) Domain (spatial vs. verbal); (4)
ISI (long vs. short); (5) extreme WM loads, termed Load1
(2 vs. 4); and (6) intermediate WM load compared to
extremes, termed Load2 (3 vs. 2 and 4). Generalized
multilevel linear models were utilized as they provide
maximum flexibility and robustness when analyzing multilevel experimental data with non-normally distributed
dependent variables (Hoffman & Rovine, 2007).
Preliminary analyses of fluency data indicated that a
nonzero inflated negative binomial distribution best fit
disfluency counts; therefore, all multilevel generalized
linear models for disfluency counts utilized a negative
binomial link function (Hardin, Hilbe, & Hilbe, 2007).
Performance on the WM task was scored as correct (1) or
incorrect (0) for each trial and was therefore analyzed using
a multilevel logistic regression model. Successive models
were compared using log-likelihood ratio, Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC), and Bayesian Information
Criterion (BIC) statistics.

Baseline WM Task WM tasks were modeled after
Salthouse, Babcock, & Shaw (1991) and adapted to examine
effects of three experimental manipulations: WM domain
(verbal vs. spatial), WM load (2, 3, and 4), and ISI (long vs.
short). In the verbal domain, participants viewed a start
number, followed by a series of individually presented,
single digit addition operations (e.g., +3), and a prompt to
enter the correct numeric outcome. In the spatial WM task, a
single colored circle was presented in one cell within a 2x2
grid. This stimulus was followed by a series of individually
presented, directional arrows and a prompt to enter the
number representing the final location of the circle, based
on a numbered on-screen grid. WM load was manipulated
by varying the number of sequential operations (2, 3, or 4)
to be performed on the initial number or circle stimulus. ISI
varied between individual operations, with intervals of 3000
ms and 1000 ms for the long and short ISI conditions,
respectively. The ISI manipulations varied the relative
frequency with which WM resources were accessed,
creating more or less competition between the WM and
simultaneous speaking task. Sixty test items were presented
within each WM domain, with 10 items for each unique
combination of WM load and ISI.
Dual Task In the dual task conditions, participants
performed the speaking task and each WM task (verbal and
spatial) simultaneously. Speech was recorded continuously
and keyboarded responses to the WM task were entered
twice per speaking trial. Five speaking trials were provided
for each combination of WM load and ISI, with a total of 30
speaking trials and 60 WM trials for each WM domain.

Results
Preliminary Analyses
Comparison of pretest and posttest baseline measures for
typical and atypical forms of disfluency within each group
(calculated as a proportion of syllables) indicated no
significant difference between the two baseline measures:
for typical disfluencies, t(19) = -1.44, p = .17 and t(18) =
0.77, p = .45 within AWNS and AWS, respectively; for
atypical disfluencies, t(19) = -0.16, p = . 86 and t(18) = 0.
93, p = .36 within AWNS and AWS, respectively.
Disfluency measures for both tasks were therefore included
in models as baseline measures without further
differentiation.

Data Processing
Audio output was orthographically transcribed and coded
for disfluencies. Disfluencies were categorized as (1) typical
disfluencies, which included fillers, revisions, repetitions of
phrases, and repetitions of multisyllabic words; or (2)
atypical disfluencies, which consisted of repetitions of
monosyllabic words, repetitions of sounds or syllables,
prolongations, blocks, and broken words. This
categorization system was based on widely accepted
typologies within the stuttering literature which classify
forms of disfluency as being more or less characteristic of
pathological stuttering (e.g., Ambrose & Yairi, 1999;
Ratner, Rooney, & MacWhinney, 1996; Vasić & Wijnen,
2005; Yaruss, 1998). Categorization was also confirmed by
actual data, which indicated similar patterns of effects for
individual disfluency types within each category. A
customized script utilizing the qdap package (Rinker, 2013)

Speech Fluency
As described above, dual task effects on fluency were
analyzed via multilevel generalized linear models with a
negative binomial link function (Hardin et al., 2007).
Models were offset by the total number of syllables
produced during each speaking trial (thus, the dependent
variable represented the ratio of disfluencies to fluent
syllables). Results indicated that a model including Speaker
(AWNS vs. AWS), Disfluency (typical vs. atypical), Task

628

(baseline vs. dual) and two two-way interactions (Speaker x
Disfluency and Disfluency x Task) provided the best fit (see
Table 2). The final model included the random effect of an
individual-level intercept (variance = .27) with residual
variance of 1.11. Examination of the coefficients indicated
that controlling for number of syllables (speech rate),
atypical disfluencies were significantly less frequent than
typical disfluencies and occurred at 28% of the rate
observed for typical disfluencies (! =-1.26, SE=.06, t=20.96,
p<.00001). The interaction between Disfluency and Speaker
was also significant, with AWS producing approximately
four times more atypical disfluencies compared to AWNS
(! =1.43, SE=.03, t=41.83, p<.00001). Most importantly, the
interaction between Disfluency and Task indicated a
significant reduction in the frequency of atypical
disfluencies under dual compared to baseline tasks. This
was true regardless of speaker type (AWS vs. AWNS) and
regardless of experimental condition (Domain, ISI, Load)
within the dual task. During dual tasks, atypical disfluencies
occurred at a rate that was 70% the rate at which these
disfluencies occurred under non-dual task conditions (! =0.35, SE=.06, t=6.04, p<.00001). Thus, for every 100
atypical disfluencies produced during baseline conditions,
70 were produced during dual task conditions. Typical
forms of disfluency did not show any change as a result of
experimental manipulations.

Table 3: Results of final model of WM task performance
Fixed Effects
Intercept
Task
Domain
ISI
Load1 (2 vs. 4)
Load2 (3 vs. 2, 4)

!

SE

t

p

-3.34
-1.26
0.21
0.03
1.43
-0.35

.06
.16
.04
.03
.06

20.96
1.30
.90
41.83
6.04

<.00001
.19
.37
<.00001
<.00001

SE

t

p

.08
.04
.04
.05
.04

20.46
7.71
2.92
5.36
1.75

<.00001
<.00001
.004
<.00001
.08

Discussion
The primary goal of the study was to examine whether
engaging WM resources during speech production resulted
in enhanced speech fluency and whether this effect varied
for speakers with different habitual levels of speech
automaticity. The critical finding was that dual task
conditions had a facilitative effect on speech fluency, which
was specific to atypical forms of disfluency but was not
influenced by speakers’ fluency status or by specific
manipulations within the secondary task (WM domain, load,
ISI). Secondary task performance was poorer in dual
compared to baseline conditions and showed expected
effects for each manipulation within the WM task; however,
there were no interactions between effects and no group
differences in performance.
Consistent with the constrained action hypothesis, our
findings demonstrate that minimizing cognitive control and
relying on more implicit modes of processing benefit speech
performance. The results also support the central premise of
the matched filter hypothesis (Chrysikou, Weber, &
Thompson-Schill, 2013), which proposes that optimal levels
and patterns of resource allocation vary based on task
demands, goals, and contexts. According to this framework,
efficient filtering of sensory information via top-down
control (associated primarily with prefrontal cortex [PFC]
activity) supports performance across a variety of tasks that
are rule-driven, involve conflict, or require abstraction of
concepts. The same form of control, however, hinders
performance on tasks that are habitual and best served by
subcortical (e.g., basal ganglia) neural systems. Thus,
optimal performance relies on dynamic adjustments to the
filtering mechanism based on task requirements.
Results of the present study suggest that greater
dependence on explicit forms of control during speech
production disrupts automaticity and contributes to stutterlike behavior. The ability to delegate control of routine tasks
from the cortex to lower neural circuits (such as the basal
ganglia) is critical for motor performance that is highly
efficient and resistant to stress (Shine & Shine, 2014).
Whereas early stages of task learning are characterized by
engagement of frontal regions and specific subcortical areas
(associative striatum) that receive input from PFC, these
regions show less activation once a task has been
automatized (Ashby, Turner, & Horvitz, 2010; Poldrack et
al., 2005). Similarly, regions within the basal ganglia show
less activity on trials that form a sequence compared to

Table 2: Results of final model of disfluencies
Fixed Effects
Intercept
Disfluency
Speaker
Task
Disfluency*Speaker
Disfluency*Task

!
3.72
-1.69
-0.33
.12
-.28
.08

Secondary Task Performance
Secondary task performance was measured based on WM
response accuracy and analyzed via multilevel logistic
regression modeling. Models included the random effect of
an individual-level intercept (variance of final model =
1.22). Coefficients for the final model (Table 3) indicated
that each experimental manipulation showed an overall
effect on secondary task performance. Accuracy on the
secondary task was 18% lower under dual compared to
baseline conditions (! =-1.69, SE=.08, t=20.46, p<.00001);
72% lower in verbal compared to spatial WM tasks (! =0.33, SE=.04, t=7.71, p<.00001); 113% higher under short
compared to long ISI conditions (! =.12, SE=.04, t=2.92,
p=.004); and 75% lower under the highest WM load (load
of 4) compared to the lowest load (load of 2) condition (! =.28, SE=.05, t=5.36, p<.00001). However, there were no
interactions between these predictors and no differences
between speaker groups.

629

pseudorandom trials, reflecting the effective chunking of
information that accompanies automatization (Poldrack et
al., 2005).
Neuroimaging studies within the stuttering literature
suggest that stuttering is associated with differences in this
neural circuitry. Giraud and colleagues (Giraud et al., 2008)
found a positive correlation between basal ganglia activity
and stuttering severity, implying that representations were
less efficiently organized and resembled early stages of
motor learning in these speakers. Imaging studies further
demonstrate increased anterior cingulate cortex activity in
stuttering compared to fluent speakers during conflict tasks,
indicating that individuals who stutter demonstrate
excessive monitoring activity, even when behavioral
performance does not show impairment relative to controls
(Arnstein, Lakey, Compton, & Kleinow, 2011; Liu et al.,
2014). These findings suggest that stuttering may be
associated with inappropriate matching of task demands
with the extent or types of cognitive resources utilized to
meet these demands.
Although our results demonstrated enhanced speech
fluency under dual task conditions, no differential fluency
effects were observed as a result of secondary task
manipulations (WM domain, load, ISI), even though these
manipulations all affected performance on the WM task
itself. Thus, similar fluency changes occurred when WM
was taxed, regardless of the nature of the stimuli being
processed and frequency with which WM resources were
accessed. Alternatively, it is possible that the spatial task
unintentionally taxed verbal WM (circle movements could
have been verbally rehearsed), that more extreme changes in
WM load and ISI were needed to observe expected effects
of these manipulations on speech fluency, or that fluent
speech and verbal WM rely on different resource pools.
The finding that fluency effects were comparable across
speaker types was unexpected and suggests that atypical
disfluencies in all speakers arise from a similar underlying
process in which maladaptive attentional tendencies
interfere with automaticity. This interpretation is consistent
with recent studies within the stuttering literature suggesting
that stuttering is associated with an attentional bias to threat
stimuli (Hennessey, Nang, & Beilby, 2008) and tendency to
respond to stress by adapting motor patterns in ways that are
ultimately counterproductive (Lieshout, Ben-David, Lipski,
& Namasivayam, 2014). Based on the CAH and results of
the present study, adjustments reported by Lieshout and
colleagues (2014) may reflect recruitment of WM resources
in an effort to consciously control movements involved in
articulatory processes.
Dual task effects on speaking rate were considered;
however, details related to these analyses are outside the
scope of this paper. Briefly, results indicated that fluency
benefits under dual task conditions were accompanied by a
reduction in speech rate, which was greater in fluent
compared to stuttering speakers. Overall, rate reduction may
be related to dual task effects on linguistic productivity;
however, the smaller reduction in AWS likely reflects

combined effects of a habitually slower speech rate (due to
excessive disfluency) and enhanced fluency under dual task
conditions.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrated a
significant benefit to speech fluency as a result of dual task
conditions that taxed WM resources. Despite differences in
their habitual levels of speech automaticity, stuttering and
fluent speakers benefited similarly from dual task
conditions, suggesting that similar processes may contribute
to atypical disfluencies in both types of speakers. These
findings contribute to the growing literature on attention and
performance by extending the concept of less is more to the
process of speech production. Further research is needed to
more precisely identify the cognitive mechanism involved in
this effect and clarify the nature of the association between
WM and speech disfluency.

References
Allport, D. a, Antonis, B., & Reynolds, P. (1972). On the
division of attention: a disproof of the single channel
hypothesis. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 24(2), 225–35.
Ambrose, N. G., & Yairi, E. (1999). Normative disfluency
data for early childhood stuttering. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 895–909.
Arnstein, D., Lakey, B., Compton, R. J., & Kleinow, J.
(2011). Preverbal error-monitoring in stutterers and fluent
speakers. Brain and Language, 116(3), 105–15.
Ashby, F. G., Turner, B. O., & Horvitz, J. C. (2010).
Cortical and basal ganglia contributions to habit learning
and automaticity. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(5),
208–215.
Bauerly, K. R., & De Nil, L. F. (2011). Speech sequence
skill learning in adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency
Disorders, 36(4), 349–60.
Baumeister, R. F. (1984). Choking under pressure: selfconsciousness and paradoxical effects of incentives on
skillful performance. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 46(3), 610–620.
Beilock, S. L., Carr, T. H., Macmahon, C., & Starkes, J. L.
(2002). When Paying Attention Becomes
Counterproductive: Impact of Divided Versus SkillFocused Attention on Novice and Experienced
Performance of Sensorimotor Skills. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8(1), 6–16.
Beilock, S. L., & Gray, R. (2007). Why do athletes choke
under pressure? In G. Tenenbaum & R. C. Eklund (Eds.),
Handbook of Sport Psychology (3rd ed., pp. 425–444).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Beilock, S. L., & Gray, R. (2012). From attentional control
to attentional spillover: a skill-level investigation of
attention, movement, and performance outcomes. Human
Movement Science, 31(6), 1473–1499.
Chrysikou, E. G., Weber, M. J., & Thompson-Schill, S. L.
(2013). A matched filter hypothesis for cognitive control.
Neuropsychologia.

630

Cocchini, G., Logie, R. H., Sala, S. D., MacPherson, S. E.,
& Baddeley, A. D. (2002). Concurrent performance of two
memory tasks: Evidence for domain-specific working
memory systems. Memory & Cognition, 30(7), 1086–
1095.
Duff, S. C., & Logie, R. H. (2001). Processing and storage
in working memory span. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Section A, 54(1), 31–48.
Dux, P. E., Ivanoff, J., Asplund, C. L., & Marois, R. (2006).
Isolation of a central bottleneck of information processing
with time-resolved FMRI. Neuron, 52(6), 1109–20.
Giraud, A.-L., Neumann, K., Bachoud-Levi, A.-C., von
Gudenberg, A. W., Euler, H. A., Lanfermann, H., &
Preibish, C. (2008). Severity of dysfluency correlates with
basal ganglia activity in persistent developmental
stuttering. Brain and Language, 104(2), 190–199.
Gray, R. (2004). Attending to the execution of a complex
sensorimotor skill: expertise differences, choking, and
slumps. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Applied,
10(1), 42–54.
Hardin, J. W., Hilbe, J. M., & Hilbe, J. (2007). Generalized
linear models and extensions. Stata Press.
Hennessey, N. W., Nang, C. Y., & Beilby, J. M. (2008).
Speeded verbal responding in adults who stutter: are there
deficits in linguistic encoding? Journal of Fluency
Disorders, 33(3), 180–202.
Hoffman, L., & Rovine, M. J. (2007). Multilevel models for
the experimental pscyhologist: Foundations and
illustrative examples. Behavior Research Methods, 39(1),
101–117.
Leclercq, M. (2002). Theoretical aspects of the main
components and functions of attention. In M. Leclercq &
P. Zimmermann (Eds.), Applied Neuropsychology of
Attention: Theory, Diagnosis, and Rehabilitation (1st ed.,
pp. 3–55). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Lieshout, P. Van, Ben-David, B., Lipski, M., &
Namasivayam, A. (2014). The impact of threat and
cognitive stress on speech motor control in people who
stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 1–17.
Liu, J., Wang, Z., Huo, Y., Davidson, S. M., Klahr, K.,
Herder, C. L., … Peterson, B. S. (2014). A Functional
Imaging Study of Self-Regulatory Capacities in Persons
Who Stutter. PLoS ONE, 9(2), e89891.
Masters, R. S. W. (1992). Knowledge, knerves, and knowhow: The role of explicit versus implicit knowledge in the
beakdown of a complex motor skill under pressure. British
Journal of Psychology, 83, 343–358.
McNevin, N. H., Shea, C. H., & Wulf, G. (2003). Increasing
the distance of an external focus of attention enhances
learning. Psychological Research, 67(1), 22–9.
Pashler, H. (1992). Attentional Limitations in Doing Two
Tasks at the Same Time. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 1(2), 44–48.
Pashler, H. (1999). Automaticity, effort, and control. In H.
E. Pashler (Ed.), The Psychology of Attention (pp. 356–
398). MIT Press.

Pijpers, J. R., Oudejans, R. R. D., & Bakker, F. C. (2005).
Anxiety-induced changes in movement behaviour during
the execution of a complex whole-body task. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. A, Human
Experimental Psychology, 58(3), 421–45.
Poldrack, R. A, Sabb, F. W., Foerde, K., Tom, S. M.,
Asarnow, R. F., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Knowlton, B. J.
(2005). The neural correlates of motor skill automaticity.
The Journal of Neuroscience, 25(22), 5356–64.
Poolton, J. M., Maxwell, J. P., Masters, R. S. W., & Raab,
M. (2006). Benefits of an external focus of attention:
common coding or conscious processing? Journal of
Sports Sciences, 24(1), 89–99.
Ratner, N. B., Rooney, B., & MacWhinney, B. (1996).
Analysis of stuttering using CHILDES and CLAN.
Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 10(3), 169–187.
Rinker, T. W. (2013). qdap: Quantitative Discourse
Analysis Package. Buffalo, New York: University at
Buffalo/SUNY.
Salthouse, T. A., Babcock, R. L., & Shaw, R. J. (1991).
Effects of adult age on structural and operational
capacities in working memory. Psychology and Aging,
6(1), 118–27.
Saltuklaroglu, T., Teulings, H.-L., & Robbins, M. (2009).
Differential levels of speech and manual dysfluency in
adults who stutter during simultaneous drawing and
speaking tasks. Human Movement Science, 28(5), 643–54.
Shine, J. M., & Shine, R. (2014). Delegation to
automaticity: the driving force for cognitive evolution?
Frontiers in Neuroscience, 8(April), 90.
Smits-Bandstra, S., & De Nil, L. (2009). Speech skill
learning of persons who stutter and fluent speakers under
single and dual task conditions. Clinical Linguistics &
Phonetics, 23(1), 38–57.
Smits-Bandstra, S., & De Nil, L. F. (2013). Early-stage
chunking of finger tapping sequences by persons who
stutter and fluent speakers. Clinical Linguistics &
Phonetics, 27(1), 72–84.
Smits-Bandstra, S., & Gracco, V. (2013). Verbal implicit
sequence learning in persons who stutter and persons with
Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Motor Behavior, 45(5),
381–93.
Snyder, K. M., & Logan, G. D. (2013). Monitoring-induced
disruption in skilled typewriting. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Human Perception and Performance, 39(5),
1409–20.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Schrock, J. C., & Engle, R. W.
(2005). An automated version of the operation span task.
Behavior Research Methods, 37, 498–505.
Vasić, N., & Wijnen, F. (2005). Stuttering as a monitoring
deficit. In R. J. Hartsuiker, R. Bastiaanse, A. Postma, & F.
Wijnen (Eds.), Phonological Encoding and Monitoring in
Normal Speech (pp. 1–30). Hove (East Sussex):
Psychology Press.
Yaruss, J. S. (1998). Real-Time Analysis of Speech
Fluency: Procedures and Reliability Training. American
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 7(2), 25–37.

631

