When high pitches sound low:
Children’s acquisition of space-pitch metaphors
Sarah Dolscheid 2

(sarah_dolscheid@gmx.de)

Sabine Hunnius 3

(s.hunnius@donders.ru.nl)

Asifa Majid 1, 3, 4

(asifa.majid@let.ru.nl)

1Max

Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
of Rehabilitation and Special Education, University of Cologne, GER
3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
4Center for Studies in Language, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
2Department

Abstract

asked to sing back musical pitches they heard in the
presence of irrelevant spatial information (i.e. lines that
varied either in height or in thickness). Dutch speakers’
pitch reproduction was significantly influenced by spatial
height (but not thickness), but the reverse was true for
speakers of Farsi. These findings suggest language can
influence nonlinguistic cognition, lending support to the
principle of linguistic relativity (Whorf, 1956).
Although language shapes links between space and
musical pitch, it does not establish these mappings in the
first place. Even infants without language possess implicit
space-pitch associations (e.g. Dolscheid, Hunnius,
Casasanto, & Majid, 2014; Jeschonek, Pauen & Babocsai,
2012; Walker et al., 2010). Four-month-old Dutch infants,
for instance, are sensitive to height-pitch as well as
thickness-pitch mappings, suggesting both associations are
present prelinguistically (Dolscheid, et al., 2014).
How can these findings be reconciled? On one proposal,
metaphors in language may gradually affect nonlinguistic
space-pitch associations via associative learning (e.g.
Casasanto, 2008). Repeated use of a particular linguistic
space-pitch metaphor may – over time – strengthen one
mapping over the other, resulting in language-specific
differences in adults. Support for this associative learning
account comes from a training study. After being trained to
use Farsi-like metaphors describing pitch relationships in
terms of thickness, Dutch speakers’ nonlinguistic thicknesspitch mappings also resembled those of Farsi speakers
(Dolscheid et al., 2013). While this training study
demonstrates how language may affect space-pitch
associations in principle, it does not consider first language
acquisition. How do children acquire linguistic space-pitch
metaphors? And when do these metaphors start to impinge
on nonlinguistic space-pitch associations?

Some languages describe musical pitch in terms of spatial
height; others in terms of thickness. Differences in pitch
metaphors also shape adults’ nonlinguistic space-pitch
representations. At the same time, 4-month-old infants have
both types of space-pitch mappings available. This tension
between prelinguistic space-pitch associations and their
subsequent linguistic mediation raises questions about the
acquisition of space-pitch metaphors. To address this issue,
5-year-old Dutch children were tested on their linguistic
knowledge of pitch metaphors, and nonlinguistic spacepitch associations. Our results suggest 5-year-olds
understand height-pitch metaphors in a reversed fashion
(high pitch = low). Children displayed good comprehension
of a thickness-pitch metaphor, despite its absence in Dutch.
In nonlinguistic tasks, however, children did not show
consistent space-pitch associations. Overall, pitch
representations do not seem to be influenced by linguistic
metaphors in 5-year-olds, suggesting that effects of
language on musical pitch arise rather late during
development.
Keywords: pitch, space, metaphor, linguistic relativity,
language acquisition

Introduction
In many languages people talk about musical pitch
metaphorically, in terms of space. In English, for instance,
tones can be described as ‘high’ or ‘low’, and in German or
Dutch the term ‘pitch’ itself is actually a height-metaphor
(Tonhöhe, toonhoogte, ‘tonal height’ = ‘pitch’). Other
languages employ alternative spatial source-domains. The
Manza of Central Africa, for instance, express pitch in terms
of size, with high pitches being referred to as ‘small’ and
low pitches as ‘large’ (Stone, 1981). Languages like Farsi,
Turkish, and Zapotec, on the other hand, describe musical
pitch in terms of thickness, with high pitches described as
‘thin’ and low pitches as ‘thick’ (Shayan, Ozturk, & Sicoli,
2011).
Differences in linguistic pitch metaphors also seem to
affect nonlinguistic space-pitch associations (Dolscheid,
Shayan, Majid & Casasanto, 2013). Dutch speakers (who,
like English speakers, use a height-pitch metaphor) and
Farsi speakers (who use a thickness-pitch metaphor) were

Linguistic relativity in development

Effects of language on cognition differ by domain (Wolff
& Holmes, 2011), and over development. Some effects arise
much earlier than others. For spatial relations (e.g., ‘in’ or
‘on’), children show some language-specific effects on
cognition as early as 2-years (Choi, 2006). Other linguistic
relativity effects develop later. For instance, cross-linguistic
differences in mass/count distinctions that affect
classification preferences (e.g. between English and Yucatec
Maya) do not arise until 9-years (Lucy & Gaskins, 2001).

584

For musical pitch, some first evidence suggests languagespecific mappings may already be present in 2‐ to 5‐year‐old
children (Shayan, Ozturk, Bowerman & Majid, 2014). Farsi
and Turkish speaking children successfully associated
spatial thickness and pitch in a similarity-matching task,
whereas same‐aged German children (who do not have a
thickness metaphor in their language) did not (Shayan et al.,
2014). While Shayan and colleagues shed some light on the
development of thickness-pitch mappings, they do not test
the development of height-pitch associations. Focusing on
just one type of space-pitch mappings leaves open how
different space-pitch associations interact during
acquisition. To address these issues, we tested children’s
nonlinguistic mappings in both height-pitch and thicknesspitch matching tasks (Experiment 2). As a prerequisite for
the non-linguistic study, we first examined children’s
linguistic mastery of space-pitch metaphors (Experiment 1).

endpoint (low, thin). Unlike ‘height’ which can refer to a
whole dimension, *‘lowness’ (marked) cannot be used in
this way. In the same vein, ‘thickness’ represents the
(default) unmarked spatial dimension, whereas * ‘thinness’
represents the marked one. Previous research shows
children understand unmarked spatial and spatio-temporal
terms better than marked ones (e.g. Clark, 1972), but it is
not clear this also applies to sound meanings. Testing
children’s comprehension of space-pitch metaphors allows
us to assess whether the same asynchrony exists for pitch.
This question is of particular interest given the markedness
relationship between space and pitch reverses in height and
thickness metaphors. While high and thick both constitute
unmarked ends of the spatial dimensions, higher tonal
frequency is described by the unmarked high in height-pitch
metaphors, but encoded with the marked endpoint thin in
thickness-pitch metaphors (see also Shayan et al., 2014).
Overall, the goal of Experiment 1 was to assess children’s
comprehension of linguistic space-pitch metaphors
including patterns of markedness. 1

Acquisition of linguistic space-pitch metaphors

There is evidence height‐pitch metaphors are acquired
late during language development (e.g., Costa‐Giomi &
Descombes, 1996). Three- to 6‐year old children have
difficulties in both pitch metaphor production (e.g. Webster
& Schlentrich, 1982) and comprehension (Durkin &
Townsend, 1997). One reason for these difficulties could be
the polysemous nature of the terms: they describe both
spatial height and musical pitch. In support of this, French
speaking children improved in labeling musical tones when
trained to describe them as aigu and grave (a pair of
antonyms exclusively used to label pitch) compared to
training with the metaphoric expressions haut ‘high’ and
bas ‘low’ (Costa‐Giomi & Descombes, 1996). This
explanation, however, does not fit the thickness-pitch
metaphor acquisition data. Despite similar polysemy (thick
is used for both spatial thickness and pitch), 2- to 5-year-old
Farsi and Turkish children showed no difficulties in pitch
metaphor comprehension (Shayan et al., 2014).
To examine this in more detail, we focus on
comprehension of both height-pitch and thickness-pitch
terminology in 5-year-old Dutch-speaking children
(Experiment 1). Since adult speakers of Dutch encode
musical pitch in terms of height, but not thickness, one may
predict that Dutch children know linguistic height-pitch
metaphors but not thickness-pitch metaphors. If so, 5-yearold children should comprehend height-pitch metaphors
better than thickness-pitch metaphors. Alternatively, since
height-pitch metaphors appear to be acquired rather late
(compared to thickness-pitch metaphors), we might not see
language-specific patterns in this age-group.
The investigation of space-pitch metaphor acquisition
further touches on issues of markedness. As has often been
noted, children acquire unmarked expressions before they
acquire marked ones (e.g. Clark, 1972). The unmarked
endpoint is usually defined as the default, more frequent or
broader dimension as opposed to the marked one (see e.g.,
Clark, 1973; Proctor & Cho, 2006). Space-pitch metaphors,
too, can be described as being bipolar, consisting of an
unmarked endpoint (high, thick), and an opposing marked

Experiment 1
Methods

Participants
Five-year-old Dutch children (N=21) participated in the
study (12 male; mean age: 5.1, range: 5.0–5.3). Children
were recruited by the Baby Research Center Nijmegen
(BRC) and compensated for participation with money or a
small gift. According to a musical background questionnaire
filled in by parents, no child had received musical training.
Children played no instruments and were not familiar with
note reading traditions.
Materials and Procedure
Children sat in front of a 20” computer monitor, next to
the experimenter. All stimuli were presented on a Windows
computer using Presentation software (version 14.9.,
www.neurobs.com). Children wore child-sized shielded
headphones. Videos of two squares (vierkante vriendjes,
'square friends') were presented on a computer screen.
During each trial, the left square ‘sang’ a single tone for two
seconds followed by the right square ‘singing’ a single tone
for two seconds. For the duration of the tone, the target
square wiggled to indicate it was producing the sound.
Three different tone pairs (262hz vs. 698hz, 262hz vs.
523hz, 330hz vs. 523hz) were presented four times. Half the
trials started with a high pitch; half with a low pitch. In
total, there were twelve trials. In the height-pitch condition,
children were asked: Welke zingt hoog/laag? (Which one
sings high/low?) The same number of marked (low) and
unmarked (high) questions was presented, order
counterbalanced. Questions were read out aloud by the
experimenter. The thickness-pitch condition followed the
same procedure, and was always presented last. The
1

To avoid spill-over effects from linguistic to nonlinguistic
tasks, Experiment 1 was administered after Experiment 2, but for
reasons of logical coherence, Experiment 1 is reported first.

585

questions were: Welke zingt dik/dun? (Which one sings
thick/thin?) Each child was tested in both the height-pitch
and thickness-pitch conditions. For each trial, children were
asked to point to the appropriate square. If they were not
sure, they could ask to hear the sounds again and the whole
trial was repeated. Responses were evaluated as correct
when they followed Dutch height-pitch and Farsi thicknesspitch metaphors (i.e., thin=high pitch; thick=low pitch). 2

were also tested in a non-linguistic height-pitch and
thickness-pitch matching condition (adapted from Dolscheid
et al., 2014). To ensure that the space-pitch task was in
principle sensitive to language-specific mappings, we also
tested adult participants in both conditions.
Since 5-year-old children’s linguistic space-pitch
metaphors appear to be different from those of adults,
children’s performance on the nonlinguistic task was
expected to be different as well. Dutch adults are assumed to
display a height-pitch association, but not a thickness-pitch
association in line with metaphors in language. The reverse
could be predicted for 5-year-old children. Consistent with
their linguistic behavior in Experiment 1, it is possible
children map high pitch to low space. In order to link
children’s linguistic and nonlinguistic space-pitch
associations, their performance on the linguistic pitch
comprehension task (Experiment 1) was used as a predictor
for their nonlinguistic performance. If language mediates
pitch associations already in 5-year-olds, an effect of
linguistic pitch comprehension on nonlinguistic space-pitch
mappings is expected.

Results
The mean proportion of correct responses on the pitch
comprehension tasks was calculated separately for heightpitch and thickness-pitch. For height-pitch, children’s mean
proportion of correct responses was significantly below
chance (M=.33) t(20)=2.52, p=.02, d=.55. 3 In the thicknesspitch comprehension task, mean proportion of correct
responses was significantly above chance (M=.71)
t(20)=4.13, p=.001, d=.90.
A repeated-measures ANOVA with factors metaphor type
(height vs. thickness) and markedness (unmarked [high,
thick] vs. marked [low, thin]) was conducted. Mean
proportion of correct responses served as the dependent
variable. There was a significant main effect of metaphor
and
markedness
F(1,20)=4.71,
p=.04,
ηp2=.43
F(1,20)=15.00, p=.001, ηp2=.46, but no significant
interaction F(1,20)=.06, ns, ηp2=.003. Simple contrasts
revealed better performance in thickness-pitch than heightpitch comprehension F(1,20)=4.71, p=.04, ηp2=.43.
Moreover, unmarked questions elicited better performance
than marked questions F(1,20)=15.00, p=.001, ηp2=.46.

Methods
Participants
In addition to the Dutch children (N=21), adult native
speakers of Dutch (N=7) were tested on the nonlinguistic
space-pitch matching tasks (and served as a pilot for the
procedure).
Materials and Procedure
Pretest To ensure children (and adults) understood the main
task, a pretest was conducted (for a similar test see
Mondloch & Maurer, 2004). Participants wore shielded
headphones and were presented with two competing
exemplars on a computer screen. These could be stationary
or moving objects or animals (e.g. images of a horse and a
cow). At the same time a sound corresponding to one of the
exemplars was presented via headphones (e.g. horse
neighing). Participants were asked to indicate which
object/animal ‘belonged’ to the sound they heard by
pressing the corresponding button on a button-box. The
pretest consisted of 4 trials. Only participants who
responded correctly on 3 or more trials were tested in the
space-pitch association tasks. All children (and adults)
fulfilled this criterion.

Discussion

We found that 5-year-old Dutch children understand
thickness-pitch mappings better than height-pitch mappings.
In fact, children seemed to favor a reverse height-pitch
mapping, with ‘high’ referring to low-pitched sounds and
‘low’ referring to high-pitched sounds. Given Dutch has a
height-pitch metaphor, this finding is unexpected. The
results also confirmed an effect of markedness in pitch
metaphor comprehension. Children seem to understand
unmarked pitch terms (Which one sounds high/thick) better
than marked terms (low/thin). Fuller discussion of the
results will follow in the General Discussion.

Experiment 2
In order to explore possible effects of language on
thought, the same 5-year-old children tested in Experiment 1

Space-pitch matching tasks Once participants passed the
pretest criterion, they were presented with the test trials. In
the height-pitch condition, two orange bouncing balls
(approximately 2.5 cm diameter) were presented side by
side in front of a 20 x 20 cm grid of small, white dots on a
black field (see Figure 1, panel a). Both balls followed the
same trajectory, however, they started moving from
different positions in space: one started from the top, the
other from the bottom (i.e. at the two extremes of the
vertical trajectory). Animations were accompanied by the
sound of a sliding whistle (a sinusoidal tone). The
fundamental frequency of the sound changed at a constant

2

To ensure children were able to comprehend height and
thickness terminology in a non-metaphorical spatial sense, an
additional space comprehension task was administered. All
children performed correctly on all height and thickness trials,
demonstrating comprehension of basic spatial terminology.
3
According to Kolmogorov-Smirnov-tests, the assumption of
normally distributed data was not met (all p-values < .05).
Therefore additional non-parametric analyses were performed
confirming the results of the parametric tests.

586

rate, between 300 and 1700 Hz over 2.5 s, coinciding with a
single phase of the animation (e.g., ball moving up). The
pitch movement thus coincided with movement of both
balls, but only one movement direction. The amplitude of
the sound increased and then decreased between
approximately 47 and 84 dB within each phase of the
animation, peaking at 1000 Hz. Participants were presented
with 8 trials in which they had to match the animation and
sound by pressing the corresponding button. Correct
response side (right vs. left) was counterbalanced within
participants.
A trial lasted for 30 seconds and was stopped as soon as a
button was pressed. If no decision was made during these 30
seconds, participants were asked to choose the correct
animation afterward. Responses were considered correct
when they were in line with the Dutch height-pitch
metaphor (i.e. when the ball’s rising movement
corresponded to rising pitch).
The thickness-pitch condition had the same procedure and
trial structure. However, instead of bouncing balls, two
vertical tubes were presented expanding in spatial thickness
(see Figure 1, panel b). Eight thickness-pitch trials were
presented. Responses were considered correct when they
were in line with a Farsi-like thickness-pitch metaphor (i.e.
when the expanding tube was matched to the sound whose
fundamental frequency ‘fell’).

performance on height-pitch trials than thickness-pitch trials
t(6)=3.64, p=.01, d=1,38.
Five-year-old children
Children performed at chance in both height-pitch
(M=.58), t(20)=1.64, ns, d=.36 and thickness-pitch trials
(M=.52), t(20)=.44, ns, d=.10. Given the results of the
linguistic pitch comprehension task (Experiment 1), one
might expect to see differences in performance in nonlinguistic conditions. However, a paired-sample t-test
revealed no significant difference between height-pitch and
thickness-pitch associations, t(20)=.63, ns, d=.14.
To assess whether performance on the pitch elicitation
task in Experiment 1 predicted patterns in nonlinguistic
space-pitch associations, simple regression analyses were
conducted. Mean proportion of correct responses on the
height-pitch comprehension condition were entered as a
regressor to predict performance (mean proportion correct)
on the nonlinguistic height-pitch matching condition. The
same analysis was performed for linguistic and
nonlinguistic thickness-pitch mappings. There was no
significant effect of height-pitch metaphor comprehension
on nonlinguistic height-pitch matching performance b=-.12,
F(1,19)=.69, ns, r2=.04. There was also no significant effect
of thickness-pitch metaphor comprehension on the
corresponding nonlinguistic condition, b=-.26, F(1,19)=1.3,
ns, r2=.06. Finally, children were assigned to two different
groups in the height-pitch comprehension condition, those
performing at chance or below (n=16) and those performing
above chance (n=5). An independent t-test between groups
revealed performance in the linguistic height-pitch condition
had no significant effect on nonlinguistic height-pitch
associations either (i.e., groups did not differ with regard to
nonlinguistic space-pitch associations) t(19)=.27, ns, d=.15.
Likewise, children were assigned to two groups in the
thickness-pitch comprehension condition, with children
performing at chance or below (n=7) and children
performing above chance (n=14). Performance in thicknesspitch comprehension did not influence nonlinguistic
thickness-pitch associations either t(19)=.38, ns, d=.18.

Discussion

Unlike adults whose nonlinguistic space-pitch mappings
follow metaphors in language, 5-year-old children
performed at chance in both height-pitch and thickness-pitch
mapping conditions. Moreover, language did not predict
performance on the space-pitch association tasks. So,
children do not seem to represent these associations at 5years.

Figure 1: Examples of the test trials. Panel a) In the height-pitch matching
condition, participants were presented with two videos with bouncing balls.
Panel b) In the thickness-pitch matching condition, stimuli consisted of
tubes changing from thin to thick and vice versa.

Results

General Discussion

Adults
Adult participants’ mean proportions of correct responses
were above chance in the height-pitch condition,
corresponding to the Dutch height-pitch metaphor (M = .82)
t(6)=3.58, p=.01, d=1.35. Performance on the thickness
pitch trials, however, was at chance (M = .38) t(6)=.1.55, ns,
d=.59. A paired-samples t-test showed significantly better

Language and space-pitch associations follow a more
complex relationship than previously thought. Dutch
children did not show knowledge of the height-pitch
metaphor in their language, in fact they reversed it. This was
despite their adult-like comprehension of the spatial source
domain (i.e. height). Moreover, children showed better

587

performance for a thickness-pitch metaphor, despite its
absence in the Dutch language.
It is possible this is the result of the experimental set-up.
To prevent potential confusion, we opted to have a fixed
order of testing with thickness-pitch metaphors always at
the end of the experiment. Prior assessment of height-pitch
comprehension may have served as a training in which
children became familiar with the task. But, note, a simple
training effect is unlikely to account for the observed pattern
(i.e. it cannot explain the reversal of height-pitch
metaphors). In order to rule out training effects entirely, one
would have to counterbalance the order of height-pitch and
thickness-pitch comprehension tasks in the future.
If we take children’s better performance in thicknesspitch comprehension at face-value though, we are in need of
an explanation for this rather surprising finding. Why do
Dutch children understand thickness-pitch but not heightpitch metaphors (and even reverse them)?
The finding that 5-year-olds have difficulties in
understanding height-pitch metaphors is not entirely new
(see e.g. Costa‐Giomi & Descombes, 1996; Durkin &
Townsend, 1997). In contrast, numerous studies show nonlinguistic associations between spatial height and pitch are
already present in prelinguistic infants (Dolscheid et al.,
2014; Jeschonek et al., 2012; Walker et al., 2010). There is
thus a discrepancy between the early presence of crossmodal height-pitch associations and the difficulty in
understanding height-pitch metaphors later. It seems then
language “may initially even hinder mappings previously
acquired nonverbally” (Eitan, Ornoy, & Gronot, 2012, p.
34). For Dutch children, linguistic height-pitch metaphors
require a mapping between established associations and new
verbal information, a process which may not be fully
complete at the age of five. This may also explain why there
is better performance in thickness-pitch metaphor
comprehension. The absence of a thickness-pitch metaphor
in the Dutch language could leave thickness-pitch
associations ‘untouched’. An alternative explanation could
be the thickness-pitch metaphor is simply more intuitive for
children since it follows correspondences in the real world
(see e.g. Lewkowicz, 2011). Children may well have
experienced people or animals with bigger ('thicker') bodies
tend to have lower voices (see also Dolscheid et al., 2014).
This account could also explain why Farsi and Turkish
children do not show delays in thickness-pitch metaphor
comprehension (Shayan et al., 2014).
It is interesting that Dutch children understood heightpitch mappings in a reversed way, with high referring to low
pitch and low referring to high pitch. How does this
reversed preference in height-pitch comprehension come
about? While this finding appears to be at odds with
metaphors used in Dutch or English, other languages make
use of a reversed height-pitch mapping: Speakers of the
Austronesian language 'Are'are, for instance, talk about high
pitch in terms of ‘low’ or ‘down’ (Zemp & Malkus, 1979).
Although this observation suggests it is not inconceivable to

reverse linguistic height-pitch metaphors, it does not explain
the Dutch children’s pitch comprehension.
Another explanation could lie in the misalignment of
Dutch space-pitch terms and their pitch quality. Contrary to
sound-symbolic intuitions, the vowel [a] in laag (‘low’) is
characterized by higher formant frequencies compared to [o]
in hoog (‘high’). So children may have based their pitch
judgments on the terms’ pitch information (i.e., frequency
of formants) rather than on the terms’ meanings. Note
however, that the same holds for Dutch thickness
terminology but children did not reverse thickness-pitch
terms: the vowel [i] in dik (thick = low pitch) is higher than
[y] in dun (thin = high pitch).
A final explanation for Dutch children’s height-pitch
reversal lies in markedness. Our results show that children
are sensitive to markedness patterns in the domain of
musical pitch, in analogy to findings in the spatial domain
(e.g. Clark, 1972). Children displayed better comprehension
of unmarked questions (‘Which one sings high/thick?’) than
marked questions (‘Which one sings low/thin?’). There is an
interesting difference, however. For space markedness
patterns are aligned (i.e., high, thick, big, etc., are all
unmarked and refer to bigger entities). The same does not
hold for pitch metaphors. Instead, markedness reverses in
height- and thickness-pitch metaphors. Children may
nevertheless be inclined to use consistent markedness
alignment and consider low pitch as the unmarked pole by
assigning it with the labels ‘high’ or ‘thick’. The
markedness distribution of musical pitch thus appears to
differ between 5-year-olds and adult speakers of Dutch,
which could also explain children’s better performance in
thickness-pitch comprehension (low pitch = unmarked =
high = thick). Overall, these findings show the acquisition
of space-pitch metaphors is a complex and dynamic process,
which in turn has implications for linguistic relativity.
While language affects nonlinguistic pitch representations
in adults, the results are not conclusive in 5-year-olds. This
lack of clarity is partly due to children’s unexpected
linguistic patterns observed in this study. Based on their
linguistic metaphor comprehension, one might have
expected better performance on the nonlinguistic thicknesspitch task or even a reversed association in the nonlinguistic
height-pitch task. However, this was not the case. Children
performed at chance on both nonlinguistic space-pitch tasks.
This finding could be for a number of reasons. (A) It could
be children (no longer) display consistent space-pitch
associations. (B) The matching tasks were simply too
difficult for them. These two options are hard to
disentangle. However, there are some hints indicating (B)
may be correct. While children basically understood the task
instructions as illustrated by their correct performance on
the pretest (matching sounds to animals or objects), the
space-pitch association tasks were more challenging.
Children had to keep track of opposing trajectories as well
as changing pitch glides which may have been too
cognitively demanding.

588

In general, task difficulty seems to be a critical factor
when it comes to children’s abilities with cross-modal
associations. Marks, Hammeal, and Bornstein (1987), for
instance, report that children are unable to systematically
map size (big vs. small) to pitch until they are 13 years old.
However, others find evidence for size‐pitch congruency
effects in children as young as three years of age (Mondloch
& Maurer, 2004). The lack of nonlinguistic space-pitch
mappings in our task is thus not by itself conclusive. Other
tasks have to be used in order to distinguish between task
difficulty and real absence of space-pitch associations in 5year-olds.
For the moment it seems unlikely language affects
children’s nonlinguistic space-pitch associations in the same
way it does in adults (see Dolscheid et al., 2013; see also
adult data in Experiment 2). Consequently linguistic
relativity effects in the domain of musical pitch might be
classified as rather late compared to other effects (e.g. Choi,
2006). Testing older children is thus a necessary next step
and could reveal when linguistic metaphors become more
adult-like and at what age they start to affect nonlinguistic
behavior in the domain of musical pitch.

Dolscheid, S., Shayan, S., Majid, A., & Casasanto, D. (2013). The
thickness of musical pitch: Psychophysical evidence for
linguistic relativity. Psychological Science, 24(5), 613-621.
Dolscheid, S., Hunnius, S., Casasanto, D., & Majid, A. (2014).
Prelinguistic infants are sensitive to space-pitch associations
found across cultures. Psychological Science, 25(6), 1256-1261.
Durkin, K., & Townsend, J. (1997). Influence of linguistic factors
on young school children’s responses to musical pitch tests: A
preliminary test. Psychology of Music, 25(2), 186–191.
Eitan, Z., Ornoy, E., & Granot, R. Y. (2012). Listening in the dark:
Congenital and early blindness and cross-domain mappings in
music. Psychomusicology: Music, Mind, and Brain, 22(1), 33–
45.
Jeschonek, S., Pauen, S., & Babocsai, L. (2012). Cross-modal
mapping of visual and acoustic displays in infants: The effect of
dynamic and static components. European Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 10(3), 337–358.
Lewkowicz, D. J. (2011). The biological implausibility of the
nature–nurture dichotomy and what it means for the study of
infancy. Infancy, 16(4), 331–367.
Lucy, J. A., & Gaskins, S. (2001). Grammatical categories and the
development of classification preferences: A comparative
approach. In M. Bowerman & S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Language
acquisition and conceptual development (pp. 257–283).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marks, L. E., Hammeal, R. J., & Bornstein, M. H. (1987).
Perceiving similarity and comprehending metaphor.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
52(1), 1–102.
Mondloch, C. J., & Maurer, D. (2004). Do small white balls
squeak? Pitch-object correspondences in young children.
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 4(2), 133–
136.
Proctor, R. W., & Cho, Y. S. (2006). Polarity correspondence: A
general principle for performance of speeded binary
classification tasks. Psychological Bulletin; Psychological
Bulletin, 132(3), 416–442.
Shayan, S., Ozturk, O., Bowerman, M., & Majid, A. (2014).
Spatial metaphor in language can promote the development of
cross‐modal mappings in children. Developmental Science,
17(4), 636-643.
Shayan, S., Ozturk, O., & Sicoli, M. A. (2011). The thickness of
pitch: Crossmodal metaphors in Farsi, Turkish, and Zapotec.
The Senses and Society, 6(1), 96–105.
Stone, R. M. (1981). Toward a Kpelle conceptualization of music
performance. The Journal of American Folklore, 94(372), 188–
206.
Walker, P., Bremner, J. G., Mason, U., Spring, J., Mattock, K.,
Slater, A., & Johnson, S. P. (2010). Preverbal infants’ sensitivity
to synaesthetic cross-modality correspondences. Psychological
Science, 21(1), 21–25.
Webster, P. R., & Schlentrich, K. (1982). Discrimination of pitch
direction by preschool children with verbal and nonverbal tasks.
Journal of Research in Music Education, 30(3), 151–161.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, thought, and reality: Selected
writings. (J. B. Carroll, Ed.) (Vol. 5). MIT Press.
Wolff, P., & Holmes, K. J. (2011). Linguistic relativity. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2(3), 253–265.
Zemp, H., & Malkus, V. (1979). Aspects of 'Are'are musical
theory. Ethnomusicology, 23(1), 5-48.

Conclusions
Five-year-old children showed sensitivity to markedness
patterns in pitch metaphors. Children found it easier to
comprehend unmarked space-pitch metaphors in
comparison to marked associations, suggesting markedness
understanding holds for pitch, as well as space. Contrary to
predictions based on language input, 5-year-old Dutch
children displayed better comprehension for thickness-pitch
metaphors than height-pitch metaphors. Children even
reversed the latter. Thus, at 5-years, children do not yet
show patterns of comprehension compatible with their
language input. Similarly, effects of language on
nonlinguistic cognition do not appear to be present in 5year-olds. Together, these findings suggest linguistic
relativity effects in the domain of musical pitch arise rather
late during development.

References
Casasanto, D. (2008). Similarity and proximity: When does close
in space mean close in mind? Memory & Cognition,
36(6), 1047-1056.
Choi, S. (2006). Influence of language-specific input on spatial
cognition: Categories of containment. First Language, 26(2),
207–232.
Clark, E. V. (1972). On the child’s acquisition of antonyms in two
semantic fields. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 11(6), 750–758.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child. In T. E.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of
Language (pp. 27–63). New York: Academic Press.
Costa-Giomi, E., & Descombes, V. (1996). Pitch labels with single
and multiple meanings: A study with French-speaking children.
Journal of Research in Music Education, 44(3), 204–214.

589

