Why Stickiness is not Enough to Explain Persistence of Counterintuitive Religious
Concepts
M. Afzal Upal (Afzal.Upal@drdc-rdc.gc.ca)
Defence Research & Development Canada
1133 Shepherd Ave W, Toronto, ON, M3K 2C9 Canada

To date, there has been little work done to investigate the
key contextual factors and their interactions with
counterintuitivenes. This paper reports on a detailed case
study carried out to investigate the spread of a
counterintuitive religious idea in the real world to identify
socio-cognitive variables and processes involved.

Abstract
Cognitive scientists of religion argue that religious ideas are
widespread because they are minimally counterintuitive.
Traditional lab studies have found support for a better
memory for minimally counterintuitive concepts. This paper
presents an in-depth case study of the spread of a
counterintuitive religious idea in the real world. It finds that
counterintuitiveness alone is not sufficient to guarantee
persistence of a religious belief. Novel religious beliefs have
to be painstakingly woven into the cultural fabric of a group’s
shared social identity to ensure its survival.

Context & Counterintuitiveness

Keywords: memory for counterintuitive concepts, cognitive
anthropology of new religious movements,

Introduction
According to a 2012 Pew Survey, 77% of South Asian
Muslims believe in jinns (genies), 35% believe in witchcraft
and 55% consult spiritual healers while 26% use talisman
prescribe by such healers to cure or ward off different
diseases or evil spirits (PewGlobal, 2012). Another Pew
Survey found that 29% Americans have felt that they were
in touch with a dead person while 18% believe that they
have seen a ghost (PewForum, 2012). Why do people hold
such counterintuitive religious beliefs? Cognitive scientists
of religion argue that to explain spread of cultural ideas, we
need to focus on transmission advantages that these ideas
have over other types of ideas (Whitehouse & McCauley,
2005). Boyer (Boyer, 1994, 2001) hypothesized that ideas
that are minimally counterintuitive i.e., concepts that violate
only a small number of intuitive expectations (e.g., talking
tree) for some people are remembered better than intuitive
concepts (such as a green tree) and maximally
counterintuitive concepts (such as a glowing tree that talks
and disappears on Fridays) by those individuals. A number
of in-lab studies using, mostly artificially designed short
stories (such as the story of an alien visiting an alien
museum), have found that people better remember
minimally counterintuitive ideas (J. Barrett & Nyhof, 2001;
Boyer & Ramble, 2001; Gonce, Upal, Slone, & Tweney,
2006; Upal, 2005; Upal, Gonce, Tweney, & Slone, 2007).
On the basis of such evidence, cognitive scientists of
religion have argued that counterintuitiveness can explain
the spread of religious ideas (Whitehouse & McCauley,
2005).
Some cultural anthropologists (Bloch, 2005)
studying religious beliefs of real world groups have argued
that counterintuitiveness, and the memorability advantages
it confers, cannot fully explain differences in spread of
religious ideas and that other contextual factors are needed
to explain the spread of religious beliefs around the world.

Traditionally, some cognitive scientists of religion have
argued that content of a concept alone determines whether a
concept is counterintuitive and therefore memorable and
that contextual factors can be ignored. The idea being that
this would allow the new cognitive approach to explain the
success of religious concepts in a group regardless of the
particular historical or social forces acting on that group.
Thus speaking about “schemas and scripts” that are
“culturally variable,” Barrett and Nyhoff (2001) argued that
they “will not provide an explanation for cross-culturally
prevalent classes of concepts.” This conventional contentbased view (J. Barrett & Nyhof, 2001; J. L. Barrett, 2008)
downplays the role played by context and assumes that for
concepts relevant to cognitive science of religion,
conceptual processing is invariant to different contextual
conditions. The context-based view (Upal, 2005, 2007a,
2007b, 2009, 2011a, 2011b), on the other hand, argues that
a concept can only be counterintuitive in a specific context
for a specific individual at a specific time. Upal defined the
context for an individual as contents of the relevant parts of
the semantic memory of the individual processing the
concept, individual’s motivation for processing the concept,
and resources (e.g., time, brain capacity) available to the
individual when processing the concept.
Upal (2010; 2011) also argued that in order to explain the
success of a concept in a group, we need to look at group
contextual factors.
These include the shared mental
representations of the group relevant to the concept. Upal
also defined socially counterintuitive ideas as those ideas
that violate shared mental representations of a group and
argued that ideas that are socially counterintuitive for a
group should have transmission advantages in that group.
Thus the notion of “a plane flying people through the air”
may have been socially counterintuitive for Melanesian
tribes in the early twentieth century. Attempts at making
sense of such counterintuitive ideas may have played a part
in the formation of cargo cult ideologies in Melanesia
(Whitehouse, 1995). To date, little work has been done to
understand how socially counterintuitive concepts interact

2452

with other socio-cognitive factors in the real world.
Understanding these interactions is crucial if we want to
understand how religious ideas spread in the real world.

Case Study of the Real World Spread of A
Counterintuitive Religious Idea
In order to understand the relative contributions of various
sociocognitive factors to the spread of counterintuitive
ideas, it would be nice if we had multiple versions of a
counterintuitive idea that were planted in different groups
with slightly different socio-cognitive characteristics with
the idea spreading in some groups but not others. Off
course, finding such instances in the real world is extremely
difficult. For the case study reported here, we selected two
different versions of an idea that was socially
counterintuitive for nineteenth century South Asian
Muslims. A century and half later, one of these versions is
deeply lodged in the minds of a large number of South
Asian Muslims while the other version is barely
remembered by a few. We will carefully examine the two
versions of the idea and the sociocognitive characteristics of
their target population to identify factors that led to
differences in their spread.

A Socially Counterintuitive Idea for 19th
Century South Asian Muslims
The nineteenth century South Asian Muslims, similar to
Muslims elsewhere in the world (then and now), did not
believe in Jesus’s crucifixion. Instead they believed that
Jesus had been saved the disgrace of death-by-hanging by a
last minute intervention by God. God raised Jesus to the
heavens and made someone else look like him. Romans
then hanged the lookalike taking him for real Jesus. The
real Jesus sits on the right hand of God awaiting his return at
the end of times as a Muslim (Reynolds, 2009). Thus
Indian Muslims found the claims that Jesus had died a
natural death and was not sitting on God’s right hand to be
counterintuitive and surprising. Such claims were made
roughly around 1890 by two Indian Muslims Sir Syed
Ahmad Khan (1817-1898) and Mirza Ghulam Ahmad
(1835-1908).

Sir Syed Ahmad Khan felt that the main reason for the
dominance of Western nations during the nineteenth century
was rational thinking and resulting scientific and
technological advances. Khan became an advocate for
incorporation of Western values of rationality and education
into Indian Muslim thought. He criticized traditional
Muslim ulema for preaching Muslims against the adoption
of Western values and education. He raised funds to open
school and colleges for Muslims throughout India where
they would be taught traditional Islamic subjects as well as
Western subjects of philosophy and science. Khan opened
the Mohamadan Anglo-Indian College in Aligarth in 1870
and dreamed of making it the Oxford University of India.
Khan also argued for reforming Islam to free it of
irrational beliefs and practices such as the belief in
supernatural miracles by arguing that God does not violate
his own laws of nature. In particular he argued that Jesus’
physical ascension to heaven violated God’s own law that
human beings are not raised to heaven alive. Thus he
argued that the belief in Jesus’s physical ascension was not
rational. He said:
The Quran makes mention of Jesus’ death in
four places… Firstly in Sura Aal Imran,
secondly in Sura Ma’ida, … thirdly in Sura
Maryam… fourthly in Sura Nisa’. Jesus was
not killed by the Jews, either by stoning or
by crucifixion, but he died his natural death,
and God raised him in rank and status…
From the first three verses it is clear that
Jesus died a natural death.”
(Khan 1880; p. 48)
Khan was very well known in his day and he was
successful in improving the relationship between Indian
Muslims and the British government. His educational
achievements are remembered by Muslims throughout
South Asia. The MAO college founded by him in Aligarh
grew into a thriving world class Aligarh University.
However, other than a few scholars and historians, almost
no one knows that he argued against Jesus’s physical
ascension and that he claimed that Jesus had died a natural
death here on earth.

Sir Syed Ahmad Khan

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad

Syed Ahmad Khan (Metcalfe, 1982) was born into a
Mughal family in Delhi, the seat of the Mughal empire that
had ruled India since the sixteenth century. At a young age
of twenty five, he was awarded the highly sought after
nobility titles of Javad-ud Daulah and Arif-Jang by the last
Mughal King Bahadur Shah Zafar. Recognizing the
growing power of the British East India Company, he joined
the company as a jurist and played a significant role in
fighting the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
The British
government recognized his services by awarding him the
Order of the Star of India in 1868, and Knighthood in 1888.
He was also awarded an honorary doctorate by Edinburgh
University in 1890.

Similar to Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad
was the son of a Mughal noble but of a much lesser rank
(Friedman, 1992; Lavan, 1974). Ahmad’s family lived far
from the center of Mughal power in a small village of
Qadian in Punjab (Dard, 1948). To make matters worse, the
family lost much of its feudal lands during the Sikh rule.
While the East India Company’s defeat of the Sikhs in 1853
was seen as a positive sign by Ahmad and his family, the
growing activities of Christian missionaries were considered
an unwelcome assault against Islam by Ahmad, his family,
and indeed most Punjabi Muslims. Ahmad never went to
school and was home schooled in Islamic arts of Quran,
Hadith, and Fiqah. Besides a brief stunt as a clerk, he never

2453

held a job and spent most of his life sequestered in the
village mosque dependent on the charity of his older brother
and friends.
Unlike Khan, Ahmad argued that the reason for Muslim
decline was that they had moved away from Islam and that
in order to restore their lost glory, they needed to go back to
following Islam more faithfully. Ahmad was concerned
with increasing number of Punjabi Muslim peasants who
were converting to Christianity.
Ahmad argued that
Christian missionaries were tricking simple Punjabi
Muslims by reminding them that according to their own
Islamic beliefs, Jesus was alive in the heavens above and
Muhammad was buried six feet underground, thus proving
Jesus’s superiority over Muhammad. He said that the only
way to blunt this argument was to change Muslims beliefs
regarding Jesus to convince them that Jesus was also dead
and buried. Unlike Khan, who made Western notion of
rationality as the reason for the change, Ahmad argued that
Jesus had to die to restore Islam’s superiority over
Christianity. Ahmad said:
To believe that Jesus is alive, is highly
insulting and derogatory to the Holy
Prophet. I cannot stand this sacrilege even
for a moment. Everyone knows that the
Holy Prophet passed away at the age of
sixty-three and lies buried in his tomb at
Medina, which millions of pilgrims visit
every year. If it is disrespectful to believe
in the death of Jesus or even to think of it,
then I ask how can you permit this
insolence and disrespect with regard to the
Holy Prophet? Indeed, you so brazenly
announce his demine. Your ceremonial
singers recount the events preceding the
demine of the Holy Prophet, and you
readily admit even to the non-believers
that he did die. But I wonder what hits
you so hard at the mere mention of the
death of Jesus that it fills you with
uncontrollable rage. I would not have
been so hurt if you had also shed tears at
the death of the Holy Prophet. But it is
such as pity that you gladly accept the
death of him who was the Seal of the
prophets and the lord and master of us all,
but consider Jesus to be alive who
pronounced himself unworthy even to
loosen the shoe-laces of the Holy
Prophet? In fact, it would be of little
wonder if the Holy Prophet, peace be
upon him, were still alive, as it was he
who brought the Supreme Guidance, the
equal of which is not to be found in the
world. He demonstrated in his person all
the possible spiritual excellences, the
equal and like of which cannot been
witnessed even if we trace history back to

Adam. The truth of the matter is that the
Muslims, as indeed the entire world,
needed the Holy Prophet, peace be upon
him, alive far more than it did Jesus…
how can one claim to love and be a
follower of the Holy Prophet if he accepts
a superior status for Jesus by pronouncing
him alive and the Holy Prophet dead?
(Ahmad, 1905) (p. 16-17)
Furthermore, Ahmad argued that Muslims in Islam’s
golden period had believed in Jesus’s death. Afterwards, as
Christian ideas slowly crept into Islam God withdrew his
favors. Note that this process of a heavenly message being
slowly corrupted is precisely the same process through
which Muslims believe that Jesus and Moses’ teachings had
been corrupted by the Christians and Jews over time.
Ahmed merely extended the same process to the Islamic
belief regarding Jesus. Ahmad argued that going back to
our original beliefs would result in restoration of the past
glory. Social psychologists have found that this arcing
pattern of narrative to be highly successful in causing social
change especially among high ingroup identifiers who are
usually resistant to all messages of social change.
To really blunt the evangelical argument who pointed to
Muhammad’s tomb as a proof of his lower status, Ahmed
wanted a physical symbol of Jesus’ death, preferably a
tomb. It appears that he turned to Christian sources
regarding Jesus which mention a grave in the holy land
where Jesus laid for three days before he was raised. Even
though the exact location of the tomb was unclear to him,
Ahmed used the existence of Jesus’ grave in the holy land as
evidence supporting his conviction that Jesus had died a
natural death in his arguments with Christians. Writing to
respond to Siraj-ud-Din, the Christian, he wrote, “Off course
it is true that Jesus died in Galilee but it is not true that his
body was resurrected” (Ahmad, 1891). He later wrote to a
Syrian acquaintance inquiring about the exact co-ordinates
of the tomb. When told that it was nearby, he assumed that
it was in Syria. He wrote, “the funny thing is that there is a
tomb of Jesus in the country of Syria. For further clarity
regarding this matter I quote the witness of brother Syed
Muhammad Al-saeedi Tarablassi who lives in Tarablas,
Syria... If you were to argue that the tomb is fake then you
would have to prove your argument. You would also have
to show when the fakery were invented? If Jesus’ tomb is
proved fake we would also become suspicious about the
tombs of other prophets and lose our belief in their
authenticity. We would have to admit that perhaps those
tombs are also fake3” (Ahmad, 1894).
To demonstrate his credibility to those Muslims who
doubted his intentions, Ahmad had to emphasize his love for
Muhammad and the strength of his belief in Muhammad’s
superiority over all other prophets. Part of this strategy
implied that when Muslims perceived a slight against the
Holy Prophet by non-Muslims, Ahmad and his successors
had to take the lead in expressing their disgust. Upon

2454

hearing of some perceived insult against Muhammad,
Ahmad wrote,
The hurtful words which these opponents
have used against the best of creation, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, has
injured my heart. I swear by God that if all
my children, and the children of my
children, all of my friends, and all of my
helpers were murdered before my eyes, and
my hands and feet were cut off, and if my
eyes were taken out, and if I was deprived of
all my ambitions, and were to have lost all
my happiness and comforts, in comparison
to all these things, that grief is far greater to
me when such filthy attacks are made
against the pure person of the Holy Prophet.
(Ahmad, 1893)(p 15)
What Ahmad lacked in formal education, a well paying
government job, or urban connections, he made up through
his passion for defending Islam in public debates with
Christian evangelists and Hindu revivalist preachers that
traveled throughout rural Punjab in the nineteenth century.
Still, even at the peak of his career, he was never as well
known or influential as Sir Syed Ahmad Khan. Despite
these shortcomings, which we know have an impact on the
extent to which the message is spread, Ahmad was far more
successful than Khan in propagating the idea of Jesus’s
death among South Asian Muslims. Today Ahmad’s
adherents number in millions and many more South Asian
Muslims associate the idea of Jesus dying a natural death
with Ahmad than with Khan. Why did that happen? What
sociocognitive factors made Ahmad’s message more
powerful than Khan’s message?

Comparison of the two version of the idea
If we compare the messages denying Jesus’s physical
ascension to heaven composed by Ahmad and Khan, we
notice similarities and differences between the two
messages. Both authors invoked traditional Islamic sources
of authority, namely, Quran and Hadith in support of their
claims thus arguing that it had been the original Islamic
belief. Both wrote books and pamphlets in Urdu, the
language spoken by many South Asian Muslims, especially
in North and Central India, to justify their counterintuitive
messages. There were, however, also significant differences
in the way the two constructed their justifications for why
they were making the claims that violated shared beliefs of
so many South Asian Muslims. Khan explained that the
beliefs about Jesus had to be changed because they violated
God’s natural law and that it’s illogical to believe that God
violates his own laws. He argued that holding such illogical
beliefs was holding Muslims back from making scientific
and technological gains that would propel Muslims into the
modern age. Ahmad, on the other hand, argued that beliefs
about Jesus were the cause of ingroup defeat at the hands of
evangelical Christianity and that a change in belief will

reverse the fortunes of ingroup members at the expense of
the outgroup.
South Asian Muslims may have been reluctant to accept
Khan’s message because notions of logic and rationality
were more closely associated with the outgroup in their
minds. Social identity theory tells us that social groups do
not like to compare themselves with other groups on
dimensions on which they do not look good. Since, they did
not believe that they could become more logical and rational
than the British outgroup, Khan’s message did not appeal to
them. Ahmad’s narrative of “Muslims lost because they
weren’t religious enough” was also supported by most other
Muslims thinkers and that versions came to dominate
Muslim thinking throughout twentieth century (Lewis,
2003). Muslims believed that they fare well when they
compare themselves to the British on religiosity. Therefore,
a message based on religiosity had more appeal for them.

Conclusions
Traditional cognitive science of religion accounts have
claimed that counterintuitiveness of an idea, regardless of
the context, can explain cultural success of religious ideas.
These notions have found some support in in-lab studies
using artificially designed stories. This paper presents an
in-depth study of the spread of a counterintuitive religious
idea. Detailed case studies, such as above, are crucial if we
want to understand the spread of religious ideas in the real
word. It shows that in order to achieve acceptance,
counterintutiveness of an idea has to be justified by
invoking the shared beliefs on the group in question. Such
justifications must resonate with their target audience in
order to convince them to accept the new belief. Thus
counterintuitvenes of an idea may be helpful in gaining
people’s attention but it is the manner of justifying the
counterintuitiveness that plays a crucial role in deciding
whether the concept becomes culturally accepted or not.

References
Ahmad, M. G. (1891). Azala Aouham. Amritsar, India:
Riaz-e-Hind Press.
Ahmad, M. G. (1893). Aina Kamalat-e-Islam. Qadian,
India: Riaz-e-Hind Publishers.
Ahmad, M. G. (1894). Tiryak-ul-Quloob. Amritsar, India:
Riaz-e-Hind Press.
Ahmad, M. G. (1905). Lecture Ludhiana. Qadian, India:
Riaz-e-Hind Publishers.
Barrett, J., & Nyhof, M. (2001). Spreading non-natural
concepts: The role of intuitive conceptual
structures in memory and transmission of cultural
materials. Cognition and Culture, 1, 69-100.
Barrett, J. L. (2008). Coding and Quantifying
Counterintuitiveness in religious concepts:
Theoretical and methodological reflections.
Method and Theory in the Study of Religion, 20,
308-338.

2455

Bloch, M. (2005). Are religious beliefs counter-intuitive. In
M. Bloch (Ed.), Essays on Cultural Transmission
(pp. 103-123). New York: Berg.
Boyer, P. (1994). The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A
Cognitive Theory of Religion. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion Explained: The evolutionary
origins of religious thought. New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Boyer, P., & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts. Cognitive Science, 25, 535-564.
Dard, A. R. (1948). Life of Ahmad: Founder of Ahmadiyya
Movement. Lahore, Pakistan: Tabshir Publications.
Friedman, Y. (1992). Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of
Ahmadi Religious Thought and Its Medieval
Background. New Delhi, India: Oxford University
Press.
Gonce, L., Upal, M. A., Slone, D. J., & Tweney, R. (2006).
Role of Context in the Recall of Counterintuitive
Concepts. Cognition and Culture, 6(3-4), 521-547.
Lavan, S. (1974). The Ahmadiyya Movement: A history and
perspective. New Delhi, India: Manohar Book
Services.
Lewis, B. (2003). What went wrong? The clash between
Islam and modernity in the Middle East. New
York: Harper Perennial.
Metcalfe, B. (1982). Islamic Revival in British India:
Deoband, 1860-1900. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
PewForum. (2012). Religious Beliefs and Practices.
PewGlobal. (2012). The World’s Muslims: Unity and
Diversity: PewGlobal.org.
Reynolds, G. S. (2009). The Muslim Jesus: Dead or alive?
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies, 72(2), 237-258.
Upal, M. A. (2005). Role of Context in Memorability of
Intuitive and Counterintuitive Concepts. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Stressa,
Italy.
Upal, M. A. (2007a). The Optimal Cognitive Template of
Minimally Counterintuitive Narratives. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Nashville, TN.
Upal, M. A. (2007b). The Structure of False
Social Beliefs. Paper presented at the The
First IEEE Symposium on Artificial
Life, Honolulu, HI.
Upal, M. A. (2009). An Alternative Account of the Minimal
Counterintuitiveness Effect. Journal of Cognitive
Systems Research, 11(2), 194-2003.
Upal, M. A. (2011a). From Individual to Social
Counterintuitiveness: How layers of innovation
weave together to form multilayered tapestries of
human cultures. Mind and Society, 10. doi: DOI

Upal, M. A. (2011b). Memory, Mystery, and Coherence:
Does the presence of 2-3 counterintuitive concepts
predict cultural success of a narrative? Cognition
and Culture, 11(1-2), 23-48.
Upal, M. A., Gonce, L., Tweney, R., & Slone, D. J. (2007).
Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context
affects comprehension and memorability of
counterintuitive concepts. Cognitive Science, 31(3),
415-439.
Whitehouse, H. (1995). Inside the Cult: Religious
Innovation and Transmission in Papua New
Guinea Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Whitehouse, H., & McCauley, M. (2005). Mind and
Religion: Psychological foundations of religion.
New York, NY: Altamira.

10.1007/s11299-011-0083-8

2456

