Why is Number Word Learning Hard? Evidence from Bilingual Learners
Katie Wagner
kgwagner@ucsd.edu
Department of Psychology
UC, San Diego

Katherine Kimura
kkimura@berkeley.edu
Department of Psychology
UC, Berkeley

Pierina Cheung
mpcheung@uwaterloo.ca
Department of Psychology
University of Waterloo

Abstract
We investigated the developmental trajectory of number word
learning in bilingual preschoolers to examine the relative
contributions of two factors: (1) the construction of numerical
concepts, and (2) the mapping of language-specific words
onto these concepts. We found that children learn the
meanings of small numbers independently in each language,
indicating that the delay in the acquisition of small numbers is
mainly due to language-specific processes of mapping words
to concepts. In contrast, the logic and procedures of counting
are learned simultaneously in both languages, indicating that
these stages require the construction of numerical concepts
that are not stored in a language-specific format.
Keywords: number word learning; bilingual speakers;
conceptual change

Introduction
Across a variety of languages and cultural groups,
including Canada, the US, Japan, Russia, Bolivia, Slovenia,
Taiwan, and Saudi Arabia, children learn number word
meanings in distinct, protracted, stages (Almoammer,
Sullivan, Donlan, Maruscic, Zaucer, O’Donnell, & Barner,
2013; Barner, Libenson, Cheung, & Takasaki, 2009; Li, Le
Corre, Shui, Jia, & Carey, 2003; Piantadosi, Jara-Ettinger, &
Gibson, 2014; Sarnecka, Kamenskava, Yamana, Ogura, &
Yudovina, 2007; Wynn, 1990). In the first stage, children
learn to recite a partial count list (e.g., one, two, three, four,
five, etc.), often pointing at objects as they count. Yet, these
children actually have little understanding of how number
words represent quantity, and as a result are often classified
as “non-knowers.” Sometime later, they acquire an exact
meaning for one, at which point they are called “1knowers”. Months later, they learn an exact meaning for two
to become “2-knowers.” They then learn three (“3knowers”) and sometimes four (“4-knowers”). Up until this
point, children are generally referred to as “subset-knowers”
since they only know the meanings for a subset of their
number words. However, at the next stage children appear
to recognize that the counting procedure can be used to
enumerate sets, and that the last word in a count routine
labels the cardinality of the entire set (for discussion of
knower levels, see Wynn, 1990; Lee & Sarnecka, 2011; Le
Corre & Carey, 2007; Piantadosi, Tenenbaum, & Goodman,
2012; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008; Davidson, Eng, & Barner,
2012). At this stage, children are generally referred to as
cardinal principle knowers (“CP-knowers”).
Even after becoming CP-knowers, children still appear
unsure of how the counting procedure represents number.
According to some accounts (Sarnecka & Carey, 2008;
Wynn, 1990), children become CP-knowers – and

David Barner
barner@ucsd.edu
Department of Psychology
UC, San Diego

understand how counting represents number – by noticing
an isomorphism between the structure of the count list and
the cardinalities that they represent. In particular, on such
accounts, children learn the successor principle – that every
natural number n has a successor, defined as n+1. However,
recent evidence suggests that many so-called CP-knowers
do not have knowledge of this principle, and that instead
they initially use a blind procedure for counting and giving
correct amounts, with little insight into how this procedure
works (Davidson, et al., 2012). When told that a box
contains 4 objects and asked how many there are when one
more is added, many CP-knowers are at chance.
Although it remains controversial when children fully
understand how counting represents number, the basic
developmental trajectory is robust (Lee & Sarnecka, 2011;
Piantadosi, et al., 2012). However, despite this consensus on
the developmental facts, it remains unknown what causes
transitions between the stages of number word learning.
What we do know is that several sources indicate that the
length of the delays between stages is highly malleable (e.g.,
Dowker, 2008; Klibanoff, Levine, Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva
& Hedges, 2006). First, children who receive greater
exposure to number words pass through knower level stages
more quickly (Levine, Suriyakham, Rowe, Huttenlocher, &
Gunderson, 2010; Gunderson & Levine, 2011). Second,
children’s rate of number word learning appears to be
affected by the structure of their language. Some languages,
like English and Russian, have obligatory singular-plural
marking, which might help children to identify that one
refers to singleton sets, whereas two and larger numbers
refer to sets of more than one (Carey, 2004, 2009).
Consistent with this, children learning English and Russian
become 1-knowers faster than children learning Japanese
and Mandarin Chinese, which do not have obligatory
singular and plural marking (Barner, et al., 2009; Li et al.,
2003; Sarnecka et al., 2007). Languages like Slovenian and
Saudi Arabic not only have singular-plural marking, but
also have dual marking, which refers to sets of precisely two
(Corbett, 2000). Remarkably, children learning these
languages are faster to learn one and two (but interestingly
not three) than children from any other previously studied
group, even though they appear to receive less training than
children from other countries (Almoammer et al., 2013).
These facts suggest that the transitions between knower
level stages can be accelerated by the frequent and
informative use of number words. However, they leave open
why frequent and informative input matters, and thus why
learning is so hard. Here we consider two, mutually
compatible, possibilities. First, it is possible that the
protracted transitions between the stages of number word

2541

learning are affected by gradual processes of conceptual
change: 1-knowers may take months to become 2-knowers
because they do not yet have a concept of “exactly two” and
must construct this as part of learning the word (Carey,
2004, 2009; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008; Spelke & Tsivkin,
2001). Consequently, hearing the word two used frequently
and in supportive grammatical contexts may be important
because it helps children construct the concept “two”.
Similarly, becoming a CP-knower may involve a conceptual
change that is speeded by frequent exposure to number
words and the counting routine. Alternatively, the primary
reason for the delays may not be conceptual, but due to the
problem of identifying how words in a particular language
map onto numerical concepts (whether these concepts are
innate, constructed but easy to acquire, or difficult to
acquire but constructed sometime before the onset of
number word learning). Consider, for example, a scenario in
which the concepts “one”, “two”, and “three” are innately
specified in the child’s representational repertoire. In this
case, the observed delays between knower level stages
might be explained by the difficulty of identifying which
words correspond to which set sizes. In the case of counting,
a similar gradual, language-specific learning process might
take place: learning the cardinal principle in English, for
example, might not require conceptual change per se, but
might instead involve a mapping of words onto innate
concepts of cardinality (Leslie, Gelman, & Gallistel, 2008).
This model, like the constructivist alternative, also predicts
that frequency of input should affect rate of learning.
These two possibilities are by no means mutually
exclusive, but they do make predictions that can distinguish
the relative role each factor plays in learning. In particular,
they make different predictions for bilingual learners.
Specifically, if the primary cause of delays between stages
of number word learning is conceptual, then when children
acquire knowledge in one language (e.g., English), this
knowledge may readily transfer to their secondary language
of instruction (e.g., Spanish) with little additional languagespecific learning required. However, if the primary
challenge is the language specific problem of mapping
words onto concepts, bilingual children may exhibit
relatively independent learning trajectories in each of their
two languages with little evidence of transfer. The best
predictor of their number word knowledge, in this case, may
be how much input they receive in a particular language,
rather than what they know in another language.
To explore these questions, we tested three groups of
bilingual children in the U.S. who spoke either English and
French or English and Spanish. Each child was tested with
Wynn’s (1990) Give-a-Number task in order to establish
their knower level in each language, and each child was
asked to count as high as they could. In addition, we tested
when bilingual children acquire the successor principle in
each language, and whether it transfers between languages
in a subset of the CP-knowers with a third task, called the
Successor Task (see Sarnecka & Carey, 2008).

Methods
Participants
One hundred and forty-seven bilingual speakers of either
English and French (n = 20; M = 3;8; range = 2;11-5;0) or
English and Spanish (n = 127; M = 4;6; range = 2;2-5;6)
from the San Diego area participated. Eighty-five children
were from predominately low socioeconomic (SES)
Hispanic families at a local preschool that caters to English
learners. The remaining 62 children were from primarily
non-Hispanic Caucasian, upper-middle class families.
Caregivers were asked to report their child’s primary
language on the consent forms that were sent home by the
preschools. As reported on the returned consent forms, 83
children were primarily Spanish speakers, 3 were primarily
French speakers, and 44 were primarily English speakers. 4
children were equally proficient in English and Spanish and
1 child was equally proficient in English and French.
Twelve parents did not respond. To avoid decreasing our
recruitment rate, parents were not asked any further
questions about their child’s language abilities. Although
parent report is often predictive of children’s overall verbal
fluency, it is not necessarily a reliable indicator of children’s
familiarity with numbers, since children may be instructed
in a language other than their primary language. Therefore,
we also directly measured children’s familiarity with
numbers by assessing counting ability in each language.
This was then used to determine each child’s “Primary
Number Language” (NL1) and “Secondary Number
Language” (NL2).

Procedures
Children completed four tasks, once in each language, in the
following order: (1) Language Proficiency; (2) Give-aNumber; (3) Highest Count; and (4) Successor Task. The
Successor Task was added to the procedures midway
through data collection. Thus, only CP-knowers from the
Low SES Spanish-English Group completed this task.
Give-A-Number Task This task, which was adapted from
Wynn (1990), assessed children’s knowledge of number
words. On each trial, the experimenter presented the child
with a plate and ten plastic fish and asked the child to place
a quantity on the plate, avoiding singular and plural marking
by asking, “Can you put n on the plate? Put n on the plate
and tell me when you’re all done.” Once the child
responded, the experimenter then asked, “Is that n? Can you
count and make sure?” If the child recognized an error, the
experimenter allowed the child to fix it. Two versions of
Give-a-Number were used. Children who participated in an
earlier version of the study completed up to twenty-one
quasi-randomized trials, consisting of three trials for each of
the seven numbers tested (i.e., 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, and 10; see
Lee & Sarnecka, 2011 for discussion). Children who
participated later were given a staircased version of the
Give-a-Number task (as in Wynn, 1990, Experiment 3).

2542

Children were defined as an n-knower (e.g., threeknower) if they correctly provided n (e.g., 3 fish) on at least
two out of the three trials that n was requested and, of those
times that the child provided n, two-thirds of the times the
child did so it was in response to a request for n. If n was
five or higher, the child was classified as a CP-knower.

Highest Count in Spanish was 17.7 (SD = 11.0) and in
English was 10.4 (SD = 4.1). Sixty-eight children counted
higher in Spanish, and 13 in English. Four additional
children counted equally high in Spanish and English, and
we classified their NL1 by parent report (n = 4, Spanish).

Highest Count Task After the Give-a-Number task, the
experimenter asked, “Can you count as high as you can?”
The child’s Highest Count was defined as the largest
number counted to before an error. For each child, “Primary
Number Language” (i.e., NL1) was defined as the language
in which she counted highest. The other language was
labeled her “Secondary Number Language” (i.e., NL2). In
cases where the Highest Count matched in both languages,
the NL1 was defined according to parent report (n = 6).

Across the three groups of bilingual children, there were a
total of 33 non-knowers, 29 1-knowers, 34 2-knowers, 24 3knowers, 18 4-knowers, and 156 CP-knowers (where each
child contributed two knower level classifications, since
each spoke two languages).

Successor Task This task was modeled after Sarnecka and
Carey (2008) and was designed to assess children’s
understanding of the successor principle, operationalized
here as the knowledge that adding one object to a set (i.e., n)
results in an increase of exactly one unit on the count list
(i.e., n + 1). Children identified as CP-knowers were shown
with an empty opaque box and a container filled with
identical plastic toys (e.g. apples). To begin each trial, the
experimenter directed the child’s attention to the box by
exclaiming, “Look, there’s nothing in the box!” and
permitted the child to look inside to confirm it was empty.
The experimenter then held up the container of objects,
stating that she had n items, poured the objects inside the
box, and closed the lid (e.g., “I have fourteen apples. I’m
putting fourteen apples in the box”). The experimenter then
asked a memory-check question, e.g., “How many apples
are in the box?” Once the child correctly answered the
memory-check question, the child watched as the
experimenter added one identical object to the box. The
experimenter then asked whether there were n + 1 or n + 2
objects, e.g., “Are there fifteen apples or sixteen apples in
the box?” Children were tested on two small numbers (5 and
8), three medium numbers (12, 14, and 16), and three large
numbers (21, 23, and 27) in a counterbalanced order.

Results
Highest Count
Highest count identified children’s NL1 and NL2. In the
high SES French-English group (n = 20), the average
Highest Count in French was 13.9 (SD = 7.0) and in English
was 10.7 (SD = 4.0). Sixteen of these children counted
higher in French, and 4 counted higher in English. In the
high SES Spanish-English group (n = 42), the average
Highest Count in Spanish was 12.3 (SD = 9.6) and in
English was 20.9 (SD = 20). Eight children counted higher
in Spanish, and 32 counted higher in English. Two children
counted equally high in Spanish and English, and NL1 was
classified by parent report (n = 1, English; n = 1, Spanish).
In the low SES Spanish-English group (n = 85), the average

Give-A-Number Task

Predictors of NL2 Knower Level Our main question was
whether children’s number knowledge in their NL1
facilitated analogous learning in their NL2 via transfer. Our
first analysis tested this idea in its simplest form. We asked
whether children’s NL2 knower level increased as a
function of their NL1 knower level. To examine this, we
compared two ordinal logistic models with Age, NL1 and
NL2 Highest Count as predictors of NL2 knower level.
Model 2 also included NL1 knower level as a predictor.
To compare these models, we computed their relative fits
to the data using three sets of criteria. Model 1, which
excluded NL1 knower level, had an overall misclassification
rate of 0.33, a RMSE (root mean squared error) of 0.55 and
an AICc (Akaike Information Criterion value) of 287.
Adding NL1 knower level (as shown in Model 2) reduced
the misclassification rate to 0.27, lowered the RMSE to 0.49
and lowered the AICc to 245, suggesting that Model 2 was a
better fit than Model 1. For Model 2, the effect likelihood
ratio tests found that NL1 knower level, χ2(5) = 53.6, p <
0.001, NL2 Highest Count, χ2(1) = 7.72, p = 0.006 and Age,
χ2(1) = 4.35, p = 0.037, were significant predictors of NL2
knower level, whereas NL1 Highest Count, χ2(1) = 0.208, p
= 0.65, and Group, χ2(2) = 1.74, p = 0.42, were not.
The results thus far indicate that NL1 knower level is an
important predictor of NL2 knower level. However,
different processes may drive children’s learning of small
(1-4) and large (5+) number words. Consistent with this,
parameter estimates from Model 2 showed that transfer only
occurred at the CP-knower level (and perhaps 4-knower).
To explore this, we conducted an ordinal logistic
regression which excluded children who were CP-knowers
in both languages, R2 = 0.196, χ2(9) = 37.7, p < .001. This
analysis found no significant effect of transfer (despite
finding other significant effects), suggesting that transfer at
the CP-knower stage drove the effects that were described
above. Specifically, effect likelihood ratio tests found that
NL2 Highest Count, χ2(1) = 5.61, p = 0.018, and Age, χ2(1)
= 3.93, p = 0.047, were significant predictors of NL2
knower-level; however, NL1 knower level, χ2(4) = 7.40, p =
0.12, NL1 Highest Count, χ2(1) = 0.231, p = 0.63, and
Group, χ2(2) = 0.959, p = 0.62, were not. In contrast, an
analysis that examined only transfer of CP-knower status
found a relationship between NL1 and NL2 knower level.
An ordinal logistic regression that coded children in each

2543

language as either a CP-knower or subset-knower found that
NL1 CP-knower status, χ2(1) = 33.4, p < 0.0001, NL2
Highest Count, χ2(1) = 8.58, p = 0.003, and Age, χ2(1) =
5.51, p = 0.019, but not Group, χ2(1) = 5.08, p = 0.08,
predicted NL2 CP-knower status. Thus, we again found
evidence of cross-linguistic transfer at the CP-knower stage.

Successor Task
Although our analyses thus far indicate that transfer
occurs at the CP-knower stage, these analyses do not
address what exactly transfers (e.g., knowledge of a
procedure or knowledge of the logic of counting). To
investigate this, we asked whether all CP-knowers
understood the successor principle – i.e., that every natural
number, n, has a successor defined as n + 1. Evidence that
some CP-knowers do not have this knowledge would
suggest that effects of CP-knower transfer reported above
do not reflect transfer of this conceptual understanding.
For each child, a trial was included in the analyses if the
child’s Highest Count measure in the corresponding
language was greater than the target number of the trial. For
example, data from the “12” trial was only included if a
child could count to at least 13 in the tested language. This
ensures that the task measured children’s conceptual
understanding of the successor principle, rather than their
knowledge of the count list. Children who had fewer than
two valid trials in either language (n = 5) were excluded
from analyses, resulting in 41 children (M = 4;11, SD = 4.6
months), who were included. On average, children
contributed 5.4 trials (SD = 2.0 trials) for their NL1 and 2.6
trials (SD = 1.1 trials) for their NL2.
Overall, performance on the Successor Task was greater
than chance (i.e., 0.50) in both NL1, M = 0.68, SD = 0.23;
t(40) = 5.00, p < 0.001, and NL2, M = 0.61, SD = 0.33; t(40)
= 2.17, p = 0.036, and there was no significant difference
between NL1 and NL2, t(40) = 1.56, p = 0.13. Nevertheless,
there were large individual differences between children.
Specifically, 30% of children were at or below chance in
their NL1 and 49% were at or below chance in their NL2.
Transfer of Successor Principle from NL1 to NL2 Even
if CP-knowers do not initially understand the successor
principle, it remains possible that this knowledge transfers
later in development. We therefore asked whether
knowledge of the successor principle transferred across
languages or if it is learned separately in each language.
For this analysis, we will only compare performance on
the small numbers (i.e. 5 and 8) because the majority of our
participants could not count high enough to contribute valid
data on the next highest number (i.e. 12). A standard least
squares regression, F(4,36) = 3.3, p = 0.02, R2 = 0.27,
revealed that knowledge of the successor principle in NL2
small numbers was significantly predicted by NL1
successor principle knowledge of small numbers, F(1,36) =
10.4, p = 0.003, but not by NL2 Highest Count, F(1,36) =
0.66, p = 0.42, NL1 Highest Count, F(1,36) = 0.69, p =
0.41, or Age, F(1,36) = 0.05, p = 0.83. These results are

consistent with the idea that knowledge of the successor
principle in a child’s first language transfers to their second
language, at least for some numbers.
To further examine the effect of transfer of the successor
principle knowledge, we asked if knowing the successor of
a particular number in NL1 (e.g., cinco) predicted successor
knowledge of the same number in NL2 (e.g., five). To test
this, we examined what predicted children’s performance on
the “5” and “8” trials independently. First, to predict
children’s NL1 performance on the “5” trial, we
implemented an ordinal logistic regression, R2 = 0.09, χ2(3)
= 0.2, p = 0.2, using NL1 performance on “5”, NL1
performance on “8”, and NL2 performance on “8”. Results
showed that NL1 performance on “5”, χ2(1) = 4.6, p = 0.03,
was the only significant predictor. Neither NL1 performance
on “8”, χ2(1) = 0.18, p = 0.67, nor NL2 performance on “8”,
χ2(1) = 0.007, p = 0.93, were significant. Likewise, we
conducted another ordinal logistic regression, R2 = 0.18,
χ2(3) = 10.1, p = 0.02, on NL2 performance on “8” and
found that NL1 performance on “8”, χ2(1) = 6.1, p = 0.01,
was the only significant predictor, but NL1 performance on
“5”, χ2(1) = 2.8, p = 0.10, and NL2 performance on “5”, χ2
(1) = 0.18, p = 0.67, were not.

Discussion
We investigated number word learning bilingual children to
examine the causes of the long delays between stages.
Specifically, we tested whether these delays are best
explained by processes of gradual conceptual change or by
language-specific processes of mapping words onto
concepts. Our findings suggest that in the 1-knower, 2knower, and 3-knower stages of number word learning,
knowledge is acquired independently in each language. In
contrast, children’s classification as Cardinal Principle
knowers in their NL2 was strongly predicted by being a CPknower in their NL1 (in addition to NL2 counting ability,
but not NL1 counting ability). This result suggests that the
scope of inference at this stage is not restricted to a
particular language but may instead involve a moment of
insight that applies to counting in general, independent of
any particular language. Finally, we replicated previous
findings that not all CP-knowers understand the successor
principle, and thus that learning this principle does not
likely drive children’s ability to use the counting procedure
to label and generate sets. Instead, children likely learn
about the successor principle gradually in both languages
after they become competent users of the counting
procedure, with some evidence of transfer.
These results allow us to draw several important
conclusions regarding the nature of number word learning,
not only as it occurs in bilinguals, but also as it occurs in
monolingual learners. First, our results support the intuition
described in previous studies (i.e., Le Corre & Carey, 2007;
Sarnecka & Lee, 2009; Wynn, 1990) that number word
learning involves multiple, discontinuous stages of learning,
such that small and large number words are acquired via
different mechanisms. In our study, the rate at which

2544

children learned labels for “one,” “two,” and “three” was
best explained by their exposure to these words in a
particular language and not by whether they had previously
learned corresponding words in another language. This
result strongly suggests that the delays between subset
knower stages are not caused by difficulties in constructing
new concepts, but instead are due to problems in identifying
which concepts correspond to which words. The situation is
different, however, when it comes to how children learn to
count. Although learning the counting procedure requires
substantial linguistic experience with number words, once
knowledge of this procedure is acquired it becomes
available to children in a format that transcends natural
language.
Second, given these basic conclusions, our data also speak
to debates regarding the origin of numerical concepts.
Although our findings cannot decide whether concepts like
“one”, “two”, and “three” are innate, they do have important
implications regarding this question. In recent years, the
protracted, stage-like process of acquiring small number
words like one, two, and three has been interpreted by some
researchers as evidence for a constructivist theory of
number word learning – on the assumption that delays
between stages must be driven by the problem of
constructing new concepts (see Le Corre & Carey, 2007, for
one example). According to this reasoning, if such concepts
were innate, we would expect children to quickly map
words onto meanings once they are made available in their
language input. However, the results of the current study
bring this logic into question: number word learning
requires not only the availability of relevant concepts but
also the ability to identify how these concepts are expressed
by a particular language. Our data suggest that this second
problem is not trivial. Even on nativist views where the
concepts “one”, “two”, and “three” are given innately,
children may nevertheless struggle to identify how they are
encoded by words in their language.
A third important conclusion suggested by our study is
that becoming a Cardinal Principle knower is much more
complex than previously argued, possibly involving several
distinct steps. Sarnecka and Carey (2008) argued that
learning the successor principle allows children to become
CP-knowers on the basis of data that showed that children
classified as CP-knowers by Wynn’s Give-a-Number task
were more likely than subset knowers to exhibit
understanding of the successor principle. Although it may
be true that CP-knowers are more likely than subset
knowers to understand the successor principle, Davidson,
Eng, and Barner (2012) note that CP-knowers are
nevertheless highly heterogeneous in their knowledge, and
that the least experienced counters among them often show
no evidence of understanding the successor principle. These
findings led them to conclude that learning the successor
principle and generalizing it to all numbers cannot be what
drives children to become CP-knowers. Instead, Davidson et
al. argued that when children become CP-knowers, their
initial knowledge is purely procedural in nature and may

better be understood as “Counting Procedure” knowers, at
least until they show evidence of understanding the logic of
counting. Our results are consistent with this conclusion.
Like Davidson et al. (2012), we found that children first
learn the counting procedure before showing evidence of
understanding the successor principle, even for very small
numbers, and that even our most experienced counters were
still far from having generalized the successor principle to
all numbers in their count list.
However, our findings add an additional wrinkle to the
story reported by Davidson et al. First, consistent with the
idea that learning the successor principle involves a type of
epiphany or conceptual change, we found that if children
were able to infer successors in one language, they were
generally able to do so in their second language, too.
However, curiously, we found that this transfer was
remarkably restricted to specific numbers like the labels for
“five” and “eight”. Because this result was not predicted,
and has not yet been replicated, it remains possible that the
degree of specificity we report is an anomaly. Still, it is
clear that despite showing some evidence of transfer across
languages, children did not generalize knowledge of the
successor principle within languages. Although we are
unable to explain precisely why this might be, given our
current dataset, the result is consistent with two broad
alternatives. First, one possibility is that children’s failure to
generalize to larger numbers may be due to their relatively
less fluid knowledge of the count sequence for larger
numbers. Although children are sufficiently familiar with
the list to allow them to name the successors of large words
(Davidson et al., 2012), the additional problem of doing this
while simultaneously tracking changes to the cardinality of
a set may prove especially taxing for larger, less familiar,
number sequences. Against this hypothesis, however,
children’s ability to apply the successor function for a
particular number in their NL2 was not predicted by their
counting ability in this language. Instead, surprisingly, it
was strongly predicted by their ability to apply the successor
function for the same number in their NL1. This result is
difficult to explain on the hypothesis that children’s
familiarity with the counting procedure mediates their
expression of the successor principle.
Another possibility is that successor knowledge is itembased both within a language and across languages. On this
hypothesis, the mechanism that allows children to transfer
knowledge of a blind counting procedure from NL1 to NL2
– i.e., the procedure that makes them CP-knowers – may
involve forming a type of structure mapping between the
count lists of their two languages, such that knowledge
about particular sequences within count lists is transferred.
Children might know that five and cinco represent the same
quantity, as do six and seis, such that when they learn that
five plus one equals six they can readily infer that cinco and
uno equal seis. If we take seriously the specificity of
transfer we report, then such a hypothesis may be the most
parsimonious explanation of children’s behavior.
While the focus of this study was to explain delays

2545

between knower levels, one additional result is also implicit
in the data that we reported. Generally it is assumed that
because children move through knower level stages one-byone in sequence, this sequence must therefore be necessary
and by some accounts, universal (Piantadosi, Jara-Ettinger,
& Gibson, 2014). Our study suggests that this need not be
true, and that stages in principle can be skipped. Although
we do not have longitudinal data to directly address this
question, we found that when children were identified as
CP-knowers in one language, they were very likely to also
be CP-knowers in their second language. Because this was
not true for lower knower levels, it would appear that a child
who is a 3-knower in one language but only a 1- or 2knower in their other might become a CP-knower in both
languages at once, thereby skipping several stages in their
secondary number language. This is interesting because it
suggests that, at least in principle, small number word
meanings can be defined from the start by their role in the
counting routine, rather than by associations between
individual words and set sizes (as is presumably normally
the case). This result does not necessarily mean that such a
process occurs in monolingual children, but it does raise the
possibility that stages could in principle be skipped given
the appropriate training.
To summarize, in a large sample of bilingual children, we
found evidence that language-specific learning likely
explains delays between early knower levels. However,
once a child learns the counting procedure in either
language, they are able to transfer this knowledge to their
other language. After learning this counting procedure,
children next learn the successor principle, which also
transfers across languages, but in a curious, incremental,
fashion. Overall, these data suggest that in bilinguals and
monolinguals alike number word learning is importantly
discontinuous and depends on different learning processes
at different moments in development.

References
Almoammer, A., Sullivan, J., Donlan, C., Marušič, F.,
Žaucer, O’Donnell, T, & Barner, D. (2013). Grammatical
morphology as a source of early number word meanings.
PNAS, 110(46), 18448-18453.
Barner, D., Libenson, A., Cheung, P., & Takasaki, M.
(2009). Cross-linguistic relations between quantifiers and
numerals in language acquisition: Evidence from
Japanese. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
103, 421-440.
Barner, D. (2012). Bootstrapping numeral meanings and the
origin
of
exactness.
Language
Learning and Development, 8, 177-185
Carey, S. (2004). Bootstrapping and the origin of concepts.
Daedalus, 59-68.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Corbett, G. G. (2000). Number. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Davidson, K., Eng, K., & Barner, D. (2012). Does learning

to count involve a semantic induction? Cognition, 123,
162-173.
Dowker, A. (2008). Individual differences in numerical
abilities in preschoolers. Developmental Science, 11, 650654.
Gunderson, E.A. & Levine, S.C. (2011). Some types of
parent number talk count more than others: Relation
between parents’ input and children’s number knowledge.
Developmental Science, 14(5), 1021-1032.
Klibanoff, R., Levine, S.C., Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M.
& Hedges, L. (2006). Preschool Children's Mathematical
Knowledge: The effect of teacher "math talk".
Developmental Psychology, 42, 59-69.
Le Corre, M., & Carey, S. (2007). One, two, three, four,
nothing more: An investigation of the conceptual sources
of the verbal counting principles. Cognition, 105, 395438.
Lee, M. D. & Sarnecka, B.W. (2011). Number-knower
levels in young children: Insights from Bayesian
modeling. Cognition, 120, 391-402.
Leslie, A. M., Gelman, R., Gallistel, C. R. (2008). The
generative basis of natural number
concepts. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 213-218.
Levine, S.C., Suriyakham, L.W., Rowe, M.L., Huttenlocher,
J., & Gunderson, E.A. (2010). What counts in the
development of young children’s number knowledge?
Developmental Psychology 46 (5), 1309–1319.
Li., P., Le Corre, M., Shui, R., Jia G., & Carey S. (2003). A
crosslinguistic study of the role of singular-plural in
number word learning. Paper presented at the 28th
Annual Boston University Conference on Language
Development, Boston MA.
Piantadosi, S.T., Jara-Ettinger, J. & Gibson, E. (2014).
Children's development of number in an indigenous
farming-foraging group. Developmental Science, 17, 553563
Piantadosi, S., Tenenbaum, J., & Goodman, N. (2012).
Bootstrapping in a language of thought: A formal model
of numerical concept learning. Cognition, 123, 199-217.
Sarnecka, B. W. & Lee, M. D. (2009). Levels of number
knowledge in early childhood. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 103, 325-337.
Sarnecka, B.W., & Carey, S. (2008). How counting
represents number: What children must learn and when
they learn it. Cognition, 108, 662-674.
Sarnecka, B.W., Kamenskaya, V.G., Yamana, Y., Ogura, T.,
& Yudovina, J.B. (2007) From grammatical number to
exact numbers: Early meanings of “one," “two,” and
“three” in English, Russian, and Japanese. Cognitive
Psychology, 55, 136-168.
Spelke, E. S., & Tsivkin, S. (2001). Initial knowledge and
conceptual change: Space and number. In M. Bowerman
& S. Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and
conceptual development. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press
Wynn, K. (1990). Children's understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36, 155-193.

2546

