Why do people fail to consider alternative hypotheses in judgments under
uncertainty?
Brett K. Hayes (b.hayes@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

Guy E. Hawkins (guy.e.hawkins@gmail.com)
Amsterdam Brain and Cognition Center, University of Amsterdam
Nieuwe Achtergracht 129, Amsterdam 1018WS, The Netherlands

Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

participants were told that a woman has received a positive
mammogram and asked to estimate the (posterior)
probability that she has cancer. To assist with problem
solution participants were told the base rate of the focal
hypothesis of having cancer, p(H), the likelihood of
receiving a positive mammogram given cancer, p(D|H), and
the false positive rate, or likelihood of a positive
mammogram in the absence of cancer, p(D|¬H). When no
additional information about false positives was supplied,
less than 15% of participants generated a normative estimate
of p(H|D) (cf. Hayes, Hawkins, Pasqualino, Newell &
Rehder, 2014).
Such findings show that people often have difficulty in
probabilistic reasoning involving alternative causes.
However they reveal little about the mechanisms that give
rise to these problems. A failure to incorporate information
about alternative hypotheses into estimates of p(H|D) could
be due to at least two distinct mechanisms. First, the
reasoner may see the alternative sources of the data as
irrelevant to the task of estimating p(H|D). Fiedler (2012)
attributes such neglect to a meta-cognitive failure to
consider the sampling or causal mechanisms that generate
observed data. In a related view, Krynski and Tenenbaum
(2007) suggest that people frequently fail to incorporate
alternative sources of the data into their mental
representation of judgment problems. We refer to these
approaches collectively as “early stage neglect” accounts.
An alternative approach locates the failure to consider
alternative hypotheses at a later stage in the judgment
process. According to this view, even when people see the
relevance of alternative hypotheses they fail to understand
how the relevant statistical information should be combined
to provide an estimate of p(H|D). In other words, people
may fail to utilize statistical information relating to
alternative hypotheses. Consistent with this utilization
deficiency account, people often confuse the likelihood
p(D|H) with the posterior probability p(H|D) (e.g.,
Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1995; Villejoubert & Mandel,
2002) and make errors in additively combining p(D|H) and
p(D|¬H) (Tversky & Koehler, 1994).

Abstract
Two experiments examined theoretical accounts of why
people fail to consider alternative hypotheses in judgments
under uncertainty. Experiment 1 found that a majority of
participants failed to spontaneously search for information
about an alternative hypothesis, even when this required
minimal effort. This bias was reduced when a specific
alternative was mentioned before search. Experiment 2
showed that when participants were given the likelihoods of
the data given a focal hypothesis p(D|H) and an alternative
hypothesis p(D|¬H), they gave estimates of p(H|D) that were
consistent with Bayesian principles. The results show that
neglect of the alternative hypothesis typically occurs at the
initial stage of problem representation. However judgments
are more consistent with Bayesian norms when they involve
utilizing information about a given alternative.
Keywords: Judgment under uncertainty; Bayesian inference;
Intuitive probability

Introduction
Judgments under uncertainty often involve evaluating the
probability of a hypothesis given data. For example, when a
person notices a persistent red blemish on their forearm they
may want to judge the likelihood of skin cancer.
Normatively, such judgments should involve consideration
of the likelihood that the observed data could have arisen
from a different cause. In its most elementary form, Bayes’
theorem assumes that after observing a datum D (e.g., the
red blemish), the probability of a focal hypothesis H (e.g.,
that the person has skin cancer), p(H|D), is assessed relative
to the likelihood of the datum in the presence of the focal
hypothesis p(D|H) and the likelihood of the data given
alternative hypotheses p(D|¬H) (e.g., that the blemish is an
allergic reaction).
A large body of evidence however suggests that people
underweight or ignore alternative causes of the data in
judgments under uncertainty (e.g., Beyth-Marom &
Fischhoff, 1983; Dougherty, Thomas & Lange, 2010;
Doherty, Mynatt, Tweney & Schiavo, 1979). Krynski and
Tenenbaum (2007) for example, presented a version of the
classic mammogram problem (cf. Eddy, 1982) where

890

Of course, these are not the only deviations from
Bayesian norms in intuitive probability judgments. People
also frequently neglect the base rate of the target hypothesis
when estimating p(H|D) (e.g., Barbey & Sloman, 2007;
Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1995). The current work however
focuses primarily on why people fail to consider
information about the alternative hypothesis.
The current studies aimed to test the early stage neglect
and utilization deficiency accounts. Experiment 1 examined
predictions that follow from the early stage neglect account.
According to this account, people will generally fail to
spontaneously look for information concerning alternative
causes of the data when assessing the evidence for p(H|D),
even when such a search requires minimal cognitive effort.
However, because such neglect is thought to reflect a metacognitive bias rather than a capacity limitation (e.g., Fiedler,
2012) it should be possible to reduce neglect by providing
explicit prompts about alternative sources of observed data.
Experiment 2 contrasted the predictions of the early stage
neglect and utilization deficiency accounts. The neglect
account suggests that when both the target and alternative
hypotheses are stated explicitly and people are given the
relevant likelihood statistics they will use this information
appropriately. That is, they will update their beliefs about
p(H|D) appropriately given the relative likelihoods of
p(D|H) and p(D|¬H) (Fiedler, 2012; Juslin, Winman &
Hansson, 2007). The utilization deficiency account predicts
that judgment performance will show marked deviation
from normative patterns, even when the hypothetical
alternatives are well specified.

p(D|¬H), and asked to choose the components that would be
most helpful in arriving at a diagnosis.
Unlike many previous studies of neglect of the alternative
hypothesis, no numerical values were presented and
participants were not required to produce a numerical
estimate of probability. Instead, the key outcome measure
was the frequency with which information concerning the
alternative hypothesis p(D|¬H) and/or p(¬H) was consulted
during search. Following the early stage neglect hypothesis,
it was predicted that participants would neglect information
about the alternative in favor of information about the focal
hypothesis, even when search for information about the
alternative required minimal effort.
A second implication of the early-stage neglect approach
is that the best way to improve statistical reasoning is to
provide participants with more detailed information about
the origins of the data that they are reasoning about (Fiedler,
2012). A number of studies have shown that providing
explicit reminders about the existence of an alternative
source of the data can increase the degree to which it is
considered in diagnostic reasoning (e.g., Beyth-Marom &
Fischhoff, 1983; Krynski & Tenenbaum. 2007). Given the
strength of the bias towards the focal hypothesis, we
expected that this bias could only be overcome when the
alternative hypothesis was made just as salient as the focal
hypothesis.
To test this prediction, we manipulated between groups
the way in which the alternative hypothesis was presented in
the search task. In the unspecified alternative condition, no
alternative source of the observed symptom was mentioned.
In this condition we expected that participants would
generally neglect information about the alternative
hypothesis in their search. In the generic alternative
condition, it was suggested that the observed symptom
could arise due to other diseases. In the specified alternative,
a different disease was identified as an alternative cause of
the observed symptom. Because this is the only condition
where the salience of the alternative is likely to be similar to
that of the focal hypothesis, we predicted that this would be
the only condition where we observe increased search for
information relating to the alternative hypothesis.

Experiment 1
Considerable evidence suggests that people are biased in
favor of considering information that confirms a current
focal hypothesis rather than seeking information about
plausible alternatives (e.g., Beyth-Marom & Fischhoff,
1983; Doherty, et al., 1979). However, many of these
studies confound search for information about the
alternative hypothesis with the use or integration of
statistical information. In many studies, for example, the
likelihoods of the focal and alternative hypotheses are given
as numerical probabilities. This means that participants have
to integrate across these probabilities to arrive at an estimate
of p(H|D). Moreover in many studies (e.g., Doherty, et al.,
1979), participants are also expected to consider the base
rates of the focal and alternative hypotheses.
To conduct a more direct test of the prediction that people
will spontaneously fail to search for information about an
alternative hypothesis, we devised a simplified task where
searching successive Bayesian components involved
minimal effort. The task was adapted from Doherty and
Mynatt (1990). Participants took the role of a doctor seeking
to diagnose whether a patient with a particular symptom
(the datum, D) had a particular disease (the focal hypothesis,
H). They were then presented with text descriptions of the
four components of Bayes rule, p(H), p(¬H), p(D|H),

Method
Participants. A total of 903 participants (39% female;
MAGE = 30.39 years) from the USA were recruited via
Amazon Mechanical Turk and were paid 50c US. Three
were excluded because they failed to respond correctly to
the attention screening item (described below). Participants
were randomly allocated to one of three conditions.
Design and Procedure. Participants in all conditions were
told to imagine that they were a doctor whose task was to
identify information that would assist in diagnosing whether
a patient who showed a particular symptom (“red rash on
their fingers”) had a target disease (“Buragamo”).
Participants were instructed to select only those options that
were “necessary for the diagnosis”. 10 s later four search

891

options appeared. These were the base rate of the target
hypothesis p(H), the base rate of the alternative hypothesis
p(¬H), the likelihood of the data (i.e., red rash) given the
target hypothesis p(D|H), and the likelihood of data given an
alternative hypothesis p(D|¬H). The four options were
presented in rectangles of different colors, arranged in two
rows of two. The location of each option was randomized
for each participant. Participants clicked on a rectangle to
indicate their choice. Once selected the rectangle changed
colour. A previously selected search option could be deselected by clicking on it a second time. Participants were
required to select at least one option and were free to select
between one and four options. Once selections were
finalized participants advanced to an attention screening
question, in which four unlabeled colored rectangles were
presented. Participants were required to click on the two
rectangles with the same color.
Three experimental conditions differed in their
specification of an alternative hypothesis (i.e., a different
diagnosis). In the unspecified alternative condition only the
target disease was mentioned in the instructions and search
options and the alternative hypothesis was “does not have
Buragamo”. The generic alternative condition was similar
except that it was noted in instructions that the symptom of
red rash “could be caused by a number of diseases”. In the
specified alternative condition participants were told that the
disease “Terragaxis” could also cause the red rash and “has
Terragaxis” was specified as the alternative hypothesis in
the search options.

Although the main focus was on search for information
about the alternative hypothesis, we also examined group
differences in consideration of the base rate of the focal
hypothesis. The proportion of searches that included p(H)
was significantly lower in the specified alternative condition
(18.5%) than in the other two conditions (M = 32.1%), χ2(2,
N=900) = 22.61, p < .001.
Table 1. Proportion of participants in each condition
following each search pattern (with modal choice in bold)

Results
The four search options yielded a total of 15 possible search
patterns (ignoring search order). The proportion of
participants in each condition whose searches conformed to
each pattern is given in Table 1. The Table shows that all
groups saw p(D|H) as important and were likely to search
for this information either as their only search choice or in
combination with other options. In the unspecified
alternative and generic alternative groups the three most
common strategies in descending order of frequency were
p(D|H), p(D|H) + p(D|¬H), and p(H) + p(D|H). Those in the
specific alternative condition showed a different pattern. In
this case the modal choice was p(D|H) + p(D|¬H), selected
by more than half the participants, with p(D|H) the next
most common choice. The percentage of participants
selecting p(D|H) + p(D|¬H) in the specified alternative
condition (50.7%) was reliably higher than in the other two
conditions; unspecified alternative (22.7%, z = 7.08, p <
.001), generic alternative (25.7%, z = 6.29, p < .001).
A more inclusive test of differences in consideration of
the alternative hypothesis was carried out by aggregating
search patterns according to whether or not they included
p(D|¬H) and/or p(¬H). The proportion of searches that
included the alternative hypothesis was significantly higher
in the specified alternative group (70.5%) than in the other
two conditions (unspecified: 41.1%; generic: 41.9%), χ2(2,
N=900) = 68.85, p < .001.

Search Patterns

Unspecified
alternative
n = 299

Generic
alternative
n = 303

Specified
alternative
n = 298

p(H)

0.020

0.013

0.023

p(¬H)

0.003

0.000

0.007

p(D|H)

0.370
0.066

0.194

p(D|¬H)

0.344
0.050

p(H), p(¬H)

0.000

0.003

0.054

p(H), p(D|H)

0.224

0.198

0.077

p(H), p(D|¬H)

0.040

0.036

0.013

p(D|H), p(D|¬H)

0.227

0.257

p(¬H), p(D|H)

0.003

0.013

0.507
0.013

p(¬H), p(D|¬H)
p(H), p(¬H),
p(D|H)
p(H), p(¬H),
p(D|¬H)
p(H), p(D|H),
p(D|¬H)
p(¬H), p(D|H),
p(D|¬H)
p(H), p(¬H),
p(D|H), p(D|¬H)

0.003

0.007

0.003

0.000

0.000

0.003

0.000

0.000

0.003

0.074

0.033

0.010

0.003

0.000

0.007

0.007

0.003

0.057

0.027

Discussion
In this study participants searched for information that they
believed to be relevant for diagnosing a particular disease
(the focal hypothesis) given observed data. The key
question was whether people would spontaneously search
for information about an alternative cause of the data (the
alternative hypothesis). The first major finding was that
despite the minimal effort required for information search,
most participants neglected the alternative hypothesis. Less
than half of those in the unspecified and generic conditions
searched for any information about the alternative
hypothesis.
Such neglect is consistent with a range of previous
findings showing a preference for examination of statistical
information about the focal hypothesis over the alternative
(e.g., Beyth-Marom & Fischhoff, 1983; Doherty, et al.,
1979). Notably the current results show that such neglect
persists when demands on attention and memory are
minimized and no numerical calculation was required.

892

This study also clarified the conditions under which this
bias can be overcome. Providing a specific but not a generic
alternative hypothesis led a majority of participants to
search for p(D|¬H) and/or p(¬H).
As in many previous studies (e.g., Gigerenzer &
Hoffrage, 1995) only a minority of people believed base rate
information was relevant to evaluating p(H|D). An
unexpected finding was that increased search for
information about the alternative hypothesis in the specified
alternative condition appeared to come at the expense of
information about the base rate of the focal hypothesis. We
return to this issue in the General Discussion.

Turk and were paid $1.00 US. Eleven were excluded
because they failed the attention check, gave zero
probability estimates at either stage 1 or 2, or reported
having previously completed a similar study. Participants
were randomly allocated to eight experimental conditions of
roughly equal size (n = 117-123).
Table 2. Summary of the likelihood conditions in
Experiment 2 and Bayesian predictions.
Likelihood
Condition

Stage 1
p(H)

High/High
Low/Low
High/Low
Low/High

0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

Stage 2
p(D|H)

Stage 2
p(D|¬H)

0.9
0.1
0.9
0.1

0.9
0.1
0.1
0.9

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 found that in line with the early stage neglect
account, people do not spontaneously consider the
alternative hypothesis when evaluating p(H|D). Experiment
2 examined whether people understand the implications of
p(D|¬H) when the alternative hypothesis is clearly specified.
The utilization deficiency account predicts that people will
fail to understand the implications of statistical information
associated with the alternative hypothesis even when this
hypothesis is clearly specified. Alternately, the early-stage
neglect account suggests that once the relevance of the
alternative hypothesis is established, people will factor the
relevant likelihood statistics into their estimation of p(H|D).
To test these accounts participants were given a
diagnostic problem in which they were sequentially
presented with numerical information corresponding to the
major components of Bayes’ theorem. In stage 1 they were
given the base rate of a focal hypothesis (the disease
Buragamo) and asked to estimate p(H|D). In stage 2 they
were presented a new datum (red rash) and with the
likelihoods of p(D|H) and p(D|¬H). Participants were asked
to re-estimate p(H|D) in the light of this information.
The key question was whether participants used the
likelihood information in a normative way when revising
probability estimates. Normatively, when the focal and
alternative hypotheses are equally likely then no revision in
initial estimates should take place. If the likelihood of
p(D|H) is substantially greater than p(D|¬H) then estimates
should be revised upwards. If the likelihood of p(D|H) is
substantially lower than p(D|¬H) then estimates should be
revised downwards. Table 2 shows the details of the
Bayesian predictions (cf. Beyth-Marom & Fischhoff, 1983).
According to early-stage neglect accounts, the provision
of the statistical details of p(D|¬H) should in itself increase
the salience of the alternative hypothesis at an early stage of
problem representation. Hence, the way that the alternative
hypothesis is framed (e.g., unspecified vs. specified) should
have less impact on evaluating p(H|D) than was found in
Experiment 1. To test this prediction we again manipulated
the framing of the alternative hypothesis.

p(H|D)
from
Bayes’
rule
0.8
0.8
0.97
0.31

Design and Procedure. The experiment was conducted in
two stages. In stage one, participants were told that they
were to take the role of a doctor and to use the information
given to assess the probability that a new patient X has the
disease Buragamo. They were then given the base rate of the
disease (“80% of patients that you have seen had Buragamo.
The remaining patients did not have Buragamo”) and asked
“What do you think is the probability that Patient X will
have Buragamo?” Answers were given as a percentage.
In stage two participants were told that the target patient
had a red rash and that the following was known from
medical records: “X% of patients that you have seen WITH
Buragamo have a red rash and that Y% of patients that you
have seen WITHOUT Buragamo [WITH another disease
Terragaxis] have a red rash. Four different combinations of
the likelihoods of p(D|H) and p(D|¬H) were administered to
different groups (high/high, low/low, high/low, low/high).
Table 2 shows the likelihood figures presented in each
condition.
These conditions were crossed with a manipulation of the
framing of the alternative hypothesis to give a total of eight
between-subjects conditions. In the unspecified condition,
the alternative was described as the absence of the focal
disease. In the specified condition the alternative was the
disease Terragaxis (see alternative instructions given in
square brackets above). Participants were then given their
stage 1 probability estimate and asked “What do you now
think is the probability that Patient X has Buragamo?”
Answers were again given as a percentage.

Results and Discussion
At stage 1, 78% of subjects gave the normatively correct
estimate of “80” based solely on the base rate of the focal
hypothesis. However there was a marginal trend for
probability estimates in the specified alternative condition to
be higher (M = 75.89) than those in the unspecified
condition (M = 74.25), F(7, 940) = 2.00, p = .05. Hence in

Method
Participants. A total of 959 US participants (45% female;
MAGE = 32.98 years) were recruited via Amazon Mechanical

893

analyses of stage 2 estimates, individuals’ stage 1 estimates
were used as a covariate.
The key dependent measure was the change in estimates
of p(H|D) between stages 1 and 2. Because the predicted
direction of change differed for high/high vs. high/low
likelihood and low/low vs. low/high likelihood conditions,
these conditions were analyzed separately. If people
considered the likelihoods of both the target hypothesis
p(D|H) and the alternative p(D|¬H), there should have been
little change in estimates from stage 1 to stage 2 in the
high/high condition but an increase in estimates in the
high/low condition (see Table 2). A 2 (likelihood condition)
x 2 (framing of alternative) analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA) revealed a reliable difference in the change in
estimates in the high/low as compared with high/high
conditions, F(1,473) = 91.96, p < .001. Figure 1 shows that
estimates in the high/high condition did not change from
stage 1 to 2. However estimates in the high/low condition
were revised upwards, consistent with Bayesian predictions.
The specification of the alternative hypothesis did not affect
change in the probability estimates (F’s < 1.0).

was larger in the low/high than the low/low condition,
F(1,465) = 139.07, p < .001. There was a further interaction
between this effect and the framing of the alternative,
F(1,465) = 4.88, p = .03. As shown in the Figure, the
difference in change between the low/low and low/high
conditions was larger when an alternative cause was
specified.
Bayes’ rule predicts that absolute change in estimates in
the high/low condition should be smaller (normatively ≈
17.29%) than in the low/high condition (normatively ≈
49.23%). This prediction was also confirmed, F(1,473) =
231.51, p < .001. However Figure 1 shows that updating
was conservative with change in estimates generally smaller
than the values given by Bayes’ theorem.
These results show that people generally understood the
implications of the relative likelihoods of the focal and
alternative hypotheses. Their use of this likelihood
information conformed to Bayesian principles, at least at a
qualitative level. The results stand in stark contrast to
Experiment 1 where the majority of participants ignored
information about the alternative hypothesis.

General Discussion
These experiments aimed to clarify why people often fail to
incorporate information about the alternative hypothesis in
judgments under uncertainty. Two competing accounts were
proposed. The early stage neglect hypothesis suggests that
the core problem is that people often do not see the
relevance of the alternative hypothesis when developing a
representation of the problem at hand (Fiedler, 2012;
Krynski & Tenenbaum, 2007). An alternative view is that
people fail to understand the implications of statistics
associated with the alternative hypothesis even when the
alternatives are stated explicitly (Tversky & Koehler, 1994;
Villejoubert & Mandel, 2002).
The results of the two experiments strongly support the
first account. Consistent with the notion of early stage
neglect, people frequently failed to consult information
about the alternative hypothesis when asked to evaluate
p(H|D) (Experiment 1). This was the case even though the
tasks were designed to minimize the cognitive effort
involved in considering the alternative hypothesis. In
contrast, when the likelihoods of the data given the focal
and alternative hypotheses were stated explicitly
(Experiment 2), most participants used this information in a
manner that was broadly consistent with a normative
approach. In sum, people generally showed little
spontaneous recognition of the relevance of the alternative
hypothesis to the evaluation of p(H|D) but were able to use
statistical information about each hypothesis appropriately
when this information was supplied.
A further important finding in Experiment 1 was that
consideration of the alternative hypothesis could be
increased by labeling it in a way that increased its salience
relative to the focal hypothesis (cf. Beyth-Marom &
Fischhoff, 1983). This suggests that neglect of the
alternative represents a misunderstanding of the structure of

Figure 1. Mean change in probability estimates from stage 1
to stage 2 in each experimental condition.
Note: Dashed lines show normative levels of belief revision for the
high/low (upper) and low/high (lower) conditions. * denotes
significantly different from zero change, p < .001

If people were considering information about both the
target and alternative hypotheses, then there should have
been little change in the low/low condition from stage 1 to 2
but a decrease in estimates in the low/high condition. Figure
1 shows that there was an unexpected decrease in
probability estimates in the low/low condition.
Nevertheless, consistent with Bayesian predictions, the
magnitude of change in estimates from stage 1 to stage 2

894

the problem rather than a capacity limitation in
simultaneously considering the alternatives.
Our findings are relevant to accounts of judgment and
reasoning which propose that people focus on one
hypothesis at a time and avoid the consideration of
uncertain alternatives. This is exemplified in Evans’ (2006)
singularity principle which states that “people construct
only one mental model at a time with which to represent a
hypothetical situation” (p. 379).
The current work suggests that this principle is only partly
true. Consistent with the singularity principle we found that
neglect of the alternative largely occurs in the initial
representation of the problem. However, our work goes
beyond singularity by showing that such neglect can be
reduced by making the alternative more salient so that is
seen as a competing causal explanation of the observed data.
Moreover, we have shown that people are readily able to use
the likelihood statistics associated with multiple hypotheses
when estimating p(H|D).
A surprising finding in Experiment 1 was that an increase
in search for information about the alternative hypothesis
was accompanied by a reduction in search for the focal base
rate. Identifying the mechanisms behind this tradeoff is an
important issue for future research. A possible explanation
is suggested by previous work examining training
interventions targeting base rate neglect. Fischhoff and BarHillel (1984) found that such interventions often lead to
increased attention to the base rate in both problems where
base rate use is normative as well as problems where the
normative strategy is to ignore the base rate. In other words,
training increased attention to certain aspects of judgment
problems but did not necessarily improve understanding of
the contexts in which it was appropriate to use or ignore
these components. Likewise in Experiment 1 priming
attention to the alternative hypothesis may have led to
neglect of other relevant components of the problem.
These studies show that the main locus of neglect of the
alternative hypothesis in judgments under uncertainty is at
the early stage of representing the problem. We found
evidence of neglect of information about the alternative in
tasks where minimal effort was required to examine such
information and numerical estimates of probability were not
required. In contrast, when statistical information about an
alternative hypothesis was provided, the qualitative pattern
of people’s probability judgments conformed to Bayesian
prescriptions. These findings are consistent with accounts of
judgment under uncertainty which emphasize that people
are often insensitive to alternative ways that observed data
might be generated but are relatively accurate when utilizing
statistical information given to them (e.g., Fiedler, 2012).

References
Barbey, A. K., & Sloman, S. A. (2007). Base-rate respect:
From ecological rationality to dual processes. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 30, 241-254.
Beyth-Marom, R., & Fischhoff, B. (1983). Diagnosticity
and pseudodiagnosticity. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 45, 1185-1195.
Doherty, M. E., & Mynatt, C. R. (1990). Inattention to p(H)
and to p(D|¬H): A converging operation. Acta
Psychologica, 75, 1-11.
Doherty, M. E., Mynatt, C. R., Tweney, R. D., & Schiavo,
M. D. (1979). Pseudodiagnosticity. Acta Psychologica,
43, 111-121.
Dougherty, M., Thomas, R., & Lange, N. (2010). Toward an
integrative theory of hypothesis generation, probability
judgment, and hypothesis testing. The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, 52, 299-342.
Eddy, D. M. (1982). Probabilistic reasoning in clinical
medicine: Problems and opportunities. In D. Kahneman,
P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press
Evans, J. S. B. (2006). The heuristic-analytic theory of
reasoning: Extension and evaluation. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 13, 378-395.
Fiedler, K. (2012). Meta-cognitive myopia and the
dilemmas of inductive-statistical inference. The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 57, 1–46.
Fischhoff, B., & Bar-Hillel, M. (1984). Focusing
techniques: A shortcut to improving probability
judgments? Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 34, 175-194.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without instruction: Frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684-704.
Hayes, B. K., Hawkins, G. E., Newell, B. R., Pasqualino,
M., & Rehder, B. (2014). The role of causal models in
multiple judgments under uncertainty. Cognition, 133,
611-620.
Juslin, P., Winman, A., & Hansson, P. (2007). The naïve
intuitive statistician: A naïve sampling model of intuitive
confidence intervals. Psychological Review, 114, 678703.
Krynski, T. R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). The role of
causality in judgment under uncertainty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 430–450.
Tversky, A., & Koehler, D. J. (1994). Support theory: A
nonextensional representation of subjective probability.
Psychological Review, 101, 547-567.
Villejoubert, G., & Mandel, D. R. (2002). The inverse
fallacy: An account of deviations from Bayes’ theorem
and the additivity principle. Memory & Cognition, 30,
171-178.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Australian Research Council
Discovery Grant DP120100266 to the first and third authors
and a Future Fellowship FT110100151 to the third author.
We thank Kate Blundell and Kelly Jones for help with
programming and running the experiments.

895

