Why Do Readers Answer Questions Incorrectly
After Reading Garden-path Sentences?
Zhiying Qian (zqian3@illinois.edu)
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 405 N. Mathews Ave, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Susan Garnsey(sgarnsey@psych.illinois.edu)
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 405 N. Mathews Ave, Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Abstract
Readers misinterpret garden-path sentences such as While the
man hunted the deer that was brown and graceful ran into the
woods as meaning The man hunted the deer that was brown
and graceful and the deer ran into the woods. The “Goodenough” processing account proposes that misinterpretation
occurs when readers are satisfied with the interpretation
derived from the first-pass parse, and thus do not bother to
fully reanalyze the sentence (Ferreira et al., 2001;
Christianson et al., 2001). Such an account predicts that there
should be more evidence of reanalysis at the disambiguating
verb (ran) on trials with correct responses to the question Did
the man hunt the deer?, than on those with incorrect
responses. The present study tested this prediction using
separate self-paced reading and event-related brain potential
(ERP) experiments. Results from Experiment 1 (self-paced
reading) showed no difference in the reading time at the
disambiguating verb between trials that were answered
correctly and those that were answered incorrectly.
Experiment 2 (ERP) corroborated this finding by showing no
difference in the amplitude of the P600 component elicited by
the disambiguating verb in trials with correct responses and
those with incorrect responses. However, results from a
norming experiment showed that plausibility information
significantly predicted question accuracy in both experiments.
Overall, these results suggest that responses to questions
intended to probe whether garden-path sentences are fully
reanalyzed do not always answer that question, but can
instead be determined primarily by the plausibility of the
events described in that question.
Keywords: lingering misinterpretation; reanalysis, goodenough processing; ERPs, P600

Introduction
It has been well established that when reading sentences like
(1), readers slow down at the main clause verb ran, because
they have initially interpreted the noun phrase the deer that
was brown and graceful as the object of the subordinate
clause verb hunted. At the main clause verb ran, the parser
realizes that ran lacks a subject and triggers reanalysis. This
is termed the garden-path effect. Successful reanalysis
would lead to the noun phrase being deleted from the object
role of the subordinate clause verb hunted and attached to
the main clause verb ran as its subject.
(1) While the man hunted the deer that was brown and
graceful ran into the woods.
(2) Did the man hunt the deer?
(3) Did the deer run into the woods?

Traditional accounts of sentence processing, regardless of
whether they are serial or parallel, assume that readers
ultimately reach the correct interpretation after reading
garden-path sentences such as (1). However, several studies
have shown that readers do not always arrive at the correct
interpretation (Christianson, Hollingworth, Halliwell, &
Ferreira, 2001; Christianson, Williams, Zacks, & Ferreira,
2006; Ferreira, Christianson, & Hollingworth, 2001).
Rather, they tend to misinterpret the sentence as meaning
that The man hunted the deer that was brown and graceful
and the deer ran into the woods, as evidenced by a high rate
of erroneous “yes” responses to (2), although the correct
interpretation licensed by syntax should be The man hunted
something unspecified and the deer that was brown and
graceful ran into the woods. Such misinterpretation arises
because the initial misinterpretation derived from first-pass
analysis (the man hunted the deer) persists.
One criticism of this interpretation of incorrect responses
to questions like (2) after sentences like (1) concerns the
possibility that misinterpretations may not entirely result
from garden-pathing. In Ferreira et al. (2001), readers
answered “yes” erroneously to (2) 73% of the time after
reading (1) and 52% of the time after reading the commadisambiguated version of (1): While the man hunted, the
deer that was brown and graceful ran into the woods.
Although the difference in question accuracy between
ambiguous and unambiguous versions of (1) could be
ascribed to garden-pathing, the fact that the error rate was
still quite high for unambiguous sentences suggests that at
least a portion of the misinterpretations did not result from
garden-pathing. Readers may have answered questions
based in part on inferences they made after reading this type
of sentence: when a deer runs into the woods while a man is
hunting, it seems highly likely that what the man is hunting
is the deer that is mentioned.
To reduce the likelihood that readers would answer
questions based on such inferences, Christianson et al.
(2001) used sentences and questions such as (4) and (5).
(4) While Anna dressed the baby who was cute and small
spit up on the bed.
(5) Did Anna dress the baby?
Unlike in (1), the subordinate clause verb dressed in (4) is a
Reflexive Absolute Verb (RAT), which takes its subject as

1925

its object if no object is explicitly mentioned. Therefore,
whereas in (1), correct reanalysis would result in the object
of the subordinate verb (hunted) being unspecified and lead
to the interpretation that the man hunted something that is
unknown, correct reanalysis of (4) would result in the
interpretation that Anna dressed herself, rather than
somebody unknown. Christianson et al. showed that
erroneous “yes” responses to (5) after reading commadisambiguated version of (4) was much lower than after
reading the ambiguous version (ambiguous: 57%;
unambiguous: 12%). Taken together, readers’ incorrect
answers to comprehension questions after reading sentences
like (1) and (4) indicates that the initial misinterpretation
derived from first-pass analysis persists to the end of the
sentence.
Several types of accounts have been proposed to explain
lingering initial misinterpretations. Perhaps the parser builds
a shallow (Clahsen & Felser, 2006; Frisson, 2009) or
underspecified (Ferreira, Bailey, & Ferraro, 2002; Sanford
& Sturt, 2002; Swets, Desmet, Clifton, & Ferreira, 2008)
linguistic representation. Other accounts posit that memory
traces of the initial misparse (Kaschak & Glenberg, 2004) or
shallow semantic processing (Barton & Sanford, 1993) are
responsible.
The major processing account that explains lingering
misinterpretation is the Good-Enough Account, which
proposes that reanalysis is not an “All-or-Nothing” process
(see Fodor & Inoue, 1998; Lau & Ferreira, 2005, for similar
explanations). Two possibilities could lead to lingering
misinterpretation. The first is that when initial interpretation
is semantically sensible, readers do not bother to fully
reanalyze the syntactic structure of the sentence even though
later information turns out to be incompatible with the
structure that has already been built. The fact that readers
answer “yes” correctly most of the time to questions like (3)
that probed comprehension of the matrix sentence after
reading (1) indicated that reanalysis started and was carried
out to such an extent that the ambiguous noun (the deer)
was successfully attached to the matrix clause verb.
However, reanalysis was not completed, so the noun phrase
was not successfully detached from the object role of the
subordinate clause (Christianson et al., 2001; Ferreira et al.,
2001). The second possibility is that reanalysis of the
syntactic structure is completed, but interpretations from
both the first-pass analysis and reanalysis linger. Both
possibilities could lead readers to incorrectly answer “yes,
the man hunted the deer”. The present study aims to test the
first possibility, i.e., lingering misinterpretation results from
incomplete reanalysis.
Such an account predicts more evidence of reanalysis in
trials that are interpreted correctly than those that are
interpreted incorrectly. We seek to test this prediction by
comparing reading times and the amplitude of the P600
ERP component at the disambiguating verb (ran) in
sentences like (1) between correctly and incorrectly
answered trials. Since more reanalysis effort should result in
more time spent on the disambiguating verb, slower reading

times for trials with correct responses than for those with
incorrect responses would support the idea that incomplete
reanalysis leads to lingering misinterpretation. The P600
ERP component, which is a positive-going deflection
occurring 600-900 ms after the onset of the word that
triggers it, has been found to be associated with reanalysis
(Osterhout, Holcomb, & Swinney, 1994), so the prediction
here was that P600 amplitude in response to the
disambiguating verb should be larger in trials with correct
responses than in those with incorrect responses, indicating
more reanalysis leading to more correct responses..
Previous studies also showed that readers misinterpreted
the sentence more often when the ambiguous noun was
modified by post-nominal modification (the deer that was
brown and graceful) than by pre-nominal or no modification
(the brown and graceful deer/deer) (Ferreira & Henderson,
1991, 1998). The present study used post-nominal
modification, because such sentences promote gardenpathing, maximize ambiguity effects at the disambiguating
verb, making it more likely that reading times and P600
amplitude will show differences between correctlyanswered and incorrectly-answered trials.

Experiment 1
Participants
Thirty-two native speakers of English (12 males; mean age
18.5; range 18-21), who were undergraduate students at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, participated for
course credit. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision
and gave written informed consent.

Materials and Design
Forty sets of sentences such as (1) (repeated here as 6) were
taken from Christianson et al. (2001), with each set
containing an ambiguous and a comma-disambiguated
version. Ambiguous nouns were followed by a post-nominal
relative clause containing two adjectives.
(6) While the man hunted(,) the deer that was brown and
graceful ran into the woods.
Experimental sentences were distributed over two lists using
a Latin Square design, so that each participant saw equal
numbers of items in each condition and only one version of
each item. Each sentence was followed by a comprehension
question that probed the comprehension of the subordinate
clause (e.g., Did the man hunt the deer?).
One hundred and sixteen distractor sentences were added
to each list for a total of 156 trials/list. There were three
types of distractors: (1) unambiguous sentences with
subordinate-matrix clause order (e.g., While Jennifer held
the cigar that was aged and expensive she told bad jokes.,
40 sentences); (2) unambiguous sentences with matrixsubordinate clause order (e.g., The mother comforted the
toddler who was chubby and scared while the clown handed
him a balloon., 40 sentences); and (3) items from a separate

1926

experiment with ambiguous and unambiguous sentences
distributed over two lists (e.g., As Jane and Mary met(,) the
men from Florida drove past them, 12 items; While Anna
dressed the baby(,) who was cute and small spit up on the
bed, 24 items). All distractors were followed by a
comprehension question that targeted various parts of the
sentences (except that questions to items from the separate
experiment targeted comprehension of the subordinate
clause). Answers to true distractors were half “yes” half
“no” across the experiment.

Procedure
Participants sat in a dimly lit and sound-attenuated booth
in front of a 23-inch LCD monitor. To make presentation
mode comparable with the ERP experiment (Experiment 2),
sentences were presented one word at a time in white font
on a black background in the center of the screen. Each trial
began with a “Ready” sign that stayed on the screen for one
second. Each time participants pressed a button on a
Cedrus-830 response box, the next word appeared to replace
the previous word. Following each sentence, a
comprehension question was presented and participants
pressed one of two buttons to indicate their answers.
Feedback about question accuracy was not given. However,
a “Too Slow” feedback message was presented if
participants did not make a response within four seconds.
The entire experiment took approximately forty minutes to
complete.

analysis. To remove individual differences in reading speed,
results presented below were based on length-corrected
residual reading times computed separately for each
participant by entering their reading times for each word in
all sentences (including distractors) into a regression
equation that took reading time as the dependent variable
and word length as the independent variable, and then
subtracted the predicted reading times from the actual
reading times (Ferreira & Clifton, 1986; Trueswell,
Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994). Residual reading times were
then analyzed using mixed-effect models that included
ambiguity and reading time as fixed effects, and participant
and item as random effects. Random effects structure was
further determined using a forward-selection approach.
Random slopes for each participant and each item that
significantly improved the model fit in the likelihood ratio
test (p<.05) were included in the model.
Results at the disambiguating region, which contained the
disambiguating verb and the word immediately following it
(e.g., ran into) showed a significant main effect of
ambiguity (β=31.1, t=4.95, p<.001), with the ambiguous
condition being read slower than the unambiguous condition
(ambiguous: mean 449 ms; mean unambiguous: 419 ms), as
illustrated below in Figure 1.
Mean RT at the Disambiguation

500

Results

450

Comprehension Accuracy All participants were above
80% in comprehension accuracy to distractor items (range:
80%-97%, mean: 90%), suggesting that they were paying
attention to the sentences.
Comprehension accuracy to experimental sentences was
analyzed using logistic regression to see whether ambiguity
predicted response accuracy. Results showed that readers
made significantly more erroneous “yes” responses
following ambiguous sentences compared to unambiguous
sentences (β=1.0, z=5.0, p<.001), as shown in Table 1.

400

Table 1: Percentage of incorrect responses to
comprehension questions in Experiment 1.
Condition
Ambiguous
Unambiguous

Error Rate
67%
51%

Reading Times Prior to data analysis, word-by-word
reading times that were faster than 100 millisecond (ms) or
slower than 2000 ms were excluded, leading to a loss of
0.5% of data. Reading times above or below 2.5 standard
deviations from each participant’s mean were replaced by
the cut-off value for that participant (Sturt, Pickering, &
Crocker, 1999), and word-by-word reading times for
sentences that participants failed to make response to the
comprehension question were excluded from further

350
300
Ambiguous Unambiguous

Figure 1: Reading time at the disambiguating region in
Experiment 1, collapsing over question accuracy.
There was also a significant interaction between ambiguity
and question accuracy (β=27.2, t=2.1, p<.05), which
resulted because the disambiguating region was read more
slowly in ambiguous sentences that were answered correctly
than in those that were answered incorrectly (mean
ambiguous correct: 455 ms; mean ambiguous incorrect: 445
ms), and this pattern was reversed in unambiguous
sentences (mean unambiguous correct 409 ms; mean
unambiguous incorrect 430 ms), as shown below in Figure
2. Pairwise comparisons showed that the differences in
reading times between trials with correct answers and those
with incorrect answers did not reach significance within
either ambiguous or unambiguous conditions (ts<1, ps>.3).
Analysis done for the region after the disambiguating verb
showed similar results: there was no difference in the
reading time between trials that were answered correctly
and those that were answered incorrectly.
Overall, Experiment 1 did not show that slower reading
time at the disambiguating region was associated with more

1927

correct responses in ambiguous sentences. Therefore, there
was no evidence that more reanalysis effort was associated
with more correct question responses, contrary to the
hypothesis that lingering misinterpretation was resulted
from incomplete reanalysis.
Mean RT at the Disambiguation
separately by Question Accuracy

450

Correct
Incorrect

400
350
300
Ambiguous

Unambiguous

Figure 2: Reading time at the disambiguating region in
Experiment 1, separately by response accuracy.

Procedure
Participants were seated comfortably in a dimly lit and
sound-attenuating booth in front of a 23-inch LCD monitor.
Each trial began with a fixation point, which stayed in the
center of the screen for 500 milliseconds. Because eye
movements cause artifacts that contaminate the EEG signal,
sentences were presented word-by-word at the center of the
screen in 26-point white Arial font on a black background,
at a rate of 400 ms per word (300 ms text, 100 ms blank
screen).
At the end of each sentence, a comprehension question
was presented and participants responded by pressing one of
two buttons on a Cedrus RB-830 response box. No feedback
was given regarding question accuracy. A total of 184 trials
were divided into four blocks, each beginning with four
distractor items. Participants took a short break after each
block and they were instructed to minimize blinking and
body movement while the sentences were being presented.
They were encouraged to blink between trials when
necessary. A practice block with five sentences was given at
the beginning. The recording session took about 40 minutes
and the entire session lasted approximately 2 hours.

EEG Recording and Data Analysis

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to
compare the amplitude of P600 evoked by the
disambiguating verb in trials with correct responses and
those with incorrect responses, since the P600 component
has been found to be associated with revision processes in
garden-path sentences (e.g., Osterhout et al. 1994), among
other things. If trials with larger P600 amplitude at the
disambiguating verb are associated with more correct
responses, such a result will support that more reanalysis
leads to less lingering misinterpretation.

Participants
Participants were fifty-five native speakers of English (26
males; mean age 19.2, range 18-22) who were
undergraduate students at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. All were strongly right-handed as
assessed by the Edinburgh inventory (Oldfield, 1971), had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no neurological or
psychiatric disorder. All gave written informed consent and
received course credits or payment for taking part. Data
from seven participants were excluded from analysis due to
low comprehension accuracy to distractors.

Materials
Critical sentences in Experiment 2 were exactly the same as
Experiment 1. There were 144 distractors, sixty-four of
which were experimental sentences of an unrelated
experiment that examined sentences with direct
object/sentential complement ambiguity (e.g., The bus
driver warned the passengers would get too rowdy.). As in
Experiment 1, a comprehension question was asked after
each sentence.

Continuous EEG was recorded from 27 Ag/AgCl sintered
electrodes placed in an elastic cap (EasyCap, 10-10 system;
Chatrian, 1985), referenced online to the left mastoid and rereferenced offline to the average of left and right mastoids:
midline: Fz, Cz, Pz; lateral: AF3/4, F3/4, F7/8, FT7/8,
FC3/4, C3/4, T3/4, CP3/4, T5/T6, P3/4, P5/6, PO7/8. Blinks
and eye movements were detected with electrodes above
and beneath the right eye and at the outer canthi of both
eyes. EEG and EOG recordings were amplified by a Grass
Model 12 amplifier and sampled at a frequency of 200 Hz.
A 0.01-30 Hz analog bandpass filter was applied during
online recording and a 0.1 Hz high-pass digital filter was
applied offline. Impedances were maintained below 5kΩ.
Epochs were extracted from the continuous waveforms
from 100 ms before the onset of the disambiguating verb
through 1200 ms later. Epochs contaminated with artifacts
were discarded, affecting 11% trials.
ERPs time-locked to the onset of the disambiguating verb
relative to a 100 ms baseline immediately preceding it were
obtained for each channel in each condition for each
participant. The conventional time window of 600-900 ms
after the onset of the disambiguating verb was chosen to
capture effects on the P600 component. Window mean
amplitudes were submitted to separate repeated-measures
analyses of variance. One set of analyses included all lateral
electrodes and another included just midline electrodes. The
ANOVA including all lateral electrodes had four withinsubject factors: two levels of ambiguity (Ambiguous,
Unambiguous), two levels of question accuracy (Correct,
Incorrect), three levels of electrode site anteriority (Frontal,
Central, Posterior) and two levels of electrode site laterality
(Left, Right). The ANOVA including just midline
electrodes (Fz, Cz, Pz) consisted of the same three within-

1928

subject factors except that there was no laterality factor. The
Greenhouse-Geisser correction was applied wherever
necessary to correct for violations of sphericity (Greenhouse
& Geisser, 1959). Corrected p-values and original degrees
of freedom are reported. Grand average ERPs were digitally
low-pass filtered at 10 Hz to smooth the waveforms for
display, but analyses were performed before such filtering
was applied.

P600 effect at the Disambiguation
−2

2

Unambig

2

−2
0
2

0

200

400
600
Time (ms)

800

1000

Figure 3: Grand average ERPs of the disambiguating verb
at midline electrodes in Ambiguous and Unambiguous
conditions in Experiment 2, baselined on 100 ms before the
onset of the disambiguating verb.
Mean P600 Amplitude at the Disambiguation
separately by Question Accuracy

Error Rate
57%
46%

ERP results Visual inspection revealed that responses to
the disambiguating verb in the ambiguous condition were
more positive than in the unambiguous condition at centralposterior sites, showing the usual scalp distribution of P600
effects, as shown in Figure 3.
However, there was no difference in the amplitude of the
P600 between trials that were answered correctly and those
that were answered incorrectly, as shown in Figure 4. These
observations were confirmed by statistical analyses.
ANOVA over all lateral electrodes showed a significant
interaction between ambiguity and anteriority, F(2,94)=4.7,
p<.05, which resulted because the ambiguity effect was
significant at posterior electrodes, marginally significant at
central electrodes, but not significant at frontal electrodes
(Frontal: F(1,47)=.1, p=.8; Central: F(1,47)=3.5, p=.07;
Posterior: F(1,47)=7.4, p<.01). There was no main effect or
any interaction involving the accuracy factor in lateral
electrodes. Midline analysis did not show main effects of
either ambiguity or accuracy, nor was there interaction
between ambiguity and accuracy.
These results indicated that the disambiguating verb (e.g.,
ran) triggered more syntactic reanalysis in ambiguous than
unambiguous sentences, but that P600 amplitude was not
associated with question accuracy, which is again contrary
to one of the predictions of the good-enough processing
account.

Voltage (µV)

Condition
Ambiguous
Unambiguous

Ambig

Pz

Table 2: Percentage of incorrect responses to
comprehension questions in Experiment 2.

0

Cz

Voltage (µV)

−2

Results
Comprehension accuracy Comprehension accuracy to
distractor items was analyzed to evaluate whether or not
participants were paying attention to the sentences. Similar
to Experiment 1, average accuracy to distractors was 89%.
Data from seven participants whose comprehension
accuracy was below 80% were excluded from further
analyses, leaving data from forty-eight participants.
Comprehension question accuracy for experimental
sentences was analyzed using logistic regression. Results
showed that, consistent with Experiment 1, readers made
significantly more erroneous “yes” responses following
ambiguous than unambiguous sentences (β=0.6, z=3.8,
p<.01), as shown in Table 2 below.

Fz

0

2
Correct
Incorrect
1

0
Ambiguous Unambiguous

Figure 4: Mean amplitude of the P600 component
averaging across all centro-parietal electrodes, separately by
response accuracy.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 aimed to examine whether or not properties of
the events described in the sentences and comprehension
questions (Did the man hunt the deer?) might affect how
likely participants were to incorrectly respond “yes” to
them.

Method
Twenty-six native speakers of English (14 males; mean age
19.9; range 18-22) were asked to provide a percentage
rating to questions like How likely is it that the man hunted
the deer?, after reading sentences like While the man
hunted(,) the deer that was brown and graceful ran into the
woods. Materials were ambiguous and unambiguous

1929

versions of the forty items used in Experiments 1 and 2, and
were distributed over two lists. Twenty-four fillers, which
were ambiguous and unambiguous versions of sentences
like While Anna dressed(,) the baby who was cute and small
spit up on the bed, were added to each list. Lists were
randomized for each participant. Item-by-item plausibility
rating was obtained by averaging across participants.

Results
The average likelihood rating across all items was 71%.
Questions following ambiguous sentences were rated
significantly more likely than those following unambiguous
sentences (mean ambiguous: 78%; mean unambiguous:
65%; t=3.9, p<.001).
After entering likelihood information into the multi-level
models as an independent variable to examine its effect on
comprehension accuracy, results of both Experiment 1 and
Experiment 2 showed a main effect of likelihood
(Experiment 1: β=0.02, z=3.0, p<.01; Experiment 2: β=0.02,
z=3.7, p<.001), suggesting that the likelihood of the events
described in the sentences and comprehension questions
reliably predicted question responses. Questions describing
more likely events led to more incorrect “yes” responses.
The main effect of ambiguity remained significant in
Experiment 1 (β=0.39, z=3.2, p<.01) and marginally
significant in Experiment 2 (β=0.34, z=1.8, p=.07), showing
that likelihood had separable effects on question accuracy.
Taken together, these findings suggest that response
accuracy to comprehension questions following garden-path
sentences such as (1) in Experiments 1 and 2 was
determined in part by the likelihood of the events described
in those questions. Therefore, responses to such questions
does not seem to provide good evidence about whether
readers reanalyzed initial misinterpretation in garden-path
sentences.

Conclusion
Experiments 1 and 2 converged on showing that there was
no evidence of more reanalysis during trials with correct
question responses than during those with incorrect question
responses. In Experiment 1, readers did not spend more time
reading the disambiguating verb and in Experiment 2 P600
amplitude was not larger at the disambiguating verb on trials
with correctly answered questions. These results are not
consistent with one prediction of the good-enough
processing account, i.e., lingering misinterpretation is
resulted from incomplete reanalysis and therefore there
should be more evidence of reanalysis for trials that were
answered correctly. However, our results do not rule out the
Good-Enough Processing Account, as we did not test the
second possibility: reanalysis is completed, but
interpretations from both initial analysis and reanalysis
linger.
The likelihood judgments obtained in Experiment 3 and
the results of including them in re-analyses of Experiments
1 and 2 suggest that accuracy to comprehension questions
following garden-path sentences may not provide a good

indicator of whether or not people fully revise an initial
misinterpretation of a garden-path sentence. Instead,
responses to such questions seem to be strongly influenced
by the likelihood of the events described in the sentence and
its question.

References
Barton, S.B., & Sanford, A.J. (1993). A case study of anomaly detection:
Shallow semantic processing and cohesion establishment. Memory &
Cognition, 21, 477-487.
Christianson, K. (2010). Effects of Plausibility on Structural Priming.
Journal of experimental psychology. Learning, memory, and cognition,
36, 538-544.
Christianson, K., Hollingworth, A., Halliwell, J., & Ferreira, F. (2001).
Thematic roles assigned along the garden path linger. Cognitive
Psychology, 42, 368-407.
Christianson, K., Williams, C.C., Zacks, R.T., & Ferreira, F. (2006).
Younger and older adults' "good-enough" interpretations of garden-path
sentences.
Discourse
Processes,
42,
205-205-238.
doi:
10.1207/s15326950dp4202_6
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Continuity and shallow structures in
language processing. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27, 107-126. doi:
doi:10.1017/S0142716406060206
Ferreira, F., Bailey, K.G.D., & Ferraro, V. (2002). Good-enough
representations in language comprehension. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 11, 11-11-15.
Ferreira, F., Christianson, K., & Hollingworth, A. (2001).
Misinterpretations of garden-path sentences: Implications for models of
sentence processing and reanalysis. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 30, 3-3-20.
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of syntactic
processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 348-368.
Ferreira, F., & Henderson, J.M. (1991). Recovery from misanalyses of
garden-path sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 725-745.
Ferreira, F., & Henderson, J.M. (1998). Syntactic reanalysis, thematic
processing, and sentence comprehension. In J. D. Fodor & F. Ferreira
(Eds.), Reanalysis in sentence processing (pp. 73-100). Dordrecht: The
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
Fodor, J.D., & Inoue, A. (1998). Attach anyway. In J. D. Fodor & F.
Ferreira (Eds.), Reanalysis in sentence processing (Vol. 21, pp. 101141). Kluwer: Dordrecht.
Frisson, S. (2009). Semantic underspecification in language processing.
Language and Linguistics Compass, 3, 111-127.
Greenhouse, Samuel W, & Geisser, Seymour. (1959). On methods in the
analysis of profile data. Psychometrika, 24, 95-112.
Kaschak, M.P., & Glenberg, A.M. (2004). This construction needs learned.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 450-467.
Lau, E.F., & Ferreira, F. (2005). Lingering effects of disfluent material on
comprehension of garden path sentences. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 20, 633-666.
Oldfield, Richard C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedness:
the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9, 97-113.
Osterhout, L., Holcomb, P.J., & Swinney, D.A. (1994). Brain potentials
elicited by garden-path sentences: Evidence of the application of verb
information during parsing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 786-803.
Sanford, A.J., & Sturt, P. (2002). Depth of processing in language
comprehension: not noticing the evidence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
6, 382-386.
Sturt, P., Pickering, M.J., & Crocker, M.W. (1999). Structural change and
reanalysis difficulty in language comprehension. Journal of Memory and
Language, 40, 136-150.
Swets, B., Desmet, T., Clifton, C., & Ferreira, F. (2008).
Underspecification of syntactic ambiguities: Evidence from self-paced
reading. Memory & Cognition, 36, 201-216.
Trueswell, J.C., Tanenhaus, M.K., & Garnsey, S.M. (1994). Semantic
Influences On Parsing: Use of Thematic Role Information in Syntactic
Ambiguity Resolution. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 285-318.

1930

