UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational PDP Model for Explaining Automatic Imitation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/49v2s2z1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Scheutz, Matthias
Bertenthal, Bennett

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational PDP Model for Explaining Automatic Imitation
Matthias Scheutz (mscheutz@cs.tufts.edu)
Department of Computer Science, 165 College Avenue
Medford, MA 02155 USA

Bennett I. Bertenthal (bbertent@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Recent evidence suggests that automatic imitation is mediated
by an observation-execution matching system that cannot be
reduced to the same processes responsible for other stimulusresponse (S-R) compatibilities. A computational model is
developed with different patterns of connectivity for imitative
and spatial compatibilities, and it is successful in simulating
the results from three different S-R tasks. Variations of the
model with identical connections for mediating the two
compatibilities reveal a significantly poorer fit. These results
provide converging evidence that imitative and spatial
compatibilities are mediated by different processes.
Keywords: automatic imitation, S-R compatibility,
connectionist modeling, direct matching hypothesis

Introduction and Background
The tendency to unintentionally and unconsciously mimic
actions performed by others has long been noted. Charles
Darwin, for example, commented that at leaping matches
spectators would move their own feet as if imitating the
athletes. More recently, Dijksterhuis and Bargh (2001)
noted that we tend to whisper or speak louder when others
do, scratch our heads upon seeing someone else scratch, or
cycle faster after seeing a cycling race on TV. During social
interactions, mimicry translates into a greater desire to want
to cooperate and affiliate with those individuals imitating
our gestures (Chartrand and Bargh, 1999). In spite of the
frequency and significance of these behaviors, our
understanding of the underlying mechanisms responsible for
these automatic tendencies remains incomplete at best.
The prevailing hypothesis for explaining spontaneous
mimicry or automatic imitation is that the perception of
some actions automatically activates corresponding motor
programs. There are by now more than 75 experimental
studies investigating automatic imitation, and most of the
evidence is based on stimulus response compatibility
paradigms, in which both stimuli and responses involve
human movements (Heyes, 2011). In this paradigm, faster
responding is observed when stimuli and responses
correspond along some perceptual, structural or conceptual
dimension than when they do not (referred to as a
“compatibility effect”).
When both the stimuli and
responses involve human movements, it is often assumed
that automatic imitation is involved. One problem with this
interpretation is that the pattern of results for automatic
imitation and all other S-R compatibility effects is exactly
the same (i.e., faster response times for compatible than

incompatible responses to the stimuli). As a consequence,
these results beg the question as to whether the processes
mediating automatic imitation are specialized or instead are
the same processes involved in other S-R compatibility
tasks. In order to resolve this issue, it is necessary to find a
paradigm where the results for automatic imitation and other
S-R compatibility tasks are predicted to be different.
We recently provided such evidence by comparing
imitative and spatial compatibilities in two experiments
(Boyer, Longo, and Bertenthal, in press). The first tested
for spatial compatibility with an imitative cue as the
imperative stimulus, and the second tested for imitative
compatibility with a spatial cue as the imperative stimulus.
The stimulus consisted of a left or right hand with fingers
spread apart and appeared on a computer screen from a third
person perspective. Participants were instructed to respond
to either the left-right spatial location or the anatomical
identity of the index or middle finger tapping downward
(Figure 1).

Figure 1. Left panel depicts the left hand stimulus with the
index finger tapping down. Right panel depicts the right
hand stimulus with the middle finger tapping down.
Responses consisted of pressing a key with the index or
middle fingers on the right hand. In the standard S-R
compatibility task (henceforth abbreviated “S-R task”), the
responses were compatible with a task-irrelevant spatial
stimulus when the left hand was presented (see Figure 1).
For example, participants instructed to respond to the spatial
cue would press a key with their index finger when
responding to the left tapping finger. In this condition, both
the stimulus and response are index fingers, and thus the
response is facilitated via automatic imitation. Likewise,
participants instructed to respond to the imitative cue would,
for example, press a key with their middle finger when
responding to the middle finger tapping. In this condition,
both the stimulus and response correspond to the right side,
and thus the response is facilitated via spatial compatibility.
When the stimulus corresponded to a right hand, the

2288

Figure 2. Upper panel. Mean response times (ms) to
spatially compatible and incompatible stimuli as a function
of task in Experiment 1. Lower panel. Mean response
times (ms) to imitatively compatible and incompatible
stimuli as a function of task in Experiment 2. (Error bars
represent ± standard error of the mean.)
responses were not compatible with a task-irrelevant
stimulus.
In the Opposite S-R compatibility task
(henceforth referred to as “OS-R task”), the task involved
responding to the stimulus not presented on that trial (e.g.,
participants responded to a index finger with their middle
finger). Responses were compatible with a taskirrelevant stimulus that corresponded to the right hand,
and incompatible with a stimulus corresponding to the
left hand (see Figure 2).
For the S-R task, Boyer et al. (in press) predicted similar
results when the irrelevant stimulus was either spatially or
imitatively compatible. By contrast, they predicted different
results for the OS-R task. Switching instructions from a
spatial S-R to a spatial OS-R task was first investigated by
Hedge and Marsh (1975), who reported a “reverse
compatibility effect”. Although there is no consensus
concerning the underlying mechanism, most hypotheses
suggest that the recoding of the stimulus generalizes to the
task irrelevant stimulus responsible for spatial compatibility
and hence facilitates responding to the incompatible
stimulus. By contrast, Boyer et al. (in press) hypothesized
that imitative compatibility involves a direct and
independent mapping between the task-irrelevant imitative
stimulus and the response as suggested by recent
neurophysiological evidence (Rizzolatti and Craighero,
2004). Thus, no reverse compatibility effect is predicted.

The results from the two experiments supported these
predictions. In the S-R compatibility tasks, participants’
response times were faster to the spatially and imitatively
compatible stimuli than to the incompatible stimuli (see
Figure 2). By contrast, in the OS-R tasks, participants’
response times to the spatially incompatible stimuli were
faster than to the spatially compatible (i.e., reverse
compatibility effect), whereas response times to the
imitatively compatible stimuli were faster than to the
imitatively incompatible stimuli (although this difference
was not significant). The results from this latter experiment
thus suggested that imitative and spatial compatibilities are
not mediated by the same domain-general process.
Although the preceding results suggest that spatial and
imitative compatibilities are mediated by different
processes, it remains an empirical question as to whether the
response differences are a function of different neural
architectures or more simply a function of differences in the
parameterization of the same architecture. The standard
processing model for explaining S-R compatibility effects is
a dual route model whereby responses are activated by an
intentional route as well as an automatic route (Zorzi and
Umilta, 1995; Zhang, H., Zhang, J., and Kornblum, 1999).
If the automatic route activates the same response as the
intentional route, the response is facilitated. If, however,
the automatic and intentional routes activate different
responses, then the response is slowed down. In spite of
sharing this general processing assumption, all dual route
models are not the same. Some models are designed with
some or all inputs mapped directly to the outputs, and other
models are designed with a middle decision layer that
selects the response (e.g., Sausser and Billard, 2002). In the
current research, we hypothesized that the spatial
compatibility task is mediated by the latter model, whereas
the imitative compatibility task is mediated by a hybrid
model (i.e., the automatic imitative route involves a direct
mapping between input and output, but the controlled route
involves a task-based mapping between the input and a
middle decision layer). This latter model is consistent with
recent theories suggesting that automatic imitation is due to
a shared representation between the observation and
execution of actions.
The purpose of the current investigation was to test this
hypothesis with a computational model that was designed to
simulate the empirical results from the previous study by
Boyer et al. (in press).

A PDP Model of Spatial and Ideomotor
Compatibility Effects
We started with our previous computational modeling
efforts (Boyer et al. 2009) and develop a new three-layered
(input-hidden-output) connectionist network, with nodes at
each layer representing the stimulus input, the S-R
translation, and the response, respectively.
We use
simplified interactive activation and competition
connectionist units (Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986) with
change in activation over time is given by Δact/Δt=netin-

2289

act(netin+decay), where act∈[0,1] is the activation of the
unit, netin∈[0,1] is the sum of the weighted inputs to the unit
and decay∈[0,1] is a constant decay factor. The model
consists of eight units: two input units, called finger units,
representing the perceived index (“I”) and middle (“M”)
input fingers; two input units, called location units,
representing the left (“L”) and right (“R”) location of the
perceived input fingers (depending on the stimulus hand);
two output units representing the index finger in the left
location (“IL”) and the middle finger in the right location
(“MR”) of the right hand; and two hidden units (or decision
units), called SR units, affecting the S-R translation between
inputs and outputs (“SR-IL” and “SR-MR”). As in (Boyer
et al. 2009), we start with a base model which shows the
participant's state before any task-based instructions and the
task models which show the participant’s condition after a
task-based instruction.
The base model consists of
automatic connections between input and hidden, and
hidden and output units. The input finger (“I” or “M”) and
spatial location (“L” or “R”) are mapped onto the requisite
hidden unit (“SR-MR” or “SR-IL”) via the connections
I SR-IL, M SR-MR, L SR-IL, and R SR-MR,
a

a

a

a

respectively.
These connections correspond to the
compatible S-R translations between the imperative
stimulus and the response, which we hypothesize are
processed automatically by the hidden units presumably
because they are overlearned and automatized. In addition
to these automatic connections, we assume direct
connections between input and output fingers that reflect the
hypothesized direct matching pathways:
I IL and
i

M MR (note that there are no direct connections between
i

input and output spatial locations). Lastly, hidden units are
mapped onto corresponding output units via connections
SR-IL IL and SR-MR MR.
a

a

input and hidden units: for the spatial compatibility models,
we add task-based connections I  SR-IL and M SR-MR
t

t

reflecting that the imperative stimulus is the anatomical
identity of the finger, and for the imitative compatibility
models, we add task-based connections L SR-IL, and
t

R SR-MR reflecting that the imperative stimulus is the
t

left-right location of the finger. Furthermore, for the
standard (S-R) mapping models we add task-based
connections between hidden and output units SR-IL  IL
t

and SR-MR MR, while for the opposite (OS-R) mapping
t

models we add task-based connections between hidden and
output units SR-IL MR and SR-MR IL in which the
t

t

controlled connection from the hidden unit crosses to the
opposite output unit. This crossing is necessary given that
the task instruction requires participants to select the
opposite response to that selected in the standard mapping
condition (i.e., either responding to the finger with the
opposite identity or spatial location). Different from (Boyer
et al. 2009), the current model has only excitatory
connections (i.e., connections with positive values).
Inputs are applied to the model by fixing the netinput of
the respective input units (e.g., “I” + “L”) at a particular
value to indicate, for example, the perceived index finger in
the left position). The input is applied on each cycle of the
trial because participants are able to observe the stimulus
finger until they respond. The state of the model is updated
in discrete time steps (“cycles”) that correspond to 10 ms of
real-time. Response selection is achieved whenever an
output unit reaches the action threshold (i.e., the activation
needed to perform a motor response by the finger). As
such, the number of cycles computed from the introduction
of the input (i.e., moving finger) until the action threshold is
reached can be used to simulate the response times directly
(e.g., 30 cycles correspond to 300 ms).
To minimize the number of free model parameters that
can be used to fit models to the empirical data, we fix all
base model parameters based on the study by Boyer et al.,
2009.
Specifically, we assume that all automatic
connections  and direct mapping connections  have
a

Figure 3. The proposed neural network model: the base
model consists of only the dashed connections; the bold
connections depict the S-R compatible task-based
connections for the index finger.
From the base model, we construct the task models by
adding additional connections that depend on the task
instructions. Specifically, we add connections between

i

the same strength in all models, and they are set to a very
low value of 0.001 (which is too low to generate any actions
without task instructions, even if all input units are activated
together). Moreover, we assume that the same decay factor
of 0.05 for all computational units and also fix both the
external input and the action threshold at 0.5. With those
base model parameters fixed, we are left with the task-based
connections as free parameters that can be used to fit the
models to the empirical data.

Model Fitting and Simulation Results
We start with spatial and imitative compatibility in the S-R
condition. There are four free parameters in each condition

2290

650

Mean Response Time (ms)

HUMAN

MODEL

600

585

580
557

560

550
500
449

443

450
407

420

410

402

400

450

450

457

460

440

410

350
Compatible

Incompatible

Spatial S-R Task

Compatible

Incompatible

Compatible

Spatial OS-R Task

Incompatible

Compatible

Imitative S-R Task

Incompatible

Imitative OS-R Task

Figure 4. The simulation results of the proposed model for both compatibilities in the S-R and OS-R conditions.
corresponding to the input-to-hidden and hidden-to-output
task connections, and we make the simplifying assumption
that all task-based connections in the standard mapping
models have the same strength. This assumption is
plausible because both finger and location inputs require
similar levels of encoding and integration followed by a
similar S-R translation process regardless of whether the
task instruction is to respond to the anatomical identity or
location of the finger (Boyer et al., in press). Accordingly,
we searched for a single positive value for all task-based
connections that minimizes the root mean squared error for
each model (RMSE). We found  =0.086 to be such a
t

value with RMSE=12.28 ms, which is just above the model
resolution of 10 ms necessary for simulating a compatibility
effect.
The next step was to use the model parameters in the S-R
condition to predict the results in the OS-R condition. As
previously described, the hidden-to-output connections for
the task-based processes reverse between these two layers
because the correct response is opposite to the one cued by
the stimulus. We assume that, because only the hidden-tooutput connections are different from the S-R models, the
OS-R models should use the same connection strength
(0.086) as the S-R models for the input-to-hidden
connections. Moreover, we assume that both hidden-tooutput connections have the same strength for both outputs;
but based on the results of Boyer et al. (in press) showing
longer response times for recoding the spatial cue, we
introduce different strengths for imitative vs. spatial
compatibility conditions. Hence, we are left with only one
free parameter SR-IL MR=SR-MR IL in each of the
t

t

two opposite mapping conditions.
In order to fit this free parameter, we begin with the OS-R
condition for imitative compatibility. Unlike the results for
the spatial compatibility condition which showed a reverse
compatibility effect, the empirical results for this condition
were similar to those for the S-R condition. Given this
similarity, we predicted that the same value of 0.086 should
work for SR-IL MR and SR-MR IL in the OS-R
t

t

condition for imitative compatibility. Consistent with our
hypothesis, this simulation was very successful with
RMSE=7.38ms, which is less than the model resolution of
10ms.
The situation was somewhat different for fitting the
spatial compatibility model in the OS-R condition. Recall
that this condition differed from the other three conditions in
two ways: (1) the results revealed a reverse compatibility
effect, i.e., response times were faster to the incompatible
than to the compatible stimulus; and (2) the response times
in this condition were significantly higher than in the
comparable imitative compatibility condition (i.e., 571 ms
vs. 454 ms). Hence, in order to model these two results, we
made two predictions: (1) the reverse compatibility effect is
a function of the model architecture, and therefore it should
be unnecessary to change the connection strength of 0.0856
for SR-IL MR=SR-MR IL from the connection
t

t

strengths used in the other conditions; and (2) a lower
connection strength (less than 0.086) is required for SRIL MR=SR-MR IL to fit the model to the significantly
t

t

longer response times with a small RMSE.
In the first simulation of this condition, we did not change
the hidden-to-output connection weight (set
SRIL MR=SR-MR IL=0.086) which yielded a response
t

t

time of 460 ms for the incompatible condition and a
response time of 470 ms for the compatible condition.
These results thus confirm our first prediction because they
are consistent with a reverse compatibility effect. In the
second simulation we lowered
SR-IL  MR=SRt

MR IL=0.083 by about 3%, which yielded a response
t

time of 560 ms for the incompatible condition and a
response time of 580 ms for the compatible condition. In
contrast to the previous simulation, these results revealed
not only a reverse compatibility effect but also a very small
RMSE=4.12, thus supporting our second prediction.
Several points are worth noting about the above modeling
results. First and foremost, the current models are capable
of capturing the reversed spatial compatibility effect in the

2291

empirical data that Boyer et al. (2009) failed to capture. At
the same time, the current model is simpler than the one
presented in Boyer et al. (2009) because it has fewer nodes
and fewer connections, does not use any inhibitory
connections, and thus has overall fewer parameters. And
finally, the fits we obtained here are better than the fits in
Boyer et al. (2009). The fact that spatial and imitative
compatibilities in the OS-R condition required separate
models is theoretically significant. This result thus provides
an important source of evidence for concluding that the two
compatibilities are not mediated by the same processes.

the trial. In order to model these within trial timing effects,
it would be necessary to design a stochastic model which is
currently in development, but it is premature to report any
results from this model.
500
HUMAN

480 480

Mean RT (ms)

460

Testing the Generalizability of the Model
Given that the model succeeded at capturing the data from
Boyer et al. (in press), we sought to test its generalizability
as a means of providing further evidence that spatial and
imitative compatibilities are not mediated by the same
processes. Recently, Catmur and Heyes (2010) conducted a
related study testing the effects of spatial and imitative
compatibilities on response times. In this study, participants
responded to a discriminative cue with an abduction of
either the index or little finger of their right hand. On each
trial, a left or right hand was displayed initially in a neurtral
position with fingers spread apart and the outline of a small
white circle appearing equidistant between the tips of the
index and little fingers. Participants were instructed to
respond as quickly as possible to the circle changing to
orange or purple by abducting their index or little finger
depending on the task instructions. Simultaneous with the
appearance of the discriminative cue, the index or middle
finger of the stimulus hand was abducted. By varying
whether the stimulus corresponded to the left or right hand,
it was possible to independently manipulate imitative and
spatial compatibility, such that both compatibilities were
present, only one, or neither.
To allow our current model to simulate the Catmur and
Heyes (2010) task, we add two additional color nodes (“O”
for “orange” and “P” for “purple”) together with task-based
connections O SR-IL and P SR-MR to the two hidden
t

MODEL

450

450

450

440
420 420

400

350
SC/IC

SC/II

SI/IC

SI/II

Figure 5. The simulation results of the model for the Catmur
and Heyes (2010) experiment (“SC”=“spatial compatible”,
“IC”=“imitative compatible”, “SI”=“spatial incompatible”,
and “II”=“imitative incompatible”).

General Discussion

t

nodes “SR-IL” and “SR-MR”, respectively, in the base
model to reflect the requirement to abduct the little finger
(“little finger”) for the orange stimulus, and the index finger
(“index finger”) for the purple stimulus or vice versa (note
that we can re-use the “middle finger” node for the “little
finger”). We hypothesize that our model should also be
able to simulate the results from this study with only minor
adjustments. Keeping the task-based connections while
inreasing the automatic connections (to 0.003) and lowering
the direct mapping connections (to 0.0001), we get a result
(with a small RMSE of 7.07ms) that very closely captures
the Catmur and Heyes (2010) data (see Figure 5). This
result confirms that our model is not limited to simulating
results from only one specific experiment. It should be
noted, however, that we do not simulate all results from the
Catmur and Heyes (2010) experiment, because they also
investigate the time course of the compatibility effect during

There are three principal conclusions from this
investigation: (1) A computational model was presented that
was successful in simulating the effects of spatial and
imitative compatibilities in three separate conditions. (2)
Unlike previous dual route models for explaining stimulusresponse
compatibilities,
spatial
and
imitative
compatibilities did not conform to the same architecture
(i.e., imitative compatibility included a direct input-output
connection, whereas spatial compatibility did not include
this direct connection). (3) The finding that spatial and
imitative compatibilities were modeled differentlty provides
converging evidence that these two compatibilities are
mediated by different processes.
A legitimate question is, therefore, whether the model
would have been equally successful if we reversed which
stimulus dimension was simulated with direct connections.
Figure 6 shows the model with direct input-output
connections for spatial, but not for imitative compatibilities.
As can be seen, the model is just the mirror image of our
previous model in the S-R conditions and thus fits the
empirical results almost as well (with a slightly larger
RMSE=15.52). In the OS-R condition, however, the model
differs significantly from the empirical results, showing the
exact opposite relations (as indicated by the two ovals in
Figure 6). Not surprisingly, the RSME=38.87 for the OS-R
condition is significantly higher than for the previous model
with the direct imitative connections (RSME=7.12). It thus
appears that these direct connections are necessary for
predicting the imitative compatibilities in the OS-R
condition. Given these results, we also investigated whether
adding to our model direct connections for spatial
compatibility improved the fit.

2292

650
HUMAN

MODEL

600

585

Mean RT (ms)

557

560

550
510

500

470
443

450
407

450

450

449

410

402

400

410

457

460

420

350
Compatible

Incompatible

Spatial S-R Task

Compatible

Incompatible

Spatial OS-R Task

Compatible

Incompatible

Imitative S-R Task

Compatible

Incompatible

Imitative OS-R Task

Figure 6. The simulation results of the model with no direct imitative, but direct spatial connections for both S-R and OS-R
conditions. The ovals depict the two conditions in which the model predicts the opposite effects from the empirical data.
Preliminary experiments show that the addition of direct
connections between the location and output nodes results in
does even worse (without lowering of the task-based
connections) in the S-R condition (with RSME=21.27
compared to RSME=13.99 for our previous model).
However, as with the model including only direct spatial
connections, this new model failed to match the empirical
data in the reverse spatial compatibility condition, with an
overall RSME=37.89 for both OS-R conditions. Hence,
neither models with only direct spatial nor models with
direct spatial and direct imitative connections are capable of
matching the empirical data in the OS-R conditions as well
as our proposed model under the given parameter
assumptions.

Conclusions
In this paper, we introduced the first computational PDP
model that can be fit to human data dissociating spatial from
imitative compatibilities and can be used to make
predictions about related tasks. While the results are
constrained by the chosen constants and the modeling
process, the comparison with alternative model architectures
together with the model's ability to predict performance in a
related, yet different task, are an encouraging step towards a
full-fledged investigation of model parameters and model
architectures that might be able to account for the empirical
differences between imitative and spatial compatibility
effects in a great variety of experimental paradigms.

References
Boyer, T. W., Scheutz, M., and Bertenthal, B. I. (2009).
Dissociating ideomotor and spatial compatibility:
Empirical evidence and connectionist models. In N.
Taatgen, H. van Rijn, and L. Schomaker (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2280-2285). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

Boyer, T.W., Longo, M.R., and Bertenthal, B.I. (in press). Is
automatic imitation a specialized form of stimulusresponse compatibility? Dissociating imitative and spatial
compatibilities. Acta Psychologica.
Catmur, C., and Heyes, C. (2011). Time course analyses
confirm independence of imitative and spatial
compatibility. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 37, 409-421.
Chartrand, T. L., and Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception–behavior link and social
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
76, 893–910.
Dijksterhuis, A., and Bargh, J.A. (2001). The perceptionbehavior express-way: Automatic effects of social
perception on social behavior. Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, 33, 1-39.
Hedge, A., and Marsh, N. W. A. (1975). The effect of
irrelevant spatial correspondence on two-choice responsetime. Acta Psychologica, 39, 427-439.
Heyes, C. (2011). Automatic imitation. Psychological
Bulletin, 137, 463-483.
Rizzolatti, G., and Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169-192.
Rumelhart, D. E. and McClelland, J. L. (1986). Parallel
distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure
of cognition. Volume I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sauser, E. L., and Billard, A. G. (2006). Parallel and
distributed neural models of the ideomotor principle: An
investigation of imitative cortical pathways. Neural
Networks, 19, 285-298.
Zhang, H., Zhang, J., and Kornblum, S. (1999). A parallel
distributed processing model of stimulus-stimulus and
stimulus-response compatibility. Cognitive Psychology,
38, 386-432.
Zorzi, M., and Umilta, C. (1995). A computational model of
the Simon effect. Psychological Research, 58, 193-205.

2293

