UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Critical Look at the Findings of Sergent (1982)

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4xv0954j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Laskin, Lyuben
Varadinov, Meryl

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Critical Look at the Findings of Sergent (1982)
Lyuben D. Laskin (lyubenlaskin@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Meryl Varadinov (meryl.varadinov@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
It is widely believed that local and global levels of visual
stimuli are better processed in the left and right cerebral
hemispheres, respectively. One classic explanation for this
observation is the spatial frequency hypothesis proposed by
Sergent (1982), which states that the left hemisphere is more
efficient at processing high spatial frequencies, whereas the
right hemisphere is better with low spatial frequencies.
Sergent tested this by measuring RTs for laterally presented
stimuli (in the left and right visual fields) composed of high
and low spatial frequencies and obtained results consistent
with the hypothesis. We put Sergent’s findings to the test by
replicating her experiment; our first experiment was a direct
replication of hers, while the second used the same procedure,
but with different stimuli. Our results largely corresponded
with those of Sergent, and the crucial interaction between
visual field and spatial frequency was obtained in Experiment
1, but was qualitatively different from Sergent’s. Possible
explanations are discussed.
Keywords: spatial frequency; global/local processing;
hemispheric differences; hierarchical stimuli; visual hemifield
paradigm.

Introduction
Neuropsychological case studies with brain-injured patients,
neuroimaging studies, and experimental research with
healthy participants have shown that there are certain
functional asymmetries in the left and right hemispheres of
the human brain. (Springer & Deutsch, 2001). When it
comes to visual perception, one of the most studied
phenomena in the field of hemispheric asymmetries
concerns the difference between the left and right
hemispheres in their ability to process (1) global vs. local
aspects and (2) categorical vs. coordinate spatial
relationships of visual stimuli. Studies show that the left
hemisphere (LH) is better at processing the details of a
visual stimulus, whereas the right hemisphere (RH) is
superior for processing its overall shape, patterns formed by
Gestalt principles, etc. (Han et. al., 2002; Hellige, 1996; Ivry
& Robertson, 1998; Van Kleeck & Kosslyn, 1989).
Similarly, research has shown a LH advantage in processing
distance-independent categorical spatial tasks (e.g., “Is the
dot to the left or right of the vertical line?”), and a RH
advantage for spatial tasks that require relative- or absolutedistance spatial judgments (e.g., “Which dot is closer to the

vertical line?”; Hellige & Michimata, 1989; Jager &
Postma, 2003; Kosslyn et. al., 1989, 1994).
An early attempt to explain some of the hemispheric
asymmetries was made by Sergent (1982) who proposed
that the global/local effect was due to hemispheric
differences in the capacity to process different spatial
frequencies.1 According to this hypothesis, the LH
advantage for local stimuli emerges because the LH is better
at processing high spatial frequencies (HSF), whereas the
RH global advantage is due to its efficiency in processing
low spatial frequencies (LSF). Attempts to verify or falsify
this hypothesis have been rather controversial. Some
neuroimaging and neuropsychological studies support the
LH-HSF/RH-LSF asymmetry (e.g., Han et. al., 2001;
Mecacci, 1993; Peyrin et. al., 2004, 2006a; Woodhead, et.
al., 2011), whereas others show results partially or entirely
inconsistent with it (e.g., Grabowska et. al., 1989; Fink et.
al., 1997, 1999). Studies with healthy participants which use
the visual hemifield paradigm yield similarly mixed results,
with some research consistent (Hübner, 1998; Peyrin et. al.,
2006b; Proverbio et. al., 1997; Van Kleeck & Kosslyn,
1989) and other inconsistent (Blanca & Lopez-Montiel,
2009; Evert & Kmen, 2002) with the hypothesis.
Yovel, Yovel, & Levy (2001) present a good metaanalysis of studies that used the visual hemifield paradigm
with hierarchical stimuli. These are mostly Navon-type
letters (large letters composed of small letters; Navon,
1977). The basic idea behind those studies is that when such
a stimulus is presented in the left (LVF) or right (RVF)
visual field, the response times (RT) and error rates should
show a LVF advantage when the response is given based on
the large letter and a RVF advantage when it is given based
on the small letters.2 Despite the theoretical predictions,
Yovel et. al. found that studies confirming them are
outnumbered by those that don’t find a significant visual
field (VF)×stimulus type interaction (i.e., more studies
failed to find one or both of the LVF-LSF/RVF-HSF
advantages).
1

This hypothesis has later been used to explain the
categorical/coordinate spatial relationship asymmetry as well (Ivry
& Robertson, 1998).
2
Visual input to one of the VFs is initially received and
processed by the contralateral hemisphere (Beaumont, 1983).

1858

Of the studies reviewed by Yovel et. al. which used the
divided attention task, only Sergent (1982) found the
significant interaction mentioned above. Another interesting
observation is that, as a whole, the studies that reported
significant results used fewer participants than those that
didn’t. Furthermore, the authors of this paper have
previously employed Sergent’s procedure along with an
additional manipulation, but failed to obtain positive results.
Sergent (1982) has been one of the most cited studies in the
literature of hemispheric asymmetries for low and high
spatial frequencies, yet, to our knowledge, there have been
no attempts to replicate its findings. For those reasons, we
decided that there is value in conducting a study with the
same methodology, but significantly more participants, in
order to gain more insight into the validity of the original
study’s results.

Stimulus Material and Apparatus
The stimuli were large letters composed of small letters. The
letters used were Н, С, Т и Р from the Cyrillic alphabet
(analogues of the English letters N, S, T, and R), the
combinations of which add up to a total of 16 stimuli. The
letters were chosen to visually resemble the ones in
Sergent’s study, which were H, L, T and F (L was replaced
with C and F was replaced with P). In our study the target
letters were H and C (Fig. 1).
Large letters subtended visual angles of 2.08°×1.36° and
small letters subtended angles of 0.23°×0.16°. The stimuli
were black and were presented against a white background
using the E-Prime software package on a 19" monitor
(refresh rate of 200 Hz) of a Samsung SyncMaster 959 NF.
The stimuli were presented in the LVF, CVF, and RVF. In
lateral presentations, the center of the stimulus appeared
1.4° to the left or to the right of the fixation cross.

Sergent (1982) revisited
Sergent’s study used Navon-type hierarchical letters
projected to the LVF, RVF, and central visual field (CVF).
The stimulus material consisted of 4 letters (for a total of 16
large-small letter combinations), 2 of which were targets
and 2 non-targets. Twelve participants had to press a “yes”
button if either the large or small letters were target, or a
“no” button otherwise. The critical finding was that in the
so-called “conflict conditions” in which a non-target large
letter was composed of small target letters (L+S-), or vice
versa (L-S+) a VF×stimulus type interaction was observed.
That is, L+S- stimuli were responded to faster in the
LVF/RH than in the RVF/LH, with the opposite result for
the L-S+ condition (for the full results, see Fig. 2a). These
results were interpreted in light of the spatial frequency
hypothesis, i.e., that the LH is superior for HSF (small
letters), whereas the RH shows an advantage for LSF (large
letters).3
In Experiment 1, we use nearly the same procedure but
with significantly more participants.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Forty-one volunteers and New Bulgarian University
students (21 men and 20 women, aged 19-42) took part in
the experiment for course credit. All were right-handed and
with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Their visual
acuity was tested by presenting 4 small letters (the same as
those used in the experiment) four times each in the RVF,
CVF, and LVF, which they had to identify. All participants
could identify most of the letters presented, deeming them
fit to participate in the study.

3

Sergent proposed that since the large and small letters are of
equal complexity, they should differ only on the spatial frequency
dimension.

Design and Procedure
Participants were led into an experimental booth and
introduced to the experiment by signing a consent form with
general information about it. They were asked about
handedness and tested for visual acuity. Instructions were
given with emphasis on the importance of speed and
accuracy of responses. Each trial began with the appearance
of a fixation cross for 1500 msec, followed by a stimulus
appearing for 150 msec in the LVF, CVF, or RVF, a 2000
msec response window (which terminated when participants
pressed one of the response buttons), and a 2000 msec
intertrial interval. Participants had to determine whether the
stimulus contained either H or C or both by pressing a “yes”
key if it did and a “no” key if neither level contained a target
letter. The hand for response was counterbalanced across
participants.
The experimental procedure began with a practice
session, consisting of 36 trials with feedback on response
accuracy, followed by the experimental session, consisting
of five blocks of 72 trials for a total of 360 trials. The
duration of the entire session was about 35 minutes, with 4
breaks in between experimental blocks, during which
participants took several seconds to rest their eyes.
Both independent variables were within-subject: (1) VF
(left, central, right); (2) stimulus type (6 types; see Fig. 1).
An equal number of positive (containing a target at at least
one level) and negative (containing only non-target letters)
stimuli were randomly presented in each VF (each of the 4
negative combinations was presented 3 times as frequently
as the remaining 12 combinations).

Results and Discussion
Before performing any analyses on the RTs for the different
conditions, we removed all incorrect responses. The average
accuracy was 97% and no participants were excluded from
further analysis based on low accuracy. We also removed all
data points above or below 2.5 standard deviations from the
mean for each participant (excluding 2.6% of the data).
There was no main effect of the between-subject factors sex,

1859

t(39) = 0.175, p = 0.862, and hand for response, t(39) =
0.212, p = 0.83, so all further analysis was collapsed over
them.
.

L+S+
Id.

L+S+
N. Id.

L+S-

L-S+

L-SL-SId.
N. Id.
Figure 1: Sample stimuli used in Experiment 1.
Top left: positive, non-conflict stimuli with
identical and non-identical large and small target
letters; Top right: positive, conflict stimuli with a
large target letter composed of small non-target
letters, and a large non-target letter composed of
small target letters. Bottom: negative stimuli
with identical and non-identical non-target large
and small letters. The С and Р in our study
replaced Sergent’s L and F, respectively.
Figure 2b displays the mean RTs and standard errors for
each condition. A repeated measures ANOVA revealed a
main effect of VF, F(2, 39) = 15, p < 0.001, with about 20
msec faster latencies in the LVF and CVF compared to the
RVF. There was also a main effect of stimulus type, F(5,
36) = 37.984, p < 0.001, with the L+S+ conditions having
the shortest latencies, while the L-S- conditions had the
longest latencies. Similar to Sergent (1982), we also found a
main effect of identicity, F(1, 40) = 41,977, p < 0.001. That
is, it took less time to respond to identical non-conflict
stimuli (i.e., large targets made up of the same small targets
and large non-targets made up of the same small nontargets), compared to their non-identical counterparts.
Next, we analyzed the conflict conditions, where we
found a marginally significant difference in latencies. RTs
were about 17 msec faster for L+S- than for L-S+, F(1,40) =
3.548, p = 0.067. This result is consistent with findings from
the psychophysical literature, according to which LSFs are
available to the visual system earlier than HSFs and are
therefore processed faster (Breitmeyer, 1975; Breitmayer &
Ganz, 1977; Kulikowski & Tolhurst, 1973; Vassilev,
Mihaylova, & Bonnet, 2001).
The conflict conditions were most interesting in regards to
Sergent’s hypothesis, namely, that there should be a LVHRH advantage for the L+S- (LSF) condition and a RVF-LH
advantage for the L-S+ condition (HSF). That is, when the
decision is based on the large letter, there should be a RH

advantage, whereas the opposite result should hold when the
decision is based on the small letters. Despite the
overwhelming correspondence between Sergent’s and our
results, as seen in Figure 2a and 2b, we only found a LVF
advantage for the large letters, but, critically, no RVF
advantage for the small letters. In fact, the LVF was
superior for both large and small letters. Nevertheless, we
did find a significant two-way interaction between left/right
visual fields and the L+S-/L-S+ conditions, F(1, 40) =
34.742, p < 0.001. This is mainly due to the difference
between the LVF and RVF being smaller for the L-S+
condition; when the decision was based on the small letters,
participants were significantly slower to respond when the
stimulus appeared in the LVF (but not slower than the
RVF). However, we don’t consider this observation to be
good support for the hypothesis. First, the case may be that
there is a ceiling effect when it comes to RVF RTs for the
L-S+ stimuli. Second, it is very difficult to draw strong
conclusions from RT interactions which don’t involve
change in sign of the slope of latency curves across
conditions, given that the relationship between task
complexity and RT is not always linear. In other words, the
interaction could have simply been due to task difficulty
(since small letters are more difficult to process) and not
because of hemispheric asymmetries related to processing
different spatial frequencies.
Given the discrepancy between our results and the results
obtained by Sergent, we decided to analyze the data from
individual participants separately. Another incentive for
doing so was based on the controversial results obtained
from other studies using similar procedures. We found 12
participants (from a total of 41) whose data had the pattern
consistent with Sergent’s results (i.e., shorter RTs in LVF
than RVF for the L+S- condition, and shorter RTs for RVF
than LVF for the L-S+ condition). Their results can be seen
in Fig. 2d. A comparison of those and Sergent’s results
reveal remarkably similar patterns (coincidentally, she also
used 12 participants).
Given the conflicting results of previous studies,
combined with our findings, we consider the possibility that
there might be a yet undiscovered dimension on which
people differ. That is, there may be individual differences
when it comes to hemispheric asymmetries for spatial
frequency processing. Hence, it might have been the case
that Sergent (1982) obtained positive results due to an
unrepresentative sample of participants from the general
population. We do not find this explanation to be
particularly appealing, however, since it is done post-hoc,
rather than based on empirical or theoretical reasoning. It is
also possible, though less likely, given our larger sample
size, that it is our sample that was unrepresentative. For
those reasons, we decided to conduct a second experiment
with different participants, using the same procedure, but
slightly different stimuli. Instead of using hierarchical
letters, we used hierarchical shapes. The purpose of this was
also partly exploratory. It is possible that using verbal

1860

stimuli is a confounding factor, since it is a well-established
fact that the LH plays a bigger role in language processing
than does the RH (Springer & Deutsch, 2001). We wanted
to see if using non-verbal stimuli would affect the results in
any direction.

Response Time (msec)

(a)

Experiment 2
Method
The method was identical to that of Experiment 1 with a few
exceptions. Compound shapes were used, instead of
compound letters (squares and triangles were target,
whereas circles and crosses were non-target, see Fig. 3) and
they subtended visual angles of 1.94°×1.94° for the large
shapes, and 0.24°×0.24° for the small shapes. Thirty-nine
right-handed volunteers and New Bulgarian University
students (18 men and 21 women, aged 19-38) took part in
the experiment for course credit (none of them had
participated in Experiment 1).

Response Time (msec)

b)

L+S+
Id.

Response Time (msec)

(c)

L+S+
N. Id.

L+S-

L-S+

L-S
L-S
Id.
N. Id.
Figure 3: Sample stimuli used in Experiment 2

Results and Discussion

Response Time (msec)

(d)

Stimulus Condition

Figure 2: Mean RTs and standard errors for the six
stimulus conditions for (a) Sergent (1982); (b)
Experiment 1 of this study; (c) Experiment 2 of this
study; (d) The data from 12 participants from
Experiment 1 with results consistent with the spatial
frequency hypothesis.

As in Experiment 1, we excluded all incorrect responses
from further analyses. The average accuracy was 97% but
one participant was excluded because of a large error rate
(26%). As before, we removed all data points above or
below 2.5 SD from the mean (excluding 2.8% of the data).
There was no main effect of the hand for response factor,
t(36) = 1.036, p = .307, but there was a marginally
significant main effect of sex, t(36) = 1.879, p = .068, with
men having a small average RT (by 63 msec) than women.
The latter factor and the hand for response factor did not
interact with any others in a theoretically meaningful or
statistically significant way, so we collapsed all further
analyses over them.
Figure 2c displays the mean RTs and standard errors for
each condition. A repeated measures ANOVA showed a
main effect of VF, F(2, 36) = 32.054, p < 0.001. As in
Experiment 1, the latencies were about 20 msec faster in the
LVF and CVF compared to the RVF. There was also a
main effect of stimulus type, F(5, 33) = 60.144, p < 0.001,
with the L+S+ conditions having the fastest latencies, while
the L-S- conditions had the slowest latencies. Similar to
Experiment 1, we also found a main effect of identicity, F(1,

1861

37) = 9.743, p = 0.003, and a large letter advantage, F(1, 37)
= 16.605, p < 0.001.
No significant visual field-stimulus type interaction was
obtained, F(1, 37) = 1.25, p < 0.269, but we still observed a
LVF-RH advantage for both large and small shapes, and no
RVF-LH advantage whatsoever for small shapes. As in the
previous experiment, these results run counter to Sergent’s
findings. Unlike in the previous experiment, in this one only
two of 38 participants exhibited similar patterns to the ones
Sergent reported. Our results are also inconsistent with some
of the studies reporting global/local or LSF/HSF
interactions with VF presentations (Gier et. al., 2010;
Hübner, 1998).

General Discussion
Our experiments revealed several consistent findings. First,
participants were faster as a function of both stimulus type
and stimulus identity. That is, they were fastest to respond
to a stimulus if both the large and small letters were target,
slower when only one of the levels was target, and slowest
when neither level was target; they were also faster to
respond when the two levels were represented by the same
letter or shape. In our interpretation, this is consistent with a
model of parallel processing of the two levels where
processing is facilitated when the global and local levels are
composed of the same letters/shapes and when they’re both
either target or non-target. Therefore, when both levels are
identical, it is more likely that at least one of them will
evoke neural mechanisms that will lead to the proper
response. Other studies have also shown evidence
supporting the parallel processing of global and local levels
of hierarchical stimuli (e.g., Hübner, 1997).
Another result of our experiments that is consistent with
the literature is the idea that LSF are available to the visual
system earlier than HSF. This phenomenon has been
explained by the differences between the magnocellular and
parvocellular visual pathways. They correspond to the
transient and sustained channels described by Breitmeyer
(1975), Breitmayer & Ganz (1977), and Kulikowski &
Tolhurst (1973). The magnocellular pathway is most
sensitive to LSH and high temporal frequencies (HTF),
whereas the parvocellular pathway is most sensitive to HSF
and low temporal frequencies (LTF). Furthermore, the
magnocellular pathway is more efficient when it comes to
the speed with which it propagates information to the higher
cortical structures, which explains the earlier availability of
LSF.
When it comes to the central hypothesis that was tested in
this study, our results are inconsistent with those of Sergent
(1982). We did not observe the critical interaction between
spatial frequency and the visual field of stimulus
presentation. At the same time, it could be argued that our
results are consistent with the general trend observed in
studies using the hierarchical stimulus/visual hemifield
paradigms of finding mixed results. A somewhat interesting
finding of our study was that 12 participants showed RT
patterns for the conflict conditions that were in line with the

hypothesis, but the remaining 29 participants did not. This
might suggest that the conflicting results in the literature
could be partially explained by individual differences on an
unidentified dimension. Individual differences in processing
time of the different levels (Evert & Kmen, 2002; Kimchi,
1992; Peyrin et. al., 2006b) are a possible candidate
dimension. For example, Peyrin et. al. found that the classic
hemispheric asymmetry for spatial frequency processing
occurred only when the stimulus presentation time was 30
msec, whereas only a LVF/RH advantage emerged when the
presentation time was 150 msec. Note that the latter is
consistent with the results from our experiments. We
propose that there may be between-subject, as well as
within-subject, differences related to stimulus presentation
time underlying these effects. Kimchi (1992) has done an
overview of a variety of other factors that could influence
the global/RH advantage in these studies, from the overall
visual angle, sparcity, and number of local elements of the
stimuli to goodness of form and attentional factors.
Finally, it is worth noting that some researchers argue that
hierarchical stimuli are not a good way of manipulating
spatial frequency (e.g., Peyrin et. al., 2003). Also, Yovel et.
al. (2001) point to the salience of the hierarchical stimuli as
a determining factor for obtaining the critical interaction.
They observed a RH advantage for both global and local
levels when stimuli were globally salient, as opposed to
equally salient, in which case they observed a RH advantage
for global letters and a LH advantage for local letters. The
stimuli used in Sergent’s and our study are of the globally
salient type.
We conclude that, despite the large number of studies,
there is still a significant amount of uncertainty surrounding
the nature of hemispheric asymmetries for low and high
spatial frequency processing. Further studies are needed to
explore the underlying mechanisms, the different stimulus
and procedural factors involved, as well as possible
individual differences that are at play.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our volunteers and Oksana Itkes for
her assistance in finding many of the references. We also
express our gratitude towards prof. Angel Vassilev and Ivan
Vankov for their valuable advice and fruitful discussions.

References
Beaumont, J. G. (1983). Methods for studying cerebral
hemispheric function. In A. W. Young (Ed.), Functions of
the right cerebral hemisphere. London: Academic Press.
Blanca, M.J., & López-Montiel, G. (2009). Hemispheric
Differences for Global and Local Processing: Effect of
Stimulus Size and Sparsity. The Spanish Journal of
Psychology, 12 (1), 21-31.
Breitmeyer, B. (1975). Simple reaction time as a measure of
the temporal response properties of the transient and
sustained channels. Vision Research, 15, 1411-1412.

1862

Breitmeyer, B., & Ganz, L. (1977). Temporal studies with
flashed gratings: Inferences about human transient and
sustained channels. Vision Research, 17, 861-865.
Evert, D. L., & Kmen, M. (2003). Hemispheric asymmetries
for global and local processing as a function of stimulus
exposure duration. Brain and Cognition, 51, 115–142.
Fink, G. R., Marshall, J. C., Halligan, P. W., Frith, C. D.,
Frackowiak, R. S., & Dolan, R. J. (1997). Hemispheric
specialization for global and local processing: the effect
of stimulus category. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B: Biological Sciences, 264(1381), 487–494.
Fink, G. R., Marshall, J. C., Halligan, P. W., & Dolan, R. J.
(1999). Hemispheric asymmetries in global/local
processing are modulated by perceptual salience.
Neuropsychologia, 37, 31-40.
Grabowska, A., Semenza, C., Denes, G., & Testa, S. (1989).
Impaired grating discrimination following right
hemisphere damage. Neuropsychologia, 27, 259-263.
Gier, V., Kreiner, D., Solso, R., & Cox, S. L. (2010). The
Hemispheric Lateralization for Processing Geometric
Word/Shape Combinations: The Stroop-Shape Effect. The
Journal of General Psychology, 137(1), 1–19.
Han, S., Waver, J. A, Murray, S. O, Kang, X., Yund, E. W.,
& Woods, D. L. (2002). Hemispheric asymmetry in
global/local processing: effects of stimulus position and
spatial frequency. Neuroimage, 17(3), 1290-9.
Hellige, J.B. (1996). Hemispheric asymmetry for visual
information
processing.
Acta
Neurobiologiae
Experimentalis, 56, 485-497.
Hellige, J.B., & Michimata, C. (1989). Categorization
versus distance: Hemispheric differences for processing
spatial information. Memory and Cognition, 17, 770-776.
Hübner, R., (1997). The effect of spatial frequency on
global precedence and hemispheric differences.
Perception & Psychophysics, 59 (2), 187-201.
Hübner, R., (1998). Hemispheric Differences in
Global/Local Processing Revealed by Same–Different
Judgements. Visual Cognition, 5 (4), 457–478.
Ivry, R .B., & Robertson, L.C. (1998). The two sides of
perception. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Jager, G., & Postma, A. (2003). On the hemispheric
specialization of categorical and coordinate spatial
relations: A review of the current evidence.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 504-515.
Kimchi, R. (1992). Primacy of wholistic processing and
global/local paradigm: A critical review. Psychological
Bulletin, 2(1), 24-38.
Kosslyn, S. M., Koenig, O., Barrett, A., Cave, C. B., Tang,
J., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (1989). Evidence for two types of
spatial representations: Hemispheric specialization for
categorical and coordinate relations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 15, 723-735.
Kosslyn, M. S., Anderson, A. K., Hillger, L. A., &
Hamilton, S. E. (1994). Hemispheric differences in sizes
of
receptive
fields
or
attentional
biases?
Neuropsychology, 8(2), 139-147.

Kulikowski, J. J. & Tolhurst, D. J. (1973). Psychophysical
evidence for austained and transient detectors in human
vision. Journal of Physiology, 232, 149-162.
Mecacci, L. (1993). On spatial frequencies and cerebral
hemispheres: some remarks from the electrophysiological
and neuropsychological points of view. Brain and
Cognition, 22(2), 199-212.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: the precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive.
Psychology. 9, 353– 383.
Peyrin, C., Chauvin, A., Chokron, S., & Marendaz, C.
(2003). Hemispheric specialization for spatial frequency
processing in the analysis of natural scenes. Brain and
Cognition, 53, 278–282.
Peyrin, C. Baciu, M., Segebarth, C., Marendaz, C. (2004).
Cerebral regions and hemispheric specialization for
processing spatial frequencies during natural scene
recognition. An event-related fMRI study. Neuroimage,
23, 698-707.
Peyrin, C., Chokron, S., Guyader, N., Gout, O., Moret, J., &
Marendaz, C. (2006a). Neural correlates of spatial
frequency processing: A neuropsychological approach.
Brain Research, 1073, 1-10.
Peyrin, C., Mermillod, M., Chokron, S., & Marendaz, C.
(2006b). Effect of temporal constraints on hemispheric
asymmetries during spatial frequency processing. Brain
Cognition, 62(3), 214-20.
Proverbio, A. M., Zani, A., & Avella, C. (1997).
Hemispheric Asymmetries for Spatial Frequency
Discrimination in a Selective Attention Task. Brain and
Cognition, 34, 311-20.
Sergent, J. (1982). The cerebral balance of power:
Confrontation or cooperation? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8,
253–272.
Springer, S. P., & Deutsch, G. (2001). Left brain, right
brain: Perspectives from cognitive science. NY: W. H.
Freeman and Company Worth Publishers.
Van Kleeck, M., & Kosslyn, S. M. (1989). Gestalt laws of
perceptual organization in an embedded figures task.
Neuropsychologia, 27(9), 1179-1186.
Vassilev, A., Mihaylova, M., & Bonnet, Claude (2001). On
the delay in processing high spatial frequency visual
information: reaction time and VEP latency study of the
effect of local intensity of stimulation. Vision Research,
42, 851–864.
Woodhead, Z. V., Wise, R. J., Sereno, M., & Leech, R.
(2011). Dissociation of sensitivity to spatial frequency in
word and face preferential areas of the fusiform gyrus.
Cerebral Cortex, 21, 2307-2312.
Yovel, G., Yovel, I., & Levy, J. (2001). Hemispheric
asymmetries for global and local visual perception:
Effects of stimulus and task factors. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 27, 1369–1385.

1863

