UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Study of Loan Color Terms Collocation in Modern Japanese

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xp53730

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Bordilovskaya, Anna

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Study of Loan Color Terms Collocation in Modern Japanese
Anna V. Bordilovskaya (firstwave.anna@gmail.com)
Graduate School of Humanities, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai-machi,
Nada-ku, Kobe 657-8501 JAPAN

Abstract
The Japanese lexicon consists of Japanese-origin words
(WAGO), Chinese-origin words (KANGO) and words
borrowed from English and other European languages
(GAIRAIGO). The acquisition of words from three sources
results in the abundance of near synonyms without any
clear rules when a particular synonym should be used.
Loveday has hypothesized that WAGO/KANGO and
GAIRAIGO concrete nouns are used to address similar
phenomena of Japanese and Western origins, respectively.
This is referred as Hypothesis of Foreign vs. Native
Dichotomy (HFND). However, the matter of abstract nouns,
adjectivals and their collocations remains unstudied. In
contrast to the previous studies, based on questionnaires, our
approach stems from statistical analysis of corpus data. Our
results illuminate a distinguishable bias in the structure of
collocations – nouns and adjectivals of the same origin tend
to appear together more often than the ones of the different
origins. Our finding implies extension of HFND to the level
of collocations.
Keywords: cognitive
loanwords, corpus study

linguistics,

Modern

Japanese,

Introduction
The structure of the Japanese lexicon is a very complex
and rapidly developing system. It consists of Japaneseorigin words (WAGO), Sino-(Chinese)origin words
(KANGO) and words borrowed from English and other
European languages (GAIRAIGO). The adoption of words
from Chinese has a long history, while borrowing of
GAIRAIGO loanwords intensified starting from Meiji
period (1868 - 1912).
However, GAIRAIGO increased in number notably and
became widely used only in the second half of the 20th
century: “English words have become especially important
since WWII, and these loanwords have become genuine
parts of the Japanese lexicon, found in daily conversation
and the world of letters.” (Daulton, 2008).
The acquisition of words from three sources (WAGO,
KANGO and GAIRAIGO) results in the abundance of
near synonyms. The differentiation between such synonyms
in some cases is clear-cut. For example, there is a
historically developed stylistic constraint for Sino-origin
synonyms to be used mainly in written speech as opposing
to Japanese-origin words, which are widely used in oral
speech.
However, the differentiation between WAGO/KANGO
and GAIRAIGO near synonyms in Modern Japanese is a
more complicated issue.

English loanwords in Japanese have been a topic of
various studies by both native and foreign linguists for
about 100 years.
Some researchers are more interested in the assimilation
processes of loanwords (Kay, 1995; Irwin, 2011), other
linguists focus on semantic changes (Daulton, 2008), third
mainly study sociolinguistic background and functions
(Loveday, 1986, 1996).
At present, the number of GAIRAIGO is increasing
rapidly and loanwords penetrate into different spheres of
life. Dictionaries (Katakanago Jiten Consaizu (The Concise
Dictionary of Katakana Words), etc.) in most cases do not
state any clear differences in the meaning and usage for the
abovementioned near synonyms.
On the other hand, the experience of studying and
communicating in Japanese shows that it is not possible to
substitute WAGO/KANGO and GAIRAIGO near synonyms
freely.
Many of GAIRAIGO words are concrete nouns borrowed
from Western culture that came to be used abundantly with
the modernization of life in Japan. Along with concrete
nouns, numerous abstract nouns and adjectives were also
borrowed into the basic vocabulary. Loanwords integrated
into the Japanese language had passed through difficult
assimilation
processes:
orthographical,
phonetic,
grammatical changes etc.
The issue of loanwords increase and native words
substitution has always been a topic not only of semantic
but also of sociolinguistic research. The comprehensive
results on this topic are presented by Loveday (1996). In
this work, Loveday gives a historical overview starting with
the contact of Japanese with the Chinese language and
finishing by describing the role, types and functioning of
English loans in Japanese mass media, etc.
According to Loveday (1996), GAIRAIGO words
comprise about 10 per cent of the Modern Japanese lexicon.
Although, the ratio of GAIRAIGO depends on the sphere of
usage. GAIRAIGO are rarely used in official documents,
political, religious, law lexicon. On the other hand, the
percentage of English loanwords is higher in daily routine,
fashion, mass media language: GAIRAIGO words “are
particularly high in the areas of fashion, cosmetics, food,
audio technology, sport, housing, music, art, business
management, and engineering.” (Loveday, 1996).
Loveday (1996) considers that the occurrence of the
synonymic WAGO-GAIRAIGO pairs is the result of the
“Westernization of Japanese culture”. Such pairs exist “in
semantic opposition where a word referring to a Western
phenomenon is English-based and ‘complementary’ with a

1362

word deriving from (Sino-) Japanese and referring to a
related version of the phenomenon belonging to native
culture".
Therefore, Loveday (1996) has hypothesized Foreign vs.
Native Dichotomy: GAIRAIGO is “a word referring to a
Western phenomenon”, while WAGO/KANGO is “referring
to a related version of the phenomenon belonging to native
culture."
Thus, Modern Japanese has a clear-cut opposition
between WAGO/KANGO and GAIRAIGO near synonyms
for concrete nouns, i.e., GAIRAIGO concrete nouns are
used to name foreign-originated phenomena, while (Sino-)
Japanese words are used to name native-originated
phenomena. Loveday provides the following examples:
tō/shōji (= sliding door) – doa (‘door’); futon (= quilted
bedding) – beddo (‘bed’), etc.
On the other hand, Loveday’s study does not consider any
abstract nouns and adjective-derived (adjectivals)
loanwords. However, GAIRAIGO abstract nouns and
adjectivals are also of extreme importance.
One of the central places among the adjectivals is
occupied by the color terms. Japanese color nomenclature is
not a new object for studying. There was some research on
loan color terms in Modern Japanese as well.
Stanlaw (1997) stated that “the Japanese colour lexicon
actually consists of two sets of mutually exclusive terms,
one of native origin, the other borrowed from English”. His
research demonstrates that some of Japanese native color
terms (such as MOMO-IRO (pink), DAIDAI-IRO (orange))
are replaced by English loanwords (PINKU and ORENJI
respectively). He also suggested that the replacement took
place “in reverse order to the Berlin and Kay evolutionary
sequence”1 (Stanlaw, 1997).
The major finding by Stanlaw is that in Modern Japanese
some of the loan color terms are more salient in the minds
of the Japanese than native color terms, where the
substitution of native color terms for loanwords develops in
a certain order.
The shortcoming of Stanlaw’s study is that neither the
semantic and stylistic differences between native and loan
words nor constraints on color terms usage are discussed.
The layer of loan color terms in modern Japanese has
been poorly investigated. At present the correct application
of loan color terms for non-native speakers, who do not
posses any implicit rules or so-called native speakers’
linguistic sense of intuition, is a difficult task.
Considering the importance of color terms and absence of
any explicit roles of application, we focus our study on
illuminating the regularities which can provide a hint for
such explicit rules.

Extended Hypothesis
Loveday’s hypothesis is easily applicable to concrete
nouns. However, Loveday’s research does not cover the
1
Berlin and Kay (1991) speculate that as languages evolve, they
develop new basic color terms in a strict chronological sequence.

differences between GAIRAIGO derived from adjectives
describing existing cultural phenomena and their
WAGO/KANGO counterparts. For example, a phenomenon
of ‘white’ color has already existed before borrowing
GAIRAIGO adjectival HOWAITO, which is used to
address the same color. The same is true for phenomena
other than basic color terms. For instance, YANGU and
WAKAI, which both refer to ‘young’ attribute.
In present study we focus on the descriptive role of
adjectivals, therefore we consider the collocation of nouns
and adjectivals in attributive positions. Consequently, in our
study we focus not on the single words (nouns), but on
collocations: pairs of nouns and adjectivals.
Our hypothesis is the extension of Loveday’s Foreign vs.
Native Dichotomy for collocations of nouns and adjectives/
adjectivals. We assume that GAIRAIGO adjectivals are
used for the description of foreign-originated phenomena
and, thus, are more likely to collocate with GAIRAIGO
nouns in attributive position. Similarly, WAGO/KANGO
adjectives are used to describe the native-originated
phenomena, that is, we expect WAGO/KANGO adjectives
to be more inclined to collocate with WAGO/KANGO
nouns rather than with GAIRAIGO nouns.
We call this hypothesis to be Extended Hypothesis of
Foreign vs. Native Dichotomy (EHFND).
The important difference between Loveday’s original
hypothesis and our extended hypothesis is that the former
one refers to the difference in usage of single words
(concrete nouns), while the later one considers collocations.
Therefore, our extended hypothesis deals with a more
general linguistic level of collocation.
Thus, the problem is to differentiate the usage of
collocations between GAIRAIGO and WAGO/KANGO
near synonyms in Modern Japanese. To our knowledge, this
matter has not been previously addressed.

Methodology
Objectives
Our primary objective is to test Extended hypothesis for
the color terms in Modern Japanese. The secondary
objective is to examine the matter of substitution of native
color terms for the GAIRAIGO ones.

Materials: Corpus-based analysis
The objective of the given research is to define the
tendency of collocation of English adjectives borrowed and
assimilated to Modern Japanese.
The number of WAGO/KANGO vs. GAIRAIGO near
synonymic pairs is considerably numerous. Since we are
interested in the presence of correlation between attributes
and words they modify the object of research is GAIRAIGO
adjectivals derived from English adjectives and Japanese
words corresponding to them, we focus on basic color
terms. For the purpose of the present study, we have
selected eight loan basic color terms, which are frequently
used in attributive position: HOWAITO, BURAKKU,

1363

REDDO, IERO:, BURAUN, PA:PURU, PINKU,
GURE:/GUREI. They correspond to (Sino-) Japanese color
terms SHIROI (white), KUROI (black), AKAI (red), KIIRO
(yellow), CHAIRO (brown), MURASAKIIRO (purple),
MOMOIRO (pink), HAIIRO (grey), respectively.
The reasons for choosing these color terms are
- all of the abovementioned GAIRAIGO color terms
have long-term assimilation to the Japanese language
(since Meiji period, more than 100 years);
- these GAIRAIGO color terms have a clear-cut
correspondence to WAGO/KANGO near synonyms,
that is why GURI:N (green) and BURU: (blue) were
excluded from the study as their correspondence to
native color terms (AOI and MIDORIIRO) is
ambiguous;
- selected loanwords belong to one semantic category
‘basic color terms’, that is why they give a wider
outlook of the Modern Japanese vocabulary.

Method
The corpus-based analysis of GAIRAIGO collocation
patterns is the main method of the analysis in the present
study. The corpus used for data collection is KOTONOHA
corpus (Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written
Japanese) available on-line2. This corpus was selected
because it is considered to be a well-balanced corpus of
Modern Japanese, including not only printed sources (such
as newspapers, magazines and literature), but also web
resources (such as Yahoo blogs and Yahoo answers).
KOTONOHA corpus was searched to compare the
frequencies for four following collocation patterns: 1)
attributive GAIRAIGO + NO + GAIRAIGO noun; 2)
attributive GAIRAIGO + NO + WAGO/KANGO noun; 3)
attributive WAGO/KANGO + (NO)3 + GAIRAIGO noun;
and 4) attributive WAGO/KANGO + (NO) +
WAGO/KANGO noun.
The cases when selected GAIRAIGO were referring to a
person’s name (like HOWAITO NO IKEN - ‘the opinion of
Mr. White’), where eliminated from the search results. The
idiomatic expressions like ‘blue blood’, ‘White House’,
‘black funds’, etc. have been excluded from the study as
well.

Results and Data Analysis
Collocation Frequency Data. The collocation frequency
data for each color term are presented in Tables 1 through 8.
The main means for statistic analysis are Chi-square test of
independence of categorical data and Binomial test.
However, if the conditions of Chi-square application were
violated, Fisher’s exact test was used instead.

2
KOTONOHA Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written
Japanese http://www.kotonoha.gr.jp/shonagon/
3
Some of the WAGO/KANGO in attributive position do not
require NO-case marker

HOWAITO vs. SHIROI pair. The results on
HOWAITO and SHIROI collocations are presented in Table
1.
Table 1: HOWAITO vs. SHIROI collocation.

Howaito
Shiroi
Total

Gairaigo
nouns (%)
23 (77%)
47 (30%)
70

Wago/kango
nouns (%)
7 (23%)
109 (70%)
116

Total
30 (100%)
156 (100%)
186

The Chi-square test of independence of categorical data
has been applied to the data in Table 1. The Chi-square test
revealed statistically significant dependence between origin
of adjective/adjectival and origin of noun (χ2(1, 186) =
23.218, p < 0.001). On the other hand, the Binomial test for
pairs (HOWAITO + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (HOWAITO +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals significant difference in
frequencies (p<0.05). The Binomial test for pairs (SHIROI
+ GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (SHIROI + WAGO/KANGO
nouns) also reveals significant difference in frequencies
(p<0.001). Therefore, for HOWAITO and SHIROI, there is
obvious preference of WAGO/KANGO nouns vs.
GAIRAIGO.
The Binomial test reveals significant difference (p<0.001)
in frequencies of HOWAITO vs. SHIROI appearance – 30
vs. 156 hits, respectively. Therefore, SHIROI is used more
often.
BURAKKU vs. KUROI pair. The results for
BURAKKU and KUROI collocations are presented in Table
2.
Table 2: BURAKKU vs. KUROI collocations.

Burakku
Kuroi
Total

Gairaigo
nouns (%)
14 (70%)
87 (23%)
101

Wago/kango
nouns (%)
6 (30%)
295 (77%)
301

Total
20 (100%)
382 (100%)
402

The Chi-square test of independence of categorical data
has been applied to the data in Table 2. The Chi-square test
revealed statistically significant dependence between origin
of adjective/adjectival and origin of noun (χ2(1, 402) =
22.531, p < 0.001). On the other hand, the Binomial test for
pair (BURAKKU + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (BURAKKU +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals no significant difference
in frequencies (p=0.115>0.05). However, the Binomial test
for pair (KUROI + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (KUROI +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals significant difference in
frequencies (p<0.001). Therefore, for KUROI there is
obvious preference of WAGO/KANGO nouns vs.
GAIRAIGO. Although the same tendency is developing for
the BURAKKU, there is no statistical evidence to support
our hypothesis.

1364

The Binomial test reveals significant difference (p<0.001)
in frequencies of BURAKKU vs. KUROI appearance – 20
vs. 382 hits, respectively. Therefore, KUROI is used more
often.
REDDO vs. AKAI pair. The results for REDDO and
AKAI collocations are presented in Table 3.

IERO:, there is no statistical evidence to support our
hypothesis. The Binomial test reveals significant difference
(p<0.001) in frequencies of IERO: vs. KIIRO appearance –
24 vs. 430 hits, respectively. Therefore, KIIRO is used more
often.
BURAUN vs. CHAIRO pair. The results for BURAUN
and CHAIRO collocations are presented in Table 5.

Table 3: REDDO vs. AKAI collocations.
Table 5: BURAUN vs. CHAIRO collocations.

Reddo
Akai
Total

Gairaigo
nouns (%)
2 (50%)
87 (26%)
89

Wago/kango
nouns (%)
2 (50%)
247 (74%)
249

Total
4 (100%)
334 (100%)
338

Buraun
Chairo
Total

The Chi-square test of independence of categorical data is
not applicable for the data from Table 3, since for two cells
the expected count (2) less than 5. Therefore, Fisher’s exact
test has been applied. This test has reveals no significant
dependencies (p=0.284>0.05).
In this case, the sample size for pairs including REDDO is
only 4 occurrences. Therefore, due to small sample size the
proper analysis of pairs (REDDO+GAIRAIGO nouns) vs.
(REDDO+WAGO nouns) cannot be conducted. On the
other hand, we have tested the frequencies of pairs
(AKAI+GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (AKAI+WAGO nouns).
The Binomial test reveals statistically significantly
difference (p < 0.001). This result illustrates a bias towards
preference of WAGO nouns to be used with AKAI.
The Binomial test reveals significant difference (p<0.001)
in frequencies of REDDO vs. AKAI appearance – 4 vs. 334
hits, respectively. Therefore, AKAI is used more often.
IERO: vs. KIIRO pair. Next, we consider IERO: and
KIIRO collocation data. The results are presented in Table
4.
Table 4: IERO: vs. KIIRO collocations.

Iero:
Kiiro
Total

Gairaigo
nouns (%)
16 (67%)
136 (32%)
152

Wago/kango
nouns (%)
8 (33%)
294 (68%)
302

Gairaigo
nouns (%)
26 (65%)
110 (28%)
136

Wago/kango
nouns (%)
14 (35%)
289 (72%)
303

Total
40 (100%)
399 (100%)
439

The Chi-square test of independence of categorical data
has been applied to the data in Table 5. The Chi-square test
revealed statistically significant dependence between origin
of adjective/adjectival and origin of noun (χ2(1, 439) =
23.822, p < 0.001). On the other hand, the Binomial test for
pair (BURAUN + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (BURAUN +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals no significant difference
in frequencies (p=0.081>0.05). However, the Binomial test
for pair (CHAIRO + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (CHAIRO +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals significant difference in
frequencies (p<0.001). Therefore, for CHAIRO there is
obvious preference of WAGO/KANGO nouns vs.
GAIRAIGO. Although the same tendency is developing for
BURAUN, there is no statistical evidence to support our
hypothesis.
The Binomial test reveals significant difference (p<0.001)
in frequencies of BURAUN vs. CHAIRO appearance – 40
vs. 399 hits, respectively. Therefore, CHAIRO is used more
often.
PA:PURU vs. MURASAKIIRO pair. Table 6 presents
the results for PA:PURU and MURASAKIIRO
collocations.

Total
Table 6: PA:PURU vs. MURASAKIIRO collocations.
24 (100%)
430 (100%)
454

The Chi-square test of independence of categorical data
has been applied to the data in Table 4. The Chi-square test
revealed statistically significant dependence between origin
of adjective/adjectival and origin of noun (χ2(1, 454) =
12.531, p < 0.001). On the other hand, the Binomial test for
pair (IERO: + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (IERO: +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals no significant difference in
frequencies (p=0.152>0.05). However, the Binomial test
for pair (KIIRO + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (KIIRO +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals significant difference in
frequencies (p<0.001). Therefore, for KIIRO there is
obvious preference of WAGO/KANGO nouns vs.
GAIRAIGO. Although the same tendency is developing for

Pa:puru
Murasakiiro
Total

Gairaigo
nouns (%)
12 (71%)
50 (24%)
62

Wago/kango
nouns (%)
5 (29%)
161 (74%)
166

Total
17 (100%)
211 (100%)
228

The Chi-square test of independence of categorical data is
not applicable for the data from Table 6, since for one cell
the expected count equals 5. Therefore, Fisher’s exact test
has been applied. This test has revealed significant
dependencies (p<0.001).
On the other hand, the Binomial test for pair (PA:PURU +
GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (PA:PURU + WAGO/KANGO
nouns) reveals no significant difference in frequencies
(p=0.143>0.05). However, the Binomial test for pair
(MURASAKIIRO
+
GAIRAIGO
nouns)
vs.

1365

(MURASAKIIRO + WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals
significant difference in frequencies (p<0.001). Therefore,
for MURASAKIIRO there is obvious preference of
WAGO/KANGO nouns vs. GAIRAIGO. Although the same
tendency is developing for PA:PURU, there is no statistical
evidence to support our hypothesis.
The Binomial test reveals significant difference (p<0.001)
in frequencies of PA:PURU vs. MURASAKIIRO
appearance – 17 vs. 211 hits, respectively. Therefore,
MURASAKIIRO is used more often.
GURE:/GUREI vs. HAIIRO pair. The search results for
GURE:/GUREI and HAIIRO collocations are presented in
Table 7.
Table 7: GURE:/GUREI vs. HAIIRO collocations.

Gure:/Gurei
Haiiro
Total

Gairaigo
nouns (%)
207 (60%)
66 (23%)
273

Wago/kango
nouns (%)
136 (40%)
225 (74%)
361

Total
343 (100%)
291 (100%)
634

The Chi-square test of independence of categorical data
has been applied to the data in Table 7. The Chi-square test
revealed statistically significant dependence between origin
of adjective/adjectival and origin of noun (χ2(1, 634) =
91.114, p < 0.001). On the other hand, the Binomial test for
pairs (GURE:/GUREI + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (GURE:
/GUREI + WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals significant
difference in frequencies (p<0.001). The Binomial test for
pairs (HAIIRO + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (HAIIRO +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) also reveals significant difference
in
frequencies
(p<0.001).
Therefore,
for
both
GURE:/GUREI and HAIIRO, there is obvious preference of
WAGO/KANGO nouns vs. GAIRAIGO.
The Binomial test reveals significant difference
(p=0.043<0.05) in frequencies of GURE:/GUREI vs.
HAIIRO appearance – 343 vs. 291 hits, respectively.
Therefore, GURE:/GUREI is used more often.
PINKU vs. MOMOIRO pair. Finally, the results for
PINKU and MOMOIRO collocations are presented in Table
8.
Table 8: PINKU vs. MOMOIRO collocations.

Pinku
Momoiro
Total

Gairaigo
nouns (%)
232 (58%)
15 (35%)
247

Wago/kango
nouns (%)
169 (42%)
28 (65%)
197

Total
401 (100%)
43 (100%)
444

The Chi-square test of independence of categorical data
has been applied to the data in Table 8. The Chi-square test
revealed statistically significant dependence between origin
of adjective/adjectival and origin of noun (χ2(1, 444) =
8.303, p < 0.001). On the other hand, the Binomial test for
pairs (PINKU + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (PINKU +

WAGO/KANGO nouns) reveals significant difference in
frequencies (p<0.001).
The Binomial test for pairs
(MOMOIRO + GAIRAIGO nouns) vs. (MOMOIRO +
WAGO/KANGO nouns) also reveals significant difference
in frequencies (p<0.001). Therefore, for PINKU and
MOMOIRO,
there
is
obvious
preference
of
WAGO/KANGO nouns vs. GAIRAIGO.
The Binomial test reveals significant difference (p<0.001)
in frequencies of PINKU vs. MOMOIRO appearance – 401
vs. 43 hits, respectively. Therefore, PINKU is used more
often.

Discussion and Conclusion
In present study we have introduced a new approach to
differentiation between (Sino-)Japanese and English-origin
near synonyms. In contrast to the previous studies, which
were based on questionnaires, our approach stems from
statistical analysis of corpus data.
We have shown that there is an obvious bias in the
structure of collocations: nouns and adjectives/adjectivals of
the same origin (WAGO/KANGO or GAIRAIGO) tend to
appear together more often than nouns and
adjectives/adjectivals of different origins. In all eight cases
considered, we have found statistical evidence for such bias
to exist for WAGO/KANGO adjectives. For GAIRAIGO
adjectivals, in the case of HOWAITO, GURE:/GUREI and
PINKU it was also possible to support this assumption with
statistical evidence. In the case of REDDO, the sample size
was too small. In five remaining cases, there was no
statistical evidence, but the same tendency of preferring
GAIRAIGO nouns against WAGO/KANGO nouns by
GAIRAIGO adjectivals can be observed.
In general, for seven pairs out of eight, except for
REDDO vs. AKAI, we have found statistical evidence for
dependencies in categorical data.
Summarizing, we consider that this volume of evidence is
enough to support our Extended hypothesis, derived from
original Loveday’s Foreign vs. Native Dichotomy
(Loveday, 1996). On the other hand, our hypothesis refers to
the
structure
consisting
of
two
words,
i.e.
adjectives/adjectivals plus nouns, while Loveday (Loveday,
1996) has investigated only concrete GAIRAIGO and
WAGO/KANGO nouns referring either to foreign or native
objects, respectively.
Therefore, we illustrated an existence of Foreign vs.
Native Dichotomy at the level of collocations.
We have also compared frequencies of the appearance of
color terms. Our results show that among the selected pairs
of color terms, there are both cases when native color terms
prevail the borrowed ones and vice versa (GURE:/GUREI
and PINKU).
The results for GURE:/GUREI and PINKU are in
coherence with the Stanlaw’s assumption of the replacement
of native words with borrowed ones (Stanlaw, 1997).
According to Berlin and Kay (1991), the color terms appear
in language in the hierarchical order starting from more
general terms covering white, black, red color categories

1366

and ending with more specific color categories like pink,
orange, grey and purple. Stanlaw (1997) suggests that the
replacement of native color terms starts from the end of the
Berlin and Kay’s hierarchy (Berlin and Kay, 1991). That is
colors like GURE:/GUREI and PINKU should be
substituted earlier than other color terms. The results of our
statistical analysis indicate that GURE:/GUREI and PINKU
are used more often than corresponding native color terms.
This finding does not provide exhaustive evidence for
replacement dynamics, but we consider that the more
frequent usage of one color term (loanword) against another
one (native color term) can be regarded as the indication of
ongoing process of substitution in accordance with the
results of Stanlaw’s study (Stanlaw, 1997).
The corpus-based method employed for the data
collection is different from Loveday’s approach (Loveday,
1996). We consider that this method offers a more
profound quantitative analysis of the gathered data. To our
knowledge, such approach to the analysis of loanword
collocations has not yet been implemented elsewhere.
On the other hand, the results of the present research are
in coherence with both Loveday’s (Loveday, 1996) and
Stanlaw’s approaches (Stanlaw, 1997).
Therefore our method exhibits successful application for
two different tasks, thus our method symbiotically
amalgamates abilities and power of inference of the
previously considered research approaches.
Many native speakers cannot explain a particular rule to
use either of near synonyms. According to Dienes and Berry
(1997), implicit learning means that information is acquired
without intension and the resulting knowledge is difficult to
express. Therefore, native-like linguistic sense of usage of
near synonyms can be considered as an implicit knowledge
possessed by native speakers. On the other hand, our
statistical data uncovers essential regularities in usage of
near synonyms. We assume these regularities to be a part of
implicit language knowledge. Thus, the approach for
analysis of near synonyms has a potential to connect the
pure linguistic study of collocation with field of implicit
learning and knowledge. Therefore, we consider that the
results of our study can be used as a starting point for
constructing the explicit rules to articulate the native-like
linguistic sense (implicit knowledge).
For the purpose of our study, only the group of basic color
terms has been employed. We have provided evidence that
Extended Hypothesis of Foreign vs. Native Dichotomy is
likely to be true for such data. However, to prove that this
tendency is general among GAIRAIGO more data on
various loanwords needs to be analyzed. On the other hand,
corpus data represents only a part of the whole scope of
Modern Japanese.
To improve the quality of analysis it is important to
integrate native speakers’ introspection-based analysis.
Thus, two main directions for further research are increasing
data set and extending methods of analysis.

References
Berlin, B. and Kay, P. (1991). Basic Color Terms: Their
universality and evolution. Berkley & Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
Daulton, F.E. (2008). Japan's built-in lexicon of Englishbased loanwords. Clevendon: Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Dienes, Z., & Berry, D. (1997). Implicit learning: Below the
subjective threshold. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4,
3-23.
Hardin, C.L., & Maffi, L. (1997). Color categories in
thought and language. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Irwin, M. (2011). Loanwords in Japanese. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Katakanago Jiten Consaizu daisanhan. 2005. The Concise
Dictionary of Katakana Words, Third edition. Sanshoudouhenshuujo.
Kobayashi, S. (1975). Nihonjin no kokoro to iro. (The Soul
of the Japanese and Colors). Kodansha. (in Japanese)
Loveday, L.J. (1986). Explorations in Japanese
Sociolinguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Loveday, L.J. (1996). Language contact in Japan: a
sociolinguistic history. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Nagata, Ya. (2002). Iro no techo. Iromihon to bunkenrei de
tsudzuru shikimei gaido. (Color notebook. The Guide of
Color Terms Illustrated with Color samples and Literature
Examples). Shogakkan. (in Japanese)
Rossotti, H. (1983). Colour. Why the world isn’t grey.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sato, Ch. (2008). Shikisai gaidobukku. (Color Guidebook).
Nagaokashoten. (in Japanese)
Stanlaw, J. (1997). Two observations on culture contact and
the Japanese color nomenclature system. In C.L. Hardin
& L. Maffi (Eds.), Color categories in thought and
language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stanlaw, J. (2004). Japanese English: Language and culture
contact. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.

1367

