UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Actor-Observer Asymmetries in Judgments of Intentional Actions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/61z3d5h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Wellen, Sarah
Danks, David

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Actor-Observer Asymmetries in Judgments of Intentional Actions
Sarah Wellen (swellen@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 135 Baker Hall, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

David Danks (ddanks@cmu.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 135 Baker Hall, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA; and
Institute for Human & Machine Cognition, 40 S. Alcaniz St.
Pensacola, FL 32502

Abstract

suggest that the Side-Effect effect is an instance of a much
more general pattern of actor-observer biases, rather than a
distinct phenomenon in its own right.

Much recent empirical research has explored the influence
of moral evaluations on judgments about the intentionality
of foreseeable side-effects of actions. Research on this
‘Side-Effect effect’ (also called the ‘Knobe effect’) has
relied almost exclusively on vignette-based surveys, which
have serious limitations when used in isolation. We present
a novel behavioral methodology that tests the Side-Effect
effect in two previously unexamined contexts: (i)
judgments of real (rather than hypothetical) actions, and (ii)
judgments about one’s own actions. The results suggest that
judgments about one’s own actions tend to show a reverse
Side-Effect effect: actors judge that (real) positive sideeffects of their own actions are intentional whereas negative
ones are not. The use of non-hypothetical situations also
appears to attenuate the standard Side-Effect effect, which
raises interesting challenges for standard theoretical
accounts. These results provide preliminary evidence that
the Side-Effect effect is driven by the same mechanisms
underlying other asymmetries in causal attribution.

The Side-Effect Effect

Keywords: Intentional action; Social cognition; Moral
psychology; Actor-observer bias; Side-effect effect; Knobe
effect; Vignettes

Introduction
Notions of ‘intentionality’ and ‘causation’ are crucial in the
way we understand our own and others’ mental lives, as
well as a range of social interactions (e.g. Gergely, Nadasdy,
Csibra, & Biro, 1994; Gopnik, et al., 2004; Leslie & Keeble,
1987; Sloman, 2005; Woodward, Sommerville, & Guajardo,
2001). There has recently been a surge in research on folk
understandings of these notions, much of it by experimental
philosophers (e.g. Adams & Steadman, 2004a, 2004b;
Knobe, 2003, 2004, 2006; Machery, 2008; Nadelhoffer,
2006; Nado, 2008; Uttich & Lombrozo, 2010). This
research has revealed that folk judgments often display
some surprising patterns. Perhaps the canonical example is
the so-called ‘Side-Effect effect’ (also called the ‘Knobe
effect’): experimental participants judge that a foreseeable
side-effect of an action is more intentional when the sideeffect is morally bad than when it is morally good. This
paper develops a novel experimental method to investigate
the Side-Effect effect that avoids some of the limitations of
previous methods. Moreover, we report findings that

Consider a company chairman who acts to maximize profit,
even though that action has the (foreseeable) side-effect of
harming the environment. Suppose also that the chairman
does not care about the environment; the occurrence of this
side-effect is irrelevant (in any way) to his decision. Knobe
(2003) found that 85% of participants judged that the
chairman had nonetheless intentionally harmed the
environment. When the program had the side-effect of
helping the environment, though, only 23% of participants
judged that the chairman had intentionally helped the
environment (Knobe, 2003). In both vignettes, the
chairman’s explicit goals (i.e., his explicit intentions) and
actions remain the same, yet people’s judgments about
whether he intentionally brought about the side-effect
change significantly depending on the valence of the sideeffect. This influence of outcome valence was present crossculturally (Knobe & Burra, 2006), in four-year-old children
(Leslie, Knobe, & Cohen, 2006), and for a range of mental
state ascriptions besides simply intentionality (Pettit &
Knobe, 2009). While there is general agreement that the
intentions of the actor should influence our moral
evaluations, it is less clear why the converse should hold.
Moral concerns seemingly ought not to have a pervasive
impact on what appear to be straightforward judgments
about an actor’s mental states (though see Bratman, 1987
and Uttich & Lombrozo, 2010, for defenses of this
influence).
Two different types of theories have been offered to
explain the Side-Effect effect. Side-effect-centered theories
hold that the different responses arise because of properties
of the side-effect: some feature of negative or positive sideeffects leads the actions to be judged as intentional or
unintentional (respectively), or both. For instance, perhaps
negative side-effects are always thought to be brought about
intentionally (Knobe, 2004, 2006; but see also Pettit &
Knobe, 2009, for an updated view), or negative cases
require the actor to judge trade-offs (Machery, 2008).
Alternately, the fact that an action violates the generalized

2523

norm against bringing about negative outcomes might
(rationally) be informative about the actor’s mental state,
since norm-violation typically requires additional reasons or
intentional action (Uttich & Lombrozo, 2010).
In contrast, process-centered theories hold that our
judgments would be symmetric in the two conditions,
except that one of the situation-types (or both) elicits a
mental process that alters or biases our judgment away from
our typically symmetric intuitions. Various influencing
processes have been suggested: a negative emotional
reaction to the chairman (Nadelhoffer, 2006); a desire to
blame based on conversational pragmatics of intentional
language (Adams & Steadman, 2004a, 2004b); an
asymmetric responsibility judgment (Wright & Bengson,
2009); or a distinct “moral mechanism” (Nado, 2008).
The Side-Effect effect has been studied almost
exclusively using vignette-based surveys, which arguably
have serious limitations when used in isolation. Vignettes
focus on hypothetical situations in which many important
(in the real world) properties and conditions are left
unspecified. Exactly what information is included in (or
omitted from) a vignette has been shown to have a
substantial effect on people’s judgments (Gugliermo &
Malle, 2010; Mele & Cushman, 2007; Phelan & Sarkissian,
2008). Moreover, vignettes describe hypothetical situations,
and previous research has found that judgments can differ
substantially when provided in response to real rather than
hypothetical situations. For instance, experimental
participants reveal different utility functions when they are
given real and hypothetical scenarios (List & Gallet, 2001;
Murphy, Allen, Stevens, & Weatherhead, 2005; Neill,
Cummings, Ganderton, Harrison, & McGuckin, 1994).
Vignettes also require (almost always) that the experimental
participant be an observer, not the actor. Thus, it is an open
question whether the Side-effect effect occurs when an
individual judges the intentionality of the side-effects of her
own actions.

Actor-Observer Asymmetries
Actor-observer asymmetries have been found in a wide
range of domains. For instance, actors and observers largely
attend to different aspects of a social interaction (Malle &
Pearce, 2001). Actors are willing to engage in risker
behaviors than observers will condone (Fernandez-Duque &
Wifall, 2007) and we appear to hold ourselves to different
moral standards than we hold others to (Nadelhoffer &
Feltz, 2008). One classic asymmetry is the Actor-Observer
hypothesis in causal attribution (Jones & Nisbett, 1971): we
tend to emphasize internal dispositional factors (e.g.,
attitudes, personality traits) as the causes of other people’s
actions, and aspects of the external situation (e.g., social
constraints, situational factors) as the causes of our own
actions. Recent research suggests the classic formulation is
an oversimplification; instead of a simple internal/external
distinction, actors tend to emphasize their reasons for acting
(the beliefs, desires, and values that contributed to their
decision to act), whereas observers tend to cite the causal

history of these reasons, including the attitudes, personality
traits, and upbringing of the actor (Knobe & Malle, 2002).
A recent meta-analysis found little evidence for a general
Actor-Observer asymmetry, but did find evidence for one
that was mediated by the valence of the action (Malle,
2006). Observers tend to use more internal explanations
than actors when explaining a negative action, but fewer
internal explanations when explaining a positive action:
Table 1: Influences on causal attribution (adapted from
Malle, 2006)

Overall
Real Situations
Hypothetical Situations

Negative
Valence
diffA < diffO 1
diffA < diffO
diffA < diffO

Positive
Valence
diffA > diffO
diffA > diffO
diffA ≈ diffO

Malle (2006) found that the valence-modified actorobserver bias was magnified when participants explained
real events (middle row of Table 1). For hypothetical events,
however, there was no difference between actors’ and
observers’ explanations of positive actions. This suggests
that, at least when explaining our own actions, it makes a
difference whether the action is real or hypothetical.
This paper presents a novel experimental method in which
participants judged real actions from either an actor or an
observer role. We used a 3 × 3 design that varies role
{Actor, Observer, Motivated Observer} between-participant
and side-effect valence {Neutral, Positive, Negative}
within-participant. Side-effect-centered theories largely
predict that the actor-observer manipulation should make no
difference, since actors and observers should share the same
conceptual asymmetries. The exception is the “Rational
Scientist” view of Uttich & Lombrozo (2010), which
arguably predicts that there should be no Side-Effect effect
in the actor condition, regardless of outcome, since one
presumably already knows one’s own mental state. Most
process-centered theories do not make a determinate
prediction, since they leave unspecified whether and how
the process that causes the asymmetry applies to judgments
of one’s own actions. Finally, if participants exhibit the
asymmetric pattern of judgments characteristic of the
valence-modified Actor-Observer hypothesis, then it is
likely that the Side-Effect effect is due to the same
mechanisms driving asymmetries in causal attributions.

Experiment
Participants
46 participants from the McGill, Concordia, and Carnegie
Mellon University communities were divided into the Actor
1

‘diffA’ and ‘diffO’ refer to the difference between the number
of internal and external reasons given by actors and observers,
respectively, in the different conditions.

2524

(N = 16), Observer (N = 15), and Motivated Observer (N =
15) conditions. Participants were mostly undergraduates; all
were fluent in English and without cognitive deficits.

Method
The experiment involved a computer game in which the
participants (in the Actor condition) generated their own
actions, discovered the consequences of these actions, and
judged whether they had brought about those consequences
intentionally. The game involved a computer interface
where each movement of a joystick (up, down, left, or right)
led to one or more colored balls being displayed on the
computer screen. One of these balls (the red one) was the
‘goal ball’ and each time the actors got this ball they were
rewarded with 10 tokens. Participants in the Actor and
Motivated Observer conditions were told that they would
redeem the tokens for money at the end of the experiment
(but were not provided with the ‘exchange rate’);
participants in the Observer condition were simply told that
collecting tokens was the goal of the game.
The experiment had four phases. In the Practice phase,
participants in every condition (Actor/Observer/Motivated
Observer) played the computer game. During this phase, a
joystick movement up deterministically produced a red ball
(and so 10 tokens), while movements in all other directions
produced a different color ball (and so no tokens). Each
action thus produced a single consequence. Participants
continued until they generated the red ball on six
consecutive trials. At this point, the connections were
shuffled (without notice) so that each movement produced a
different color ball than before, and participants continued
until they again generated the red ball six consecutive times
by discovering and then moving in the new rewarded
direction. The Practice phase continued until the movementball connections had been shuffled three times.
Actor Condition Participants in the Actor condition then
moved (without notice) to the Neutral phase. This phase
was identical to the practice phase, except that participants
now received two balls after each joystick move. A move in
the “rewarded” direction always produced both a red ball
and a white ball, and every other move resulted in a random
pair of unrewarded balls (white, yellow, blue, or green). The
white ball thus played the role of a foreseeable side-effect:
participants quickly learned that it always appeared with the
red ball, but were indifferent to its occurrence. The white
ball was introduced after the Practice phase to ensure that
participants were motivationally neutral towards it.
The rewarded direction was randomly selected at the start
of the Neutral phase. Once participants had made six
consecutive moves in that direction, the rewarded direction
would change and participants would have to rediscover it.
The Neutral phase ended when the participant discovered
the rewarded direction after the third change of ballmovement connections.
Participants then entered either the Negative or Positive
phase (order counterbalanced between participants). In these

phases, participants were informed that generating the white
ball now had consequences: a randomly chosen other
participant in the experiment (i.e., not the participant) would
either gain (Positive) or lose (Negative) three tokens for
each white ball that the participant generated (no others
were actually helped or harmed, however). As in the Neutral
phase, participants continued until there had been four
different rewarded positions. After completing one of these
phases, Actor participants were informed of the change in
the valence of the white ball, and then performed the other
phase.
Throughout all three non-practice phases (Neutral,
Positive, and Negative), the following two questions were
asked at regular intervals:
Action question: You moved [direction]. How
intentional was this?
Color question: You got a [color] ball. How
intentional was this?
The Action question was always presented directly after a
joystick move, and the Color question was presented after
the ball display screen. We are particularly interested in
responses about the white (side-effect) ball after participants
had already discovered the currently rewarded direction. In
this case, the participants presumably could foresee that they
would get the white ball, so the white ball is a foreseen sideeffect of their action. Answers were reported by clicking on
a (540-point) rating scale with left-middle-right anchor
points of “not at all intentional”, “somewhat intentional”,
and “completely intentional”.
Observer Condition In the Observer condition, participants
performed the practice phase, but then watched a video of
an actor playing the Neutral phase instead of playing it
themselves. Participants were told that the other individual
was receiving real money when she got red balls. The
actor’s hand, joystick, and computer screen were shown, but
not her face. Whenever the actor was asked an Action
question, participants observed her answer “completely
intentional.” But instead of observing the actor answer for
the Color question, the video paused and participants were
asked:
Color question (Observer): Julie got a [color] ball.
How intentional was this?
Participants were able to replay the video as much as
desired before providing an answer. After the Neutral phase,
participants observed the same actor in the Positive and
Negative phases. Participants were told the relevant valence
information, and the video order of the Positive and
Negative phases was counterbalanced between participants.
As a comprehension check, participants were also given a
follow-up questionnaire asking whether the actor was trying
to get the white ball in the Positive and Negative phases.
Motivated Observer Condition The Motivated Observer
condition was identical to the Observer condition, except
that participants were informed that they were the individual
who had been randomly selected as the ‘other participant’ to

2525

gain (Positive) or lose (Negative) three tokens whenever the
actor got the white ball. They were reminded that tokens
were redeemable for actual money.

condition, the positive side-effect was significantly (p<.05)
more likely to have been rated as intentional than the
negative one (75% vs. 38%). There was no corresponding
difference in the Observer (86% vs. 73%; p>0.5) or
Motivated Observer (73% vs. 86%; p>0.5) conditions.

Results
There were no order effects, so different orderings were
pooled for further analyses. Although the questions used a
540-point rating scale, responses largely concentrated
around the three labeled points, indicating that many
participants interpreted the scale as categorical. We thus
transformed the data into a five-point scale, where each
category corresponded to an equal-length segment of the
original line. This transformation captured the generally
categorical use of the line while preserving information
about those few participants who used between-label points
in their answers. Intentionality ratings for the goal (i.e., the
red ball) were all at ceiling. In contrast, mean intentionality
ratings for the foreseen side-effect (i.e., the white ball) are
shown in Figure 1 (error bars indicate confidence intervals).
In the Actor condition, a planned, one-way withinparticipants ANOVA revealed a significant effect of phase
valence (F(2, 42)=6.09, p<.05). Post hoc Tukey HSD
comparisons revealed that the Positive phase (M=3.18,
SD=1.34) led to significantly higher ratings than the Neutral
(M=2.10, SD=1.36) and Negative (M=2.09, SD=1.25)
phases, p<.05; the latter two were not significantly different.
Participants in the Actor condition thus rated the foreseen
side-effect as significantly more intentional when it had a
positive valence than a negative one, as found in standard
actor-observer biases in causal attribution. A planned, oneway within-participants ANOVA did not reveal a significant
effect of valence in the Observer (F(2, 42)=0.36, p=.69) or
Motivated Observer (F(2, 42)=0.48, p=.62) conditions. The
conditions were designed to also permit a statistical
comparison of ratings from different conditions. One-way
between-participants ANOVAs revealed significant effects
of participant role for the Neutral (F(2, 42)=9.33, p<.05) and
Negative (F(2, 42)=6.97, p<.05) phases, but not for the
Positive phase (F(2, 42)=1.3, p=.28). Actors had
significantly different ratings than both the Observers and
the Motivated Observers, except when the side-effect was
positive.
Since every participant experienced all three valence
phases, we can also analyze the rating patterns of each
individual. We define ‘POS’ participants to be those who
gave significantly higher intentionality ratings for the
Positive phase compared to the Negative phase. As
predicted by the valence-modified actor-observer
hypothesis, the frequency of POS participants was
significantly greater in the Actor condition (8/16
participants) than in the Observer condition (4/15
participants), X2(1, N=30)=.96, p<.05, or Motivated
Observer (2/15 participants) conditions, X2(1, N=30)=1.0,
p<.05. We can also approximate forced-choice probes
(common in Side-Effect effect experiments) by further
discretizing intentionality ratings into a binary variable
(“Side effect was intended” iff rating ≥ 3). For the Actor

5
Actor

4

Observer

3

Motivated
Observer

2
1
Neutral

Negative

Positive

Figure 1: Mean intentionality ratings for foreseen sideeffect (95% confidence intervals)

Discussion
When asked to judge their own actions, participants were
systematically more likely to judge those actions as
intentional when the foreseen side-effect was positive rather
than negative; that is, they exhibit something like a reverse
Side-Effect effect. This pattern of results closely mirrors the
valence-modified actor-observer hypothesis in causal
attribution, where actors are more likely to cite internal
dispositional factors as the causes of their positive actions
than their negative ones. This suggests that the mechanisms
driving the Side-Effect effect are plausibly the same ones
driving asymmetries in causal attribution, although the
nature of these mechanisms is still an open question.
Process-centered accounts focus primarily on the
motivations of the observers. While these accounts have not
made explicit predictions about the actor case, it is clear that
in moral scenarios actors and observers often have different
motivational pressures. Actors may have an incentive to
minimize their responsibility (blameworthiness) for negative
side-effects while overestimating their responsibility
(praiseworthiness) for positive ones. Observers do not have
these same concerns, and may even have incentives that
tend in the opposite direction. However, we found that
actors and observers differed in their intentionality
judgments even for neutral side-effects, a result that cannot
be explained by process-centered accounts. This difference
is instead plausibly explained in terms of the epistemic
differences between actors and observers. Actors have
greater access to their own intentions, and thus are more
aware that the side-effect (regardless of valence) was not
among their goals. The observers do not have direct access
to the mental states of the actor and thus they may rely more
heavily on the behavior of the actor and the norms of the
situation as a guide to her intentions.
This epistemic explanation fits nicely with the ‘Rational
Scientist’ view, wherein epistemic differences between

2526

norm-conforming and norm-violating cases drive the
asymmetries in observer judgments. However, these
epistemic considerations alone are unable to explain the
reverse side-effect for actors, because actors have (at least
perceived) direct access to their own mental states. It seems
likely, then, that a combination of epistemic and
motivational factors is necessary to explain the full range of
results. Further research should explore this possibility.
Interestingly, we did not find a significant difference
between judgments in the Positive and Negative phases in
the Observer condition, as has typically been found using
vignette studies. There are several possible reasons for this
null result. One explanation is that we used visually
presented situations involving real people rather than
hypothetical vignettes. The abstract nature of vignettes
potentially magnifies various distorting effects; for example,
participants are perhaps less likely to believe the
hypothetical chairman’s reported intentions and more likely
to be swayed by a moral evaluation of his actions. Another
(not mutually exclusive) possibility is that the side-effect in
the present experiment was not sufficiently negative or
positive from the perspective of the observers. This
explanation seems unlikely, however, since no significant
difference was found even in the Motivated Observer
condition where the side-effect directly affected the
participant. Similarly, Feltz, Harris, & Perez (2010) found
no significant Side-Effect effect for observer conditions
using realistic settings, suggesting that our finding is not
simply an artifact of our experimental design. Finally, an
explanation could be given from the perspective of the
‘Rational Scientist’ view: the norms of computer games in
psychological experiments differ from the norms of
corporations affecting the environment, and it might be that
the observers did not believe the actors in the experiment
were violating any norms. This explanation is in some
tension, however, with the fact that individuals were
observed to violate the generalized norm not to harm others.
The results we report do not provide a definitive
connection between the Side-Effect effect in vignette studies
and judgments in realistic settings. The vignette results may
plausibly generalize in cases where the side-effect valence is
strongly negative or positive, when bringing about the
negative side-effect involves violating a norm, or when
there is greater psychological distance between the
participant and the person whose actions are being judged
(e.g., when reading a news article or listening to a
description), although we currently have no evidence that
this is the case. It is clear, however, that the Side-Effect
effect should be situated within a more general class of
valence-mediated actor-observer biases, and that the
connections between these biases and folk psychological
judgments warrant further investigation.

Acknowledgments
Andrew Reisner, Lesley Fellows and Nathalie Camille
provided valuable advice and assistance. We also thank
Joshua Knobe, Thomas Nadelhoffer, and other participants

at the 2010 SPP Conference for helpful comments on an
earlier version of this paper. This research was partially
supported by the James S. McDonnell Foundation.

References
Adams, F., & Steadman, A. (2004a). Intentional action and
moral considerations: Still pragmatic. Analysis, 64(3),
268-276.
Adams, F., & Steadman, A. (2004b). Intentional action in
ordinary language: Core concept or pragmatic
understanding? Analysis, 64(2), 173-181.
Bratman, M. (1987). Intentions, plans, and practical reason.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fernandez-Duque, D., & Wifall, T. (2007). Actor/observer
asymmetry in risky decision making. Judgment and
Decision Making Journal, 2(1), 1-8.
Feltz, A., Harris, M., & Perez, A. (2010). Perspective in
intentional action attribution: Reversing the side-effect
effect. Manuscript Submitted for Publication.
Gergely, G., Nadasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Biro, S. (1995).
Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age.
Cognition, 56, 165-193.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E.,
Kushnir, T. & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal
learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes nets.
Psychological Review, 111, 3-32.
Gugliermo, S., & Malle, B. F. (in press). Can unintended
side-effects be intentional? Resolving a controversy over
intentionality and morality. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin. In Press.
Jones, E. E., & Nisbett, R. E. (1971). The actor and the
observer: Divergent perceptions of the causes of behavior.
In E. E. Jones, D. E. Kanouse, H. H. Kelly, R. E. Nisbett,
S. Valins & B. Weiner (Eds.), Attribution: Perceiving the
causes of behavior. Morristown, NJ: General Learning
Press.
Knobe, J. (2003). Intentional action and side effects in
ordinary language. Analysis, 63(3), 190-194.
Knobe, J. (2004). Intention, intentional action and moral
considerations. Analysis, 64(2), 181-187.
Knobe, J. (2006). The concept of intentional action: A case
study in the uses of folk psychology. Philosophical
Studies, 130(2), 203-231.
Knobe, J., & Burra, A. (2006). The folk concepts of
intention and intentional action: A cross-cultural study.
Journal of Cognition and Culture, 6(1-2), 113-132.
Knobe, J., & Malle, B. F. (2002). Self and other in the
explanation of behavior. Psychologica Belgica, 42, 113130.
Leslie, A. M., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old
infants perceive causality? Cognition, 25, 265-288.
Leslie, A. M., Knobe, J., & Cohen, A. (2006). Acting
intentionally and the side-effect effect: Theory of mind
and moral judgment. Psychological Science, 17(5), 421427.
List, J. A., & Gallet, C. A. (2001). What experimental
protocol influence disparities between actual and

2527

hypothetical stated values? Environmental & Resource
Economics, 20(3), 241-254.
Machery, E. (2008). The folk concept of intentional action:
Philosophical and experimental issues. Mind & Language,
23, 165-189.
Malle, B. F. (2006). The actor-observer asymmetry in
attribution: A (surprising) meta-analysis. Psychological
Bulletin, 132(6), 895-919.
Malle, B. F., & Pearce, G. E. (2001). Attention to behavioral
events during social interaction: Two actor-observer gaps
and three attempts to close them. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81, 278-294.
Mele, A. R., & Cushman, F. (2007) Intentional action, folk
judgments, and stories: Sorting things out. Midwest
Studies in Philosophy, 31, 184-201.
Murphy, J. J., Allen, P. G., Stevens, T. H., & Weatherhead,
D. (2005). A meta-analysis of hypothetical bias in stated
preference valuation. Environmental & Resource
Economics, 30(3), 313-325.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2006). Bad acts, blameworthy agents, and
intentional actions: Some problems for jury impartiality.
Philosophical Explorations, 9(2), 203-220.
Nadelhoffer, T., & Feltz, A. (2008). The actor-observer bias
and moral intuitions: Adding fuel to Sinnott-Armstrong’s
fire. Neuroethics, 1(2), 133-144.
Nado, J. (2008). Effects of moral cognition on judgments of
intentionality. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 59, 709-731.
Neill, H. R., Cummings, R. G., Ganderton, P. T., Harrison,
G. W., & McGuckin, T. (1994). Hypothetical surveys and
real economic commitments. Land Economics, 70(2),
145-154.
Pettit, D., & Knobe, J. (2009). The pervasive impact of
moral judgement. Mind & Language, 24(5), 586-604.
Phelan, M. T. & Sarkissian, H. (2008). The folk strike back;
Or, why you didn’t do it intentionally, though it was bad
and you knew it. Philosophical Studies, 138, 291-298.
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal models: How people think
about the world and its alternatives. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Uttich, K., & Lombrozo, T. (2010). Norms inform mental
state ascriptions: A rational explanation for the side-effect
effect. Cognition, 116, 87-100.
Woodward, A., Sommerville, J., Guajardo, J. (2001). How
infants make sense of intentional action. In B. F. Malle, L.
J. Moses, D. A. Baldwin (Eds.), Intentions and
Intentionality: Foundations of Social Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Wright, J., & Bengson, J. (2009). Asymmetries in
judgments of responsibility and intentional action. Mind
& Language, 24(1), 24-50.

2528

