UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adaptive Information Search and Decision Making over Single and Repeated Plays

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0n43b6rp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Wulff, Dirk U.
Hills, Thomas T.
Hertwig, Ralph

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adaptive Information Search and Decision Making over Single and
Repeated Plays
Dirk U. Wulff (Dirk.Wulff@unibas.ch)
Department of Psychology, Missionstrasse 64A
4055 Basel, Switzerland

Thomas T. Hills (T.T.Hills@warwick.co.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK

Ralph Hertwig (Ralph.Hertwig@unibas.ch)
Department of Psychology, Missionstrasse 64A
4055 Basel, Switzerland

Abstract
For over 50 years expected value and expected utility
theory has been challenged by behavioral findings in
repeated and single plays of risky gambles. The inherent
long-term nature of these models has been found to be at
odds with preferences indicating short-term maximization
in single play situations. With the present study we provide
further evidence on the distinction between long-term and
short-term oriented behavior. Evaluating experiencedbased decisions over repeated and single play situations we
demonstrate that both choice preferences and search
behavior change in response to long and short-term
framing. This suggests different cognitive approaches for
single and repeated play situations, with single decisions
often favoring risk-aversion and therefore the
underweighting of rare events. These findings are in line
with alternative models of risky choice as for example
proposed by Lopes (1996) and also the literature on statedependent foraging.
Keywords: Decisions from experience, information
sampling; risky choice, single-play and repeated-play.

Introduction
Over lunch nobel-laureate Paul Samuelson offered his
colleague the following bet: Win 200$ with a 50%
chance or lose 100$. To his surprise the colleague
rejected the offer but mentioned that he would agree to a
series of a hundred such bets. Samuelson (1963)
considered the choice of his colleague irrational. He later
showed how this pattern of choice is incompatible with
expected-utility maximization. A series of bets, which
individually are all inacceptable, should not be accepted.
But is the behavior of Samuelson’s colleague irrational?
The prevailing answer after 50 years of scientific
debate seems to be unanimously no. However, very
different theoretical explanations have been invoked. On
one hand, it has been demonstrated that the behavior of

Samuelson’s colleague can indeed be captured by models
of expected utility theory when the decision is made over
the aggregated outcome of repeated plays (Aloysius,
2007). On the other hand, “distinct process differences
between the situations” (Wedell, 2011) have been
emphasized. Particularly Lola Lopes argued in favor of a
two-stage decision process in which the qualitative
feature of “coming-out-ahead” plays an important role
(Lopes, 1996; Lopes & Oden, 1999). Formally Lopes
assumes next to decumulative weighting a second
process that maximizes the probability of achieving an
aspiration level.
Along the lines of Lola Lopes’ explanation, Hills and
Hertwig (2010) recently provided evidence for a decision
strategy that focuses on winning most of the time. Hills
and Hertwig used an alternative paradigm of risky choice
– decisions from experience – in which the information
about options is acquired in a prior inconsequential
sampling phase. They found that the choice behavior of
people who sampled less and evaluated options in shorter
intervals – were best described by a “round-wise”
decision strategy. Instead of aiming at the overall higher
mean of both options, this strategy compares the options
over all sampling transitions and tallies the wins.
Consequently, this strategy favors the option with a
higher probability of coming out ahead—i.e., the option
that wins most of the time. The results of Hills and
Hertwig (2010) indicate that distinct processes are indeed
at work when people aim for either long-run expected
value maximization or for short-run maximization that
focuses on coming-out ahead.
The distinction between such strategies is prevalent
also outside the field of human decision-making. For

1167

example, risk sensitivity and state-dependent foraging
explain why a bird that needs food regularly to avoid
starvation should concern itself with short-term outcomes
and not seek for the better long-term average, which may
not come in time (e.g., Caraco, 1980; Houston &
McNamara, 1999; Stephens, 1981). In the present study
we build on these ideas by examining information search
and decision making in single and repeated play
situations.

Behavioral Findings Under Repeated Plays
Behavioral studies have shown that in repeated-play
situations—where people get to play the same gamble
multiple times—people are more likely to act according
to the principles of expected utility maximization
(Wedell, 2011). Generally, under repeated plays, the
preference for the option with the higher expected value
is substantially increased (e.g. Montgomery & Adelbratt,
1982). In addition, repeated plays reduce a number of
well-known decision anomalies including possibility and
certainty effects (Keren & Wagenaar, 1987; Keren,
1991), violations of procedural invariance (Wedell &
Böckenholt, 1990) and ambiguity aversion (Liu &
Coleman, 2009).
The effect of repeated plays on choice preference has
also been established in applied settings. Redelmeier and
Tversky (1990, 1992) found that physicians make
differential decisions for individual versus aggregated
instances. Bernartzi and Thaler (1990) have also
demonstrated the relevance of the single repeated play
distinction for investment decisions.

Present Study
The goal of the present study is to evaluate the effect of
single and repeated plays in the context of decisions from
experience. By incorporating an active sampling phase
decisions from experience account for the lack of full
information about the available options in real life; a
quality that is neglected in the commonly used paradigm
of decisions from description. Based on the findings of
Hills and Hertwig (2010) we expect the contrast between
repeated and single play to impact pre-choice information
search in addition to preferences. Specifically we expect
people in single play as compared to repeated play
situations to draw fewer samples and have shorter
evaluation intervals for the available options. We also
expect a higher preference in single play situations for

options that have a higher probability of winning most of
the time irrespective of expected. For repeated plays we
expect the opposite pattern. Such findings would indicate
an overall differential cognitive approach to single and
repeated plays of the same gamble and speak in favor of
choice models such as Lola Lopes’ two-stage account.
Additionally, we are interested in the degree to which
the pattern of results is dependent on the certainty of the
available options. In much of the risky choice literature a
risky high outcome option is paired with an option that
offers a smaller but certain outcome. Thereby, the quality
of “coming-out-ahead” is often confounded with
certainty. However, given the prior assertions we would
expect the pattern of results to be largely independent
over cases where the secure option is certain (or only
relatively secure).
Finally, we want to evaluate how the standard
application of decisions from experience relates to
situations where the single and repeated-play character is
made salient. Decisions from experience have recently
received much attention as they depart from decisions
that are made based on full description of the options (see
Hertwig & Erev, 2009). In this context it will be very
telling to observe if the overall pattern of results in the
paradigm used most often in the literature (following
Hertwig et al., 2004) resembles more a single or repeated
play instantiation.

Method
Participants We collected data from 124 participants.
The mean age of the sample was about 24.2 years, 85%
were students of the University of Basel. Participants
were rewarded either by course credit or a fixed payment
of about 13$. Every participant also received a
performance-based bonus as a result of his or her choices.
Materials A set of 12 target problems was created (see
table 1). Each problem required a choice between two
gambles. Every gamble was comprised of two outcomes
– one positive outcome and zero. One gamble posed a
relatively secure (p>.7) or certain chance (p=1) to win a
positive outcome. The other gamble was substantially
more risky (p<=.15). This riskier option was always
superior in expected value (1.5 to 1.8 times as high). We
refer to these two options are referred to as the low (L)
and high (H) expected value options, respectively. For
control purposes, we included two problems where the
high outcome options had the lower expected value (C1,

1168

Table1: Study problems
Problem

H

L

1

92 with p=.05

3 with certainty

2

34 with p=.05

1 with certainty

3

120 with p=.05

5 with p=.70

4

44 with p=.05

2 with p=.70

5

70 with p=.10

4 with certainty

6

16 with p=.10

1 with certainty

7

54 with p=.10

4 with p=.75

8

23 with p=.10

2 with p=.75

9

35 with p=.15

3 with certainty

10

21 with p=.15

2 with certainty

11

48 with p=.15

5 with p=.80

12

9 with p=.15

1 with p=.80

C1

0 with certainty

1 with p=.75

C2

0 with certainty

1 with certainty

C3

9 with p=.10

3 with p=.75

C4

7 with p=10

2 with certainty

C2) and two problems where the supposedly high
outcome option was actually a sure event of zero (C3,
C4). Those problems were created to exclude participants
showing unsystematic or extreme risk seeking behavior.
Procedure The experiment was entirely computer based.
Participants were given verbal and visual instructions that
explicitly explained the payoff modality according to
their assigned experimental condition. Participants then
made choices for three practice trials. On every problem
the participants were able to sample from the two options
as much and in whatever fashion they liked. They were
instructed to proceed to the decision whenever they felt
confident enough. Finally the participants made their
decisions on all 16 problems (12 target and 4 control
problems) in random order.
Payoff Manipulation The single and repeated play
character was induced between-subjects through different
payoff modalities. The payoff in the repeated play
condition was determined by one hundred draws from
one of the participant’s chosen options. In the single play
condition the payoff, one random sample was taken from

one the participant’s chosen options and then this value
was multiplied by one hundred. A third condition
(neutral) corresponded to the payoff modality usually
applied in the literature (Hertwig et al., 2004), with the
payoff equivalent to one random draw from each option
chosen by the participant. As the payoff in the neutral
condition is based on only 16 draws all presented
outcomes were multiplied by a fixed factor to equal the
expected values in the other two conditions.

Results
We applied two criteria to exclude participants showing
extreme risk seeking or unsystematic behavior. First, we
excluded participants that neither preferred the higher
mean nor the higher median in the control problems C1
and C2 (see table 1). Second, we also excluded
participants that did not sample at least once from every
option. As a result the following analyses are based on 82
out of 124 participants. Inspection of control problems
C3 and C4 reveals that this restriction very efficiently
reduces zero EV choices, which can be regarded as an
indicator for either extreme risk seeking or not very
systematic behavior. The excluded participants chose the
zero EV option in about 27% of the cases, whereas the
included participants chose did not choose this option at
all. Thus, the remaining participants showed neither
extreme risk-seeking nor unsystematic behavior.
The main focus of this study is on the contrast between
the single and repeated play conditions. Statistical tests
are therefore mainly reported for this contrast.
Additionally, comparisons for the neutral condition are
reported to see where usual experimental instantiations of
this paradigm fall in the context of salient single and
repeated play situations.
Figure 2A illustrates choice patterns over the
experimental conditions. In support of our predictions, H
preferences increased for the repeated-play as compared
to single-play situation (t42.4=3.58, p<.001). H preference
in the neutral condition resembled the pattern in the
single-play condition (t53.1=0.54, p=.594), but there was a
difference for H choices between the neutral and repeated
play conditions (t43.8=-3.05, p=.004). This effect is not
affected by the inclusion of the certainty of the L option
in the prediction of H choices (X22=.51, p=.776). Because
none of the following analyses were influenced by a
comparison of certain and uncertain gambles, the
following results are collapsed over both problem types.

1169

Figure 2B shows the information search behavior of
the participants. Descriptively, it matches our predictions.
The repeated-play condition elicited higher total sample
sizes as well as longer evaluation intervals for the
individual options (samples per transition: average
number of samples taken per transition in the sampling
sequence). However, only the contrast for total number of
samples reaches statistical significance (total: t32.9=2.28,
p=.029; per transition: t31.8=1.58, p=.124). Again the
neutral condition closely resembled the single-play
condition in both sampling variables (total: t49.1=.52,
p=.609; per transition: t52.1=.85, p=.40), but was at least
in terms of total sample size marginally different from
the repeated-play situation (total: t37.9=-1.85, p=.072; per
transition: t34=-1.07, p=.29).
So far we have shown that the payoff structure
independently affected choice and information search in
the predicted direction. However, we generally predicted
that information search and choice behavior were
likewise affected by the induction of a repeated play
situation in that it was expected to elicit both a higher
preference for the long run winner as well as higher total
and per transition sample sizes. To demonstrate this, two
additional analyses have to be carried out. First, it has to
be shown that the contrast for H preference is not entirely
caused by a sampling bias. Hertwig et al. (2004) showed
how small sample sizes can systematically obscure rare
outcomes in decisions from experience. When rare
outcomes are obscured, the option that secures winning
most of the time can also appear as the option with the

20

30

Total
Per transition

0

10

Mean number of samples

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Proportion of H choices

40

B
1.0

A

higher long run expectation. Second, an association
between the choice preferences and the sampling
behavior needs to be established. Therefore we tested if
this pattern of results holds when the qualities of winning
most of the time – represented by the higher median –
and higher long run expectation – represented by the
higher mean – do not coincide in respect to actually
observed outcomes. Then we evaluate if the preference
for the higher mean option is associated with the
sampling behavior.
Figure 3 shows the proportions of choices that were
consistent with the higher experienced mean. The
separate lines distinguish cases where the experienced
median and mean predict the same (dotted lines) or
different (solid lines) choices. Focusing on the cases
where the mean and median do not fall together, it is
apparent that participants in the repeated play situation
opted more often for the option with the higher
experienced mean as compared to the single play
situation (t49.1=2.72, p=.001). Thus, the differences in
choices do appear to be associated with different decision
strategies and not simply differences in observed
outcomes. The neutral condition again matches the single
(t48.3=.12, p=.90) but not the repeated play condition
(t48.8=-2.26, p=.028). Overall, the observed differences
are all the more convincing given the pattern of results
for cases where the experienced mean and median fall
together. Independent of the payoff condition we
observed stong preferences for the option with the higher
experienced mean pointing towards very systematic

Neutral

Repeated

Single

Neutral

Condition

Repeated

Single

Condition

Figure 2: (A) Proportion of H choices as a function of the experimental condition. (B) Mean number samples in total and
per transition in the sampling sequence as a function of the condition. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

1170

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Proportion of higher mean choices

●
●

●

●

●

●

Equal
Unequal

Neutral

Repeated

Single

Condition
Figure 3: Higher mean choices as a function oft he
experimental condition.
behavior.
Now, is the shift in strategy use for the repeated play
condition associated with changes in the sampling
behavior? In line with our predictions we found this to be
the case. Regressing higher mean choices on sample size
and the group contrast of single and repeated play
situations yields a significant interaction (t52=-2.73,
p=.009), while the main effect of the contrast vanishes
(t52=.54, p=.59). The same pattern was found for samples
per transition (interaction: t52=-2.36, p=.022; contrast:
t52=-0.33, p=.746). It was not possible to determine which
of these sampling variables were more strongly
associated with the strategy use because they were highly
correlated (r = .83). In sum, we thus were able to show,
that the repeated play condition influenced both choice
preference and sampling behavior.

Discussion
The primary aim of our study was to use experiencebased decisions to investigate information search and
decision making over repeated and single plays. Based on
prior findings of Hills & Hertwig (2010) we predicted
that the situations of repeated and single plays would
elicit information search behavior that has been found to
be associated with short and long-term maximization,
respectively. Our results confirm this prediction.
Participants in the situation of repeated plays –
particularly those that sampled more avidly and switched

less frequently between the options – exhibited higher
preferences for the superior option in the long run. These
results did not appear to be mediated by a simple
sampling bias (Hertwig et al., 2004; Fox & Hadar, 2006).
Rather, they were associated with different decision
strategies.
We believe that our findings provide new evidence for
the theoretical debate on single and repeated-play
decisions. So far behavioral studies that separated these
situations have focused entirely on decision outcomes.
We extend this literature by showing that differences can
also be demonstrated on more process-oriented measures
such as information search. Our results imply that
possibly more is changing over the situations of single
and repeated play than the weighting of probabilities and
outcomes (Aloysius, 2007), as suggested by unitary
theoretical accounts, e.g. prospect theory (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979). We suggest that an overall different
cognitive approach towards repeated plays is applied.
These results appear to be consistent with theoretical
accounts such as Lola Lopes’ (1996, 1999) two-stage
model.
Our findings also hold important insights for the
literature on experienced-based decision making. On all
of our measures, the standard payoff procedure resulted
in behavior that resembled the condition where the
single-play character was strongly emphasized. This
might not appear surprising as in both cases only single
draws were taken out of the chosen option. However, in
the standard realization all decisions contribute to the
overall payoff. Thus, the whole set of choices could be
mentally combined (see Read, Loewenstein, & Rabin,
1999) and thereby the set of problems could more
resemble a repeated play situation. In this context our
findings suggest that under the standard paradigm of
decisions from experience, all choices are evaluated
independently. This finding might contribute in the
explanation of the description-experience gap.
In conclusion, we find that single and repeated play
situations impact more than just choice preferences. The
way people search for information and specific decision
strategies change as well. Our findings emphasize the
distinction between long-term and short-term maximizing
behavior in human decision-making - a distinction that is
long established in the literature on animal foraging.

References
Aloysius, J. A. (2007). Decision making in the short and

1171

long run: Repeated gambles and rationality. British
Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology,60,
61–69.
Benartzi S., & Thaler, R. H. (1999). Risk aversion or
myopia? Choices in repeated gambles and retirement
investments. Management Science, 45, 364–381.
Caraco, T. (1980). On foraging time allocation in a
stochastic environment. Ecology, 61, 119–128.
Fox, C. R., & Hadar, L. (2006). “Decisions from
experience” = sampling error + prospect theory:
Reconsidering Hertwig, Barron, Weber & Erev (2004).
Judgment and Decision Making, 1, 159–161.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events
in risky choice. Psychological Science, 15, 534–539.
Hertwig, R., & Erev, I. (2009). The description–
experience gap in risky choice. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 13, 517–523.
Hills, T. T., & Hertwig, R. (2010). Information search in
decisions from experience: Do our patterns of sampling
foreshadow our decisions? Psychological Science, 21,
1787-1792.
Houston, A. I., & McNamara, J. M. (1999). Models of
adaptive behavior: An approach based on state.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Liu, H. H., & Colman, A. M. (2009) Ambiguity aversion
in the long run: Repeated decisions under risk and
uncertainty. Journal of Economic Psychology, 20, 277–
284.
Lopes, L. L. (1996). When time is of the essence:
Averaging, aspiration, and the short run.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 65, 179–189.
Lopes, L. L., & Oden, G. C. (1999). The role of
aspiration level in risky choice: A comparison of
cumulative prospect theory and SP/A theory. Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 43, 286-313.
Montgomery, H., & Adelbratt, T. (1982). Gambling
decisions and information about expected value.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 29,
39–57.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory:
An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47,
263–292.
Keren G. (1991). Additional tests of utility theory under
unique and repeated condition. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 4, 297–304.
Keren, G., & Wagenaar, W. A. (1987). Violation of
utility theory in unique and repeated gambles. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 13, 387–391.
Read, D., Loewenstein, G., & Rabin, M. (1999). Choice
bracketing. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19, 171197.
Redelmeier, D. A., & Tversky, A. (1992). On the framing

of multiple prospects. Psychological Science, 3, 191–
193.
Redelmeier D. A., & Tversky, A. (1990). Discrepancy
between medical decisions for individual patients and
for groups. New England Journal of Medicine, 322,
1162–1164.
Samuelson, P. A. (1963). Risk and uncertainty: A
fallacy of large numbers. Scientia, 98, 108–113.
Stephens, D. W. (1981). The logic of risk-sensitive
foraging preferences. Animal Behavior, 29, 628–629.
Wedell, D. H. (2011). Evaluations of single and repeatedplay gambles. Wiley Encyclopedia of Operations
research and Management Science.
Wedell, D. H., & Böckenholt, U. (1990). Moderation of
preference reversals in the long run. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 16, 429–438.

1172

