UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Empirical Study on the Mechanisms of Creativity in Visual Arts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/36s2z4xm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Indurkhya, Bipin
Ogawa, Shinji

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Empirical Study on the Mechanisms of Creativity in Visual Arts
Bipin Indurkhya (bipin@agh.edu.pl)
Institute of Computer Science, AGH University of Science and Technology, Cracow, Poland
Cognitive Science Lab, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India

Shinji Ogawa (perfectworld@nyc.odn.ne.jp)
Abstract

Background: Infinite Landscape Workshops

This collaborative research between a visual artist and a
cognitive scientist is based on the assumption that the socalled aha moment actually emerges from a number of
interacting micro-processes. The empirical study presented
here focuses on the creative process involved in connecting
two pictures by painting another picture in the middle. This
technique was involved in four Infinite Landscape workshops
conducted at Art Museums in Japan and Europe over the last
five years. Based on the artist’s verbal recollection of the
ideas that occurred to him as he drew each of the connecting
pictures, we identify the micro-processes and cognitive
mechanisms underlying these ideas, and discuss their
implications for modeling creativity.
Keywords: Creativity; emergence; perceptual features;
similarity; surface features; visual art.

Introduction
A central problem in creativity research is how new ideas
are generated. In recent years, it is gradually being realized
that creativity is an emergent property of many interacting
micro-processes (Dunbar 1997; Sawyer 2006). These microprocesses can occur within a cognitive agent itself, or in
different agents within a group or society. Our larger goal in
this research is to study and model these micro-processes.
In particular, we are focusing on the creative processes in
visual art. For this, one could consider the creative insights
spanning over the entire career of an artist (for example,
Dali 1993); or over a part of the career of an artist (for
example, Okada et al. 2009); or across several artists (for
example, Mace & Ward 2002). When a longer period is
covered, it is difficult to get information about the microprocesses involved in the creation. Even when one focuses
on the creation of a particular work, if the goal is too openended, the micro-processes are too unrestrained and
divergent. For example, in the study of Mace & Ward
(2002), twenty-five artists were interviewed to get data
about their creative processes. But because the artists could
create any work they wanted, the insights from their selfreflection are only useful for a macro-level model.
When a work is created under constraints, it often
increases the level of creativity required (Stokes 2005); it
also makes it easier to compare data across different works
because they were created under the same constraint. With
this in mind, we focused on the task of creating a picture to
connect two given pictures seamlessly, as described below.

This research is a collaborative effort between a visual artist
[henceforth referred to as the Artist] and a cognitive
scientist. Over the last five years, the Artist conducted four
workshops at art museums in Japan and in Europe with the
common theme Connecting different spaces. In each
workshop, there were 15-19 participants, all children (8-14
years) except in one workshop there were six adults. Three
workshops conducted in Japan followed the following
modus operandi.
In the first step, the children were shown about 20
photographs of scenery from around the world, and then
they were asked to draw imaginary landscapes using the
building, people, animals etc. in these pictures as they liked.
In the second step, the Artist brought the children’s
imaginary landscapes to his studio, and then he drew one
picture to be inserted between every two pictures of
children, so that all three pictures form a seamless scene.
One such trio of pictures is shown in Fig. 1: scenes 9 and 10
were drawn by participants, and the Artist drew S9 to
connect the two.

Figure 1
In the third and final step, all the pictures were connected
in a ring without a beginning and an end, and the completed
ring was suspended from the ceiling of the museum where
the workshop was held. The ring was placed with the
paintings on the inner side, so that the viewer is surrounded
by the work while viewing it.
The fourth workshop conducted in Kraków was similar
except for two differences. One is that the children were not
shown any photographs in the first step, but half the group
was asked to draw Kraków as they imagined it in the past;
and the other half the future of Kraków, all based on their
imagination. This was only suggested to them and the
participants drew whatever they wished. The other
difference was that in the final step, the completed ring was
placed on a glass floor.

1727

Methodology
Our overall methodology for this research project is as
follows. In the first step, the Artist recorded various ideas
that occurred to him as he drew each of the connecting
pictures. It should be emphasized that in this step, the Artist
was not aware of any potential hypotheses as to what we
might be looking for in this data. In the second step, we
analyzed these self-reflections to identify various microprocesses and their interactions with each other that were
instrumental in the creation of the macro-level connecting
pictures. In the third step, we posit cognitive mechanisms
underlying these micro-processes. Finally, we plan to model
these mechanisms in a computational system.
The research presented in this paper focuses on Steps 2
and 3. From the self-reflection data collected about each of
the four workshops, we identified instances where a new
idea was generated that became a major theme in the
finished picture. This identification itself is also based on
the self-reflection data. In other words, we are relying on the
Artist’s own judgment of the novelty factor. We should
emphasize here that because of the nature of the task,
namely to connect the two pictures seamlessly, there were
many cases where the Artist copied elements, extended
texture, color or shape from one of the pictures to the
middle picture, and so on. Though we have included such
micro-processes in our complete analysis, they are not
discussed here.

Mechanisms of Creativity
We present here several examples of the Artist’s thought
processes as he sought to connect the given two pictures
seamlessly. The Artist’s original comments were in
Japanese, and are translated here with minor editing by the
other author of this paper. We have also labeled and
categorized these examples based on the factor that played a
key role in the overall theme and the composition of the
connecting picture.

Surface Similarity

into the parent horse in S9, which became a nested image
structure. Then I extended the baby horse and the hill with
the buildings.”
Here the same shading for the horse’s body in 10 and the
background in 9 led to the idea that the background in 9 can
be morphed into the mother horse in S9, which results in an
Escher-like nesting of pictures. The same phenomenon is
also seen in Fig. 2: “There was the ground and the sky in the
left one-third of 11, but the sea covered the remaining part
on the right. In 12, a vast meadow was drawn with rich
pictorial details. Here my attention was drawn to the
connection between the color of the giant bridge in 11 and
the color of the sky in 12. In S11 I drew the enlarged bridge
of 11 and connected it with the picture on 12, which resulted
in a nested image structure.”
These two examples show how texture or shading
triggered an association that led to nested image structures.

Figure 2
Similarity in shape: In Fig. 3, it is the shape of the curves
that started a chain of thought: “I felt these two could not be
connected with the techniques I had used so far. Then I
noticed the wall on the top-right corner of 12 and the curved
ledge surrounding the fountain in 13. Using these two
curves, I drew a large Mobius strip in S12. As this Mobius
strip divided S12 into four sections, in each section I
extended the adjacent scenery. It felt like pouring in the
scenery. Accordingly, I was able to connect them without
blending, and this became the first work with this
technique.”

In several instances, similarity with respect to color, shape
or texture played a key role in the genesis of the connecting
picture, and in such a way that a semantic construct was
created. This is illustrated by the following examples.
Similarity in shading or texture: Consider the Artist’s
observations concerning Fig. 1: “These two had completely
different atmosphere from each other. Sketch 9, drawn by an
adult participant, is a scene set at dusk; a person looking at
the artist is drawn wearing a sad expression. Sketch 10 has a
bright atmosphere with flowers, fountains, buildings on a
hill, and a horse. Moreover, each picture had an important
character in the bottom left. The idea for connecting these
sketches came to me while looking at the wonderful horse in
10. I thought of putting a parent horse running nearby.
Because the background color of 9 and the body color of the
horse in 10 was the same, I transformed the background of 9

Figure 3
Surface features trigger a new concept: In Fig. 4, surface
features of an object drawn by the participant reminded the
Artist of a completely different object, and that became the
theme of the connecting picture: “Suddenly my attention
was caught by the strange-shaped, cage-like object drawn at
the corner fence in the right pencil-sketch. I thought this
shape was a piano. Once I could overlap these images, the

1728

line of fence naturally transformed into a musical staff, and I
could draw the dragon playing the piano. I made the
particles of light in the sky of the left picture as if they are
the sound emanating from the piano.”

realistic rocks and the bridge in 8 were rendered in 3-d and
were connected with the bridge in 7 that was extended in 2d. To make this connection smoother and give an accent to
the picture, I drew 3 Russian onion domes from 7 into S7.”

Figure 4

Figure 6

Contrast
There were also several examples where the contrast or the
opposition between the two pictures was instrumental in
generating a new idea.
Contrast in perspective: In Fig. 5, the contrast between the
viewpoints of the pictures was a major factor: “I thought it
is not possible to connect 3 and 1. Picture 1 is clearly a
bird’s eye-view, as if a bird is looking down towards the
ground; in contrast, picture 3 has a distinct horizon with a
clear separation between the earth and the sky. First I
extended the broken train track and the tire tunnel. Then as I
was drawing the dark blue river, I thought, ‘But where
should I extend this river? Towards the top? Towards the
bottom? If I extend it below, then I can connect it with the
ground of 3. But…’ I felt lost. Finally, I resolved to bring
the river up. It was a desperate effort. However, at that time
I thought of a good way to solve this problem. In the
remaining left edge of the picture, I extended the scenery
from 3. Finally, to integrate the inconsistent parts of the
picture, I floated a number of clouds from 3 on the river.
Thus, by using clouds as intermediaries, I was able to
connect a bird’s eye-view picture with a perspective
picture.”

Fig. 7 provides another example: “I thought about how to
connect picture 5 with picture 6 that had strong green with
dark lines and was rich in details. I thought I could turn the
contrast of a picture rich in details and a picture low in
details into a pictorial effect. On the top right of 5, there is a
game-character like man standing with a trident basking in
the sunlight. First, to counter that, I drew a partner woman’s
figure on top left of S5. But I laid down the trident by her
side. I drew most of S5 as an extension of the dynamics of
picture 6. On the bottom right of 5, there is an abstract
painting-like area, and I placed this dark touch on the left
edge of S5. This was a pleasure to work on. When I saw all
of the paintings arranged in a ring at the Art Museum in
Okazaki, it was obvious that it was picture 5 that was being
the heretic and bringing out the effect of difference in
richness of details in paintings. This realization was the
most important lesson to me from this case.”

Figure 7

Semantic similarity/association
There were several examples where similarity at the
meaning level played a key role in generating ideas for the
middle picture.
Figure 5

Contrast in richness of details: In Fig. 6, it was the
contrast between the richness of details that lead to a very
interesting result: “Because 8 was a richly detailed realistic
presentation, to contrast it with the presentation in 7, I
decided to stress dimensionality in the connection. The

Concept retrieval based on semantic association: In Fig.
8, the wisp of smoke coming out of the chimney of a house,
suggested the idea of a steam engine: “Perhaps my worst
betrayal (in a good sense) of the participants is when I
changed the brown house of the robot into a steam engine
somewhat arbitrarily. The thread of smoke coming out of
the chimney made me do this.”

1729

Figure 8
Similar objects: Two objects, both trains, but with surfacelevel dissimilarities played a major role in Fig. 9: “I first
noticed the train in 1 and 2. I admired that even though they
both had drawn the same train, their drawing styles were
very different, and I felt a strong urge to connect the two
trains. First I connected the two train tracks that were
cutting across 1 and 2, and then drew the gradual
transformation of one train into the other. On the bottom left
I drew a swan from 1, and on the top right I drew the water
fountains and trees from 2, and then connected the
backgrounds of the two pictures.”	 

both pictures was the street in 3 and the bridge on the
bottom left of 4. I could connect this street and the bridge.
Luckily, bottom left of 4 looks like the sea, and bottom right
of 3 also looks like a body of water. In S3, I extended the
road in 3 in S-shaped curve and connected it with the bridge
in 4. Continuing, I also extended the sea. Until here it was
traditional technique. The problem was what to do on top of
this. On the left part of S3, the only possibility was to
extend the street-side houses on 3, so I did that in the same
touch. Then I gradually changed the color of houses from
gray to black, while introducing spatial distortion, and
changing them from solid to liquid. I floated a swan in the
dark pond that the buildings were turned into.”
This example also illustrates the role of surface features
(similarity between the shapes of the road and the bridge)
and semantic association based on functionality (roads and
bridge are both used for travelling.)

Metaphor
In Fig. 11, an overarching metaphor was generated in trying

Figure 11

Figure 9

Deliberately Ignoring Meaning

Figure 10
Fig. 10 provides an interesting example where the Artist
deliberately chose to ignore the meaning and focused on the
surface features only: “At first Sketch 4 was filled-in
completely black, and then brightened by eraser. It had no
earth and sky, but an ambiguous space from a dark fantasy.
Normally, a picture like this cannot be connected with any
picture. I decided to connect this dark picture with 3, which
had a child-like pictorial space. However, it would be
impossible to connect the two in an ordinary way. Here, I
decided to ignore all the meanings in these pictures, but
instead focus on the pattern of light and dark. I said to
myself, ‘it is just a blotch’. The only connecting point in

to connect a picture with two neighboring pictures. We
include a long quote here to familiarize the reader with the
context and the thought processes of the Artist: “The child
who drew this seemed (and it is my personal impression)
emotionally repressed, and who is not accepted as himself
by the surroundings. I had decided to not consider the
psychological problems of the children, but focus only on
the expression of form and color. However, when I was
confronted with this work that expressed intense
psychological problem, I instinctively thought, ‘What can
we do to help this heart?’ But I am well aware that the most
I can do is to finish the work and by having the participants
view it as an aesthetic experience send them some kind of
message. I placed on both sides of 11 two of the brightest
pictures, 10 and 12, and started to connect it with them. The
sky in 10 is clear, but the top portion is dull and grey. Even
more than that, the colors of gloomy 11 seem to entirely
reject any possible connection. In S10, losing to this strong
feeling of rejection, I connected the pictures rather abruptly
and formally. As a result, I gave angel wings from the globe
in the middle of 11 to the swan in the red area of S10.
Continuing with connecting 11 with 12, on the spur of the
moment, I thought of mixing the color of the water surface.
In other words, in the middle of the blood red lake of 11, I
poured in a stream of bright blue from 12. I was hoping that
the same effect would also occur in the heart of the child
who drew 11. I felt relieved instinctively when this work
was finished. Furthermore, as a cheering party for the child

1730

who drew 11, I added on the top right of S11 the street
lamps and the acorn decorations of 12.”

Influence of Other Ongoing Projects
Fig. 12 illustrates a case when an idea was borrowed from
another ongoing project of the Artist: “In S6, I first drew the
remaining portion of the cow in 6, and then the remaining
portion of the cliffs of Cappadocia. Moreover, to connect
the complex-shaped terrain in 7 with the savannah meadow
of 6, I extended the grey building on the right edge of 6 and
transformed the terrain. Incidentally, at the same time I was
working on my ‘Moire’ series, so I made the shape of the
grey buildings like the silhouette of Mt. Saint Michel. This
became an example of my incorporating a concept of my
own in the scene through my pro-active involvement.”

Figure 12

Discussion and Related Research
Having gleaned these bits of insights, we now identify four
major themes underlying creativity that are highlighted by
this study. We comment below on each theme and also
discuss previous research related to it.

Role of Surface Features
It has been widely recognized that similarities play a key
role in the generation of new ideas (Kokinov et al. 2009;
Ward 2011.) Although surface similarities are often found to
influence memory access and recall (Barnden & Holyoak
1994), most of the research has focused on semantic aspects
of the similarity, like structural alignment, for these are
considered to be more helpful in problem solving and
learning. In fact, surface similarities are often thought to be
distracting (Faries & Sclossberg 1994). Our data, however,
indicates that surface features can have a significant
influence on creation of new ideas in at least two different
ways.
Surface similarities between two objects: Here noticing
surface similarities between two different objects triggers an
exploration for a possible deeper meaningful relation
between them, as we saw in many examples above. This is
consistent with the results of our earlier studies (Indurkhya
et al. 2008; Ojha & Indurkhya 2009), where we found that
similarities with respect to color, shape, texture etc.
facilitate generation of conceptual associations.

Surface features of an object recall a different concept:
We saw above how the perceptual features of a cage-like
object in Fig. 4 triggered the concept of piano, which
became the motif of the connecting picture. This is
consistent with a model of perceptual metaphors we had
proposed in our earlier work (Indurkhya 2006), where we
argued that certain metaphors rely on a perceptual resonance
between the images corresponding to the source and the
target.

Role of Contrast or Opposition
We found several instances where new ideas or perspective
emerged in trying to connect contrasting elements. Many
previous studies of creativity have also found that
opposition can be a key to generating new insights. For
instance, Schön (1963) emphasized that in order to get a
new insight about a concept, it needs to be displaced, that is,
put in the context of other unrelated concepts. Koestler
(1964) emphasized that the pattern underlying a creative act
is the perception of a situation or an idea in two selfconsistent but habitually incompatible frames of reference.
More recently, Shapira and Liberman (2009) suggest
psychological distance as a mechanism for enhancing
creativity. They and their colleagues (Jia, Hirt and Carpen
2009) have demonstrated that psychological distance can be
induced by such simple devices as taking another person’s
perspective or thinking of the problem as if it is unreal.

Deliberate Deconstruction of Meaning
We presented one example above where the Artist
deliberately chose to ignore the meaning, and focused on the
perceptual features like shade and texture. This mechanism
is also often acknowledged as a useful heuristic for
creativity. For example, Gordon’s (1961) making-thefamiliar-strange is essentially the process of deconstructing
the familiar meaning associated with the problem. Similarly,
the first step in one of the creativity mechanisms proposed
by Rodari (1996) is estrangement, where you are asked to
see the object as if for the first time, without associating
familiar meanings with it.

Interaction of Top-down and Bottom-up Influences
The metaphor and the moiré series examples (Fig. 11 and
12) illustrate the top-down influences in the creative
processes. What we mean here is that the psychological
state of the artist and her or his past experiences can also
influence the particulars of a creative insight. There have
been several accounts of creativity that emphasize the
interaction of top-down and bottom-up processes
(Fauconnier and Turner 2002; Hofstader 1995; Indurkhya
1997).

Conclusions and Future Research
We analyzed data from the Artist’s verbal recollection of his
thoughts as he drew the middle pictures to connect pairs of
pictures seamlessly. From this analysis, we identified a

1731

number of micro-processes that led to the big picture idea.
In particular, we found that surface features, contrast, and
meaning deconstruction play major roles in the generation
of new ideas.
There are two lines of research that we are pursuing from
here onwards. One is to develop a meme-based approach to
formalize these micro-processes, and implement a
computational model of them (Ogawa, Indurkhya and
Byrski 2012). Besides, we are also interested in studying the
cognitive processes of the viewers as they look at the trio of
pictures. The term creativity is generally restricted to the
artist or the person who generates the work, design or the
artifact; and one does not attribute it to the reader or the
viewer. However, we have argued before that in some
situations at least, some creativity is required from the
reader or the viewer as well (Indurkhya 2007). Moreover,
our past research has shown that surface-level perceptual
similarities influence how viewers connect pairs of images
and relate them conceptually (Ojha and Indurkhya 2009;
2012). It would be interesting to see how this process is
affected when there is an intervening picture in the middle;
and we would like to study the effect of contrast as well. We
plan to conduct behavioral and eye-tracking experiments to
measure the viewers’ response and incorporate those
observations in our model.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Meguro Museum of Art, Tokyo, the
National Museum of Art, Osaka, Okazaki Mindscape
Museum, Aichi, and Museum of Contemporary Art,
Kraków for hosting these workshops. We are also thankful
to all the participants for their efforts and contributions.

References
Barnden, J.A., & Holyoak, K.J. (Eds.) (1994). Analogy,
Metaphor, and Reminding, Intellect Books.
Dali, S. (1993). The Secret Life of Salvador Dali. New
York: Dover.
Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: On-line creativity
and conceptual change in science. In T.B. Ward, S.M.
Smith and J. Vaid (Eds.), Creative thought: An
investigation of conceptual structures and processes.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Faries, J.M., & Schlossberg, K.R. (1994). The effect of
similarity on memory for prior problems, Proceedings of
the 16th annual conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 278 – 282.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002). The Way We Think:
Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s Hidden
Complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Gordon, W.J.J. (1961). Synectics: The Development of
Creative Capacity. New York: Harper & Row.
Hofstadter, D. (1995). Fluid concepts and creative
analogies: Computer models of the fundamental
mechanisms of thought. New York: Basic Books.
Indurkhya, B. (1997). On Modeling Creativity in Legal
Reasoning. Proceedings of the Sixth International

Conference on AI and Law, 180-189. Melbourne,
Australia.
Indurkhya, B. (2006). Emergent representations, interaction
theory, and the cognitive force of metaphor. New Ideas in
Psychology, 24(2), 133–162.
Indurkhya, B. (2007). Creativity in Interpreting Poetic
Metaphors. In T. Kusumi (Ed.) New Directions in
Metaphor Research, Tokyo: Hitsuji Shobo, Tokyo.
Indurkhya, B. (2010) On the role of metaphor in creative
cognition. Proceedings of the International Conference
on Computational Creativity: ICCC-X, Lisbon, Portugal.
Indurkhya, B., Kattalay, K., Ojha, A., & Tandon, P. (2008).
Experiments with a creativity-support system based on
perceptual similarity. In H. Fujita and I. Zualkernan (Eds.)
New Trends in Software Methodologies, Tools and
Techniques, Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Jia, L., Hirt, E.R., & Karpen, S.C. (2009). Lessons from a
Faraway land: The effect of spatial distance on creative
cognition. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
45, 1127–1131.
Koestler, A. (1964). The Act of Creation. London:
Hutchinsons.
Kokinov, B., Holyoak, K. & Gentner, D. (Eds.) (2009).
New Frontiers in Analogy Research, Sofia: New
Bulgarian University Press.
Mace, M., & Ward, T. (2002). Modeling the creative
process: A grounded theory analysis of creativity in the
domain of art making. Creativity Research Journal 14,
179–192.
Ogawa, S., Indurkhya, B., & Byrski, A. (2012). A memebased architecture for modeling creativity. Proc. of the
Int. Conf. on Computational Creativity, Dublin, Ireland.
Ojha, A., & Indurkhya, B. (2009). Perceptual vs. conceptual
similarities and creation of new features in visual
metaphor. In B. Kokinov, K. Holyoak & D. Gentner
(Eds.) New Frontiers in Analogy Research, Sofia: New
Bulgarian University Press.
Ojha, A., & Indurkhya, B. (2012). On the role of perceptual
features in metaphor. To appear in F. Ervas & E. Gola
(Eds.) Metaphor and Communication.
Okada, T., Yokochi, S., Ishibashi, K., Ueda, K. (2009).
Analogical Modification in the Creation of Contemporary
Art. Cognitive Systems Research 10 (3), 189–203.
Rodari, G. (1996). The Grammar of Fantasy (J. Zipes,
Trans.) New York: Teachers & Writers Collaborative.
Sawyer, K. (2006). Explaining Creativity. Oxford (UK):
Oxford University Press.
Schön, D.A. (1963). Displacement of Concepts. New York:
Humanities Press.
Shapira, O., & Liberman N. (2009). An Easy Way to
Increase Creativity. Scientific American (Mind Matters),
July 21, 2009.
Stokes, P.D. (2005). Creativity from Constraints: The
Psychology of Breakthrough. Berlin: Springer.
Ward, T.B. (2011). Analogies. In M.A. Runco & S.R.
Pritzker (Eds.) Encyclopedia of Creativity, (2nd ed.), New
York: Academic Press.

1732

