UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Experimental Examination of Emergent Features in Metaphor Interpretation Using
Semantic Priming Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2h50s472

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Terai, Asuka
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Experimental Examination of Emergent Features in
Metaphor Interpretation Using Semantic Priming Effects
AsukaTerai (asuka@nm.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Global Edge Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
2-12-1, Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 1528550 JAPAN

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

prevalent and play an important role in metaphor comprehension. Furthermore, the authors conducted an experiment
using priming effects. In their experiment, emergent, topicterm or vehicle-term features were presented and participants judged whether the feature was related to the primed
metaphor (topic-/vehicle-term) or not. Emergent features required a longer response time to be regarded as a feature of
the prime than topic or vehicle features, when the features
were tested with topic-term or vehicle-term primes. When
tested with the metaphor as the prime, the topic and vehicle
features required longer response times than did the topicterm or vehicle-term as the prime. However, the emergent
features did not change their response times from one prime
condition to another. As a result of these results are consistent
with the interaction theory of metaphor (Black 1979), which
suggests that metaphor comprehension is a product of an interaction between the target and the vehicle concepts.

In comprehension of the metaphor “TOPIC is VEHICLE,”
emergent features in the interpretation of metaphors are characteristic neither of the topic nor the vehicle. An experiment examines the hypothesis that new features emerge
as metaphoric interpretations through association with nonemergent features connected with the topic, vehicle, or both.
In the experiment, participants were presented with a nonemergent feature as a prime, a metaphor, and an emergent
feature, sequentially. Participants were then asked to respond
as to whether the emergent feature is an appropriate interpretation of the metaphor. The results showed that primed
non-emergent features derived from the vehicle facilitate the
recognition of emergent features. The results support an account in which new features emerge through two processes –
non-emergent features are recognized as interpretations of the
metaphor and then these non-emergent features facilitate the
recognition of emergent features. Keywords: Metaphor comprehension; Feature emergence; Interaction.

Introduction
In this research, we examined the process of feature emergence, which is realized in comprehension of metaphors taking the form of “TOPIC is VEHICLE”, such as “Education is a gateway.” In previous papers, interpretations (features) of this kind of metaphor were classified into four types:
common features, topic features, vehicle features and emergent features (Becker 1997; Gineste, Indurkhya & Scart,
2000; Nueckles & Janetzko 1997). When an interpretation
is thought of in relation to both the topic and the vehicle,
it is regarded as a common feature. When an interpretation
is thought of as a characteristic of the topic (or of the vehicle), it is referred to as a topic feature (or a vehicle feature). The common, topic and vehicle features are regarded
as non-emergent features. Finally, emergent features are not
typically thought of in relation to either the topic or the vehicle alone, but do come to mind when the topic and vehicle
enter into a metaphoric comparison. For example, for the
metaphor “Ideas are diamonds,” the feature “come in a flash”
is a topic feature, “beautiful” is a vehicle feature, “precious”
is a common feature because it is listed as a feature when
people are given either “ideas” or “diamonds” by themselves,
and “unique” is an emergent feature because it is not listed for
either word by itself, but is listed when the words are paired.
Previous research (Gineste et al., 2000) made a list of
features and reported that over 60% of metaphoric interpretations are emergent features. Emergent features are thus

However, there is also evidence that links emergent interpretations asymmetrically with topics and vehicles. Becker
listed interpretations of metaphorsinan experiment. She reported that altering a metaphor’s vehicle (e.g. “A smile is a
knife” vs. “A smile is a pearl”) produced greater changes in
emergent content than did altering the topic (e.g. “A smile
is a knife” vs. “Teeth are knives”). This suggests that emergent features are influenced primarily by one’s representation
of the vehicle. Nueckles and Janetzko (1997) introduce the
idea that metaphor comprehension proceeds in analysis-based
and synthesis-based stages. According to their idea, there is
first an analysis of the lexical meanings of the topic and vehicle during the analysis-based stage. If the topic and vehicle have sufficient similarity, the metaphor comprehension
does not proceed to the synthesis-based stage. For cases in
which the topic-vehicle similarity is not sufficiently high, a
shift to synthesis-based processing occurs. In the later case,
the metaphor comprehension is achieved through a construction of new components of meaning by synthesis of the topic
and the vehicle. It is during this second phase that emergent
features would be generated.
Previous computational models of metaphor comprehension have been constructed under the assumption that emergent features are emphasized more than non-emergent features through interactions among features in metaphor comprehension (Utsumi, 2000; Terai & Nakagawa 2007, 2008,

2399

2010). All of these models function to increase activation of
emergent features beyond that of non-emergent features by
incorporating interactions among features. Terai and Goldstone (2011) reported that emergent features require more
time to be recognized during a metaphoric interpretation than
do non-emergent features. Conversely, when a relatively long
time period was allowed for metaphor processing, then recognition of non-emergent features was diminished. This suggests that non-emergent features that are true of one metaphor
term but not the other have reduced activation as metaphor
processing continues. The results support the kind of positive and negative interaction among features assumed by the
computational models above, and also supports Nueckles and
Janetzko’s (1997) two-process assumption. In particular, the
meanings of the topic and the vehicle are emphasized as nonemergent features, and then with ongoing interactions among
features, emergent features are discovered as valid interpretations. However, empirical evidence is still lacking to support
the details of this mechanism.
Some previous research used a priming paradigm to investigate the roles played by the topic and the vehicle in
metaphor comprehension and reported that metaphor comprehension was facilitated by presentation of either a vehicle or topic concept (Wolff & Gentner, 2000; McGlone &
Manfredi, 2001). McGlone and Manfredi used a sentence
ascribing a metaphor-irrelevant or metaphor-relevant property to a topic or a vehicle as a prime. They found that all
of these presentations, including the presentation of the sentences ascribing metaphor-irrelevant properties to topics, facilitated metaphor comprehension with the exception of sentencesascribing metaphor-irrelevant properties to vehicles.
Thus, we conducted an experiment employing priming effects of non-emergent features (common, topic and vehicle
features) in order to investigate the role played by these features in processing emergent features and test the two-process
assumption of feature emergence. If the two-process assumption is correct, non-emergent features should activate emergent features. An unresolved issue concerns the kinds of nonemergent features that most influence activation of emergent
features.

Experiment Method
In this experiment, we examined the priming effect of nonemergent features on processing of emergent features in
metaphor comprehension.

Participants
134 undergraduates participated in this experiment. All participants were native English speakers.

Materials
We selected 39 metaphors of the form “TOPIC is VEHICLE”
from Becker (1997) as “target metaphors.” Becker (1997)
asked participants to list features of individual words and interpretations of metaphors involving those words. She categorized the resulting features into four types: emergent, com-

mon, topic, and vehicle features. Based on her categorization
and feature listings, for each of these 39 metaphors, 1 to 4
emergent features and 1 to 4 non-emergent features were selected. 114 emergent features, 26 common features, 29 topic
features and 32 vehicle features were selected. The types of
the non-emergent features (common, topic or vehicle feature)
selected for a given metaphor differed from each other. Three
native English speakers checked these selected features to ascertain whether a feature and the word is an appropriate interpretation of the metaphor or not. For the selected items, at
least one judge recognized the feature as an apt interpretation
of the metaphor.
In addition, another 39 metaphors of the form “TOPIC
is VEHICLE” from previous research (Gentner & Clement
1988, McGlone & Manfredi 2001) were used as “irrelevant
metaphors” in a baseline condition.

Procedures
The procedures are shown in Figure1. In the prime condition,
participants were first presented with a non-emergent feature
as a prime on a screen for 2 seconds. In the no-prime condition, no prime was presented. In both conditions participants
were then asked to interpret a metaphor that was presented on
the screen for 3 seconds. After presentation of the metaphor,
an emergent feature was presented as a target word. The participants were asked to respond “Yes” or “No” depending on
whether the word was relatedto the metaphor or not. Participants responded by pressingthe “p” key (“Yes”) or “q” key
(“No”) within 6 seconds. They were asked to respond as fast
as possible without sacrificing accuracy. If they could not respond within 6 seconds, the feature disappeared and the text
“Your response is too slow” appeared on the screen. The fixation point was presented between trials. For each metaphor,
the combination of the prime and emergent features was randomized. The target metaphor and baseline conditions were
presented equally often, but the presentation frequencies of
feature conditions were dependent on the number of features.
In order to distinguish between the relationship between
just a prime (non-emergent features) and target words (emergent features) and the interaction between them in metaphor
understanding, we used irrelevant metaphors as a baseline.
For example, if presentation of the common feature “beautiful” as a prime for the metaphor “Stars are diamonds” facilitates recognition of the subsequent emergent feature “amazing,” there are two possible cognitive mechanisms. One is
that “beautiful” influences the metaphor understanding process and facilitates recognition of “amazing” as an interpretation of the metaphor. The other is that “amazing” directly relates to “beautiful” much in the same way that “doctor” is related to “nurse,” and so presentation of “beautiful” facilitates
“amazing” regardless of the metaphor understanding process.
Thus, we also employed irrelevant metaphors as a baseline.
If presentation of “beautiful” does not influence judgments
of the interpretation of an irrelevant metaphor (e.g. “Crime
is a disease”) but does influence judgments of the related
metaphor, then this will be taken as evidence that not only the

2400

relationship between “beautiful” and “amazing” is relevant,
but also the interaction between “beautiful” and “amazing”
have a role in metaphor understanding. Therefore, in the target metaphor condition, prime and target words are listed as
interpretations of an intervening target metaphor. In the baseline condition, an irrelevant metaphor is presented between
prime and target words, which do not relate to it. Therefore, there were two conditions of metaphors (target metaphor
and baseline conditions) and four conditions of primes (common, topic, and vehicle features, and no-prime). After all
trials, participants were asked to evaluate aptness and conventionality of the metaphors on the scale of 1 (highly inappropriate or rare metaphor) to 5(highly appropriate or common
metaphor).

Results
The data of two participants were removed because they responded “Yes” to more than half of the items in the baseline
condition. We analyzed the remaining dataobtained from 132
participants. The average rate at which the participants responded within the time limit was 99.4%.

Analysis of all data
The averages of response times are shown in Table 1. In
the target metaphor condition, the response time is longer
than in the baseline condition (F(1, 131) = 6.43, p < .05).
There is also a main effect of prime kind (F(3, 393) = 7.38,
p < .01). Combining across difference of kinds of prime
and metaphor conditions, primes made participants respond
faster. The results show that the prime facilitated responding to target words (emergent feature) and made judgment to
them faster in both conditions. The results indicate that there
is a relationship between a prime (non-emergent features) and
target words (emergent features).
We analyzed the difference between response times depending on the response. Average response times when the
participants respond “Yes” or “No” are shown in Table 2.
Thirty participants responded “Yes” (“No”) for all emergent
features with any kind of prime in the target metaphor condition (in the baseline condition) and these data were removed
for this analysis. There was an interaction between metaphor
condition and responses (F(1, 101) = 86.1, p < .01). Participants responded “Yes” significantly faster than “No” in
the target metaphor condition. Conversely, they responded
“No” faster than “Yes” in the baseline condition. In the target metaphor condition, when participants responded “Yes,”
the response is correct in the sense that the materials were
designed so that the target would be an apt interpretation of
the metaphor. Similarly, in the baseline condition, a “No”
response would be correct. This suggests that people might
be making errors not through fast guessing, but because of
close competition between “Yes” and “No” responses. And,
when participants made errors, there was a possibility that
they could not interpret the metaphor. Thus, the response
times confirmed an influence of the primes to “the correct
responses.” So, we tested the “correct” responses.

Analysis of correct responses

Figure 1: Time course of a trialin the experiment. In the target metaphor condition, prime and target words are interpretations of the metaphor which was presented between them.
In the baseline condition, the primes and targets do not relate
to the metaphor.

The average response times when the participants responded
with the “correct” response are shown in Figure2. The results
show that the primed non-emergent features (common, topic,
vehicle features) facilitated processing of emergent features
(F(3, 393) = 8.12, p < .01) in both conditions.
Therefore, we tested proportions of correct responses. The
proportions of “Yes” responses in the target metaphor and
“No” responses in the baseline condition are shown in Figure 3.
The proportions were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA1 .
The proportion of correct responses in the baseline condition
is higher than in the target metaphor condition(F(1, 131) =
15.7, p < .01). The response times and the accuracy rates
indicate that it was more difficult to recognize an emergent
feature as an interpretation of the metaphor than to find that
1 When an arcsine transformation was applied to the proportion
data because of the restriction of these data to a 0-1 range and theproportions were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA after transformation, the results show the same tendency that are indicated when
the non-transformed proportions are analyzed.

2401

Table 1: Averages of the response times (milliseconds) for all data. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.

Kinds
of
prime

Common feature
Topic feature
Vehicle feature
No prime

Metaphor (condition)
Target metaphor
Irrelevant metaphor
(Target metaphor condition) (Baseline condition)
1769.0 (957.0)
1724.2 (905.4)
1759.8 (933.1)
1716.5 (927.2)
1756.6 (877.8)
1718.2 (908.6)
1848.7 (952.2)
1797.5 (934.8)

Table 2: Averages of the response times (milliseconds) depending on their responses. Standard deviations are shown in
parentheses.
Target metaphor condition
Response
“Yes”
“No”
Common 1704.3 1919.8
feature
(914.2) (1035.2)
Kinds Topic
1726.6 1830.2
of
feature
(922.3) (952.3)
prime Vehicle
1701.3 1861.6
feature
(891.6) (983.3)
No
1816.3 1921.0
prime
(929.9) (997.1)
Baseline condition
Response
“Yes”
“No”
Common 1839.3
1687.9
feature
(1080.4) (840.0)
Kinds
Topic
1821.8
1684.1
of
feature
(1010.5) (830.3)
primes Vehicle
1851.9
1679.6
feature
(1042.3) (862.6)
No
1848.9
1781.8
prime
(1056.8) (894.1)

Figure 2: Average response times for correct responses.
(The response time when they responded “Yes” in the target metaphor condition and when they responded “No” in the
baseline condition.)

the emergent feature was not an interpretation of the irrelevant metaphor. Furthermore, there is a two-way interaction
(F(3, 393) = 4.16, p < .01). There are no significant differences among the proportions correct in the baseline condition,
however, the accuracy with the vehicle primes is significantly
lower than with the common primes or without a prime in
the target metaphor condition at a p < .05 level. This means
that presentation of a non-emergent feature as a prime affected the metaphor understanding process and that vehicle
primes inhibited recognition of emergent features as interpretations of the metaphor. The difference of the results in the
two conditions suggests an interaction between non-emergent
and emergent features in metaphor comprehension.
Furthermore, there is no significant difference between
proportions of correct responses with and without a com-

Figure 3: Average proportions of correct responses. (Average
proportions of “Yes” responses in the target metaphor condition and that of “No” responses in the baseline condition.)

mon prime in the target metaphor condition. However, the
proportion with common primes is slightly higher than without a prime. That is, the presentation of the common feature
might make the emergent features recognized more easily as
the metaphor interpretations.

2402

Discussion
The response time results show that participants gave faster
correct responses with a prime than without a prime. Even
in the baseline condition, the response times with a prime
are shorter. Therefore, there is a robust relationship between
the primed feature (non-emergent feature) and the target word
(emergent feature), regardless of the condition. The proportions of correct responses with a vehicle prime were significantly lower than that with a common prime or with no prime
in the metaphor condition but there was no significant difference in the baseline condition. The results of the proportion
correct suggest the existence of an interaction between nonemergent and emergent features in metaphor comprehension.
McGlone and Manfredi (2001) found that the primed
metaphor-irrelevant properties of vehicles inhibited metaphor
comprehension. They concluded that metaphor-irrelevant
property primes led their participants to initially consider the
inappropriate literal sense of the vehicle, rather than retrieve
the metaphoric category that the vehicle exemplified, their results are consistent with the interactive property attribution
model (Glucksberg, McGlone, & Manfredi 1997). This latter
approach models metaphor comprehension as a process of interpreting the topic as a member of the metaphoric category
of the vehicle. This model can account for the inhibition of
the emergent interpretation of the metaphor by presenting the
vehicle feature prime. For example, the vehicle “gateway”
can be interpreted either as a literal arch or as a metaphorical opening. If the vehicle prime “swings” is presented, this
may be expected to inhibit the emergent metaphoric feature
of “way to reach desired destination.” Our results provide evidence for active competition between literal and figurative
interpretations of vehicles.
Particularly when a metaphor is not conventional, the
metaphoric category of the vehicle may not simply be retrieved. For example, in the conventional metaphor “the
lawyer is a shark,” the metaphoric category of “shark” (e.g.
vicious, dangerous) may be stable and reliably activated.
However, for the metaphor “marriage is a joyride,” because
“joyride” is not only fun but also dangerous, the metaphoric
category of “joyride” could be retrieved as a product of the
features of either “fun” or “dangerous.” That is, the category
of “joyride” might be unstable and flexibly represented. In
this case, the presentation of a vehicle feature “fun” might
inhibit the recognition of “frightening” which is associated
with “dangerous.” In this experiment, the average rating of
conventionality of the target metaphors is 2.74 (standard deviation is 1.73). Because this value is between 2 (slightly
rare) and 3 (neutral), these metaphors should probably be
considered non-conventional. As such, the priming of vehicle features could have inhibited recognition of the emergent
features, many of which would not have been automatically
triggered by the vehicle.
There was no significant difference between the proportions of correct responses with topic primes and without/with
other primes in the metaphor condition. These results show

that features derived from the vehicle might affect feature
emergence more than that from the topic, bearing in mind that
the effect of vehicle features on the interpretation of emergent features is negative. This assumption is consistent with
Becker’s (1997) suggestion that altering a metaphor’s vehicle
produced greater changes in emergent content than did altering the topic.
The proportion of correct responses with the common feature primes is slightly higher than that without a prime, and
the response times with primed common features are significantly shorter than without a prime. Priming with common features apparently made participants recognize emergent features quickly and easily. The common features are
also, naturally, present in the vehicle. Thus, having a feature
that is shared by both the topic and vehicle affects feature
emergence in a very different manner than when the feature
is only possessed by the vehicle. Given that the common features also come from the topic, variations in them are more
limited than that of the vehicle features. In fact, Nueckles
and Janetzko (1997) reported that different people agree on
the same common features as interpretations of the metaphor.
Furthermore, Becker (1997) showed that the common features are judged to be most important for metaphor interpretation. Therefore, priming with the common feature might
give a well-constrained, general direction of the interpretation to the reader. As a result, it is likely that new features for
a metaphor emerge through associations with common features. This is consistent with the findings that emergent features are relatively creative reactions to metaphors (Gineste et
al., 2000), because the common features might be more active
when the metaphor is primed than when the vehicle or topic
term only is primed.
From these results, there are apparently interactions, both
facilitative and inhibitory, among features in metaphor comprehension. Furthermore, because the feature derived from
the vehicle had the greatest impact on emergent feature interpretation, it supports the interactive property attribution
model. The property attribution model assumes that the literal level of abstraction is appropriate only for the topic term.
The vehicle term is understood at a higher level of abstraction,
specifically, a category. If the assumption is correct, then the
primed features derived from the vehicle have a stronger affect on metaphor comprehension.
Previous research has shown that emergent features required more time to be recognized as interpretations of the
metaphor than non-emergent features (Terai & Goldstone,
2011). Nueckles and Janetzko (1997) suggested the idea that
metaphor comprehension proceeds in two stages. Based on
these previous results and the findings in this experiment, we
may speculate that metaphor comprehension proceeds in two
processes. In the first process, a reader tries to interpret a
metaphor based on the non-emergent features. If this does
not produce a sufficiently high aptness evaluation, then the
reader attempts to find emergent features, a longer and cognitively more taxing process. The first process could be ac-

2403

complished according to the interactive property attribution
model (Glucksberg et al., 1997). That is to say, at first, nonemergent features are discovered as interpretations through a
process in which the vehicle is understood to be referring to
a metaphoric category that includes the topic’s literal referent
as a member. Subsequently, new features become associated
with non-emergent features.
This assumption has been incorporated into a simulation
model but not validated by an experiment. The model (Terai
& Nakagawa 2008, 2010) simulates feature emergence under the two-process assumption which consists of a categorization process followed by a dynamic interaction process.
The categorization process is based on the interactive property attribution model and the dynamic interaction process
represents interaction among features. The currently reported
results support the two-process assumption. However the
results did not provide unambiguous evidence for the twoprocess assumption. Therefore, more examination is required
to verify it.
To elucidate the mechanism of feature emergence during
metaphor interpretation, we used non-emergent features as
primes. The experiment was conducted in order to explain
feature emergence during the comprehension of metaphors
taking the form of “TOPIC is VEHICLE.” For this type of
metaphor, the interaction could explain feature emergence.
However, when “emergence” is explained in different types
of metaphor comprehension (e.g. predicative metaphor comprehension), it might not be sufficient. Indurkhya (2006) proposed an idea to explain how new representations emerge
through a cognitive agent’s interaction with the environment
from the viewpoint of “interaction” and “Gestalt perception.”

Acknowledgments
We are deeply grateful to Dr. Angela H. Becker for allowing
us to use their valuable data. This research is supported by
MEXT’s program Promotion of Environmental Improvement for Independence of Young Researchers, KAKENHI
Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) 23700160. We want to
thank to Alex Nay for collecting data.

Glucksberg, S., McGlone, M., & Manfredi, D. (1997). Property attribution in metaphor comprehension. Journal of
Memory and Language, 36, 50–67.
Indurkhya, B. (2006). Emergent representations, interaction
theory and the cognitive force of metaphor. New Ideas in
Psychology, 24, 133–162.
McGlone, M. S., & Manfredi, D. A. (2001). Topic-vehicle
interaction in metaphor comprehension. Memory and Cognition, 29, 1209–1219.
Nueckles, M., & Janetzko, D. (1997). The role of semantic
similarity in the comprehension of metaphor. In Proceedings of the 19th annual meeting of the cognitive science
society (pp. 578–583).
Terai, A., & Goldstone, R. L. (2011). Processing emergent
features in metaphor comprehension. In Proceedings of the
33rd annual meeting of the cognitive science society (pp.
2043–2048).
Terai, A., & Nakagawa, M. (2007). A neural network model
of metaphor understanding with dynamic interaction based
on a statistical language analysis; targeting a human-like
model. International Journal of neural systems, 17, 265–
274.
Terai, A., & Nakagawa, M. (2008). A corpus-based computational model of metaphor understanding incorporating
dynamic interaction. In V.kurkova et al. (eds): Proceedings of icann 2008, part2, lncs 5164 (pp. 443–452). Berlin
Heidelberg Springer-Verlag.
Terai, A., & Nakagawa, M. (2010). A computational model
of metaphor understanding based on a probabilistic concept structure-using statistical analysis of japanese corpus
(in japanese). Cognitive Studies, 17, 129–142.
Utsumi, A. (2000). Hiyu no ninchi / keisan moderu (cognition
of metaphors / computational model). Computer Today, 96,
34–39.
Wolff, P., & Gentner, D. (2000). Evidence for role-neutral
initial processing of metaphors. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26, 529–
541.

References
Becker, A. H. (1997). Emergent and common features influence metaphor interpretation. Metaphor and Symbol, 12,
243–259.
Black, M. (1979). More about metaphor. In A. Ortony (Ed.),
Metaphor and thought (pp. 19–45). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Clement, C. (1988). Evidence for relational
selectivity in the interpretation of analogy and metaphor. In
G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation, advances in research and theory (pp. 307–358). New
York: Academic Press.
Gineste, M., Indurkhya, B., & Scart, V. (2000). Emergence of
features in metaphor comprehension. Metaphor and Symbol, 15, 117–135.

2404

