UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An experimental investigation of consistency of explanation and graph representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5rd400c8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kanzaki, Nana
Miwa, Kazuhisa

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An experimental investigation of consistency of explanation and graph
representation
Nana Kanzaki (kanzaki@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Japan

Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Japan

Abstract
Many previous studies of graph comprehension have
confirmed that information gleaned from a graph is greatly
influenced by its representation. When explaining data with a
graph, writers/researchers must generate graphs whose
representation is consistent with the explanation contents. In
the current study, we defined those who engage in academic
activities using graphs on a daily basis as expert graph users
and investigated whether they and undergraduates (nonexperts) can adaptively generate a consistent graph with
explanations from the viewpoint of the consistency of the
contents and graph representation. Experiment 1 indicated
that expert graph users adaptively generate a graph whose
structure is consistent with the explanation contents. On the
other hand, Experiment 2 suggests that undergraduates cannot
do so. But in Experiment 3 undergraduates were supported by
selecting graphs from provided candidates, but there was a
limited concordance between the type of explanation and
graph representation.
Keywords: Diagrammatic representation; Graph; Explanation.

Introduction
Many previous studies confirmed that using diagrams is
effective for understanding information. In a pioneering
psychological paper, Larkin & Simon (1987) theoretically
demonstrated the efficacy of using diagrams while solving a
problem and suggested that diagrammatic representation
simplifies access to relative information more than
sentential representation does, and transforms the cognitive
processes into more efficient ones.
Norman (1991) pointed out that task difficulties depend
on such visual representation as figures and tables and
promote problem solving performance. He also suggested
that a cognitively consistent correspondence between
internal representation and external world is crucial.
In this study, we experimentally investigated the
consistency of the contents of the explanations and the
representations of graphs for the explanation. Kosslyn
(2006), who marshaled psychological findings about graph
design, argued that graph representation must be examined,
especially based on the human cognitive system for
effectively conveying information. And also, Hegarty(2011)
mentioned the importance of cognitive science to design
visual-spatial displays.
Graphs, which are pictures that convey logical
relationships among numbers for a specific purpose, include
line graphs, bar graphs, step graphs, and pie charts. Specific

examples of graph usage are demonstrated in the
Publication Manual of the American Psychological
Association (2001).
Experimental studies of graph comprehension confirmed
that the information from a graph is greatly influenced by its
representation. Graphs can be represented in various forms.
Different representations generated from an identical data
set elicit different interpretations of the graphs. For example,
in studies of inferences from bar and line graphs, viewers
are more likely to describe x-y trends when viewing line
graphs than bar graphs (Zacks & Tversky, 1999; Shah,
Mayer, & Hegarty, 1999). Peebles and Cheng (2003)
suggested that the comprehension time of certain
information differs depending on the graph structure.
Although many studies on graph comprehension have
been conducted, graph generation is also an important issue.
In the current study, we deal with the issue of arrangements
of variables on graphs when generating them. Shah and
Carpenter (1995) confirmed that x-y trends were
comprehended easily, although z-y trends were
comprehended with difficulty using three-variable line
graphs (e.g., Carpenter & Shah, 1998; Kanzaki & Miwa,
2011). The reason may be that visual chunks are constructed
for every line in a line graph, and the graph is interpreted
based on each chunk.
Consider the case indicated in Table 1 where a line graph
is depicted from the data that consist of two independent
Variables, A and B, and one dependent variable, Variable C.
Two types of graphs are considered. One is a graph in which
Variable A is put on the x-axis and Variable B on the z-label
(Figure 1(a)), and on the other Variable B is put on the xaxis and Variable A on the z-label (Figure 1(b)). According
to Larkin & Simon (1998), these two graphs are
informationally equivalent but computationally different;
they are equivalent because they are constructed from
identical data sets, but they are different since different
chunks are constructed in each of the graphs and the
information may be read in different ways. When explaining
Table 1: Variable C vs. Variables A and B.

Variable A

557

10
30
50

10
20
50
80

Variable B
30
50
50
50

50
80
50
20

100

Variable B 10

80

Variable B 30

60

Variable B 50

Variable C

Variable C

100

40

Variable A 10

80

Variable A 30

60

Variable A 50

40
20

20

0

0
10

30

10

50

30

50

Variable B

Variable A

(b)

(a)
Figure 1: Graphs made from Table 1.
the data of Table 1, one of two alternative graphs must be
generated whose structure is consistent with the explanation.
Consider a more specific situation in which we must
adjust independent Variable B with an uncontrollable
change of Variable A to intentionally control the quantity of
dependent Variable C. When explaining how to manage
Variable B in this situation, the explanation is classified into
two types from the viewpoint of the representation of
Variable A. In one explanation, Variable A is described
discretely. In this classification, the explanation is generated
for each level of Variable A, such as “when Variable A is at
…, you should set Variable B to ...” In the other explanation,
Variable A is described continuously. In this classification,
the explanation reflects whether its value is larger than a
specific value, such as “when Variable A is larger than ...,
set Variable B to …”, or from the viewpoint of a
continuously changing variable A, such as “according to the
increase of Variable A.”
When two independent variables are placed on a line
graph, one variable is commonly put on the x-axis and the
other on the z-label. In such a situation, it is contemplated
that the variable on the x-axis is regarded as a continuous
variable, and the one on the z-label is regarded as a discrete
variable because the x-axis is represented as a continuous
factor and the z-label as a discrete factor.
Kosslyn (2006) noted that “the continuous rise and fall of
a line is psychologically compatible with the continuous
nature of an interval scale. . . Time, temperature, and
amount of money are measured using an interval scale.”
Additionally, Kanzaki & Miwa (2011) suggested that an
explanation based on each line increases the comprehension
of a line graph because a chunk of each line is generated
(e.g., Carpenter & Shah, 1998; Shah & Carpenter, 1995).
These studies indicate that a variable on the z-label in a line
graph is regarded as a discrete variable.
The above investigations propose a hypothesis, where in a
normative graph, an independent variable is put on the xaxis when the variable is regarded as a continuous variable
in the explanation; in contrast, an independent variable is
put on the z-label when it is regarded as a discrete variable.

If this hypothesis is correct, we predict the following
when we must explain how to adjust independent Variable
B, with the uncontrollable change of independent Variable
A to control the quantity of dependent Variable C:
1. Participants who treated Variable A as a continuous
variable in their explanation put it on the x-axis (Figure
1(a)).
2. Participants who treated Variable A as a discrete
variable in their explanation put it on the z-label (Figure
1(b).
In the current study, expert graph users participated in
Experiment 1, whom we defined as those who daily engage
in academic activities using graphs. Our first objective is to
confirm whether such experts adaptively generate graphs
that are consistent. We expected them to do so because they
have much experience giving presentations with graphs and
reading them in research papers.
Our second aim is to perform a similar experiment with
undergraduates as novices. Undergraduates who have not
received systematic training in statistics participated in our
second and third experiments. We propose a hypothesis that
they may have trouble generating consistent graphs when
they are required to adaptively generate graphs based on
understanding such highly abstract mathematical concepts
as continuousness and discreteness.
Recently, various types of software have been developed
for making graphs. User can automatically generate them by
simply choosing some properties. In this situation, users
select a graph rather than generate one. The third objective
is to examine whether undergraduates can select a consistent
graph when they are presented alternative candidates of
consistent graphs.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 investigated whether people who use graphs
daily can adaptively generate consistent graphs when
constructing an explanation with them.
We set a situation in which either “air temperature” or
“humidity” was adjusted to promote the growth of “newly
discovered mushrooms.” Two dependent variables, air

558

temperature and humidity, can be treated either as
continuous or discrete. An independent variable is the
“amount of mushroom growth.” The table used in our
experiments is the same as Table 1, but Variables A, B, and
C were replaced with specific factors: humidity, air
temperature, and amount of growth. The shape of the line
graph generated from the table is also the same as in Figure
1. These two graphs’ shapes were controlled to be the same
in order that the ease of constructing explanation should not
be affected by the shapes of the graphs.
In our experiments, we set two situations for a particular
explanation context. In one situation, participants explained
how to promote mushroom growth by adjusting the
humidity, where air temperature was not controllable. In the
other situation, they did so by adjusting the air temperature,
where the humidity was not controllable. These two
situations were counter-balanced in the experimental
procedure.

Method
Participants The participants in Experiment 1 were either
university associate professors or doctoral students in
experimental psychology. 22 researchers participated as
experts. 17 had Ph. Ds. All participants had published one
or more peer-reviewed academic journal papers.
Procedure The experiment was performed individually or
in small groups. The participants were presented the table
shown in Table 1 and given the following instructions:
“A new kind of mushroom was recently discovered
whose growth greatly depends on air temperature and
humidity. Its growth at specific temperatures and humidities
is shown in this table.”
Half of the participants were given a situation where the
amount of growth was controlled by adjusting the humidity,
but the temperature was not controllable. For these
participants, the following instructions were given:
“You are a salesperson of mushroom seedlings. Your
customers can adjust the humidity in their mushroom
greenhouses, but they cannot adjust the temperature.
Explain how to grow the mushrooms by adjusting the
humidity with uncontrollable changes of temperature. Use a
line graph in your explanation.”
For counter-balance manipulation, the other half was
given a situation where the humidity could not be adjusted,
and temperature was replaced by humidity in the
instructions.
They wrote their explanation in ten minutes and then
drew a graph on an experimental sheet shown in Figure 2 in
five minutes, labeling the x-axis and the z-legend by
themselves.

Figure 2: Graph format used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Classifying generated graphs The generated graphs were
classified by the placement of an unadjustable variable in
the graphs. The following were the classification criteria:
(1) X-axis unadjustable graph: an unadjustable variable is
put on the x-axis
(2) Z-legend unadjustable graph: an unadjustable variable is
put on the z-legend
Classifying explanations The participant explanations were
classified depending on whether the unadjustable variable
was described as a continuous or a discrete variable. The
following were the classification criteria:
(1) Continuous explanation: an unadjustable variable is
described continuously. The following are example
explanations in this category for a situation where the
temperature is not adjustable: “When the temperature is
above 30ºC,” “according to the increase of temperature,”
and so on.
(2) Discrete explanation: an unadjustable variable is
described discretely. Example explanations in the same
situation include, “When the temperature is at 10ºC,”
“when the temperature is low,” and so on.
When both types of descriptions appeared in an
explanation, the classification was made based on the
description that was part of the conclusion. Such
descriptions were usually seen in the last part of the
explanation.

Results and discussions
The participants were grouped depending on whether they
generated continuous or discrete explanations. Those who
generated continuous explanations were classified as the
continuous explanation group, and those who generated
discrete explanations as the discrete explanation group. Ten
of the 22 participants were categorized in the continuous
explanation group and the other twelve in the discrete
explanation group.
Figure 3 shows the proportions of the graphs classified
into each category in the two groups.
To examine whether the structure of the generated graphs
was influenced by the described explanation, a two
difference in the distribution (Χ2(1, N=22) = 6.42, p< .05).

559

Z-legend
unadjustable graph

0.8

X-axis
unadjustable graph

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Continuous

Proportion of participants

Proportion of participants

1.0

1.0

Z-legend
unadjustable graph

0.8

X-axis
unadjustable graph

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Continuous

Discrete

Discrete

Explanation group

Explanation group

Figure 3: Proportions of participants who generated x-axis
or z-legend unadjustable graphs in Experiment 1.

Figure 4: Proportions of participants who generated x-axis
or z-legend unadjustable graphs in Experiment 2.

(continuous and discrete explanation groups) x two (x-axis
and z-legend generated graphs) chi-square test was
performed on their distribution. There was a significant
A residual analysis shows that both the numbers of the
participants who generated x-axis unadjustable graphs in the
continuous explanation and z-legend unadjustable graphs in
the discrete explanation group were greater than the
expected values (the residual value was 2.53). On the other
hand, both the numbers of participants who generated zlegend unadjustable graphs in the continuous explanation
group and x-axis unadjustable graphs in the discrete
explanation group were less than the expected values (the
residual value was -2.53).
This result suggests a tendency to generate specific line
graphs in which an unadjustable variable was put on the xaxis when it was regarded as a continuous variable in an
explanation. On the other hand, there was a tendency to
generate graphs in which an unadjustable variable was put
on the z-legend when it was regarded as a discrete variable.
This result implies that the participants, who use graphs on a
daily basis, adaptively generate graphs whose structures are
consistent with their explanations.

other half was given a situation where the growth was
controlled by adjusting the temperature, but the humidity
was not controllable.
Procedure The procedure of Experiment 2 was the same as
that of Experiment 1.

Experiment 2

Results and discussions
Seventeen of the 44 participants were categorized in the
continuous explanation group and the other 27 in the
discrete explanation group.
Figure 4 shows the proportions of graphs classified into
each category in the two groups.
To examine whether the structure of the generated graphs
was influenced by the described explanation, a two
(continuous and discrete explanation groups) x two (x-axis
and z-legend generated graphs) chi-square test was
performed on the distribution of the generated graphs. There
was no significant difference in the distribution (Χ2(1,
N=44) = 0.02, ns). This result suggests that undergraduates
cannot generate consistent graphs.

Experiment 3

In Experiment 1, we confirmed that expert graph users
adaptively generate graphs whose structures are consistent
with their explanations. In Experiment 2, we performed the
same investigation with undergraduates who have little
experience of making graphs when explaining something.

In Experiment 2, we confirmed that undergraduates did not
necessarily make graphs whose structure is consistent with
their explanations. In Experiment 2, the participants
generated graphs by themselves. But in Experiment 3, we
gave them two candidates of consistent graphs and let them
select one to investigate whether they could adaptively
select a consistent graph from two alternatives.

Method

Method

In the following, descriptions are omitted about the same
procedures as in Experiment 1.
Participants 44 undergraduate Liberal Arts majors who had
not completed a course in statistics participated. Half were
given a situation where the growth was controlled by
adjusting the humidity, but the temperature was not
controllable, and for counter-balance manipulation, the

In the following, descriptions are omitted about the same
procedures as in Experiment 2.
Participants 57 undergraduate Liberal Arts majors who had
not completed a statistics course participated. 29 were given
a situation where the growth was controlled by adjusting the
humidity, but the temperature was not controllable, and for
the counter-balance manipulation, the other 28 were given a

560

Proportion of participants

Discussion and conclusions

1.0

Z-legend
unadjustable graph

0.8

X-axis
unadjustable graph

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Continuous

Discrete

Explanation group

Figure 5: Proportions of participants who selected x-axis or
z-legend unadjustable graphs in Experiment 3.
situation where the growth was controlled by adjusting the
air temperature, but the humidity was not controllable.
Procedure The experiment was performed as part of their
class assignments. The participants wrote a script for the
given situation and presented the table used in Experiments
1 and 2. They were also presented two types of line graphs
made from the table, such as those in Figure 1, and required
to select a suitable one.

Results and discussions
Five participants were excluded from analysis because they
failed to follow the instructions. 20 were categorized in the
continuous explanation group and the other 32 in the
discrete explanation group.
Figure 5 shows the proportions of graphs classified into
each category in the two groups.
To examine whether the structure of the selected graphs
was influenced by the described explanation, a two
(continuous and discrete explanation groups) x two (x-axis
and z-legend selected graphs) chi-square test was performed
on their distribution. There was a significant difference
(Χ2(1, N=52) = 5.62, p< .05). A residual analysis shows that
both the numbers of the participants who selected x-axis
unadjustable graphs in the continuous explanation group
and z-legend unadjustable graphs in the discrete
explanation group were greater than the expected values
(the residual value was 1.96). On the other hand, both the
numbers of the participants who selected z-legend
unadjustable graphs in the continuous explanation group
and x-axis unadjustable graphs in the discrete explanation
group were less than the expected values (the residual value
was -1.96).
This result implies that undergraduates tended to
adaptively select consistent graphs if alternatives were
presented to them. However, in Experiment 3, the
proportions of participants who selected x-axis unadjustable
graphs were greater than those in the result of the expert
graph users in Experiment 1. We discuss this point below.

In this study, we investigated whether expert graph users
and undergraduates make consistent graphs from given data
to construct explanations. The result of Experiment 1
confirmed that expert graph users successfully generated
graphs in relation to their explanations. On the other hand,
Experiment 2 showed that undergraduates failed to indicate
this tendency.
We discuss the results in the light of our hypothesis
proposed in the introduction by analyzing the proportions of
each type of graphs in each explanation group.
In the result of Experiment 1 (Figure 3) in the discrete
explanation group, the proportion of z-legend unadjustable
graphs was significantly larger than that of the x-axis
unadjustable graphs (p = .019, one-tailed Fisher’s exact
tests). This means that the clearly greater use of a discrete
factor in the graph was due to the influence of the greater
use of discrete expressions in the explanation. In other
words, there was a consistency between the explanation and
the graph. On the other hand, in the continuous explanation
group, although the proportion of x-axis unadjustable
graphs was larger than that of the z-legend unadjustable
graphs, there was no significant difference in their
proportions (p = .172, one-tailed Fisher’s exact tests). Three
of the ten experts in the continuous explanation group put
the variable described as a continuous one on the z-legend,
contrary to our expectation. When analyzing their
explanations, two of the three generated explanations based
on the slopes of the lines. For example, in the humidity
unadjustable situation, “when the humidity is lower than
30%, the mushroom growth proportionally increases with
the air temperature because the line slope is positive.” Since
a line slope is described based on each label of the z-legend,
and a line slope is represented continuously in a line graph,
they put the continuous variable on the z-legend. The above
investigation supports that, as a whole, expert graph users
adaptively generated consistent graphs both in the
continuous and discrete explanation groups.
Next, we discuss the graph generation by undergraduates
in Experiment 2 (Figure 4). To generate consistent graphs,
we must examine what should be represented based on deep
consideration of explanations (Kosslyn, 2006). Our result
implies that undergraduates tend to use graphs without such
consideration.
On the other hand, when selecting a graph in Experiment
3, undergraduates were given choices. Such given choices
might enable them to consider the consistency of their
explanation and graph representation.
As Norman (1992) noted: "to think of the problem of
designing something that people will find understandable
and easy to use as the same problem as writing something
that other people will understand and find easy to read." The
process of generating a graph for conveying information
resembles the process of writing. A cognitive writing model
proposed by Hayes & Flower (1980) consists of planning,
translating (text production), and reviewing. Similarly, the
process of generating a graph also involves planning, in

561

which people discuss how to present information,
translating (depicting), in which people depict a graph, and
reviewing, in which people review whether the graph is
appropriate for their purpose. Studies on writing point out
the troubles of the planning phase in novices: e.g., not
considering situations and objectives for explanation
(Flower & Hayes, 1980) and tending to ignore planning
(Carey, Flower, Hayes, Schriver, & Haas, 1989).
When selecting a graph from the candidates in
Experiment 3, the undergraduates were only required to
review a graph in the light of explanation without planning
and translating. This may explain why more consistent
graphs were selected in Experiment 3 than in Experiment 2.
In Experiment 3 (Figure 5), although we confirmed that
the proportions of each type of graphs adaptively changed
depending on the explanation contents, as a general
tendency, the proportion of x-axis unadjustable graphs
exceeded that of the z-legend unadjustable graphs. This
tendency was also shown in Experiment 2 (Figure 4). These
results suggest that undergraduates tended to put an
unadjustable variable on the x-axis without considering their
explanations.
In this study, we defined the normative consistency of
explanation and graph representation from the viewpoint of
the variable’s continuousness and discreteness. Scrutiny is
needed to confirm whether such graph consistency actually
promotes understanding. Such investigation remains
important future work.
Finally, even if the automatic generation of graphs with
spreadsheet software simplifies their utilization, this study’s
results indicate that undergraduates still have trouble
selecting consistent graphs. On the other hand, presenting
candidate graphs improved the selection of consistent
graphs, implying that presenting undergraduates with
variations of possible graphs and having them consider the
relation of what they wish to explain and the candidate
graphs may be an effective method in tutoring graph
construction.

Hegarty, M. (2011). The cognitive science of visual-spatial
displays: implications for design. Topics in cognitive
science,3, 446-474.
Kanzaki, N., & Miwa, K. (2011). Experimental
investigation of effects of representations and contexts on
comprehension and generation of line graphs.
Proceedings of 33rd annual conference of the cognitive
science society (CogSci 2011), 2196-2201.
Kosslyn, S. M. (2006). Graph Design for the Eye And Mind.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science,
11, 65-99.
Norman, D. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In J. M. Carroll
(Ed.), Designing interaction: Psychology at the humancomputer interface. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 17-38.
Norman, D. (1992). Turn signals are the facial expressions
of automobiles. Cambridge: Perseus Books.
Peebles, D., & Cheng, P. C. H. (2003). Modeling the effect
of task and graphical representation on response latency
in a graph reading task. Human Factors, 45, 28-45.
Shah, P., & Carpenter, P. A. (1995). Conceptual limitations
in comprehending line graphs. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-General, 124, 43-61.
Shah, P., Mayer, R. E., & Hegarty, M. (1999). Graphs as
aids to knowledge construction: Signaling techniques for
guiding the process of graph comprehension. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 690-702.
Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (1999). Bar and lines: A study of
graphic communication. Memory & Cognition, 27, 10731079.

References
American Psychological Association (2001). Publication
Manual of the American Psychological Association. 5th
ed., Washington, DC; American Psychological
Association.
Carpenter, P. A., & Shah, P. (1998). A model of the
perceptual and conceptual processes in graph
comprehension. Journal of Experimental PsychologyApplied, 4, 75-100.
Carey, L.J., Flower, L., Hayes, J. R., Schriver, K. A., &
Haas, C. (1989). Differences in writers’ initial task
representations. Technical Report No. 35. (ERIC
Document Reproduction Service No. ED310403)
Hayes, J. & Flower, L. (1980). Identifying the organization
of writing processes. In L. Gregg, & E. Steinberg (Eds.),
Cognitive processes in writing. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

562

