UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Automated and Partner-Specific Factors Influencing Lexical Entrainment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6w4926dt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Mol, Lisette
Bogers, Rens
Bouwens, Tommy

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Automated and Partner-Specific Factors Influencing Lexical Entrainment
Lisette Mol (l.mol@uvt.nl)
Rens Bogers (e.a.j.j.bogers@uvt.nl)
Tommy Bouwens (t.j.f.bouwens@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities, Tilburg University
P.O. Box 90135, NL-5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract

choose their referring expressions based on these factors,
they may end up choosing the same references as a result.
However, most referents can be referred to in very many
ways (Brennan & Clark, 1996). Therefore, these three
factors alone are insufficient to explain the (frequent)
occurrence of lexical entrainment. Rather, the course of a
conversation needs to be taken into account too.
Brennan and Clark also propose four factors influencing
reference production that are related to the conversation
history: recency, frequency of use, provisionality and
partner-specificity. The first two factors imply that speakers
choose the reference that was used successfully for a certain
referent most recently, taking into account the frequency of
occurrence as well. That is, if a certain referring expression
has repeatedly been used successfully (e.g. 'couch') and then
an alternative reference is used successfully only once (e.g.
'sofa'), speakers may still revert to the more frequently used
reference afterward. The factors recency and frequency of
use together provide an explanation of lexical entrainment.
These two factors are compatible with a view that lexical
entrainment is based on automated priming (Pickering &
Garrod, 2004). In a (partly) connectionist model of
cognition (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998; McClelland &
Rummelhart, 1986; Rummelhart & McClelland, 1986), both
frequency of use and recency affect the availability of
chunks of information, such as lexical items. In line with
such models, Pickering and Garrod (2004) propose that
through the process of automated priming, interlocutors
align their linguistic representations, which causes them to
produce similar utterances. For example, when hearing a
certain reference, linguistic representations are associated
with it in the process of interpretation. As a result, the
activations of these representations increase, which makes it
more likely that they will be used in the process of language
production. Therefore, a referent that has been heard
frequently or recently is more likely to be produced. This
automated account of lexical entrainment, known as the
interactive-alignment account, predicts that lexical
entrainment will occur whenever speakers are exposed to,
and thus primed with, linguistic input.
Effects of provisionality and partner-specificity are not
necessarily predicted by such an automated account. These

Both automated priming (Pickering & Garrod, 2004) and
partner-specific adaptation (Brennan & Hanna, 2009) have
been proposed to underlie lexical entrainment (the repetition
of words across interlocutors). Since activation levels of
infrequently used words are relatively low, the effect of
automated priming is predicted to be weaker in L2- than in
L1-conversations, leaving more room for deliberate partnerspecificity (Costa, Pickering, & Sorace, 2008). We tested this
prediction by means of a production experiment, in which we
varied whether participants interacted in their L1 or L2, and
whether they addressed the confederate who had introduced a
certain reference or another addressee. We found that in their
L2, participants repeated references more frequently when
addressing the person who had introduced the reference. Yet
we did not find this effect of partner-specificity in the L1
conditions. Therefore, our results support the proposed
combination of the two accounts.
Keywords:
Speech
production; alignment;
lexical
entrainment; interactive-alignment account; conceptual pact

Introduction
When people interact in dialogue, the referring expressions
they use tend to converge (e.g. see Branigan, Pickering,
Pearson, & McLean, 2010). For example, if one person
refers to a landmark as 'the cathedral', it is likely that a
conversation partner would refer to it as such as well, rather
than saying 'the church'. This process is known as lexical
entrainment (Garrod & Anderson, 1987). Different
explanations have been proposed for this observation, either
relying on automated processes (Pickering & Garrod, 2004)
or on the more deliberate process of grounding (Brennan &
Clark, 1996; Clark, 1996). In the current study, we test
predictions made by each of these two accounts.

Accounts of Lexical Entrainment
Lexical entrainment can be measured by comparing the
ways in which people refer to objects, locations, times,
actions, people, etc. If two interlocutors use the same
expressions, they are said to be lexically entrained (Garrod
& Anderson, 1987). Brennan and Clark (1996) describe
three factors that influence reference production that are
independent of a conversation's history: informativeness,
lexical availability, and perceptual salience. If all speakers

755

factors have to do with a more active view of dialogue, in
which interlocutors are actively trying to establish common
ground (Clark & Brennan, 1991). According to Brennan and
Clark, "[w]hen speakers present a reference, they do so only
provisionally, and they then work with their addressee to
establish that it has been understood" (Brennan & Clark,
1996, p. 1484). Once this is established, interlocutors are
said to have formed a conceptual pact, which they are likely
to maintain. Since a conceptual pact results from an active
process, conceptual pacts are established between specific
interlocutors only (partner-specificity). Therefore, they
cannot simply be transferred to new interaction partners.
Rather, the process of grounding a referring expression will
have to start anew with any new interlocutor. Therefore, in
Brennan and Clark's account of lexical entrainment,
entrainment is more likely to occur when interlocutors share
a conversation history.

Thus, deliberate motivations for entrainment can also play a
role in L1-L2 conversations. Costa et al. (2008) predict that
there will always be some extent of lexical entrainment due
to automated priming, but this extent will be larger when
interlocutors have similar activation profiles for lexical
items, such as in L1-L1 conversations, than when they have
dissimilar activation profiles, such as in L1-L2 or L2-L2
conversations. Therefore, more deliberate ways of reaching
alignment of representations may be more likely to come
into play in L1-L2 and L2-L2 conversations.

Present Study
We are not aware of any empirical study that tested the
predictions made by Costa et al. (2008). Therefore, in this
study we aim to test the predictions previously laid out, as
well as the predictions made by Brennan and Clark's theory
on conceptual pacts (Brennan & Clark, 1996). To do so, we
measure the degree of lexical entrainment when speakers
are talking to an interlocutor who just addressed them (No
Switch condition) and when they need to switch to a
different addressee (Switch condition). In addition, we
assess whether there is a difference in the extent to which
this factor affects lexical entrainment when interlocutors
communicate in their native language (Dutch, L1-L1), as
compared to when they communicate in their second
language (English, L2-L2).
In order to keep track of who adapts to whom, we use a
controlled experiment, in which participants interact with a
confederate. The confederate introduces certain references
in one speech turn. We measure the degree to which these
references are repeated by the participant in the subsequent
speech turn.
The prediction following from grounding theory is that
participants are more likely to (partially) repeat a reference
when interacting with the partner who introduced the
reference than when switching partners. Even though
interactivity is limited in our study, participants can decide
to accept the reference (provisionally) introduced by the
confederate, introduce an adaptation of it, or introduce a
completely new reference. It is expected that participants are
less likely to produce a completely new reference for a
given referent, when interacting with a partner who already
introduced a reference for that referent.
The interactive-alignment account does not necessarily
predict such a difference between the Switch and No Switch
conditions, since whether a referent is reproduced solely
depends on automated priming and the linguistic input does
not differ across these settings. However, the characteristics
of the person who introduced the reference may serve as a
prime as well, such that an automated account may also
predict a (slight) difference, with more lexical entrainment
in the No Switch condition (e.g. Horton & Gerrig, 2005).
In both the L1 (Dutch) and L2 (English) conditions, the
confederate uses scripted route directions, with references
that were designed in advance. In the L2 conditions, these

Adaptation in L2 and L1
Consistent with the interactive-alignment account of lexical
entrainment, Costa, Pickering and Sorace (2008) propose
that lexical entrainment will be less pronounced when at
least one of the interlocutors needs to speak a second
language (L2) instead of the native language (L1). Since
some lexical items may have been used very rarely by an L2
speaker, their basic level activation may be very low.
Therefore, even though recency enhances this activation, it
may still be too low for the lexical item to be repeated. This
could lead to partially failed entrainment, as in the following
example, taken from Costa et al. (2008, p. 538):
(1) L2 speaker: I need a piece of paper with nothing on it
L1 speaker: A blank sheet of paper?
L2 speaker: Yeah, a blank piece of paper.
The more frequent word 'blank' is successfully entrained on,
which can be explained as it reaching a level of activation
that is sufficient for production. However, the infrequent
word 'sheet' is not repeated, which may evidence a too low
activation level, even after the recent occurrence. Thus,
interlocutors are less likely to entrain on words they have
encountered only infrequently, such as less familiar words
in their L2.
Apart from the automated process of priming underlying
lexical entrainment, which Costa et al. (2008) propose to be
the default, they also recognize that speakers can make
conscious decisions to either suppress the outcomes of this
automated process, or to entrain in situations where
automated priming does not facilitate entrainment. This
leaves room for the factors proposed by Brennan and Clark
(1996), such as partner-specificity. Bortfeld and Brennan
(1997) for example, found that native speakers were more
likely to entrain on the reference 'wheel' to refer to a tire
when interacting with an L2-speaker, than when interacting
with another L1-speaker. This seems to illustrate a
conscious decision by the L1-speaker, based on their
knowledge of their interlocutor's proficiency in the L2.

756

Procedure

references include lexical items that participants may have
come across only infrequently. Therefore, the account by
Costa et al. (2008) predicts that the automated process of
priming plays a more important role in our L1 conditions
than in our L2 conditions. Since the effect of automated
priming is predicted to be weaker in the L2 conditions, the
effect of deliberate partner-specificity is predicted to be
stronger there.

Participants were randomly assigned to the No Switch or
Switch conditions, as well as to the L1 (Dutch, L1-L1) or L2
(English, L2-L2) conditions. In the L1 conditions, the entire
experiment was carried out in Dutch. In the L2 conditions,
the routes had to be described in English, but instructions
were given in Dutch.
In the Switch conditions, two participants came to the lab,
where two confederates showed up as participants as well.
The experimenter took the four 'participants' to a room and
handed out written instructions to the participants and
confederates, who were allowed to ask clarification
questions. Once all was clear, one confederate and one
participant were selected by the experimenter to start the
experiment in another room. In each room, the participant
and confederate were seated across from each other, with a
table in between that had a low visual barrier on it, such as
to keep the listening interlocutor from already seeing the
route. A camera was positioned on one end of the room,
which was used to make recordings of the interaction.
In each of the two rooms, a confederate started the task by
sequentially describing two routes to a participant, who was
to draw these routes on corresponding maps. Once two
routes were described, the two participants were asked to
switch rooms, while the two confederates stayed in the same
room (this procedure was explained in the written
instructions). Each participant then described two routes to
the confederate whom they had not yet interacted with.
After these two descriptions, the participants switched
rooms again and the cycle repeated once. That is, the
participants heard two more routes from the confederate
they first interacted with and described two more routes to
the other confederate. Thus, in the Switch conditions,
participants never described routes to the confederate who
had given them route descriptions as well, but always to the
other confederate.
In the No Switch conditions, there was only one
confederate and one participant at a time. Both the
participant and the confederate switched rooms after the
confederate had described two routes and then the
participants described two routes in the other room, to the
same confederate. The interlocutors then switched rooms
again and the cycle was repeated once. The switching of
rooms was the same as in the Switch condition, to ensure
equal intervals between hearing and describing routes. In the
No Switch conditions, participants described routes to the
confederate who had also given them route descriptions.
After all routes had been described, the participants and
confederates filled out a questionnaire, including questions
on their native and second language. In the English
conditions, the questionnaire included the participant's high
school grade in English and a short 'fill in the gaps' test on
English. Finally, participants were asked consent for the use
of their data for research and educational purposes. All
participants consented to their data being used in this study.

Method
Participants
Forty-eight (14 male) native Dutch first-year students from
Tilburg University participated in our study as part of their
curriculum. They were aged between 18 and 35 years old
(M = 21.94, SD = 3.59). In the Netherlands, formal teaching
in (British) English starts around the age of twelve. Hence,
all participants knew English as a second language, but they
were not raised with it.

Design
We used a 2 x 2 between participants design with two
factors: Partner (levels: No Switch, Switch) and Language
(levels: L1/Dutch, L2/English). As dependent variable, we
used the mean number of (partial) repetitions of the
confederate's descriptions of certain landmarks. Two
confederates were counterbalanced across the different
conditions. Both confederates were male, native speakers of
Dutch, from the same (linguistic) region, similar in age (22,
24) and overall appearance (e.g. length, body type, dress,
haircut, complexion and hair color).

Task and Material
A confederate and a participant took turns describing two
routes to each other, which were depicted on bird's-eye view
maps of a city (see Figure 1). While one interlocutor
described a route as depicted on their map, the other
interlocutor tried to draw this route on a map that was
identical, except that the route was not depicted on it yet.
Interlocutors were instructed not to interrupt one another
during the route descriptions.

Figure 1: Example of a map used in the experiment.

757

Table 1: Examples of landmark descriptions given by the
confederates.

Table 2: Mean (SD) number of (partial) repetitions of the
confederate's landmark descriptions by participants.

Landmark Descriptions
Dutch:
English:
historisch stadspaleis
historical city palace
hoge symmetrische fontein

tall symmetrical
fountain

kleurrijke tramstation

colorful tram station

arenavormige
voetbalstadion
kleine intieme terras

arena-shaped
soccer stadium
small intimate terrace

Language
condition
L1: Dutch

L2: English
Total

Partner
condition
No Switch
Switch
Total
No Switch
Switch
Total
No Switch
Switch

N
11
14
25
11
12
23
22
26

Number of
Repetitions:
9.72 (2.24)
10.00 (2.94)
9.88 (2.60)
11.27 (3.26)
8.42 (2.39)
9.78 (3.13)
10.50 (2.84)
9.27 (2.76)

than once. Hence, a participant could produce more than
twelve repetitions.

Since all our participants were students in the same year,
we did not inform them on the use of confederates before
the study was completed, to ensure they would not know of
this in advance. Participants could freely withdraw from the
study at any point during and after the experiment.

Results
We performed an ANOVA with Partner (levels: No Switch,
Switch) and Language (levels: L1, L2) as independent
factors. In line with the predictions, analysis of participants'
(partial) repetitions of the confederate's descriptions, as
listed in Table 2, showed a marginally significant interaction
between the two factors, such that the difference between
the No Switch and Switch conditions was larger in the L2
conditions than in the L1 conditions, F(1, 44) = 3.86, p =
.06, η2p = .08. We did not find a main effect of Partner, F(1,
44) = 2.63, p = .11, η2p = .06, or Language, F(1, 44) < 1, p =
.98 on the number of (partial) repetitions.
Posthoc analyses by means of independent-samples Ttests did not reveal an effect of Partner in the L1 conditions,
t(23) = .26, p = .80. In the L2 conditions however, there was
an effect of Partner, t(21) = 2.41, p < .05, ω2 = .17, such that
participants repeated more of the confederate's references if
they were interacting with the same partner (M = 11.27, SD
= 3.26) than when they had to switch (M = 8.42, SD = 2.39).
Given our design, it is important that participants in the
L2 (English) conditions were equally proficient in English
in the No Switch and Switch condition. Analysis of the
score participants obtained on the short English post-test did
not reveal a difference between the English No Switch (M =
7.00, SD = .89) and the English Switch condition (M = 6.83,
SD = 1.19), t(21) = .38, p = .71. Similarly, we did not find a
difference in the reported high school grade in English
between the English No Switch (M = 7.55, SD = .96) and
the English Switch condition (M = 7.08, SD = 1.12), t(21) =
1.05, p = .30. (These high school grades are on a 1 to 10
scale, with 6 being sufficient and 10 being exceptional.)
Since there seems to be a numerical difference in the high
school grades between the English Switch and the English
No Switch condition, we also performed an ANOVA on the
data from the English conditions with high-school grade as a
covariate. Similar as before, analysis of participants'
repetitions of the confederate's descriptions revealed an
effect of Partner, F(1, 23) = 5.05, p < .05, η2p = .20, such

Stimuli and Coding
Each route description given by a confederate included three
unique critical references to landmarks; see Table 1 for
some examples. Since word boundaries sometimes differ
between English and Dutch, these references each consisted
of three content units, for example 'historical city palace' or
the Dutch equivalent: 'historisch stadspaleis'. The
confederate started by describing two routes on two
different maps. The participant was then to describe two
different routes that were depicted on the same maps that
the confederate's routes had been on. This allowed for the
three landmarks that the confederate had described to be
along the participant's route as well, such that partial or full
repetitions of the confederate's references could occur. To
reduce the possibility of participants accidentally using the
same references as the confederate, that is, due to factors
independent of the conversation history, the confederate
used rather specific wordings (Table 1).
We first transcribed participants' descriptions from the
videos. We then coded any literal repetition of content units
originally contained in the confederate's critical references.
Because full repetitions (3 content units) of references were
rare, we report the total number of partial (1 or 2 content
units) and full repetitions of the confederate's references.
Since true dialogue was not possible between interlocutors,
a conceptual pact may not have been fully established yet
after the confederate had described the landmarks once.
Therefore, participants may still shorten, elaborate on or
adapt the reference (provisionally) introduced by the
confederate. By counting each reference that contained a
literal repetition of at least one content unit, these
adaptations were mostly included in our measure of
entrainment, while avoiding subjective coding. Note that
although the confederate described twelve landmarks, it is
possible for a participant to repeat a single landmark more

758

that in the English conditions, participants repeated the
confederate's reference more often when they interacted
with the same partner, than when they had to switch. We did
not find an effect of high school grade in this analysis, F(1,
23) < 1, p = .84.
Similar results were obtained when analyzing at most one
repetition per landmark, and also when separate variables
were computed for each half of the experiment (the order of
the routes was counterbalanced across the first and second
half of the experiment).

easily primed by recent uses. This process does not depend
on whom is being addressed. Therefore, no effect of partnerspecificity is predicted in the L1 conditions, which is in line
with our findings. Yet when using the L2, the activation
levels of less frequently used lexical items may be too low
for these items to be primed by a single recent use.
Therefore, the effect of automated priming is weaker in L2
conversations. Speakers may therefore make a more
deliberate decision on whether to entrain on a given
reference or not in the L2 conditions, which could very well
depend on whom they are interacting with. The stronger
effect of partner-specificity that we found in the L2
conditions thus indirectly supports the interactive-alignment
account.
Can our findings be accounted for without the interactivealignment account? One can think of many reasons why we
did not find an effect of partner-specificity in the Dutch (L1)
conditions. For example, there were only few turns and
participants were not free to engage in dialogue. However,
these factors equally apply to the English (L2) conditions, in
which we did find an effect of partner-specificity. This also
holds for the argument that in the second half of the
experiment, there may be some conversation history in the
Switch conditions. (Critical landmarks from the first half of
the experiment did not occur in the second half.) Thus, from
grounding theory alone, it is hard to explain why we did not
find an effect of partner-specificity in the L1 conditions,
whereas we did find this effect in the L2 conditions.
A possible explanation of our results in terms of a
deliberate process is that in the L2 conditions, participants
did not repeat the confederate's references as frequently
when they had to switch partners, because they were less
certain of their new interaction partner's proficiency in
English. Therefore, they may have used more common
references instead. At the same time, when interacting with
the same partner, the already introduced reference was most
likely to be understood. This explanation fits the numerical
pattern in our data, as the larger effect of partner-specificity
in the L2 conditions seems to result both from there being
more repetitions in the No Switch condition and from there
being fewer repetitions in the Switch condition (see Table
2). However, although to a lesser extent, similar deliberate
considerations apply to the L1 conditions. Moreover, in the
L1 condition in which participants had to switch partners,
there seems little reason for participants to repeat the
reference introduced by the confederate at all (which they
did to the same extent as in the No Switch condition), other
than because of automated factors. Therefore, deliberate
partner-specificity alone does not convincingly explain all
of our results.
Can our findings be accounted for without deliberate
partner-specificity? The interactive-alignment account
predicts that interlocutors will show less lexical entrainment
in their L2, but it does not predict an effect of either
addressing the person who introduced the reference or

Discussion
Our results confirm the prediction that the effect of partnerspecificity is stronger for non-native speakers than for
native speakers (Costa, et al., 2008). When participants were
asked to communicate in a foreign language (English), they
more often repeated parts of a confederate's referring
expressions when they were talking to the confederate who
introduced the reference, compared to when they were
addressing a third person. When speaking in their native
language (Dutch), the difference between addressing the
same or a different partner was not as large. This finding
seems to support both grounding theory (Brennan & Clark,
1996; Clark & Brennan, 1991) and the interactive-alignment
account (Pickering & Garrod, 2004).
In the English conditions, we found that when participants
did not need to switch conversation partners in between
hearing and giving route descriptions, they repeated the
confederate's references to a greater extent than when they
had to switch partners. This goes well with the prediction
that conceptual pacts are partner-specific (Brennan & Clark,
1996). Even though our paradigm did not allow for
interlocutors to freely interact in arriving at conceptual
pacts, repeating part of a previously (provisionally)
introduced reference can be seen as a first step in forming a
conceptual pact. We found that in the L2 conditions,
participants produced such a repetition more often to the
person who had introduced the reference than to a person
who had no knowledge of this conversation history.
Therefore, these results support the account of lexical
entrainment based on grounding theory (Clark, 1996; Clark
& Brennan, 1991).
The prediction by Costa et al. (2008) that automated
priming will be more prominent when interlocutors interact
in their native language than when they interact in a foreign
language also seems to be supported by our data. Our results
show that the effect of partner-specificity, which can be
thought of as a more deliberate factor, was stronger when
participants were asked to interact in a foreign language as
compared to when they interacted in their native language,
exactly as predicted. The explanation offered by Costa et al.,
that the weaker effect of automated priming in L1-L2 and
L2-L2 conversations would allow more room to such
deliberate factors seems very plausible. Because the lexical
items from the native language are very familiar, they are

759

another person. That is, a main effect of the factor Language
would be predicted, rather than an interaction between the
factors Language and Partner. Horton and Gerrig's
association account states that conversation partners
automatically form an association between a given
expression and a conversation partner (e.g. Horton &
Gerrig, 2005). Hence, the conversation partner may serve as
a prime as well, leading to more entrainment when
interacting with the same partner as compared to when
switching partners. This could provide an automated
account of partner-specificity. Yet importantly, if partnerspecificity were fully automated, there is no reason to
expect its effect to be stronger in the L2 than in the L1
conditions. That is, a main effect of the factor Partner would
be predicted, rather than an interaction between Partner and
Language. Yet although we did not find an effect of partnerspecificity when interlocutors interacted in their L1 (Dutch),
we did find that in their L2 (English), participants showed
more lexical entrainment when they kept interacting with
the same partner than when they had to switch. This
interaction effect cannot be accounted for by an automated
account alone. Therefore, a combination of both the
interactive alignment account (Pickering & Garrod, 2004)
and more deliberate partner-specificity (Brennan & Clark,
1996), as proposed by Costa et al. (2008), explains our
results best. Moreover, this account predicted the results
that we found.
Our study illustrates that automated and deliberate
accounts of adaptation in dialogue are compatible (also see
Brennan & Hanna, 2009; Costa, et al., 2008; Pickering &
Garrod, 2004). In future work, it would be interesting to
further explore what factors influence the extent to which
automated and deliberate factors come into play, as well as
to assess which factors are more automated and which are
more deliberate, given a certain setting. Next to the
theoretical merit, this could provide insight into how and
when to facilitate effective communication.

entrainment would be stronger when interlocutors interact in
their native language, compared to when at least one of
them uses a non-native language. Therefore, when
interlocutors interact in their non-native language, the effect
of more deliberate factors, such as partner-specificity, will
be (relatively) stronger. This is exactly what we found. Our
findings thus support the view that both automated priming
and deliberate partner-specific adaptation influence the
degree of lexical entrainment between interlocutors.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge all speakers for allowing us to
analyze their data, we thank the anonymous reviewers for
their insightful suggestions and we thank Nathalie
Bastiaansen for drawing the maps used in this experiment.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic
components of thought. Manwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bortfeld, H., & Brennan, S. E. (1997). Use and acquisition
of idiomatic expressions in referring by native and nonnative speakers. Discourse Processes, 23, 119-147.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., Pearson, J., & McLean, J.
F. (2010). Linguistic alignment between humans and
computers. Journal of Pragmatics, 42, 2355-2368.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 22(6),
1482-1493.
Brennan, S. E., & Hanna, J. E. (2009). Partner-specific
adaptation in dialogue. Topics in Cognitive Science
(Special Issue on Joint Action), 1, 274-291.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. Levine & S. D.
Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition.
Washington, DC: APA.
Costa, A., Pickering, M. J., & Sorace, A. (2008). Alignment
in second language dialogue. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 23(4), 528-556.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you mean
in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2005). The impact of
memory demands on audience design during language
production. Cognition, 96, 127-142.
McClelland, J. L., & Rummelhart, D. E. (1986). Parallel
distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure
of cognition. Volume II. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27(2), 169-225.
Rummelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1986). Parallel
Distributed
Processing:
Explorations
in
the
Microstructure of Cognition. Volume I. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Conclusion
Our results on lexical entrainment support both the
interactive-alignment account (Pickering & Garrod, 2004)
and the account of partner-specific conceptual pacts
(Brennan & Clark, 1996). However, neither of these two
theories alone predicted the pattern of results that we found.
When interacting in their second language, speakers were
shown to entrain more on previously heard references when
interacting with the person who introduced these references,
than when interacting with another partner. When speakers
interacted in their native language, this effect did not reach
significance, evidencing an interaction between the factors
of whether or not speakers used their native language and
whether or not speakers switched conversation partners.
This interaction was previously predicted, yet not tested, by
Costa et al. (2008), who combined the two theories and
predicted that the effect of automated priming on lexical

760

