UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Bayesian Logic and Trial-by-Trial Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/29q4p2w3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Von Sydow, Momme
Fiedler, Klaus

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Bayesian Logic and Trial-by-Trial Learning
Momme von Sydow (momme.von-sydow@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de)
Klaus Fiedler (klaus.fiedler@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de)
University of Heidelberg, Department of Psychology, Hauptstr. 47-51,
D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany
Abstract
Standard logic and probability theory are both beset with
fundamental problems if used as adequacy criteria for relating
logical propositions to learning data. We discuss the problems
of exception, of sample size, and of inclusion. Bayesian pattern logic (‘Bayesian logic’ or BL for short) has been proposed as a possible rational resolution of these problems. BL
can also be taken as psychological theory suggesting frequency-based conjunction fallacies (CFs) and a generalization
of CFs to other logical inclusion fallacies. In this paper, this
generalization is elaborated using trial-by-trial learning scenarios without memory load. In each trial participants have to
provide a probability judgment. Apart from investigating logical probability judgments in this trial-by-trial context, it is
explored whether under no memory load the propositional assessment of previous evidence has an influence on further
probability judgments. The results generally support BL and
cannot easily be explained by other theories of CFs.
Keywords: Conjunction fallacy, probability judgments, trialby-trial learning, Bayesian induction, logical predication.

Standard Logic and Probability Theory
as Criteria for True Logical Propositions
The relationship between general logical propositions (or
sentences) and evidence is fundamental to both epistemology and psychology. We here investigate general predication of logical relationships between two dichotomous attributes (or predicates), like “ravens are black and they can
fly” (with the conjunction ‘and’). What would be an
adequate justification for such a type of sentences?
Arising from an old tradition going back to Aristotle,
modern formal logic uses truth table definitions for all 16
logical connectives. The truth table definition may be used
as a deterministic criterion of truth for empirical relationships. With regard to a conjunctive predication, like “ravens
(R) are black (A) and they can fly (B)” (A ∧ B| R), the whole
sentence is true (or, more correctly, ‘not false’) as long as
one has observed only exemplars corresponding to true cells
of a truth table (for the conjunction this is the ‘a-cell’, ‘A &
B’). In contrast, the proposition would be falsified, if one
observed a single case defined to be false (here: b-cell: ‘A &
¬B’; c-cell: ‘¬A & B’, or d-cell: ‘¬A & ¬B’).
Problem of Exceptions Exceptions may not prove the
rule, but in ordinary language exceptions are indeed
regularly tolerated. This may reflect the deeper epistemological point that in the empirical world deterministic
relationships are rather the exception than the rule. Actually,
in philosophy of science it has been argued that strict falsificationism would absurdly imply that all important theories
would be falsified. Even more so in normal language, as
evident from our deterministic example, there exist
exceptions: white (albino) ravens as well as ravens that

cannot fly. If exceptions are the rule for contingent,
empirical relationships, it seems reasonable to replace the
strict deterministic truth criteria of logic by a highprobability criterion (see Schurz, 2005): P(black & can fly |
ravens) > Ψ, with Ψ > .5. However, the following two problems beset a simple extensional probability criterion of
truth as well as one based on standard formal logics.
Problem of Sample Size If we had to access the truth of
“ravens are black and they can fly” without previous knowledge about ravens, either one confirmatory raven (A & B
case) or many cases both equally yielded the same extensional probability of 1 (the number of confirmative cases divided by all cases). In the latter case, however, a higher subjective probability of this sentence seems justified. Therefore, a kind of second order probability, a probability concerning probabilities, is needed, as introduced in the model.
Problem of Inclusion The extension (all cases falling
into a set) of a subset can never be larger than that of a
superset. Comparing conjunctions and inclusive disjunctions, it follows that P(ravens are black AND they can fly) ≤
P(ravens are black OR they can fly or both) [formally: P(A
∧ B|R) ≤ P(A ∨ B|R)]. If we use extensional probabilities as
truth criterion, the second sentence can therefore never be
‘less true’ than the first one. If one assumes at least some
exceptions, the latter is even ‘truer’ in principle. Going one
step further, the logical tautology, allowing for all values
(“Ravens are black or not, and they can fly or not”), is a
priori the extensionally most probable sentence [P(A ∨ B|R)
≤ P(A T B|R) or even P(A ∨ B|R) < P(A T B|R)]. Using
standard (extensional) probabilities as truth criterion, one
would therefore always have to choose tautologies as the
most suitable hypothesis, regardless of the evidence and of
the properties in question. In conclusion, if a truth criterion
should be informative about the observable world, simple
extensional probabilities in principle cannot provide a reasonable truth criterion.

Bayesian Logic
Bayesian pattern logic (or ‘Bayesian logic’, BL, for short)
formulates a second order probability that given data may
have been generated by noisy-logical patterns of probabilities. The model provides a technical, rational solution to
the three mentioned problems and – in approximation – a
potential psychological model of human induction of noisylogical relationships as well. The model is part of a
renaissance of Bayesian approaches in cognitive science
(e.g., Chater, Tenenbaum, Yuille, 2006; Oaksford & Chater,
2007, Kruschke, 2008). The following sketch is meant to
clarify the main idea of Bayesian logic (for more detail, see
von Sydow, 2011).

1090

The construction of the model starts with all 16 dyadic
logical connectives known from standard propositional
logic. The logical truth tables are taken as explanations that
are distinguished from the data level. While standard logic
makes no assumptions about probabilities of true classes in
a truth table, Step 1 of BL formulates ideal explanations by
assuming equi-probability of all true classes of a truth table.
For instance, for the exclusive disjunction (X are either A or
B, but not both) it is assumed that P(b-cell) = P(c-cell) = ½
(for no noise, R = 0). Thereby, 2 by 2 truth tables become 2
by 2 probability tables. Note, however, that such ideal
explanations need not generate ideal data patterns. In Step 2
(cf. Fig. 1) the idea of exceptions is modeled by introducing
possible levels of noise. For each possible level a uniform
noise function is added to all four cells of probability table,
followed by a normalization, so that the resulting sum of all
four cells of a probability table adds up to unity. This results
in a field of ideal (explanatory) noisy-logical patterns of
probabilities, each with an additional second order probability: P(A connective B, noise level R | data)) =: P(A o B,
R| D). Here flat priors for the connectives and noise levels
are used for each new situation.

Figure 1: Sketch of the model of only five logical
propositions and three noise levels (cf. text for details).
For the novel noisy-logical representation one can calculate
the posterior probabilities for each probability table by
combining some standard statistics. Given observed data
about the co-occurrence of A and B (a 2 by 2 contingency
matrix), one can calculate (Step 3) the likelihood of the data
given a probability table, P(D | AoB, R), by using the
multinomial distribution, which here determines for each
table of four probabilities how likely it produces the
observed four frequencies. In Step 4, Bayes’ theorem is used
to transform the likelihood P(D| AoB, R) into a posterior
P(A o B, R | D). In a final step, one sums up the probabilities
of a connector over all noise levels (here we modeled 11
equidistant levels from R = 0 to 1). We obtain the requested
posterior pattern probability, PP(AoB | D), clearly differing
from the analogous extensional probability, PE(AoB|D)
(frequency of positive cases, divided by all cases).

BL and the Conjunctions Fallacy Debate
One of the most heated and philosophically interesting
psychological debates concerns the apparent inability of
people to understand that conjunctions (for instance, “Linda
is a Bank teller and a feminist”) can never be (extensionally)
more probable than their conjuncts (e.g., “Linda is a bank
teller”)—even for apparent feminists. This phenomenon has
been called “conjunction fallacy” and first has been explained by the representativeness heuristic (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1982). This heuristic, however, has been criticized
as being formulated too imprecise (Gigerenzer, 1996; cf.
Nilsson, Juslin, & Olsson, 2008).
There have been several other classes of explanations of
CFs. One focusses on possible misunderstandings. “A and
B” may actually be understood as “A or B” or to “if A then
B” (Mellers, Hertwig, & Kahneman, 2001; Hertwig, Benz &
Krauss, 2008). Moreover, “A” may be interpreted as “A but
not B” instead of “A, whether B or not B” (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1983; Hilton, 1995; cf. Sides, Osherson, Bonini, &
Viale, 2002; Wedell & Moro, 2008). A second class of
explanations considers different ways in which probabilities
are introduced and how the probability question is posed. It
has been shown that frequency presentations (Fiedler, 1988;
Gigerenzer, 1996), rating formats (Sloman, Over, Slovak, &
Stibel, 2003), and clear set inclusions (Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto, & Legrenzi, 1999; Sloman et al., 2003)
often substantially reduced the portion of CFs. Although
these factors often do play a role, BL under certain
conditions (if one is concerned with alternative hypotheses
about whole situations) has predicted CFs even when all
these factors apply simultaneously (von Sydow, 2011a, b).
A third class of explanations specifies quantitative conditions of CFs. Most prominently, it has been suggested that
the requested probability P(A∧B | D) is replaced by the
inverse probability P(D | A∧B); cf. Wolford, 1991; Fisk &
Slattery, 2005), or by a measure of support, like P(A∧B | D)
- P(A∧B) (support theory, cf. Sides, et al., 2002; Lagnado &
Shanks, 2002; cf. Tentori, Bonini, & Osherson, 2004; Crupi,
Fitelson, & Tentori, 2008), or several other measures, like
signed summation, averaging, quantum logic, or rescaling
(see Wedell & Moro, 2008; von Sydow, 2009).
BL provides a rational quantitative account of frequencybased a particular class of conjunction fallacies and made
several novel predictions that cannot be explained by the
previous models (von Sydow, 2011). One important aspect
has been the generalization of the idea of CFs into a system
of logical inclusion ‘fallacies’ (von Sydow, 2009).

Experiment: Trial-By-Trial Induction
of Logical Relationships
The primary goal of the reported experiment is to test aspects of the postulated system of frequency-based logical inclusion ‘fallacies’ in a trial-by-trial way. Whereas confirmatory results for this system have already been achieved,
even using trial-by-trial presentation of items (von Sydow,
2011b; cf. Lagnado et al., 2001), we here additionally

1091

investigate trial-by-trial assessment of the
dependent variable: the selection of the
most probable hypotheses after each new
observation. To the best knowledge of the
authors, this has never been investigated
before in the CF debate.
A supplementary goal is to assess whether putting evidence into language in the
course of trials may have an additional topdown effect on the successive evaluation of
evidence. Here the ways how one obtains a
final (fixed) pattern of evidence are varied,
so that this may affect the predicted propositional representations. In one condition
the finally predicted hypothesis is expected
to appear most probable all along (homogeneous condition) and in another condition
different hypotheses are predicted to appear
more probable throughout the first learning
trials (heterogeneous condition). In its
current formulation BL, as a model of databased induction, would not be able to
account for such top-down effects. This is
the case although BL goes beyond naïve
probability, and leaves room also for
subjective priors. As we think there are topdown effects for instance of categorization
(Hagmayer, Meder, von Sydow, & Waldmann, 2011) or causal coherence (von
Sydow, Hagmayer, Meder, & Waldmann,
2010), we think there may well be topFigure 3: Format of the frequency presentation in Phase 1 (patterns)
down-effects of mere verbalization. In this
and in Phase 2 and 3 (trial-by-trial) and formulation of hypotheses.
experiment, however, participants are prothirdly, it excludes a deterministic understanding of the
vided with summary statistics, excluding memory effects. In
rules in the next phases by inducing a non-deterministic
such settings, also intended as base-line for future exnoise-prior (especially for few observed cases, priors may
periments, no such additional top-down effects are expected.
well affect the results).
Phase 2 and 3 are both trial-by-trial judgment tasks. BL
predicts that various hypotheses should be selected to be
most probable, each from an extensional perspective involving several logical inclusion fallacies. The sequences
should end up either in an AND hypothesis (C1, C2) or an
EITHER-OR hypothesis (C3, C4). Both hypothesis are
extensionally less probable than the OR hypothesis or the
tautology. Additionally, the order in which data is presented
differs, investigating whether verbalization throughout
learning affects the verbalization of identical final patterns
(the probability judgments). As sketched, either a
Figure 2: Design (see main text for details).
homogeneous condition (C1, C3) or a heterogeneous condition (C2, C4) is used. Finally, Phase 2 and 3 are identical,
The design involves three phases. All phases involve a
in order to assess whether the previous learning phase had
selection of the most probable logical hypothesis given
an effect (as, e.g., suggested by support theory) and to find
some evidence. In Phase 1, participants in all conditions are
out whether participants increasingly make either
randomly presented with six patterns of evidence, each
extensional or BL selections.
referring to a different situation (Fig. 2, Phase 1). First, this
phase should replicate previous generalizations of BL (von
Material
Sydow, 2009, 2011b). Secondly, it investigates whether par130 participants of the University of Göttingen participated
ticipants grasp the intended meaning of logical terms, and,
in the experiment. The participants were told about newly

1092

discovered species of apes on a
lonely island. They were in the
role of ethologist concerned with
statements the animals of a species
are curious or not (here A) and
whether they are aggressive or not
(here B), as well as judging the
relation of these properties.
In Phase 1 participants were
concerned with six species of apes
in randomized order. For each species they were shown a photo of an
ape (e.g., “P. calvus”) with a text
Figure 4: Six patterns of Phase 1 (first row), BL’s pattern probabilities
“The animals of this species
(second row) and the frequency of hypotheses (cf. Fig. 3) selected (third row).
are…”, leading to the main infollowed by an update of a summary table (right table). Of
structions (Fig. 3) and a contingency table summing up the
the
18 trials the first nine are presented in Figure 5 and 6.
observed features combinations (cf. Fig. 2, 3). For each
In
all probability judgment tasks the formulations of the
species one had to select the most probable logical hypohypotheses were carefully chosen to rule out the plausible
thesis and one had to provide a confidence rating (Fig. 3).
misunderstandings discussed in the CF debate. For instance,
Phase 2 and 3 were concerned with trial-by-trial learning.
the conjunctions were formulated as “A and at the same time
Participants were randomly assigned to the eight conditions.
B” and the single conjuncts (the affirmations or negations)
Single events were symbolized by a circle flying to a place
as “A (and are B or not B)” (Fig. 3).
in the contingency table (Fig. 3, Phase 2/3, left table),

Figure 5: Patterns, predictions and results for Condition 1 and 2 (Phase 2 and 3). Within each condition, Row 1 shows
the first nine shown patterns (Fig. 3, Phase 2 and 3, right). Row 2 depicts BL’s pattern probabilities for 15 hypotheses
(cf. Fig. 3). Row 3 and 4 show the portion of hypotheses actually selected to be most probable (in Phase 2 and 3).

1093

Figure 6: Patterns, predictions and results for Condition 2 and 3 (cf. Fig. 4 and main text for details).

Results
Figure 4 shows the presented data patterns, the predicted
pattern probabilities (BL), and the empirically found
frequency of selected logical hypotheses for the six shown
species of apes. Participants for each pattern actually
selected the hypothesis that had the highest pattern
probability, PP(A o B); from left to right: H1 (A and B); H5
(A); H8 (not-B); H9 (either A or B), H11 (A or B or both),
H15 (everything is possible). If one extended other theories
so that they may predict these connectives, one would
presumably not to be able to explain the data (cf. von
Sydow, 2010). For instance, the interesting support theory
would make predictions for Pattern 6 [8, 10, 9, 9] based on
the five other patterns (resulting in sum in [30, 29, 25, 10]).
The highest support is suggested for the d-cell (H4) which is
actually found only rarely. The strongest deviation from BL
is observed in Pattern 5 were participants did not only select
H11 but also H1. But this needs not to refer to an alternative
strategy, but perhaps – and without elaborating this here –
with a noise prior excluding deterministic patterns and causing the actual outcome (cf. von Sydow, 2011b).

With regard to Phase 2 and 3, Figures 5 and 6 show for all
conditions the presented data sequence, the resulting BL
probabilities, and the actually observed frequencies of the
selections of the most probable hypotheses. Even for the
low trial numbers 1 to 9, reported here, the main selections
are generally surprisingly in line with the pattern probabilities (presented without any fitting).
There were only small deviations. For instance, in
Condition 1 only in Pattern 4 the predicted mode of answers
(H5: A) differed from the observed one (H1: A∧B).
However H1 has actually the second highest pattern
probability and there may again have been a plausible
influence of noise priors resulting from Phase 1 (lowering
P(R = 0)), which would actually increase P P(H1). This
would likewise be coherent with Pattern 6 [4 1 0 0], were a
surprisingly clear majority choose the AND-hypothesis (H1)
and the extensional answer would be the A-hypothesis (H5).
The patterns that were kept identical in the corresponding
homogeneous and heterogeneous conditions (the bold
printed Patterns number 4, 6, 8, and 9) mostly corroborated
the same results, suggesting that if memory effects are ruled
out (as done here), no or only small effects of homogeneous

1094

versus heterogeneous conditions are obtained. Furthermore,
as predicted based on BL, the results were more pronounced
for the conjunction conditions than for the exclusive disjunctions. Finally, the outcomes of Phase 2 and 3 did not
differ much (or the results for BL even improve over time).
The confidence ratings varied less clearly than expected.
One reason may be that this measure reflects not only, for
instance, PH(H most probable)/PP(H second most probable),
but a general belief in a system of answers corresponding to
BL or extensional probabilities. Furthermore, the ratings,
averaged over all participants, may not be diagnostic, since
they include ratings of unpredicted hypotheses (particularly
relevant in C3 and C4). However, at least in the second
trial-by-trial phase (Phase 3) participant’s confidence ratings
roughly corresponded to predictions derivable from BL: In
C1 confidence increases from Pattern 1 to 3. In Pattern 9 the
confidence is higher than in all previous patterns (despite
more outliers). For Condition 3 and 4 the ratings show less
differences, as is understandable based on pattern probabilities. Nonetheless, if one additionally takes a look at the next
repeated nine trials, not reported here, Trial 18, for instance,
confirmed a high confidence, leading to a median of 80 in
C3 and 70 in C4. Hence, also the confidence ratings, at least
in Phase 3, strongly reflect changes coherent with BL.

Discussion
The results show correspondence with the predictions of BL
also in trial-by-trial probability judgment tasks. Although
other models of the CF have not been extended to all other
connectives, it seems implausible that they could account
for the findings (cf. von Sydow, 2009, 2011a). Without
being able to discuss this here, some deviations (but clearly
not all findings) may be coherent with a model that I have
previously called pattern support, combining the pattern
idea of BL with the idea of support. Overall, however, the
results provide additional evidence for the predicted class of
frequency-based CFs and for BL as a (computational level)
psychological model for noisy-logical relationships.
Furthermore, as expected the results show no (or only a
small) top-down effects of verbalization of hypotheses
about the same situation (homogeneous vs. heterogeneous
conditions). In the future it will be interesting to investigate
identical settings without memory hooks (without summary
statistics in Phase 2 and 3). Then verbalization may well
effect represented exemplars (cf. von Sydow, 2011b). A
further line of future research should be to investigate the
role of noise priors on the selection of hypotheses.

Acknowledgments
The first author has been the main author of this paper. We
thank H. Wilke and J. Frisch for support. The first author is
grateful for inspiring discussions at the Universities of
Göttingen (M. R. Waldmann, R. Mayrhofer, Y. Hagmayer)
and Heidelberg (group of K. Fiedler). This work was supported by the grant Sy 111/2-1 to M. von Sydow from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) as part of the priority program New Frameworks of Rationality (SPP 1516).

References
Chater, N., Tenenbaum, J., & Yuille, A. (2006). Probabilistic models
of cognition: Conceptual foundations. Trends in Cognitive Science,
10, 287-291.
Crupi, V., Fitelson, B, & Tentori, K. (2008). Probability, Confirmation,
and the Conjunction Fallacy – Theoretical Note. Thinking and
Reasoning, 14(2), 182 - 199.
Fiedler, K. (1988). The dependence of the conjunction fallacy on
subtle linguistic factors. Psychological Research, 50, 123-129.
Gigerenzer, G. (1996). On narrow norms and vague heuristics.
Psychological Review, 103, 592-596.
Hagmayer, Y., Meder, B., von Sydow, M., & Waldmann, M. R.
(2011). Category Transfer in Sequential Causal Learning: The
Unbroken Mechanism Hypothesis. Cognitive Science, 35, 842-873.
Hertwig, R., Benz, B., & Krauss, B. S. (2008). The conjunction fallacy
and the many meanings of and. Cognition, 108, 740-753.
Hilton, D. J. (1995). The social context of reasoning: Conversational
inference and rational judgment, Psych. Bulletin, 118, 248-271.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, M. S. &
Caverni, J.-P. (1999). Naive probability: A mental model theory of
extensional reasoning. Psychological Review, 106, 62-88.
Kruschke, J. K. (2008). Bayesian approaches to associative learning:
From passive to active learning. Learning & Behavior, 36, 210-226.
Lagnado, D. A. & Shanks, D. R. (2002). Probability judgment in
hierarchical learning: A conflict between predictiveness and
coherence. Cognition, 93, 81-112.
Mellers, B. A., Hertwig, R., & Kahneman, D. (2001). Do frequency
representations eliminate conjunction effects? An exercise in
adversarial collaboration. Psychological Science, 12, 269-275.
Nilsson, H., Juslin, P., & Olsson, H. (2008). Exemplars in the mist:
The cognitive substrate of the representativeness heuristic.
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 49, 201-212.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality. The
probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Schurz, G. (2005). Non-monotonic reasoning from an evolutionary
viewpoint: ontic, logical and cognitive foundations. Synthese, 146,
37–51.
Sides, A., Osherson, D., Bonini N., & Viale, R. (2002). On the reality
of the conjunction fallacy. Memory and Cognition, 30, 191-198.
Sloman, S. A., Over, D., Slovak, L., & Stibel, J. M. (2003). Frequency
illusions. Organizational Behavior and Human Processes, 91, 296309.
Tentori, K., Bonini, N., & Osherson, D. (2004). The conjunction
fallacy: a misunderstanding about conjunction? Cognitive Science,
28, 467-477.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus intuitive
reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability judgment.
Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.
von Sydow, M. (2009). On a General Bayesian Pattern Logic of
Frequency-Based Logical Inclusion Fallacies. Proceedings of the
Thirty-First Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 248-253). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
von Sydow, M. (2011 a). The Bayesian Logic of Frequency-Based
Conjunction Fallacies. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 55(2),
119-139.
von Sydow, Momme (2011 b). Logical Inclusion Fallacies - Transfer
of Logical Patterns and Noise (pp. 1-6). In: Kokinov, B., KarmiloffSmith, A., Nersessian, N. J. (eds.). European Perspectives on
Cognitive Science. New Bulgarian University Press.
von Sydow, M., Hagmayer, Y., Meder, B. & Waldmann, M. (2010).
How Causal Reasoning Can Bias Empirical Evidence. Proceedings
of the Thirty-Second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2087-2092). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Wedell, D. H., & Moro, R. (2008). Testing boundary conditions for the
conjunction fallacy: Effects of response mode, conceptual focus,
and problem type. Cognition, 107, 105-136.

1095

