UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Changing Global Warming Beliefs with Scientific Information: Knowledge, Attitudes, and
RTMD (Reinforced Theistic Manifest Destiny Theory)

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8w0356gd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ranney, Michael
Clark, Dav
Reinholz, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Changing Global Warming Beliefs with Scientific Information:
Knowledge, Attitudes, and RTMD (Reinforced Theistic Manifest Destiny Theory)

1

Michael Andrew Ranney (ranney@berkeley.edu)1,2
Dav Clark (davclark@berkeley.edu)2
Daniel Lee Reinholz (reinholz@berkeley.edu)1
Sarah Cohen (sarahc51990@berkeley.edu)1
Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
2
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
Abstract

Unlike peer nations’ residents, Americans are less accepting
of, and concerned by, (especially anthropogenic) climate
change. Reinforced Theistic Manifest Destiny theory
(RTMD; e.g., Ranney, 2012) explains many such “U.S.exceptionalist” phenomena by combining geopolitical history
with six belief constructs: afterlife, deity, nationalism, creation, evolution, and global warming. We assess predictions
that climate change acceptance is increased by mechanismexplaining interventions. A 270-participant survey established
widespread mechanistic ignorance, and an experiment with
149 other Americans (Californians and Texans) showed that a
400-word description of climate change’s mechanism dramatically reduced ignorance and increased climate change acceptance. The mechanism, briefly, is: (a) Earth’s surface absorbs (mostly visible) sunlight and subsequently emits infrared light, which (b) greenhouse gases selectively absorb and
retain (because these molecules can become asymmetrical),
so (c) heat energy leaves more slowly, warming Earth. Our
intervention yielded desirable conceptual changes and science-coherent attitude changes. RTMD-predicted betweenconstruct relationships were obtained and/or again replicated.
Keywords: Climate Change; Global Warming; Conceptual
Change; Society; Science Education; Belief Revision.

In contrast to our exploding human population, many species are dwindling––often due to people’s actions (e.g.,
hunting, degrading environments, and introducing nonnative species). Still, many past effects pale compared to the
threat of global climate change. (Nb. We will henceforth
largely use the colloquial term, “global warming,” although
of course not all locations may exhibit warming due to human-enhanced greenhouse conditions.) In geologic time––
on the order of 10,000 years or more––warming periods
have consistently resulted in high levels of extinction (Mayhew, Jenkins, & Benton, 2008). Now, though, comparable
warming is occurring over hundreds of years or less––
posing a unique threat to many species’ futures (cf. Harte &
Harte, 2008), and direct threats to humans (particularly the
poor)––such as increased risks of floods, droughts, and low
crop yields (Kerr, 2007). Nothing, then, seems to exceed the
importance of researchers finding ways to help people accept that anthropogenic global warming is (1) occurring, and
(2) crucial to quickly address (Harte & Harte, 2008).
This urgent state is due to dramatic, human-caused atmospheric greenhouse gas increases from pre-industrial levels (about 260 years ago); for instance, methane is up by
150% and carbon dioxide is up by 40%. These levels are

accelerating, and may easily cause rapid mass extinctions
(Malcolm et al., 2006), as with prior fast warmings. Fortunately, if humans act quickly, we may be able to conserve
much of the current biosphere (Harte & Harte, 2008).
Sadly, U.S. attitudes clash with the 97% of actively publishing climate scientists who accept global warming’s tenets. (Anderegg, Prall, Harold, & Schneider, 2010). Leiserowitz, Maibach, and Roser-Renouf (2010) report that only
57% of the U.S. accepts global warming as occurring, and
only 47% accepts it being “caused mostly by human activities.” The U.S. accepts both less than do similarly developed
“peer” nations. Indeed, among 33 peers and non-peers, only
Indonesia, South Africa, and Nigeria rated global warming
as less “serious” than the U.S. (Leiserowitz, 2007). Given
global warming’s potentially disastrous, irreversible effects,
increasing Americans’ global warming acceptance seems a
worthy goal (Ranney, 2012). In the next subsection, we
highlight a theory (RTMD) designed to explain U.S. exceptionalism regarding scientific, religious, and nationalistic affinities—especially the marked divergence in climate beliefs
noted above. We then describe two empirical studies that
test the RTMD-inspired notion that science instruction may
powerfully rectify false beliefs about climate change.

Theory: Reinforced Theistic Manifest Destiny
As Ranney (2012; Ranney & Thanukos, 2011) and other researchers have discussed, Americans are clearly outliers
compared to peer nations’ residents. Beyond global warming acceptance, Ranney describes other dimensions of
American exceptionalism (e.g., regarding guns, murders,
prisoners, military costs, executive salaries, income variability, teen pregnancies, infant deaths, health inefficiency, evolution acceptance, biblical literalism, piety, and beliefs in
God and an afterlife). He also proposed the Reinforced Theistic Manifest Destiny (RTMD) theory to explain how a nation’s collective theistic (and related) beliefs are reinforced—militarily, economically, etc. (Ranney, 2012; Ranney & Thanukos, 2011). RTMD focuses on beliefs and attitudes regarding the six inter-related constructs shown in
Figure 1. The theory predicts that (1) acceptances of creation, nationalism, a deity/dieties, and an afterlife positively
correlate, (2) acceptances of evolution and global warming
positively correlate, and (3) constructs in (1) negatively correlate with those in (2)––partly because creation and evolution incohere. Among other offered explanations, RTMD
explains the U.S.’s low acceptance of both evolution (Mil-

2228

ler, Scott, & Okamoto, 2006) and global warming, compared to peer nations. At its heart, RTMD posits that unparalleled U.S. military and economic success—especially in
WWI and WWII—has bolstered U.S. nationalism and theism, inhibiting American acceptance of evolution and global
warming (Ranney, 2012). (In brief, Americans feel most reinforced for thinking “God is on our side.”)
Afterlife

Deity

Creation

Evolution

Global
Warming

Nationalism

Figure 1. RTMD theory extends an often implicit “received
view” (the three bold ovals; Ranney, 2012) of modest U.S.
evolution acceptance with three extra constructs (non-bold
ovals), such as global warming. Solid/dashed lines respectively represent coherent/conflicting conceptual links.
To date, RTMD has been assessed with seven data sets
from the U.S. and one from Canada. RTMD predicts the directions of the 15 possible correlations among Figure 1’s six
constructs; only the five main theoretical links are shown.
Empirically, the 15 correlations virtually always exhibit the
directions RTMD predicts (Ranney, 2012). RTMD theory
also predicts that a change in one’s global warming acceptance may affect the other five variables––especially
evolution acceptance. Analyses of such correlation-change
predictions, though, exceed this piece’s space and scope.

Mechanistic Knowledge and Climate Attitudes
RTMD notes the negative correlations between sciencebased and more faith-based constructs, and suggests that increased scientific knowledge may enhance positive attitudes
towards evolution and climate change. Acceptance beliefs
largely follow understanding, given variation in both. Thus,
while evolutionary acceptance might be uniformly high or
low in a certain classroom or campus, evolutionary biologists largely accept evolution more than do “Intro to Bio”
students (Shtulman & Calabi, 2012). Therefore, low global
warming acceptance may well be related to a lack of understanding. Consider humanity’s adoption of a heliocentric
model of our solar system over geocentrism. Although geocentrism had (or has) its appeal, an understanding of gravity
and orbits renders geocentric arguments hard to accept––or
even “silly.” Similarly, we might expect that increasing individuals’ knowledge of the mechanism of global warming
may help them accept the “less desirable” model of the
world in which global warming is occurring (Ranney &
Thanukos, 2011; cf. just world theory, e.g., Feinberg &
Willer, 2011). Our approach to environmental conceptual
and belief changes thus differs from most other efforts,
which don’t focus as heavily on understanding the mechanism of the greenhouse effect (e.g., Al Gore’s Climate Project). Ours appears to be the first work to examine the extent
to which one’s mechanistic global warming understanding
affects relevant attitudes and support for climate policies.

Our research group is carrying out experiments and surveys that assess the hypotheses that (1) a proper understanding of global warming is rare, but (2) enhancing such understanding has desirable effects, such as increased global
warming acceptance. There are many global warming education efforts, yet it is difficult to find an explanation of the
basic physical/chemical mechanisms involved that is appropriately complete (see below) and yet not filled with too
much extra detail (Ranney, Clark, Reinholz, & Cohen,
2012). We are not sure why this mechanistic pedagogical
lack exists, but suggest that many would-be climate educators (1) do not adequately understand the mechanism themselves, and/or (2) fear that Americans are incapable of learning the basic scientific principles behind the greenhouse effect; others may (3) doubt that a scientific understanding
would make much difference in our attitudes and policies
towards global warming, and still others may (4) despair
about the political, financial, or even agnotological (e.g., deceptive) elements of the quandary, suggesting that “the
masses just can’t learn this.” But the aforementioned survey
data suggest that peer nations’ residents accept (and fear––
e.g., anthropogenic) global warming more than Americans
do, and humanity has accepted other difficult ideas that
were heavily suppressed by political or economic powers—
such as heliocentrism and the links between tobacco smoke
and severe illnesses. Likewise, we predict that a mechanistic warming explanation may help many people appreciate
the soundness of climate change’s science––driving greater
acceptance, concern, and imperative action.
Unless you read (and recall) this piece’s abstract, it is not
likely that you can explain (even quite basically) the physical mechanism by which global warming occurs––as was
true of most of our research team prior to our studies. Indeed, part of the present piece’s motivation stems from dozens of interviews the first author carried out with colleagues
and acquaintances. Responses were often embarrassing and
rarely accurate. So, imagine that you were chatting with a
physicist/chemist, and she eyeballs you and asks, “How
would you explain global warming’s mechanism?” Please
take 30 seconds to answer this query before reading on.
Now that you’ve pondered global warming’s mechanism,
please visit the abstract’s points (a) through (c). Did your
explanation include these fundamental mechanistic aspects?
In contrast to our abstract’s directly mechanistic explication
(which is much abbreviated), many people articulate global
warming’s temporal precursors, such as overindustrialization, rather than the fundamental mechanism
that greenhouse gases are transparent to the sun’s incoming
visible (i.e., “colors of the rainbow”) light, yet largely
opaque to the infrared light that the Earth radiates. Other
people often articulate global warming’s effects––such as
increasing mean global temperatures, sea level increases,
extinctions, or melting icecaps––but draw a blank mechanism-wise. Yet others focus on atmospheric features that
don’t, or negligibly, explain global warming (e.g., ozone
layer depletion). Many people who are familiar with both
global warming’s potential precursors (e.g., more CO2 emis-

2229

sions) and effects cannot describe the causal mechanism between them. (Nb. Only one of the many dozens of interviewees knew that greenhouse gas molecules exhibit at least
a transient electric dipole moment––e.g., via vibrations,
bending, etc., to become asymmetrical––as CO2 and CH4
can, but O2 cannot.)
Given the relations that RTMD theory coordinates, we infer that many Americans who accept global warming do so
with sub-scientific rationales, and many who reject it do so
by repressing the science due to religiously or nationalistically motivated reasoning. Thus, if Americans could grasp
global warming’s science, that might offer a better basis for
shifting or strengthening their attitudes. Given that our dozens of informal interviews suggest the widespread lack of a
mechanistic global warming understanding among U.S. residents, we predicted that this lack undermines U.S. global
warming acceptance. Unfortunately, surveys about global
warming knowledge (e.g., Leiserowitz, Maibach, & RoserRenouf, 2010) rarely ask for mechanistic knowledge and often focus on recognition (thus likely overpredicting what is
known by non-climatologists). Therefore, Study 1 below
assessed our hypothesis that a broader, more representative
sample than those in the informal interviews might also
show a modest understanding of global warming’s mechanism. Then, in Study 2, we assessed whether a brief explication of the mechanism might be successful in markedly enhancing both global warming knowledge and acceptance regarding anthropogenic climate change.

Study 1: Gauging Global Warming Knowledge
Prior studies have documented numerous difficulties in understanding global warming (e.g., Shepardson, Niyogi,
Choi, & Charusombat, 2011; Bord, Fisher, & O’Connor,
1998). Herein, though, we focus on less-studied difficulties
in mechanistic understanding, three of which we believed
were most critical to understanding the greenhouse effect
(as highlighted in the abstract): (a) differentiating types of
light/radiation, (b) understanding how the greenhouse effect
depends on infrared light’s selective absorption by greenhouse gases, and (c) understanding how that consequently
warms the troposphere, water, and ground. To test the hypothesis that an understanding of global warming is indeed
related to acceptance, we needed to determine whether the
above conceptual difficulties were prevalent in a general
adult population. Thus, we designed and administered a survey of global warming attitudes and understandings.

Method: Participants, Design, Procedure, Materials
We collected 270 anonymous surveys from park visitors (n
= 201) and community college students (n = 69) in San Diego. Random intercept sampling techniques were used for the
park visitors; the community college students agreed to fill
out the survey during a scheduled class break. A $5 gift card
compensated each participant. We refrain from offering
contrived hypothesis tests below, simply reporting percentages––as is common with survey data. The full survey took
10-15 minutes to complete. We report here on a subset of

items: (1) 20 policy preference Likert items (e.g., “How
much effort do you want the federal government to put into
X?”), (2) two global warming belief items, (3) six shortanswer global warming knowledge questions, (4) 13 items
on possible causes of global warming (e.g., participants
were to label Y as a major/minor/non- cause of global
warming), and (5) four items gauging respondents’ willingness to make personal sacrifices for specific climate policies. Short answers were coded and scored with a rubric that
showed high inter-rater reliability (mean Cohen’s κ = 0.74).

Results and Discussion
The data support our hypothesis that Americans rarely understand global warming’s mechanism. When asked to explain “the basic physical, chemical, or biological mechanism
of global warming,” only 32 participants (12%) referenced
gases in the atmosphere (e.g., emissions, CO2, or pollution)
trapping heat––which is merely a partial understanding. Of
these 32, only four (1%) attempted to differentiate types of
energy (or light). Not a single participant (0%) mentioned
either correct absorption(s) or the difference (input/output
asymmetry) between visible and infrared light, which is the
crux of understanding the greenhouse effect. Notably, only
eight participants (3%) even named the greenhouse effect.
Many responses included possible causes, yet few included
possible mechanisms––and the item’s median score was 0.
Problematic conceptions were also prevalent. For instance, in answering our question about global warming’s
mechanism, 42 participants (16%) claimed that the destruction of the atmosphere or ozone layer was letting in more
heat, thus causing global warming. This finding echoes the
results of previous work (e.g., Bord, Fisher, & O’Connor,
1998). Indeed, on a subsequent “possible cause” item, 201
participants (74%) incorrectly believed that ozone depletion
was a major cause of global warming, but only 81 (30%)
knew that livestock are a major cause of global warming.
Despite this poor showing regarding global warming
knowledge, many people were willing to accept global
warming and its anthropogenic origins. In particular, when
the responses “mildly agree” and “strongly agree” are combined, 217 people (80%) agreed with the statement, “I am
certain that global warming (i.e., climate change) is actually
occurring,” and 208 participants (77%) agreed that “human
activities are a significant cause of global warming.” Although this willingness to accept global warming is higher
than the averages found on most national surveys, there appears not to have been a prohibitive ceiling effect.
Crucially, experimenter-scored knowledge of the mechanism significantly correlated with peoples’ willingness to
accept global warming as both real (r = .22, p = .0002) and
anthropogenic (r = .17, p = .005). Also importantly, anthropogenic climate change acceptance significantly predicted
(via ordinal models) all four survey items about willingness
2
to sacrifice (χ (4) > 32, p < 0.001)––and one’s knowledge
score significantly predicted two of these (χ (1) > 3.8, p <
2

0.05). In addition, all 15 correlations among the six RTMD

2230

constructs fell in the predicted directions—replicating previous findings—and 13 of the 15 were significantly different from zero at p < .01; likewise, evolution/creation acceptance strongly predicted global warming knowledge and
acceptance (as occurring and anthropogenic)––notably,
even more strongly than political party.
In sum, these U.S. respondents clearly knew little about
the mechanism of the greenhouse effect––the anthropogenic
increase of which is the basis for global warming. This is
true even of individuals who accept the reality of global
warming, which ought give us pause. The mere acceptance
of global warming, even absent knowledge of its basic science, appears to yield warranted climate policy attitudes.
We predict, though, that skeptically evaluated knowledge of
a basic mechanistic account should enhance that precursory
global warming acceptance. (Consider someone who might
accept evolution without even having a rudimentary understanding of how organisms procreate!) Scientific literacy
ought to mean that people seek out causal explanations, just
as those who deny global warming––should they be believed––ought to explain the mechanism by which our planet would be unaffected by massive additions of greenhouse
gas emissions. More directly, Study 1 shows that, in crucial
cases, veridical knowledge has a clear relationship to one’s
willingness to sacrifice. It seemed incumbent upon us, then,
to begin developing interventions meant to improve Americans’ understandings of the basic physical-chemical global
warming mechanism––as described in Study 2.

Study 2: Learning and Increased Acceptance
Drawing on past research on both physics cognition and the
Numerically Driven Inferencing paradigm (NDI; e.g., Garcia de Osuna, Ranney, & Nelson, 2004), we hypothesized
that a small amount of targeted information could yield
dramatic conceptual changes––ultimately including changes
in attitude and acceptance. In the NDI paradigm, people are
asked to estimate the value of a quantity, and they are later
told its true value. By having individuals “put their cards on
the table” before receiving the true value, we inhibit hindsight bias and post-hoc rationalization, and the impact of the
information is thus increased (Rinne, Ranney, & Lurie,
2006). Here we report on a similarly compact and empirically grounded intervention with a 400-word text that highlights the three key conceptual pieces noted in Study 1’s introduction (labeled a-c). See Ranney et al. (2012) for the full
text. Our most recent work combines NDI and RTMD, utilizing misleading “anti-climate change acceptance” numeric
quantities––yielding notable shifts in attitudes and self-rated
knowledge)––but this is outside the scope of this paper.

Method: Participants, Design, Procedure, Materials
For Study 2, 103 University of California, Berkeley, and 46
University of Texas, Brownsville, undergraduates were randomly assigned to one of two groups: “sandwich” or “nopretest.” Sandwich group participants: (1) both provided an
explanation of the greenhouse effect (effectively “putting
their cards on the table”) and filled out knowledge and atti-

tude surveys, (2) read a 400-word explanation of the mechanism of the greenhouse effect and gave a rating of experienced surprise, and (3) were re-tested on their knowledge
and attitudes (with a posttest identical to the pretest). Nopretest (or “open-faced”) group participants completed only
(2) and (3) above. Thus, (1) and (3) can be thought of as
“bread” and (2)—the explanation—is the “jam” of our design. The no-pretest group offers a between-subjects contrast via their posttest, obviating test/re-test concerns about
experimenter demand regarding the sandwich group. Just
before leaving the experiment, all participants also filled out
a demographic questionnaire. Surveys were again anonymous, as in Study 1.
Below, we report data from the 85 Berkeley and 41
Brownsville students who completed the survey as intended
and had been U.S. residents for ten years or more (because
we expressly consider U.S. exceptionalism/nationalism). Of
the Berkeley data, we analyzed 43 no-pretest (open-faced)
surveys and the pretest part of 42 sandwich surveys––but
due to anticipated time constraints, only 30 sandwich posttests could be completed/obtained. Of the Brownsville data,
we analyzed 22 no-pretest and 19 sandwich surveys. To be
conservative, all between-group t-tests were Welch-method
adjusted for unequal variance and sample size. All hypotheses below were clearly stated as a priori ones and were replicated across our two samples except where noted.
The attitude survey used 12 items (on 9-point Likert
scales) to assess the six RTMD constructs. True knowledge
of global warming was assessed based on (1) three written
responses by participants and (2) (on the posttest only:) two
fill-in-the-blank items about the types of light (visible, infrared, etc.) involved in the greenhouse effect. Self-reports of
knowledge were also reported on a 9-point Likert scale.

Results and Discussion
The Crucial Global Warming Mechanism Was Learned
Even our rather sophisticated samples initially exhibited incorrect or non-normative understandings of the greenhouse
effect’s mechanism (e.g., on the roles of ultraviolet light, the
ozone layer’s depletion, non-greenhouse-gas pollution, and
the reflection of incoming light). Most notably, not a single
pre-test explanation mentioned different light/radiation
types or atmospheric retention time, despite an explicit
prompt to explain any differences between the energy traveling toward and away from Earth. However, after reading
the 400-word description, 61% of the Berkeley participants
across both groups correctly answered that “infrared” light
was emitted from Earth (in its fill-in-the-blank space), as did
55% of the Brownsville students who responded.
Beyond the blank-filling items, we statistically analyzed
individuals’ qualitative explanations—creating scoring rubrics for three central concepts: (a) differentiating between
the types of light entering and exiting the atmosphere, (b)
atmospheric greenhouse gases’ interactions with radiation,
and (c) the increased atmospheric retention time of energy.
Inter-rater reliability was again high (weighted κ = 0.71
based on about one-third of the Berkeley data; κ = 0.67

2231

across the full Brownsville dataset). Table 1 shows the percentages of all possible points: overall, we found dramatic
knowledge increases (doublings, triplings, or more), which
were significant for all subscales—both within-subjects for
the sandwich condition, and between-subjects from the
sandwich pretest to the no-pretest condition’s posttest, (p <
.05 for all six improvement possibilities).
Table 1. The mean percentage scores for each of the three
assessed global-warming constructs (with greenhouse gases
= GHGs), for each test and sample (for California;Texas).
All improved from pretest (‘*’: p < .05; ‘**’: p < .005).
Group & Test (& means)
Light
GHGs
Energy
Sandwich Pretest
33%; 7% 39%;16% 28%;11%
(meansCA;TX = 33%;11%)
Sandwich Posttest
78%;36% 83%;39% 47%;35%
(meansCA;TX = 69%;37%)
**;*
**;**
*;*
No-pretest Posttest
66%;43% 74%;54% 57%;51%
(meansCA;TX = 66%;49%) **;**
**;**
**;**
Global Warming Acceptance Via Mechanistic Learning
It may seem quite remarkable, but participants’ global
warming acceptance increased dramatically after our brief
intervention, as predicted. To assess this, we used all of the
73 Berkeley posttest ratings in a paired t-test, and used imputation for pretest scores for the no-pretest group. (In particular, the full set of 42 pretest ratings was used to avoid
sampling bias.) We found a significant change in global
warming acceptance on the posttests, as compared to pretest measures (t(72) = 2.28, p = .01). This result was replicated with the Brownsville surveys (t(39) = 4.24, p < .0001).
In addition, although Study 2’s statistical power was rather
limited, the correlation matrices for the RTMD variables
again largely supported RTMD theory––as was certainly
found in Study 1 and all prior studies. The relationship between knowledge and attitudes was also reflected in Berkeley students’ naïve pre-test data, in which participants’ selfperceived ratings of their own global warming knowledge
correlated significantly with their global warming attitudes
(r = .39, p = .01). This was not the case with Brownsville
students (r = .15, p = .55), which may be reflective of their
overall lower self-perceived knowledge.
Please recall that we had also predicted a betweenconditions difference in surprise ratings due to reduced
hindsight biases among the sandwich participants. The difference for Berkeley students was at the significance borderline (t(42.08) = 1.65, p = .05); the surprise ratings only
reached “6” in the no-pretest condition (out of 9, with “5”
being “somewhat surprising”), but were as high as “9" (i.e.,
“extremely surprising”) in the sandwich condition. Among
Brownsville students, surprise was uniformly higher, with a
numerically similar difference between conditions, although
this result was not significant (t(38.1) = 0.92, p = .18).
Conclusions from Study 2
This experiment replicates and extends the findings noted
earlier (from prior interviews and Study 1), such that even

rather well-educated people initially held mostly nonnormative understandings of global warming’s mechanism.
Only 400 words later, though (roughly the duration of a TV
commercial break), dramatic increases were observed in (1)
mechanistic knowledge and (2) global warming acceptance.
(Further, the increases were found in divergent U.S. states
and colleges.) Differences in surprise ratings between the
sandwich and “no-pretest” (“open-faced”) groups further
support the notion that eliciting an explanation or theory
prior to offering information increases surprise and reduces
post-hoc rationalization and hindsight bias. (On surprise, see
Clark & Ranney, 2010; Munnich, Ranney, & Song, 2007.)

General Discussion
Of Study 1’s 270 participants, none could fully explain that
(a) visible light makes its way to Earth’s surface where it is
(mostly) absorbed and emitted later as infrared light, (b) this
infrared light is largely (actually, 90%) absorbed by greenhouse gases before reaching outer space, and (c) this slows
energy loss and warms Earth. (Ranney calls the unimpeded
10% the “Goldilocks tithe.”) While others (e.g., Leiserowitz, 2007) have shown aspects of U.S. ignorance, we extend these results to mechanistic understandings of the
greenhouse effect. If our sample even vaguely represents the
U.S. public, then they rarely understand global warming’s
mechanism. Further, such knowledge does relate to policy
preferences, willingness to sacrifice due to legislation, and
beliefs about (anthropogenic) climate change’s reality. We
suggest that prior works’ inattention to this mechanism may
be because it is scientifically uncontroversial relative to the
effects, mitigation strategies, and other causes re: climate
change. However, it seems that mechanistic knowledge may
play a key role in successful climate policy ventures.
Just as knowing “how reproduction works” supports evolutionary acceptance (cf. Shtulman & Calbi, 2012), our studies show that a mechanistic global warming understanding
(e.g., a-c above) supports its acceptance. Study 2 showed
that we increased students’ acceptance by increasing global
warming knowledge. Space prohibits a full treatment of this,
but a new study further shows that, after providing people
with misleading, cherry-picked facts, we caused them to
discount climate change (dropping from 6.5 to 5.9 on a 9point scale) with a dramatic, concurrent drop in their confidence in their knowledge (plummeting from 5.0 to 2.9, on a
9-point scale). Thus, as the nefarious are well aware, empirical data do not always increase acceptance, global coherence, and self-confidence in one’s understanding.
In short, work spawned by the Reinforced Theistic Manifest Destiny theory (Ranney, 2012; Ranney & Thanukos,
2011) regarding concerns about U.S. exceptionalism led us
to find a successful way to enhance wisdom about the
greenhouse effect’s mechanism. That is, we found that instruction focused on a mere 400 words of text dramatically
increases undergraduates’ global warming understandings
and increases their mean acceptance of anthropogenic global warming. We suspect that our instruction is effective in
that it addresses head-on the implicit mystery of how ener-

2232

gy—as visible light—can easily get close to Earth’s surface
and troposphere, yet has difficulty leaving that surface/troposphere (as absorbed, intercepted infrared light).
Future research will determine our intervention’s longevity,
among other attempts to better comprehend the landscape of
the cognitions and emotions regarding global warming. As
the studies above demonstrate, insights from cognitive science show much promise for tackling the challenges for
climate-relevant education in the U.S. and abroad.

Acknowledgments
We greatly thank Megan Beale, Amanda Cain, Roxana Farjadi, Jackie Felipe, Benji Walklet, and Jeff Wilson (as well
as M. Crain, J. Fong, D. Gillingham, L. Goldwasser, A.
Lazaris, L. Nevo, B. Rai, T. Ryan, J. Spector, and UC-B).

References
Anderegg, W. R. L., Prall, J. W., Harold, J., & Schneider, S.
H. (2010). Expert credibility in climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(27),
12107-12109.
Bord, R. J., Fisher, A., & O'Connor, R. E. (1998). Public
perceptions of global warming: United States and international perspectives. Climate Research, 11(1), 75-84.
Clark, D., & Ranney, M. A. (2010). Known knowns and
unknown knowns: multiple memory routes to improved
numerical estimation. In K. Gomez, L. Lyons & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences
(Vol. 1, pp. 460-467): International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Feinberg, M., & Willer, R. (2011). Apocalypse soon? Dire
messages reduce belief in global warming by contradicting just world beliefs. Psychological Science, 22, 34-38.
Garcia de Osuna, J., Ranney, M. A., & Nelson, J. (2004).
Qualitative and quantitative effects of surprise:
(Mis)estimates, rationales, and feedback-induced preference changes while considering abortion. In K. Forbus, D.
Gentner & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twentysixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 422-427). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harte, J., & Harte, M. E. (2008). Cool the Earth, save the
economy: Solving the climate crisis is EASY. Retrieved
from http://www.cooltheearth.us/
Kerr, R. A. (2007). Global warming is changing the world.
Science, 316(5822), 188.
Leiserowitz, A. (2007). International public opinion, perception, and understanding of global climate change
(Human Development Report 2007/2008): UNDP.
[Online].Available:http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/h
dr2007-2008/papers/leiserowitz_anthony6.pdf [2009, July 9].
Leiserowitz, A., Maibach, E., & Roser-Renouf, C. (2010).
Climate change in the American mind: Americans global
warming beliefs and attitudes in January 2010. Yale University and George Mason University. New Haven: CT.
Yale Project on Climate Change. Available at:

http://environment.yale.edu/uploads/AmericansGlobalWa
rmingBeliefs2010.pdf.
Malcolm, J. R., Liu, C., Neilson, R. P., Hansen, L., & Hannah, L. (2006). Global warming and extinctions of endemic species from biodiversity hotspots. Conservation
Biology,
20,
538-548.
doi:10.1111/j.15231739.2006.00364.x
Mayhew, P. J., Jenkins, G. B., & Benton, T. G. (2008). A
long-term association between global temperature and biodiversity, origination and extinction in the fossil record.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
275, 47-53. DOI:10.1098/rspb.2007.1302
Miller, J. D., Scott, E. C., & Okamoto, S. (2006). Public acceptance of evolution. Science, 313, 765-766.
Munnich, E. L., Ranney, M. A., & Song, M. (2007). Surprise, surprise: The role of surprising numerical feedback
in belief change. In D. S. McNamara & G. Trafton (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-ninth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 503–508). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Ranney, M. A. (2012). Why don't Americans accept evolution as much as people in peer nations do? A theory (Reinforced Theistic Manifest Destiny) and some pertinent
evidence. In K.S. Rosengren, S.K. Brem, E.M. Evans, &
G.M. Sinatra (Eds.), Evolution challenges: Integrating research and practice in teaching and learning (pp. 233269). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ranney, M.A., Clark, D., Reinholz, D., & Cohen, S. (in
press for 2012). Improving Americans’ modest global
warming knowledge in the light of RTMD (Reinforced
Theistic Manifest Destiny) theory. In The Future of
Learning: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences. International Society of the
Learning Sciences, Inc.
Ranney, M. A., & Thanukos, A. (2011). Accepting evolution or creation in people, critters, plants, and classrooms:
The maelstrom of American cognition about biological
change. In R. S. Taylor & M. Ferrari (Eds.), Epistemology
and science education: Understanding the evolution vs.
intelligent design controversy (pp. 143-172). New York:
Routledge.
Rinne, L., Ranney, M. A., & Lurie, N. (2006). Estimation as
a catalyst for numeracy: Micro-interventions that increase
the use of numerical information in decision-making. In
S. A. Barab, K. E. Hay & D. T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning Sciences (pp. 571-577). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shepardson, D. P., Niyogi, D., Choi, S., & Charusombat, U.
(2011). Students’ conceptions about the greenhouse effect, global warming, and climate change. Climatic
Change, 104, 481-507.
Shtulman, A., & Calabi, P. (2012). Cognitive constraints on
the understanding and acceptance of evolution In K.S.
Rosengren, S.K. Brem, E.M. Evans, & G.M. Sinatra
(Eds.), Evolution challenges: Integrating research and
practice in teaching and learning (pp. 47-65). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

2233

