UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Changing Discriminatory Norms Using Models of Conceptually-Mediated Cognition and
Cultural Worldviews

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4011269f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Olsher, Daniel

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Changing Discriminatory Norms Using Models of Conceptually-Mediated
Cognition and Cultural Worldviews
Daniel Olsher (dan@intmind.com)
National University of Singapore
strategy entitled Directed Dissonance Reduction (DDR), a
conceptually-mediated formulation of inoculation theory,
and a brief discussion of techniques for modifying belief
networks. Examples (including sample networks) are then
given demonstrating how to apply these tools in the prejudice
and terrorism reduction domains.
Beyond norm change, this research seeks to advance nuanced knowledge representation of worldviews, cultures,
and norms as well as to advance our understanding of
conceptually-mediated cognition.

Abstract
Cognitive modeling can provide immense social benefits, especially in the case of unconscious processes causing significant psychological and societal distress. One such process,
discrimination against minorities, is typically grounded in unconsciously held stereotypes reflecting deep ignorance of the
realities minorities face. Another, suicide terrorism, results in
significant suffering for many communities. Related beliefs often arise from unquestionable values, norms and worldviews,
however, making direct/conscious change appeals unworkable.
Building upon cultural knowledge representation and cognitive modeling, this paper shows how change could be effected via cognitive operations on conceptual worldviews. After introducing a novel framework for modeling conceptuallymediated belief systems and techniques for guided dissonance
reduction and network change, the paper applies these to antidiscrimination and terrorism reduction. Such work holds great
potential for better aligning perception of minorities with the
realities they face, reducing suffering, and disrupting psychological processes dependent on improper views of stigmatized
minorities and other phenomena.
Keywords: Culture; Cognitive Models; Nuance; Knowledge Representation; Norm Change; Discrimination Reduction; Terrorism Reduction

Core Representation Frameworks:
COGVIEW and INTELNET

Introduction
Cognitive Science has the potential to provide immense social benefits, especially in shedding light on processes that
are normally unconscious but which tend to cause significant
psychological and societal distress.
One such process is discrimination, often grounded in
stereotypes reflecting deep ignorance of the realities of what
minorities are and what they face. Another is the process by
which people decide to undertake violent action during conflict.
Because the beliefs underlying such processes often arise
from norms, cultures, values, and other strongly unconscious,
often nearly unquestionable, belief systems, direct conscious
appeals are often unworkable and insufficient for effecting
change.
In this paper, we consider how to construct procedures capable of achieving change in beliefs by modeling the beliefs
people already hold (and the connections between them) and
designing procedures tailor-made to effect change.
Incremental changes are most effective. The use of familiar concepts lowers fear, and as the status quo already appears
to be ‘reality’, small changes to it are more likely to succeed.
Direct/conscious attempts to change such beliefs often fall
afoul of cognitive and social defense mechanisms, with excessive change causing dissonance, negative emotional outcomes, and ultimately, rejection.
This paper introduces a framework for modeling
conceptually-mediated belief systems, a novel change

In this paper, the author’s COGVIEW and INTELNET formalisms are used to model nuanced conceptual worldviews.
Both formalisms are the subject of ongoing development,
with this paper providing an early demonstration of their
combined capabilities.
COGVIEW is a network-based framework for representing
complex worldviews through ’fields’ of interconnected concepts and energy flows. It serves as a base for simulating
important psychological, conceptual, and cognitive semantics processes mediated by worldviews. COGVIEW reflects
the insight that information originating from human cognitive
processes is of a different type than that typically considered
in the ’hard sciences’; namely, it is deeply nuanced and inherently distributed.
COGVIEW uses networks of concepts to store information. Networks are defined as collections of nodes connected
with edges (or links). Energy originates from energy sources
and flows across edges (capable of modifying the energy that
flows across them). Each edge has an indicated direction in
which energy traversing it will flow.
COGVIEW supports two levels of cognitive processing,
the C(onscious)-Level and the U(nconscious)-Level. U-Level
processing is not accessible to conscious awareness and is
dominated by the effects of associational memory in that the
primary activity taking place at this level is the spreading of
energy between concepts and concept fields and the associative detection of congruence/similarity between various portions of the extended concept universe. Critically, ’rational’
or ’logical’ thought does not take place at this level and is
therefore incapable of acting as a filter for change. Growing evidence (see Shermer, 2002) suggests that at this level,
mere understanding may be cognitively tantamount to acceptance, requiring an active act of ’disbelief’ to be overcome.
’Raw’ concepts and a wide range of energies can be accessed
directly here and immense amounts of energy easily shifted
and deployed, as well as emotions triggered, all without conscious or rational intervention.

2138

Clashes In COGVIEW, a clash occurs when energy flowing in one direction meets energy flowing in the other, an especially important occurrence when the positive or negative
valences of clashing energies are opposed to one another.
Clashes represent the point at which conceptual incompatibilities become manifest, and when the ability and/or need to
take some sort of meaningful action has been identified, that
is, when the model makes a certain type of ’conclusion’.
The subnetwork within which a clash occurs will naturally
be activated most when a result propagates to consciousness,
and thus is the subnetwork from which the conscious knower
will consider the ’insight’ of the clash to have originated.
Critically, this is true even (as is the common case) when
the energy which caused the clash came from other concept
fields. This phenomenon allows for persuasive processes in
which the semantic/conceptual content of a clash is removed
from its original context (usually one in which conscious
processing would have caused the desired conceptual understanding to be rejected) and shifted to another context (i.e.
another subportion of the conceptual cloud) wherein which
the attribution of the clash output to that context is ’safer’ (or
more desired).
The sites of clashes often coincide with the most relevant
and important (moral) ’issues’ that a human would identify
within particular conceptual fields. This phenomenon provides one source of evidence that specific COGVIEW networks are accurately reflecting certain real world semantics.
Arguably, clashes have a neural basis; for example,
Lieberman, Schreiber, and Ochsner (2003, p. 689-690) suggest that ”The C-system [conscious] (named for the ”c” in
reflection), consisting of the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and medial temporal lobes, is recruited when the
X-system [unconscious] fails to create coherent outputs from
the different sources of input. ... According to this model,
the C-system is usually involved only to the extent that the
X-system fails to resolve the current set of inputs into a coherent output ... [I]f the conflict between different considerations is too large, the C-system will detect this tension in the
X-system and become involved (Botvinick, Braver, Barch,
Carter, and Cohen, 2000).”

Tools for Effecting (and Inoculating Against)
Belief Change
In this section we introduce tools for use both at the macro
and COGVIEW network levels.

Network-Level Tools
This section provides a very high-level listing (due to space
limitations) of techniques for adjusting COGVIEW networks.
While useful on their own, a high-level understanding of
these techniques is also helpful in understanding Directed
Dissonance Reduction.
1. Break Link Between Two Concepts: Disconnects energy
sources from downstream concepts (can be accomplished
via DDR).

2. Introduce new connections to compete for energy with preexisting connections.
3. ’Attraction’: Prime concepts likely to attract energy and
thus create more desirable energy flows. Priming of ’incompatible’ concepts (those causing dissonance with other
salient concepts) may cause confusion, weakening previous connections.
4. Use ’attractor cognitions’, that is, new cognitions more
pleasant than undesired ones. Protoypical examples: ’hotbutton’ concepts like ’family’. Energy from these may
‘overwhelm’ that of undesired concepts or paths.
5. ’Blocking cognitions’ capable of blocking flow along undesired paths. To accomplish, associate original path with
something unpleasant, confusing, or fear-inducing. Highlight path nonoptimality by pointing out logical inconsistencies or suboptimal conclusions arising from the path.
6. Create Links: Repeatedly reference pairs of concepts together, point out semantic similarities, and/or create scenarios where concepts are always associated or required to
be used together to accomplish a goal.
7. Emphasize / De-emphasize Concepts: De-emphasize
through neglect - emphasize through repetition.
8. Redirect Link: Prime desired concepts and paths. Reinforce through Repetition and Need-To-Use. Repetition:
use narratives or linguistic constructions continually invoking and refreshing the salience of desired concepts or paths.
Need-To-Use: cognitions become more salient when they
are necessary to accomplish important goals.
9. Change Polarity (what was once sending negative energy
now sends positive, and vice versa): Represents significant
changes in perspective. Overwhelm energy of one polarity
with energy from a source of the opposite polarity.
10. Re-Normalize: Show that concept ‘X’ is actually much
more like concept ‘Y’ than was originally believed to be
the case.
11. Stigma Disconnect: Stigma is a highly potent source of
negative energy. Stigma Disconnect breaks energy flows
associated with stigma as early as possible and/or refits
them with more positive energy sources.
12. Concept Implantation and Reconstruction of Incorrect
Concept Fields: Entire concept fields may be incorrect, either in terms of content or in connections.
Associations may be reinforced if they cover entire concept
chains - that is, from energy input nodes to output nodes, as
this provides cognitive ’closure’ and makes chains easier to
process.

Directed Dissonance Reduction
Dissonance reduction (Festinger, 1957) represents a powerful mechanism for effecting psychological change, capable of marshaling significant emotional and mental energies.
In this section we reformulate this mechanism in terms of
COGVIEW networks, and later demonstrate how it may be
repurposed in service of both belief change and ‘inoculation’.

2139

DDR redefines dissonance reduction as a process of positive energy maximization, suggesting that people seek to maximize the most positive energy obtainable within their belief
networks. Dissonance is understood as a threat to current energy maximization, and dissonance reduction as an attempt to
create a new equilibrium. Motivation arises from discomfort,
with motivation levels proportional to the potential amount of
threatened energy change.

Phase V. Solidification
This phase solidifies energy at important clash points in order to enhance satisfaction and attitudes towards outcomes,
as well as make it less likely that changes will be reversed or
re-examined.
The more likely it is that the new energy balance will persist in future, the more anxiety will be reduced during the
dissonance reduction process.

Stages of Directed Dissonance Reduction

Directed Dissonance Reduction Examples

Phase I. Design
Phase I analyzes subjects’ COGVIEW networks and identifies clash nodes, important positive energy sources, and potential psychological defenses.
COGVIEW allows putative belief changers to identify
where concepts and energy sources lie in relation to others
and to determine what concepts to prime and interconnect in
order to ’reach’ desired energy sources.

Phase II. Initiation (Build Initial Context)
Priming of concepts identified in Phase I takes place here.
This phase may also seek to add new useful concepts or links,
though strategies built significantly on pre-existing networks
are likely to be more effective, reliable, and easier to implement in practice.
If subjects perceive that large negative changes in energy
balance may result, denial may occur. In order to avoid this
defense strategy, significant positive energy sources (such as
FAMILY) may be identified and primed at this stage.
In some cases, negative energy sources may be primed, for
example, if subjects believe that there is ‘no problem’ or that
a potential dissonance-inducing stimulus is of little or no significance. A canonical example is the use of fear by terrorists
to cause target populations to take their goals seriously. Another involves health appeals, in which subjects may not be
convinced of the reality of possible threats.

Phase III. Dissonance Introduction
In this stage, a stimulus - a single or small set of new links
whose existence threatens the existing positive energy balance - is introduced, causing dissonance. These must be significant enough to threaten belief network energy maximization.
Care must be taken here to avoid resort to denial as a clash
defense strategy; if the target is able to simply ignore the stimulus altogether, it will not be effective. Thus, stimuli should
be factually accurate, important, and otherwise impossible to
ignore.

Phase IV. Directed Dissonance Reduction
Here, energy is introduced and links are adjusted so that dissonance will be resolved as desired. This stage attempts to
direct the choice of energy maximization equilibrium; energy
placed at clash sites is most beneficial.

We now provide two detailed examples of how DDR can be
used in diverse domains.

Coming Out
The first example illustrates the case of a son who comes out
to his father, whose view of the situation is initially quite inaccurate. The goal of DDR is that the father maintain his
positive associations and attitudes about his son.
Figure 1 provides a diagram of the father’s COGVIEW network before DDR has taken place. Energy flows from the energy source nodes, following the arrows indicated in the diagram, with two properties: magnitude (amount) and valence
(positive or negative). Whenever energy crosses a graph edge
labeled ‘NEG’, the valence of that energy is reversed.
Energy derives from three sources. Biological energy
arises from parental love, the need to guide children, parentchild and father-son bonding, the desire to raise well-adjusted
children capable of participating in the wider world, and the
psychological need to view oneself as a good parent. Societal
energy arises from in-built needs to be seen positively by the
community as a good parent and as someone who has raised
a well-adjusted child. Lastly, Cultural energy draws on local
imperatives to guide children, act as good parents, and raise
moral children.
Phase I (Design): DDR goals are as follows: break
the link between INCORRECT- BELIEFS - ABOUT- GAYS and
GAY (Link IncorrectBeliefs) and maintain the link between
IDEAL - SON and THE - SON (Link IdealSon). The unfavorable
outcome is the opposite, that is, the breaking of link IdealSon
and the maintenance of the IncorrectBeliefs link. Another
undesired outcome could be the breaking of the link between
THE - SON and FATHER - in other words, the father disowning
the son.
Clash points occur at FAMILY, RAISING CHILDREN, and
THE - SON . At FAMILY, positive energy (+50) comes from
SOCIETY and significant negative energy from COMBINED ENERGY (initially positive but reversed after crossing the
NEG edge near INCORRECT- BELIEFS - ABOUT- GAYS). Without mitigation this will flow into IDEAL - SON, ultimately making this path one that contravenes DDR goals. If positive energy is introduced at this node through priming or statements
such as ‘your son wants to raise children and start a family’,
‘gay people want to start loving families‘, and/or associating
FAMILY with significant positive energy, positive energy may
’overwhelm’ the negative energy at the clash point. A similar
technique may be applied at RAISING CHILDREN.

2140

FATHER'S COGVIEW NETWORK
ENERGY-SOURCE (LEGITIMACY BIOLOGICAL)

ENERGY-SOURCE (LEGITIMACY SOCIETAL)

BIOLOGICAL

SOCIETAL

CULTURAL

COMBINED-ENERGY

CONCEPT FIELD: THE-FAMILY
SOCIETY
The West

SOCIETY

ENERGY-SOURCE (LEGITIMACY CULTURAL)

SUPPORT
ROLE: FATHER

RESPONSIBLE

propel: pos50

RESPECTABLE

NEG

NEG

MENTALLY-SOUND

NEG

NEG

MORALLY-GOOD

NEG

CULTURE

MASCULINE

NEG

CONCEPT FIELD: THE-FAMILY
FAMILY
NEG

INCORRECT-BELIEFS-ABOUT-GAYS
VALUE-SOCIAL-ROLES

VALUE-FAMILY-OVER-SELF

VALUE-SOCIAL-ROLES

VALUE-FAMILY-OVER-SELF

IDEAL-SON

NEG
FAMILY-TIES

GAY
Raising Children

ROLE: CHILDREN

THE-SON

Figure 1: Father’s COGVIEW Network before DDR
The clash located at THE - SON is particularly interesting, as
it points to the exact dilemma faced by the father in this situation: either accept his son and break links to his incorrect
beliefs or vice versa. Such correspondences can help verify
how well COGVIEW networks fit the situations they represent.
Energy does not actually flow from INCORRECT- BELIEFS ABOUT- GAYS to THE - SON until the dissonance-inducing
cognition (linking GAY to THE - SON - the ComingOut link) is
introduced, matching the reality of the problem being modeled.
Because THE - SON connects to FATHER, reminding the father that his son is a ‘good’ son will introduce positive energy
into this node and make it more likely that he will not want
to disown his son so that he may remain associated with this
positive energy source.
Other positive energy sources include caring/compassion,
parental attachment, the desire for enhanced well-being, the
desire to focus on strengthening family and not break it apart,
and so on. Other potential strategies could include creating
new links between desirable nodes or changing the polarity
of existing links between personal attributes (RESPONSIBLE,
RESPECTABLE , etc.) and GAY or THE - SON .
Phase II (Initiation): In Stage II, the priming-related components of the Phase I design are carried out.
Phase III (Dissonance Introduction): In this stage, the
link (from GAY to THE - SON), labeled as ComingOut above,
is introduced by the son coming out to the father. Denial must

be avoided, which would appear as refusing to believe the son
is gay.
Phase IV: (Directed Dissonance Reduction) At this
stage, the full strategy designed at Phase I is implemented.
Positive energy is inserted at FAMILY, RAISING CHILDREN,
THE - SON , and so on. This stage makes use of link change
strategies 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12 (see above).
The goal here is to make it more painful for the father to
configure his belief network in a manner contrary to the goals
of DDR - that is, if he breaks or maintains non-preferred links,
the maximum energy balance (equilibrium) he will achieve
will ultimately be lower than that if he configures his network
as desired. As an example, if the father breaks the link from
IDEAL - SON to THE - SON , he will cease to receive the benefit of the positive energy entering the node THE - SON from
IDEAL - SON . A similar outcome will arise if he breaks the
link between IDEAL - SON and THE - SON.
Phase V (Solidification): Operations remain at Phase IV
until sufficient change has been effected. To test, we may ask
the father how he feels about his son, tallying the total number
of positive and negative qualities.
Further positive energy may be added to THE - SON by focusing on the father’s need that his son and other family members be associated with positive attributes, and re-priming
may be performed on FAMILY, CHILDREN, and so on.

Terrorism Reduction
DDR also has significant application in the domain of terrorism reduction. DDR can support public communications de-

2141

INOCULATION SCENARIO

ENERGY-SOURCE (REVENGE)

ENERGY-SOURCE (NEED-FOR-PERSONAL-SIGNIFICANCE)

1/5

ENERGY-SOURCE (CREATE-JUSTICE)

ENERGY-SOURCE (Societal Group Pressures)

Social Significance

Serve a Cause

1/5

1/5

1/5

Sacrifice Self

PUNISHMENT

ENERGY-SOURCE (SHAME)

1/5

Put Cause Over Self

Live Forever (Build Legacy)

PERPETRATORS

REDEMPTION

ENERGY-SOURCE (OBTAIN-FINANCIAL-SUPPORT-FOR-FAMILY)

NEG

CAUSED-SUFFERING

ENERGY-SOURCE (DESIRE-TO-BE-MORAL)

propel: neg-1000

Means of Achieving Personal Significance

ENERGY-SOURCE (DESIRE-TO-LIVE)

propel: neg-1000

SA: Suicide Terrorism ***

prop

ENERGY-SOURCE (DESIRE-TO-PRESERVE-LIFE)

propel: neg-1000

propel: pos1000

propel: pos600

el: po
s100

propel: neg-1000
propel: pos1000

FAMILIES

ENERGY-SOURCE (Contribution: Contribute To Family)

ENERGY-SOURCE (LOVE)

VICTIMS

ENERGY-SOURCE (Contribution: Charity)

ENERGY-SOURCE (Contribution: Community Efforts)

DIE *

NEG

ENERGY-SOURCE (Contribution: Work)

Peaceful Significance Achievement

NEG

propel: neg-500

FAMILY *

Parent Role

COMMUNITY *

Raise Children

IDENTITY *

Dissatisfactory Life

Insignificant Life

prop
el:p
0

os50

propel: neg-100

propel: neg-100

Personal Significance, Worth, Morality ***

Figure 2: Citizen COGVIEW Network before Persuasion
signed to slow the adoption or ’taking root’ of radical ideologies in susceptible individuals (termed ‘inoculation’). Focus
can also be placed on interrupting the flow from conception
to the carrying out of acts.
We focus here on ’inoculation’ against suicide terrorism,
as it is a highly effective strategy capable of blocking entire
event chains from occurring. Suicide terrorism’s reliance on
interlocking societal and personal value systems is an excellent fit for the COGVIEW+DDR approach.
We draw on Kruglanski et al. (2009)’s view of suicide terrorism as a quest for personal significance. We also draw
on ’inoculation theory’ (McGuire, 1961; Pfau et al., 1997),
which suggests that subjects may be ’inoculated’ against later
attempts to change their beliefs by being exposed to weakened forms of counterarguments to their current positions.
‘Beliefs’ are understood here as COGVIEW links relevant to
suicide terrorism and ’attempts to change beliefs’ as attempts
to convince others to undertake suicide terrorism.
Inoculation seeks to protect existing beliefs against change,
assuming that people initially believe that suicide is wrong
and that they should seek to make their life meaningful
through appeal to family and activities rather than through
terrorism.
Inoculation consists of two phases: Threat and Refutational Preemption (Pfau et al., 1997, 188-189). Threat motivates belief protection by demonstrating that beliefs (and
energy maximization) can be threatened. Refutational Preemption inoculates against future threats by presenting weak-

ened forms of counter-arguments (which may ultimately be
the same or different as what are eventually encountered, as
the effect works in both cases.) (Pfau et al., 1997, 188-189)
(McGuire, 1961, 330).
DDR assists (and induces) participants to ’create their
own’ counterarguments against persuasion attempts. As Pfau
(1997, 189) suggests, ”[i]t is the motivation provided to generate answers to potential counterarguments, as opposed to
the specific information provided, that is responsible for [conferring resistance].”
By highlighting anxiety related to energy equilibrium loss,
DDR can help explain findings related to distraction and differential performance of inoculation as a strategy (see, for
example Keating & Brock, 1974).
Applying DDR Threat occurs at Phases II and III of DDR,
and Refutational Preemption at Phases IV and V.
Phase I (Design - Threat): Identify nodes expected to
lose significant positive energy if persuasion occurs: FAM ILY, COMMUNITY , IDENTITY , PERSONAL SIGNIFICANCE ,
WORTH , AND MORALITY and PEACEFUL SIGNIFICANCE
ACHIEVEMENT . Also threatened is the loop between FAM ILY and PERSONAL SIGNIFICANCE , WORTH , AND MORAL ITY . Loops such as these serve to simulate stability; the loss
of stability represented by energy flowing within stable feedback loops is a significant loss in and of itself.
Simulate the introduction of negative energy into threatened

2142

nodes (and loss of stability). This can be accomplished by
calling attention to the following potential outcomes of energy loss:
FAMILY : Children without parents, not close to loved ones,
loss of significance, judged as immoral, not supportive, broken family (leading to suffering, shame), ostracism, discrimination, prejudice, family suffering from revenge taken by others.
COMMUNITY : Chaotic communities, crime out of control,
suffering, no rule of law, fear, bad example, children hurt, not
growing up well, bad publicity for cause, martial law.
IDENTITY : Unclear about role in life, no personal meaning,
unsure how to live life, deep instability, lose identity as good
parent, good spouse, good member of community.
PERSONAL SIGNIFICANCE , WORTH , AND MORALITY : loss
of face/worth to family, community, and friends, seen as
wrong and immoral, family members feel societal shame,
ashamed, unhappy due to lack of access when in need.
PEACEFUL SIGNIFICANCE ACHIEVEMENT : never-ending violence throughout the community, loss of life, family, and
friends, international condemnation, loss of resources, great
danger, great instability, fear throughout.
Loss of stability loop between FAMILY and PERSONAL SIG NIFICANCE , WORTH , AND MORALITY : great uncertainty,
chaos, lack of predictability surrounding life.
Refutational Preemption: For this component we identify
clashes at the following nodes: SIGNIFICANCE ACHIEVE MENT: SUICIDE TERRORISM (3 clashes), PERSONAL SIG NIFICANCE , WORTH , MORALITY (3 clashes), FAMILY , COM MUNITY , DIE , and IDENTITY .
Clash nodes are those most contested from a good-vs-bad
moral perspective; at these sites worldviews may be modified
significantly and immense shifts may occur. Clash points are
marked with asterisks in Figure 2; the number of asterisks
denotes the number of clashes occurring at any given node.
Phases II and III (Initiation and Dissonance Introduction)
involve execution of the Threat component. Threat primes
appropriate concepts and the existence of a threat in and of
itself creates dissonance.
In Figure 2, blue links mark those that would be threatened
and red links those that would be newly introduced should
indoctrination succeed.
Phase IV (DDR and Refutational Preemption): The
goal of DDR is to cause maintenance of blue links (those
that are threatened) and rejection of red links (those that are
indoctrination-related).
This can be accomplished by priming the clash nodes and
significant energy sources that feed into them as follows:
PERSONAL SIGNIFICANCE , WORTH , MORALITY : Prime
RAISE CHILDREN and PARENT ROLE by highlighting importance of personal roles and positive emotions for all. Instinctual protecting, providing for. Prime IDENTITY through critical non-violent roles played by subject in the community.
FAMILY : Children with supportive parents in a stable home
with a good reputation worthy of respect. The importance of
the family as a unit with the individual present to participate

within it.
COMMUNITY : Stable communities conducive for leading a
good, moral life, international support, and so on. Link
strengthening, performed by simultaneously invoking JUS TICE and COMMUNITY , affecting the link between CREATE JUSTICE and COMMUNITY .
DIE : Prime DESIRE - TO - LIVE by cultural allusions to the importance of life, stories about what can be achieved during
one’s lifetime, meaning behind life, and so on. Mortality itself may be primed, but with undesirable follow-on effects.
Attempts may be made to introduce negative energy
into SIGNIFICANCE ACHIEVEMENT: SUICIDE TERRORISM,
though this is risky as it may be seen as a clumsy attempt to
persuade, inducing change in an undesired direction.
The stability loop between FAMILY and PERSONAL SIG NIFICANCE , WORTH , MORALITY , will be automatically
strengthened by introduction of positive energy to any constituent node, serving as further support for the status quo
during DDR.
In the above, link-changing strategies 4,5, and 7 are employed.

Conclusion and Next Steps
This paper has introduced strategies for modeling and changing beliefs and demonstrated examples of their application
in the domains of prejudice and terrorism reduction. Further work will involve extended validation of the COGVIEW
modeling framework and DDR technique, as well as development of further rubrics for using these techniques in critical
real-world scenarios.

References
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Row,
Peterson.
Keating, J., & Brock, T. (1974). Acceptance of persuasion
and the inhibition of counterargumentation under various
distraction tasks. Experimental Social Psychology(10).
Kruglanski, A. W., Chen, X., Dechesne, M., Fishman, S., &
Orehek, E. (2009). Fully committed: Suicide bombers’
motivation and the quest for personal significance. Political
Psychology, 30(3), 331–357.
Lieberman, M. D., Schreiber, D., & Ochsner, K. N. (2003).
Is political cognition like riding a bicycle? How cognitive
neuroscience can inform research on political thinking. Political Psychology, 24.
McGuire, W. (1961). Resistance to persuasion conferred by
active and passive prior refutation of the same and alternative counterarguments. Abnormal and Social Psychology,
63(2).
Pfau, M., Tusing, K., Koerner, A. F., Lee, W., Godbold, L. C.,
Penaloza, L. J., . . . Hong, Y.-H. (1997). Enriching the inoculation construct: The role of critical components in the
process of resistance. Human Communication Research,
24(2), 187–215.
Shermer, M. (2002). Why people believe weird things (2nd
ed.). Holt.

2143

