UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children's Causal Learning from Fiction: Assessing the Proximity Between Real and Fictional
Worlds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3dk4b2tr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Walker, Caren M.
Ganea, Patricia A.
Gopnik, Alison

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Causal Learning from Fiction:
Assessing the Proximity Between Real and Fictional Worlds
Caren M. Walker1, Patricia A. Ganea2, & Alison Gopnik1
(caren.walker@berkeley.edu, patricia.ganea@utoronto.ca, gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Psychology Department, University of California, Berkeley, 3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
2
Human Development & Applied Psychology, University of Toronto, 56 Spadina Rd., Toronto, Canada M5R 2TI
1

Abstract

this perceived similarity by presenting information in a
fictional world that seamlessly interweaves fantasy and
reality (Woolley & Cox, 2007). Even in explicitly
pedagogical scenarios, teachers often embed their intended
curriculum within a fantasy context. This decision is based
on the assumption that fictional worlds are more engaging
to the young child, and may therefore encourage increased
sustained attention and learning of novel material (Harris,
2000; Renninger & Wozniak, 1985).
Previous research supports the proposal that fantasy
contexts serve to improve children’s performance on certain
types of cognitive tasks, such as deductive and syllogistic
reasoning and theory of mind (e.g., Dias & Harris, 1988;
Dias, Roazzi, & Harris, 2005; Hawkins, Pea, Glick &
Scribner, 1984; Richards & Sanderson, 1999; Lillard &
Sobel, 1999; Sobel & Lillard, 2001). For example,
according to Dias et al. (2005), placing an unfamiliar
premise in a fantastical context – particularly when the
premise directly contradicts a currently-held theory – allows
children to override their natural empirical orientation, or
bias to reason in line with their past experiences. It is
unknown, however, how learning and generalization of
novel causal information (which does not require the
suspension of existing knowledge) is affected by the
fantastical contexts of the fictional stories in which this
information is embedded.
The ability to effectively process fictional information is
dependent upon a variety of representational skills,
including at least two major factors that are unique to
learning from fictional material. The first includes the
development of a mature concept about the boundary
between the fictional and real world, as well as an
understanding of what information is more appropriately
quarantined to the fictional space. Second, it is necessary
for children to develop an understanding of when it is
appropriate to transfer information from the fictional to the
real world, and what contextual cues should be considered
in this decision. The current research explores the early
development of each of these factors, and in particular,
examines whether children’s sensitivity to contextual cues
in fictional worlds changes over the course of development.

Fictional information presents a unique challenge to the developing
child. Children must learn when it is appropriate to transfer
information from the fictional space to the real world and what
contextual cues should be considered in this decision. The current
research explores children’s causal inferences between fictional
representations and reality by examining their developing
sensitivity to the proximity of the fictional world to the real world,
and the effect of this judgment on their subsequent generalization
of novel causal properties. By 3-years of age, children are able to
evaluate the data that they receive from fictional stories in order to
inform their generalization of novel story content to the real world.
Additionally, as children develop, they become better able to
discriminate between close (realistic) and far (fantastical) fictional
worlds when assessing which stories are likely to provide relevant
causal knowledge.
Keywords: causal inference; fiction; cognitive development;
prior knowledge; representation

The ‘Reader’s Dilemma’
Children’s growing knowledge about the world comes from
a variety of sources, including their exposure to fictional
material. In fact, much of the unfamiliar information that
children encounter appears in the context of stories and
fantastical representations of the world. Children, like
adults, therefore often encounter the “reader’s dilemma”:
the need to compartmentalize fictional information to
insulate real world knowledge from false facts, and the
simultaneous need to incorporate this information due to its
potential application to a host of real world topics (Gerrig &
Prentice, 1999; Potts, St. John, & Kirson, 1989). There is
substantial evidence in developmental psychology that
indicates that the ability to distinguish reality from fiction
develops significantly during the preschool years (e.g.,
DeLoache, Pierroutakos, Uttal, Rosengren, & Gottlieb,
1998; Flavell, Flavell, & Green, 1989; Woolley & Cox,
2007; Woolley & Wellman, 1990; Woolley & Van Reet,
2006). However, very little research has explored children’s
ability to learn causal information about the real world from
their exposure to fictional material.
Fictional information presents a unique challenge to the
developing child. Research has shown that the transfer of
knowledge is generally facilitated by similarity between the
context in which the information is learned, and the context
in which it is to be applied (Catranbone & Holyoak, 1989;
Spencer & Weisberg, 1986). However, many of the learning
contexts that are created for young children act to reduce

Children’s Beliefs about Fictional Worlds
There is a growing literature in developmental psychology
regarding when and how children distinguish between
fantasy and reality. Methods for testing this distinction vary

1
1108

greatly, and include assessing children’s beliefs about their
imaginary companions (e.g., Taylor, 1999), their beliefs in
magic (e.g., Rosengren Kalish, Hickling, & Gelman, 1994),
and directly asking children about their beliefs in familiar
and novel fantastical entities (e.g., Clark, 1995; Woolley &
Van Reet, 2006). There has also been some work
specifically aimed at assessing children’s beliefs about the
reality status of fictional content in storybooks (e.g.,
Morison & Gardner, 1978; Wellman & Estes, 1986;
Woolley & Cox, 2006). Taken together, this research has
shown that children do distinguish fantasy characters from
real ones, and that (depending on the particular method and
the nature of the task) this ability matures between 3- and 6years of age.
Related research also indicates that children differentiate
the particular contexts in which they encounter information
in storybooks from a relatively young age. For example,
Woolley & Cox (2006; 2007) presented preschoolers with
realistic, fantastical, or religious stories in a variety of
contexts and found that while 3-year-olds were more likely
to judge characters as real than were 4- and 5-year-olds,
most children accurately judged all characters as not real for
all story types. They also found that children made more
claims that the realistic story events “could happen in real
life” than they did for fantastical story events, which
indicates that context matters in the formation of these
judgments. While this work explores children’s willingness
to believe that the story events themselves could happen in
real life, the authors do not consider whether children learn
and apply the information presented in the storybook to real
world scenarios.
According to a study conducted by Skolnick & Bloom
(2006), children conceptualize multiple fictional worlds as
separate from one another, and separate from the real world.
Given children’s tendency to quarantine fictional worlds
from the real world, it is possible that children also consider
the content of these worlds to be distinct, regardless of the
assessed possibility of the events themselves.

labels both from picture books to real objects and from real
objects to picture books. Additionally, they showed that
performance was affected by the iconicity of the pictorial
images, indicating that the nature of the represented content
matters for transferring labels learned in the context of a
picture book interaction. In related work, Ganea, et al.
(2011) showed that 3- and 4-year-old children can also learn
simple biological information about color camouflage in
animals from a single picture book interaction, and apply
this newly acquired knowledge to real world situations.
These experiments indicate that from a very young age,
children are able to incorporate factual information about
the real world from minimal exposure to picture books, in
certain highly realistic and pedagogical scenarios.
In an attempt to explore children’s ability to learn from
stories that include fantastical content, Richert, et al. (2009)
conducted a series of studies looking at analogical reasoning
from picture books to other stories and from picture books
to the real world. In three experiments, 3½- to 5-year-old
children were presented with analogical problems in the
context of a short story which involved either real or fantasy
characters. In the first experiment, children were tested on
their ability to transfer a solution from a story about familiar
fantasy characters to a story about realistic characters, and
vice versa. In general, children were more likely to transfer
the solution to the novel problem from the real source than
from the fantasy source. In the second experiment, children
were asked to generalize these same solutions to real world
contexts (games that involved the manipulation of physical
objects). Again, children were more likely to transfer the
solution from the real source than from the fantasy source.
Later, Richert and Smith (2011) replicated these findings
using more complex stimuli that were introduced in a
pedagogical context.
The results of these experiments indicate that the context
of a story does affect children’s ability to draw analogies
between the story content and novel scenarios in the real
world. One explanation for these results may be that
children are sensitive to the proximity of the story world to
reality, or the similarity of the causal structure of the
fictional world to the real world.

Learning from Stories
Despite the importance of understanding the distinction
between fiction and reality, storybooks do often provide
important opportunities for children to learn information
about the real world that cannot be experienced directly
(Ganea, Pickard, & DeLoache, 2007). There is currently a
small, but growing number of researchers examining the
development of children’s ability to learn from picture
books and the factors that affect their successful
generalization of this newly learned information to the real
world (e.g., Ganea, Pickard, & DeLoache, 2008; Ganea, Ma,
& DeLoache, 2011; Simcock & Dooley, 2007; Walker,
Walker, & Ganea, under review). To date, most of this
work has focused primarily on transferring labels and
simple concepts from a realistic or factual representation,
rather than embedded in the context of a fictional story.
For example, Ganea, et al. (2008) demonstrated that 15and 18-month-old infants are able to extend newly learned

Assessing Proximity of the Fictional World
Fictional worlds that are closer in possibility space (i.e.,
have higher proximity) share more of the causal structure
with the real world, while those that are further away (i.e.,
have lower proximity) share less. In line with this idea,
research with adult participants has demonstrated that the
perceived proximity of the fictional world to reality
influences participants’ decisions to import facts about the
real world in making inferences about fictional
environments (Skolnick & Goodstein, 2009).
To test this, Skolnick and Goodstein (2009) presented
adult participants with three stories that varied in their
similarity to reality. They found that participants were more
likely to import true facts from the real world to the fictional
worlds that were more similar in underlying causal

2
1109

structure. Adult participants were also more likely to import
facts that were considered to be more causally central to the
representation of reality (e.g., mathematical facts) to all
worlds (regardless of their proximity) than facts that are less
central (e.g., conventional or contingent facts). Thus, adults
infer that fictional worlds that are more similar to the real
world, or closer in possibility space, should contain more
facts that are true of the real world. It is currently unknown
whether children also display this sensitivity to the distance
that a story world lies from reality, and to what extent (if
any) this sensitivity to world proximity would affect
children’s learning from fictional representations.
Examining these issues will inform us about the nature of
the mechanisms that underlie learning from fictional
material and contribute to a more complete understanding of
how causal knowledge is acquired more broadly.

Table 1: Close World and Far World Story Events.
Close World Events

Far World Events

Drive in car

Fly with magic cape

Find a ladybug

Find a fairy

Climb a tree

Talk with a tree

Raining raindrops

Raining stickers

Smell ‘Popple Flower’

Smell ‘Popple Flower’

Get Hiccups

Get Hiccups

Swim in pond

Swim in chocolate pond

In both stories, a novel (plausible) causal relationship was
embedded within context of the other events – smelling a
‘Popple Flower’ causes the protagonist to get the hiccups
(see Figure 1). This causal relationship was identical across
both versions of the story.

Current Research
In the current research, we explore children’s causal
inferences about fictional content and examine whether
contextual information influences their subsequent
generalization of novel causal properties to the real world.
In particular, we examine whether the likelihood that
children will generalize novel causal information varies
based upon the perceived proximity of the fictional world
(with far worlds generating a lower probability of
generalization than close worlds), and whether sensitivity to
the proximity of the fictional world changes over the course
of development.

Figure 1: Sample pages from close world (top left) and
far world (top right) versions and the target causal
relationship as it appears in both storybooks (bottom).

Participants
One hundred and eight preschoolers participated in the
study, including 36 3-year-olds (M = 43.7, SD = 3.9, range =
37.2 – 48.0), 36 4-year-olds (M = 54.9 months, SD = 3.2,
range = 49.8 – 59.9), and 36 5-year-olds (M = 66.8 months,
SD = 2.8, range = 61.6 – 71.8). An approximately equal
number of males and females were included at each age.
Eight additional 3-year-olds and two 4-year-olds were
tested, but excluded for failure on both memory questions or
failure to complete the training for the sorting task.
Although most children were from White, middle-class
backgrounds, a range of ethnicities resembling the diversity
of the local population was represented. All children were
recruited from local preschools and museums.

For the sorting task, eight training cards and two sets of
six story event cards were constructed. The eight training
cards depicted illustrations of real and fantastical versions of
events that did not appear in the story (e.g., a boy eating
spaghetti vs. a boy eating lightening). The two sets of story
event cards depicted each of the individual story events (see
Table 1). One set was constructed for children in the close
world condition and the other set was constructed for
children in the far world condition. One of the six cards in
each set was an identical depiction of the target causal
relationship (i.e., a boy smelling a ‘Popple Flower’ and
getting the hiccups).
For the generalization task, we used a 5 x 7 color
photograph of a real flower that was similar in shape and
color to the illustrated ‘Popple Flower’ in the stories.

Materials
Two 13-page illustrated storybooks were constructed for the
experiment. Both stories depicted human protagonists who
go on a family camping trip. One version of the story (the
close world) was realistic, including no explicit violations of
reality (i.e., all events could have easily taken place in the
real world), and the other version of the story (the far world)
was fantastical, including major violations of reality. Both
stories shared the same general structure and the same
number and type of events, but varied in the degree of
proximity to the real world (see Table 1 for a list of all
major story events and Figure 1 for sample pages).

Procedure
In a between-subjects design, half of the children in each
age group were randomly assigned to the close world or far
world story condition. Children were tested individually,
sitting next to the experimenter. The experimenter read one
of the two books to the child, interacting naturally, pointing
to illustrations, and asking questions in a manner that is
typical of parent-child book interactions. The experimenter

3
1110

Results

introduced the story by saying, “This is a made-up story
about a boy who goes on a camping trip.” While children
were encouraged to engage with the content of the story, the
experimenter provided no additional information over the
course of the interaction.

Nearly all children who were included in the final analysis
answered both memory questions correctly (97% of 3-yearolds, 97% of 4-year-olds, and 100% of 5-year-olds). There
was no difference found between conditions on the memory
assessment, F (1, 106) = 1.86, p = .18, indicating that
children in both conditions were equally able to recall the
content of the story.
Analysis of sorting judgments indicates that children
were also sensitive to the presence of fantastical and
realistic content in the story that they heard. There were a
total of five contextual story events (not including the target
causal relationship). Children in the close world condition
correctly sorted the majority of the realistic story events to
the “real pile” (M = 4.43, SD = 0.93), while children in the
far world condition correctly sorted the majority of the
fantastic story events to the “pretend pile” (M = 4.33, SD =
1.06). While the purpose of the sorting task was to assess
whether children were capable of identifying the story
events as real or pretend, children were also asked to sort a
story event card depicting the target causal relationship (i.e.,
a boy smelling a ‘Popple Flower’ and getting the hiccups),
which served as an additional measure of generalization.
Although this story event card was identical in both
conditions, children in the close world condition were more
likely to sort this story event in the “real pile” (M = .67, SD
= .40), while children in the far world condition more likely
to sort this story event in the “pretend pile” (M = .72, SD =
.45), with a significant difference between conditions χ2
(108, 1) = 9.69, p < .01.
Loglinear analysis and chi squares were conducted to
assess differences in children’s responses on the
generalization task at each age and for each condition.
Results appear in Figure 2 below. Results of loglinear
analysis demonstrate an effect of condition on
generalization, χ2 (108, 1) = 27.39, p < .001, indicating that
children successfully differentiated between close worlds
and far worlds when selectively generalizing novel causal
information from the story to the real world.
Overall, children in the close world condition chose to
generalize the target causal information to the real world
scenario, χ2 (54, 1) = 10.67, p < .01, with no difference
between age groups, χ2 (54, 2) = 0.45, p < .80, indicating
that preschoolers are able to generalize novel causal
information from realistic stories. Children in the far world
condition made the opposite inference, with the majority of
children choosing not to generalize the target causal
information to the real world scenario, χ2 (54, 1) = 14.42, p
< .001. While 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds all generalized more
often from the close world than from the far world (χ2 [36,
1] = 5.04, p < .05; χ2 [36, 1] = 7.80, p < .01; and χ2 [36, 1] =
14.57, p < .001, respectively), our results also provide
evidence for a developmental change: children’s willingness
to generalize novel causal information from the far world
decreased (marginally) with age, χ2 (54, 2) = 5.67, p = .059,
with 3-year-olds more likely to generalize the target causal
relationship (39%) than 4-year-olds (28%) and 5-year-olds

Memory Assessment. Immediately after hearing the story,
children were asked two memory questions intended to
assess attention and recall. One question assessed recall of
the novel causal relationship (“What happened to the boy in
the story when he smelled the Popple Flower?”). The
second question was open-ended, and intended to assess
recall for other story events (“What kinds of things did the
boy do on his camping trip in the story?”). Children were
prompted to continue responding until they successfully
recalled at least three story events. If children responded
with fewer than three events, the experimenter would ask,
“did anything else happen?” until the child could no longer
recall any more story events. Children who failed both
memory questions were excluded from the study.
Sorting task. Children were trained to sort picture cards
into “real” and “pretend” piles. The eight training cards
were presented, one at a time, and children were instructed
to sort the cards into two piles: one pile for things that “can
really happen” and one pile for things that “cannot really
happen, and are just pretend.” This training was
discontinued after children successfully sorted four cards in
a row. Children who failed this training were excluded from
analysis. Immediately following the training, children were
asked to continue sorting, using the six test cards that
depicted each of the events that took place in the story
(including a card depicting the target causal relationship).
As in the training, children were asked to sort each of the
depicted events into the “real” pile or the “pretend” pile.
Generalization task. To assess generalization, children
were presented with the target causal property that appeared
in the story (smelling ‘Popple Flowers’ causes hiccups) in a
real world context, and asked to judge whether this causal
relationship would hold in the real world. To do so, the
experimenter showed the child a realistic photograph
depicting flowers that were similar in shape and color to the
illustrated flowers in the story, saying, “On my way here
today, I saw these. I didn’t know what kind of flowers they
were, but I smelled them. What do you think happened to
me, here in the real world? Do you think that I got the
hiccups or that I did not get the hiccups?” The order of
presentation of the potential outcomes was counterbalanced.
The generalization question was presented in a forced
choice format in order to eliminate a “yes” bias. Children
received a score of “0” if they responded that the
experimenter did not get the hiccups (no generalization) and
a score of “1” if they responded that the experimenter did
get the hiccups (generalization). The order of the sorting
and
generalization
tasks
was
counterbalanced.

4
1111

(6%). There was a significant difference between 3- and 5year-olds’ willingness to generalize from the far world, χ2
(36, 1) = 5.79, p < .02.

story to inform their decision to generalize novel
information should improve over time. For example, if
story events are determined to have a high probability of
occurring in the real world, children should be more likely
to generalize novel causal information learned in this
context than in cases in which the story events are
determined to have a low probability of occurring in the real
world. Therefore, as their prior knowledge about the causal
structure of real world increases, children become better
able to evaluate the information that they receive from
fictional contexts to inform and structure their own learning.
Similarly, children’s developing sensitivity to the
proximity between fictional worlds and reality may be
mediated by their increasing prior knowledge about the
nature of fantastical representations. Previous research has
shown that children who score higher on fantasy orientation
scales (i.e., children who have more experience engaging
with fantasy worlds) are less likely to transfer solutions to
analogical problems from fantastical stories to real world
scenarios (Richert & Smith, 2011). In other words, those
children with the greatest amount of prior knowledge about
fantastical representations are the least likely to draw
analogies between worlds. One explanation for these
findings is that children with more experience with
fantastical representations have developed an increased
appreciation of the distinction between the causal structure
of far worlds and reality, which may lead to the
sophisticated strategy of quarantining causal information
acquired from these fantastical contexts. The developmental
change that we document in the current study provides
evidence for each of these related proposals. Future
research should further explore the particular type of prior
knowledge – knowledge about the true causal structure of
the real world, knowledge about the nature of fictional
representations, or some combination of the two – that is
most relevant to developing this sensitivity during early
childhood.
In sum, our findings demonstrate that by 3-years of age,
children are already able to evaluate the data that they
receive from fictional stories in order to inform their
generalization of novel story content to the real world.
Additionally, as children develop, they become better able
to discriminate between close and far fictional worlds when
assessing which stories are likely to provide relevant causal
knowledge about the real world. These findings have
important implications for educational contexts that rely
upon children’s literature to present intended curriculum.
Storybooks provide rich opportunities for children to learn
about aspects of the world that are otherwise inaccessible to
them. However, because children’s selective learning from
storybooks is at least partly contingent upon the perceived
proximity between worlds, the presence of fantastical events
may inadvertently undermine educational goals.
By
explicitly directing children to the generalizable information
in fictional stories, adults may help young learners to
negotiate the complex relationship between fictional worlds
and reality.

Figure 2. Percentage of 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children who
generalized the target causal relationship from the story to
the real world in each condition.

Discussion
The current study examined children’s generalization of
novel causal information from fictional representations to
the real world. Findings provide evidence that preschoolaged children are sensitive to the proximity of the fictional
world when selectively learning and applying novel causal
information from stories. While children in both close
world and far world conditions were able to remember the
target causal relationship embedded in the story, the
proximity of the fictional world to reality influenced their
subsequent generalization of this novel information. These
results demonstrate that children begin to differentiate
between close and far fictional worlds from a very early age,
and that this sensitivity undergoes a process of
developmental change, increasing between 3- and 5-years.
How might this sensitivity to the proximity of fictional
worlds develop over time? The development of this ability
requires the learner to successfully integrate the information
provided in the story with their prior knowledge and beliefs
about the causal structure of the real world. However, little
was previously known about children’s use of prior
knowledge when evaluating the applicability of information
learned in fictional representations, and how their reliance
on this prior knowledge may change over the course of early
development.
Recent probabilistic accounts of learning (e.g., Gopnik,
Glymour, Sobel, Schulz, Kushnir, & Danks, 2004; Schulz,
Bonowitz, & Griffiths, 2007) may provide a natural
framework for addressing these questions. According to
these accounts, a learner’s background knowledge and prior
beliefs are productively integrated with new data when
forming novel inferences about the causal structure of the
world. As prior knowledge increases over the course of
development, children will become better able to
approximate the true causal structure of the real world. As a
result, children’s ability to use contextual cues from the

5
1112

Acknowledgements

Morison, P. & Gardner, H. (1978). Dragons and dinosaurs:
The child’s capacity to differentiate fantasy from reality.
Child Development, 49 (3): 542-648.
Nichols, S., & Stich, S. (2000). A cognitive theory of
pretense. Cognition, 74: 115-147.
Potts, G.R., St. John, M.F., & Kirkson, D. (1989).
“Incorporating new information into existing world
knowledge.”Cognitive Psychology, 21:303-333.
Richert, R. A., Shawber, A. B., Hoffman, R. I., & Taylor,
M. (2009). “Learning from real and fantasy characters in
preschool and kindergarten.” Cognition & Development.

This research was funded in part by the McDonnell
Foundation to A. Gopnik. The authors thank Ellen Winner
for her contributions to the development of this research and
Ngoc Nyugen for illustrating the storybooks. We also thank
Rosie Aboody, Anna Akullien, Sierra Eisen, and Brynna
Ledford for their assistance with data collection.

References
Catranbone, R. & Holyoke, K.J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 15: 1147-1156.
Clark, C.D. (1995). Flights of fancy, leaps of faith:
Children’s myths in contemporary America, University
of Chicago, Chicago.
DeLoache, J. S., Pierroutsakos, S. L., Uttal, D. H.,
Rosengre, K. S., & Gottlieb, A. (1998). “Grasping the
nature of pictures,” Psychological Science, 9 (3): 201210.
Dias, M.G. & Harris, P.L. (1988). The effect of makebelieve play on deductive reasoning. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 6: 207-221.
Dias, M.G., Roazzi, A., & Harris, P.L. (2005). Reasoning
from unfamiliar premises: A study with unschooled
adults. Psychological Science, 16(7): 550-554.
Flavell, J. H., Flavell, E. R., & Green, F. L. (1989). Young
children’s knowledge about the apparent-real and
pretend-real distinctions. Developmental Psychology,
23, 816-822.
Ganea, P. A, Pickard, M., & DeLoache, J.S. (2008).
“Transfer between picture books and the real world by
very young children,” Journal of Cognition and
Development, 9, 46-66.
Ganea, P. A., Ma, L., DeLoache, J. (2011). Young
children’s learning and transfer of biological information
from picture books to real animals. Child Development,
82(5): 1421-1433.
Gerrig, R.J. & Prentice, D.A. (1991). “The representation
of fictional information.” Psychological Science, 2(5):
336-340.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D.M., Schulz, L.E.,
Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal
learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes Nets,
Psychological Review,111(1):3-32.
Harris, P.L. (2000). The work of the imagination.
Blackwell: Oxford, UK.
Hawkins, J., Pea, R.D., Glick, J., and Scribner, S. (1984).
Merds that laugh don’t like mushrooms: Evidence for
deductive reasoning by preschoolers. Developmental
Psychology, 20:584-594.
Lillard, A. & Sobel, D. (1999). Lion kings or puppies: The
influence of fantasy on children’s understanding of
pretense. Developmental Science, 2: 75-80.

Richert, R.A. & Smith, E.I. (2011).
Preschoolers’
quarantining of fictional stories. Child Development,
82(4): 1106-1119.
Renninger, K.A. & Wozniak, R.G. (1985). Effect of
interest on attentional shift, recognition, and recall in
young children. Developmental Psychology, 21: 624.
632.
Richards, C.A. & Sanderson, J.A. (1999). The role of
imagination in facilitating deductive reasoning in 2-, 3and 4-year-olds. Cognition, 101: B9-B18.
Schulz, L., Bonawitz, E., Griffiths, T. (2007). Can being
scared make your tummy ache?
Naïve theories,
ambiguous evidence, and preschoolers’ causal
inferences, Developmental Psychology, 43(5): 11241139.
Simcock, G. & Dooley, M. (2007). Generalization of
learning from picture books to novel test conditions by
18- and 24-month-old children. Developmental
Psychology, 43, 1568-1578.
Skolnick, D. and Bloom, P. (2006). What does Batman
think about SpongeBob? Children’s understanding of
the fantasy/fantasy distinction. Cognition, 101: B9-B18.
Skolnick, D. & Goodstein, J. (2009). What belongs in a
fictional world? Journal of Cognition and Culture, 9, 6978.
Sobel, D.M. & Lillard, A.S. (2001). The impact of
fantasy and action on young children’s understanding of
pretense. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
19,85-98.
Spencer, R.M. & Weisberg, R.W. (1986). Contextdependent effects on analogical transfer during problem
solving. Memory & Cognition, 14: 442-449.
Walker, C.M., Walker, L., & Ganea, P. (2012). The role of
symbol-based experience in learning and transfer from
pictures: Evidence from Tanzania. Manuscript under
review.
Woolley, J.D. & Van Reet, J. (2006). Effects of context
on judgments concerning the reality status of novel
entities. Child Development, 77(6): 1778-1793.
Woolley, J.D. & Cox, V. (2007). “Development of beliefs
about storybook reality.” Developmental Science, 10 (5):
681-693.

6
1113

