UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children and Pragmatic Implicatures: A Test of the Pragmatic Tolerance Hypothesis with
Different Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vm7p644

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Pipijn, Katrijn
Schaeken, Walter

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children and Pragmatic Implicatures: A Test of the Pragmatic Tolerance Hypothesis
with Different Tasks
Katrijn Pipijn (Katrijn.Pipijn@Ppw.Kuleuven.Be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102 Bus 3711
3000 LEUVEN, Belgium

Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@Ppw.Kuleuven.Be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102 Bus 3711
3000 LEUVEN, Belgium

Abstract
The pragmatic tolerance hypothesis (Katsos & Smith, 2010)
was originated to explain the difference between children and
adults concerning scalar implicatures. They introduced the
use of a Likert-scale to test this hypothesis. We conducted a
study with a within subjects design in which we compare
children‟s binary and scalar responses to the same
underinformative sentences. We also used two separate tasks
to look at the effects of task difficulty on performance. The
results show that the more difficult task, Euler circles, lead to
less pragmatic responses compared to the easier task,
drawings. Confirming the study by Katsos and Smith (2010;
see also Katsos & Bishop, 2011) children choose the middle
options on the scale more when they are confronted with
underinformative sentences and they choose more extreme
options for the control sentences. The comparison with the
binary responses however, reveal that the link between the
two measuring methods is not as straight forward as we
would think.
Keywords: Scalar Implicatures; underinformative sentences;
children; scalar responses pragmatic tolerance.

Introduction
Communication is not always as straightforward as one
might think. In 1989 Grice published his work on the
cooperative principle that was meant to explain how our
human interaction can be described. The cooperative
principle expects a person to interact in a way that furthers
the purpose of the conversation and indicates that a second
person expects the first person to do so. The cooperative
principle allows for implicatures to be used. When a person
uses an implicature, the meaning of what that person says is
not explicitly communicated, but can nonetheless be derived
from what he says. The utterance is under-informative, more
information could have been given but has not. For example
when a wife asks her husband whether he‟ll be home for
supper, and the husband answers that he has a meeting that
will run late that day, then the husband is using an
implicature. His wife will not expect him for dinner. One
can assume that she accepts the meeting running late will be
the reason, or at least a possible reason, that the husband
will not be present at dinner. Nevertheless it is still possible
that the husband will appear for dinner, for the implicature
is cancellable. It is possible that the husband just meant he
would be a little late for dinner, still he would not have lied
in his earlier utterance.

One specific form of implicatures are scalar implicatures,
which we will focus on in this paper. As the name implies,
scalar implicatures consist of words that can be situated on a
scale, known as Horn scales (see Horn, 1984). These words
range from less informative to more informative, for
example a scale containing words like <none>, <some> and
<all>. Each word further on the scale contains more
elements of a group. When a speaker uses a certain less
informative word in an utterance, it is implicated that the
more informative word is not applicable. When a person
uses the word „some‟, the word „all‟ would not be
appropriate. It is considered a mutual understanding
between speaker and recipient that the speaker would have
used the more informative word if it were suitable.
Nevertheless he deliberately chose to use the less
informative word on the scale therefore the more
informative is not suitable. For example when the prime
minister says „Some banks are collapsing due to the
financial crisis‟, a citizen can assume that „not all‟ banks are
collapsing due to this crisis, for the expression of „some‟
implicates „not all‟. The citizen presumes that the prime
minister would have said „All banks are collapsing due to
the financial crisis‟ is this were the case. If a few months
later the prime minister makes the announcement „All the
banks have collapsed due to the financial crisis‟, this would
not be a withdrawal of his earlier statement. Specific to
implicatures is that they are cancellable in only one
direction. When a speaker uses the weaker term „some‟, it
can later be easily corrected to „all‟. Yet when a speaker
initially uses the stronger term „all‟, it is not possible to
change it to „some‟ later on. At least not without admitting
one was erroneous the first time. The stronger term „all‟
entails the weaker term „some‟ but not vice versa.
When a speaker uses the word „some‟ in an utterance,
there are two different ways to interpret this weak scalar
term. The first way is the pragmatic way that was described
above. A recipient might produce a scalar implicature and
assume that the speaker meant „some and not all‟ with the
statement. Yet another way of interpreting the word „some‟
is a purely explicit logical interpretation. The explicit
meaning of the word „some‟ is „at least one and possibly
all‟. Both interpretation of the word are equally correct and
it is the choice of the recipient on how he will interpret it.

2186

Further in this article, we will refer to scalar implicatures as
underinformative items or sentences.
We already know from different studies that children and
adults interpret underinformative sentences in alternative
ways. Noveck (2001) argues that a weak scalar term is
understood in its explicit meaning first and will appear first
in human development. Only later on the more complex
pragmatic meaning will be incorporated. This argument is
clearly demonstrated by the results of Noveck‟s study
(2001). He found how children of 7-8 years old and 10-11
years old have acceptance rates of 89% and 85% for
sentences that are logically true but pragmatically
infelicitous. Adults on the other hand, accept these
sentences in only 41% of the cases. This clearly
demonstrated how for children the pragmatic meaning of
these sentences is not incorporated. While for adults these
pragmatic meanings are fully incorporated and are used as
the principal criteria to accept or reject sentences.
The results also show how these differences between
children and adults cannot be explained by the children‟s
limited understanding of words like „some‟ and „all‟. For all
the different utterances that do not hold a conflict between
the logical and the pragmatic meaning, the answering
patterns of children and adults are very alike. The reason for
the discrepancy between children and adults is not entirely
clear. Noveck explains this by the posterior development of
the pragmatic understanding of underinformative sentences.
The processing of the pragmatic meaning of
underinformative sentences is also cognitively much more
demanding than the processing of the logical meaning (De
Neys & Schaeken, 2007). Because of this, the pragmatic
interpretation is harder to incorporate for children. Another
factor that contributes to this is the nature of the task.
Pouscoulous et al. (2007) reported experiments in which
they changed the nature of the task from verbal judgments
to action-based judgments. Using small boxes that contained
tokens, participants were asked to alter the setting of the
tokens to match a statement. They were also allowed to
leave a setting as it was. Within the experimental design,
children‟s performance on producing implicatures was
much higher than in experiments with verbal judgments.
This increased implicature production was found for all ages
(4-, 5-, and 7-year-olds as well as adults). Still, the
developmental effect was present. These experiments show
how the understanding of implicatures can be facilitated in
young children by changing task features. Other studies
have also showed how changing task features can facilitate
children‟s performance (Guasti et al., 2005; Papafragou &
Musolino, 2003; Papafragou & Tantalou, 2004)
Katsos and Smith (2010) did research on
underinformative sentences in children and adults. They
raised the pragmatic tolerance hypothesis to explain for
differences between children and adults as well as
differences between adults. The starting point of this
hypotheses is that there are different degrees of violations.
Several violations can lie within an utterance yet not every
violation is equally grave. Participants can and will reject

utterances that are a grave violation of the logical truth. Yet
they might accept or reject an utterance that only holds a
violation of informativeness and thus is an infringement of
the cooperative principle. There is no implicit rule on how
to deal with pragmatically infelicitous utterances. The
threshold of what is and what is not acceptable is individual
for each person and is called pragmatic tolerance by Katsos
and Smith (2010).
An obvious way to test this hypothesis was adopted by
Katsos and Smith (2011, also see Katsos and Bishop (2011)
and Katsos et al (2011)). Katsos and Smith (2010)
introduced the use of a Likert scale to the research on
underinformative sentences. A Likert scale is a bipolar
psychometric scale on which a participant can indicate to
what extend he agrees or disagrees with a certain statement.
Katsos and Bishop (2011) made their participants indicate
how much they agreed with utterances containing the words
„some‟ and „all‟. Both children and adults clearly rejected
utterances that were inherently false and accepted utterances
that had an optimal use of the words „some‟ and „all‟.
Interestingly, for the underinformative utterances, the
answering patterns for children and adults were also very
similar, as both groups chose the middle option on a 3-point
Likert scale. This is in strong contrast with Noveck (2001)
were the answering patterns for children and adults were
much more distinct, notwithstanding the children in this
study were older. Katsos and Smith (2011) explain this with
the pragmatic tolerance principle. Children appear to be
competent pragmatic comprehenders. They do sense the
pragmatic violation when underinformative sentences are
used. Yet due to their different tolerance levels, they do not
experience this violation to be grave enough to be rejected.
Therefore, when they are confronted with a two alternatives
forced choice, they will not reject the violation while adults
will.
In this paper, we want to explore these results more
thoroughly and make three hypotheses. First of all, we will
vary the task method. Pouscoulous et al. (2007) and others
taught us that the nature of the task is of great importance.
We expect that when we use different tasks, we will be able
to make children reason more or less pragmatic, depending
on the task difficulty. We will apply different methods than
those used in Katsos and Bishop (2011) and Katsos and
Smith (2010). Earlier research on underinformative
sentences used different methods than the current ones. For
example Newstead (1989, 1995) used Euler circles in his
research. This abstract testing method should be difficult for
children and thus induce more logical reasoning. We also
developed a more child-friendly method using drawings
which should induce more pragmatic reasoning in children.
Our second hypothesis concerns pragmatic tolerance. It
seems obvious that this theory should be examined with a
within subjects design in which children are confronted with
a Likert scale as well as with the two alternative forced
choice paradigm. We expand the testing method used in
Katsos and Bishop (2011). Participants will be confronted
with each underinformative sentence twice, once with the

2187

option of responding on a Likert scale or once with a two
alternative forced choice. With this research we expect to
replicate Katsos and Bishops (2011) findings, namely that
children do seem to detect a conflict when they are
confronted with underinformative sentences. We expect that
this conflict detection will be hidden when confronted with
a two alternative forced choice but will become clear when
they are confronted with the Likert scale. We will use
children around the age of eleven, congruent with Noveck
(2001). According to this study we expect children of this
age to be still much more logical than adults.
Finally, we will look at consistency in children‟s answers.
We expect that children that answer logically or
pragmatically with the scalar measuring method, will
answer in the same direction with the two alternative forced
choice measuring method.

Method
Twenty-two Dutch speaking children participated in this
research (mean age 11,3 range 11-13).
The children received a pen and paper test. The test
started with a cover-up story about a boy named Thomas.
The children were told that Thomas was new in class and
came from a foreign country. They were told he was still
learning the Dutch language and the children were to
indicate how precise his answers were. Children had to
indicate their answers either by indicating right or wrong, or
on a 5-point Likert scale. The ends of the Likert scale were
illustrated with a happy smiley and a frowning smiley. On
the scale, the children were to indicate how well they
thought that the boy‟s answer was, going from completely
wrong to completely right. They were also allowed to use
the middle options when the answer was only a little right or
wrong or evenly right and wrong.
Two different tests were used. Both tests had the same
basic structure. We started each trial with a given situation.
This situation was presented either by a figure or a drawing.
Then the participants were given a statement about the
situation. They were instructed to indicate how well the
statement described the situation given above.
First was the Euler circles task. The circles for each figure
were either completely overlapping, partially overlapping or
completely disconnected. Each circle represented a group of
blocks, for example „red blocks‟, „square blocks‟, which
was written inside each circle. The participants received a
statement about the blocks and had to judge how precise the
statement described the circles setting. For an example of
this, see Figure 1.
For the second task, we used a method which was more
adapted to children, Drawings. For the given situation, the
children were now shown a drawing of a real life setting, for
example a few kids playing with a bow and arrows. Again
the children had to judge a statement about the setting, e.g.
„Some arrows are shot in the bull‟s-eye‟. Due to the more
authentic stimuli, the task became much easier for children.

Figure 1: Example of Euler circles, drawings, scalar
response option and binary response option.

Results
We inverted all scores of the logically false items. This way,
high scores on the control items, for both logically false
items and optimal items, indicate competent reasoning. We
also inverted answers on the underinformative items.
Because of this, the maximal score of five points is an
extreme pragmatic answer and the minimal score of one is
an extreme logical answer. Finally we converted the binary
zero and one scores to one and five scores to make them
comparable with the scalar responses.
For the control items we found very high average scores,
4.72 (.20) for binary responses and 4.56(.34) for scalar
responses. This means that the children understand the
words „some‟, „all‟ and „none‟ adequately. For the
underinformative items, we found average scores of
3.93(.89) for the binary responses and 3.16(.98) for the
scalar responses. For more detailed results, see Table 1.
Table 1: Mean ratings and standard error of the mean for
Euler circles (EC) and Drawings (D)
Binary

Scalar

EC – Control items

4.60 (.36)

4.46 (.36)

D – Control items

4.92 (.18)

4.65 (.41)

EC – Underinformative items

3.18 (1.51)

2.65 (1.05)

D – Underinformative items

4.70 (.57)

3.71 (1.11)

We ran a repeated measures design with three within
factors with two levels each, namely measuring method,
task and item type. We found three main effects. The two
measuring methods levels, binary answers versus scalar
answers, are significantly different from each other (F(1,21)
=9.46, p<.01). Binary responses are higher than scalar
responses, as expected because binary responses only allow
extreme answers. For the two tasks, Euler Circles seem to

2188

be more difficult and lead to more logical answers than
Drawings, F(1,21) =54.07, p<.00. For the item types,
control items versus underinformative items, children
answer more extreme for control items and more varied for
underinformative items, F(1,21) =54.72, p<.00. We found
two interaction effects. The interaction between measuring
method and task was not significant but the other two
interaction effects were, measuring method versus item
(F(1,21) =4.63, p<.04; see Figure 2) and task versus item
(F(1,21) =21.62, p<.00; see Figure 3). The three-way
interaction was not significant.

underinformative sentences, children were much less
consistent, only 33 % of them was consistent in their
answers between the two methods. When we adopt a more
flexible rule including also the two and four answers on the
scale, which would also be acceptable, 87% and 57% of
children can be considered consistent.
For the
underinformative items, 16% of the time the middle option
of the scale was chosen.

Figure 3: Interaction between task and item type.

Discussion

Figure 2: Interaction between measuring method and item
type.
We calculated the difference between the control items
and the underinformative items for each measuring method.
A paired-samples t-test on these values was significant
(t(21)=2.21, p<.04). This means that the interaction between
measuring method and item type is explained by a
difference in size of the effect of measuring method on item
type.
The main effect of task and its interaction with item,
mean that the Euler Circles were more difficult, especially
for the underinformative items and thus lead to more logical
answers. To confirm this, we calculated the difference
between the control items and underinformative items for
each task and analyzed with a paired t-test, t(21)=4.65,
p<.00.
For the control items, 84% of the items were answered
with an extreme answer of one or five on the scale . For the
underinformative items, only 47% were answered with an
extreme one or five. These two percentages were
significantly different from each other (t(21)=5.22, p<.00).
Finally we look at consistency of answers. We interpret
being consistent between the two methods when a child
gives an extreme answer of one or five on the scale and
gives the equal binary response for the same item. For the
control items, the children were fairly consistent between
the two measuring methods. 80% of the children can be
considered consistent under this rule. For the

In this study we examined three hypotheses. First of all, we
expected that children‟s performance will depend on the
task difficulty. More precisely, we expected the Euler
circles to be more difficult than the Drawings task and to
lead towards less pragmatic answers for the
underinformative items. Next we expected to replicate
Katsos and Bishops (2011) findings, namely that children
answer extremely pragmatic or logical when confronted
with control items but more doubtful when confronted with
underinformative items and a scale. Finally we expected
children to be consistent in their answers on the two
different measuring methods.
For the first hypothesis, we can find confirmation in the
main effects of task and the interaction between task and
item type. The Euler Circles task is clearly more difficult
than the Drawings task. For the control items this difference
is small but significant. For the underinformative items, this
difference becomes even larger. For the more difficult task,
the Euler circles, this leads to more logical answers. For the
easier task, the Drawings, children become more pragmatic.
There still remains a significant difference with the control
items though. We hereby can confirm what Pouscoulous et
al. and others made us expect. Task features can influence
children‟s pragmatic reasoning on underinformative
sentences. We noted earlier that we expect task difficulty to
be the determining factor here. Yet we acknowledge that
another factor may be at work as well. The Euler Circles
task is believed to rely on logical reasoning skills. It might

2189

be possible that the logical interpretation is triggered by the
general logical characteristics of the task. In this case, not
task difficulty but the logical nature of the task would be the
determining factor. More in depth research on the matter
seems necessary. The tasks used in this study were also very
adapted to usage with children. More grammatical
approaches to the material might lead to different
conclusions. If the grammatical view of scalar implicatures
(e.g. Chierchia, 2006; Fox, 2007) is correct, then in
principle the implicature-computing operator could also be
inserted in embedded positions, thus giving rise to
embedded scalar implicatures. Chierchia, Fox and Spector
(de twee papers) argue that an implicature-computing
operator can indeed be inserted in embedded positions. It
would be interesting to see how our conclusions and those
of Katsos and Smith (2010) and Katsos and Bishop (2011)
could be incorporated into this grammatical approach.
Secondly, we found a significant effect of measuring
method and an interaction with item type. The difference
between binary answers and scalar answers for the control
items is significant. But the difference between the methods
becomes much larger for the underinformative items. This
confirms our hypothesis and replicates Katsos and Bishop
(2011). When confronted with a scale, children do feel that
there is a conflict between the pragmatic and the logical
interpretation of underinformative sentences. They tend to
choose the middle options of the scale more often (53%)
than when confronted with control items (16%). This rules
out the possibility that children are just unfamiliar with the
use of scales. They are adequate in using scales and it is a
deliberate action to choose the middle options for the
underinformative items and the more extreme options for
the control items. This confirms the pragmatic tolerance
hypothesis in that children use the scale to express that they
feel the conflict between the logical and the pragmatic
interpretation.
We do however find a difference with common literature.
The children in this study seem to be much more pragmatic
than reports from other studies, especially with the binary
responses. One explanation for this is probably the
children‟s ages. Much research on this topic used younger
children than the ones used in this study. It is self-evident
that the slightly older children used in this study would
perform more pragmatically and adult-like. Moreover, the
current study was conducted in Dutch. Previous unpublished
research on underinformative sentences with Dutch
speaking children, revealed that these children are more
pragmatic than their English-speaking (Katsos and Bishop,
2011) or French-speaking (Noveck, 2001) counterparts.
Dutch speaking children seem to be more comparable to
Spanish speaking children for example. In a study by Katsos
et al. (2011), Spanish-speaking children rejected
pragmatically false underinformative statements in 87% of
the cases. It seems that the Dutch word „sommige‟ is not the
exact equal of the English word „some‟. This will probably
contribute to the high rate of pragmatic answers in Dutchspeaking children.

Finally we examined consistency. These results seem to
differentiate from the earlier found results. The children
were not very consistent in their answers. Especially for the
underinformative items, children were consistent in only
57% of the cases and 16% they chose the middle option.
This still leaves 27% of the cases where children were not
consistent. This percentage seems rather high to us and it
interferes with the pragmatic tolerance theory. In roughly
one fourth of the times, children‟s binary responses and
their responses on the scale are not related. On top of that
and in contrast to the study by Katsos and Smith (2010), we
found much larger variances for both the control items and
the underinformative items. This all suggests that the link
between binary answers and scalar answers is not a direct
link. For control items and underinformative items, up to
19% of the answers were cases in which the children gave
an exact opposite to answer the binary items and the scalar
items. We can hypothesize that in these cases children just
made a simple error and that this wasn‟t intentional or due
to a lack of understanding. But there is no way to be sure of
this and it is in contrast with high overall levels of
performance.
In conclusion, our study mainly confirms the pragmatic
tolerance hypothesis but it also questions some aspects of it.
It is clear to us that the pragmatic tolerance hypothesis and
the relationship between binary and scalar answers on
underinformative sentences is not as straightforward and
that more thorough research on the matter is necessary.

Acknowledgments
This research was carried out with the financial support of
the National Council for Scientific Research – Flanders,
Belgium (FWO grant G.0634.09)

References
De Neys, W., & Schaeken, W. (2007). When people are
more logical under cognitive load: Dual task impact on
scalar implicature. Experimental Psychology, 54, 128133.
Chierchia, G. (2006). Broaden Your Views: implicatures of
Domain Widening and the “Logicality” of Language.
Linguistic Inquiry, 37, 535-590.
Chierchia, G., Fox, D., & Spector, B.. The grammatical
view of scalar implicatures and the relationship between
semantics and pragmatics. To appear in Portner, P.,
Maienborn, C. & von Heusinger, K. (Eds.), Handbook of
Semantics. New York, NY: Mouton de Gruyter.
Chierchia, G., Fox, D., and Spector, B. (2009). Hurford‟s
constraint and the theory of scalar implicatures: evidence
for embedded implicatures. In Egré, P. & Magri G. (Eds.),
Presuppositions and implicatures. Proceedings of the
MIT-Paris workshop. MIT Working Papers in
Linguistics 60.
Fox, D. (2007). Free choice and the theory of scalar
implicatures. In Sauerland, U. & Stateva, P. (eds.),
Presupposition and implicature in compositional

2190

semantics, 71–120. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge MA.
Guasti, M.T., Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Foppolo, F.,
Gualmini, A., & Meroni, L. (2005). Why children and
adults sometimes (but not always) compute implicatures.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 20, 667-696.
Horn, L. (1984). Toward a new taxonomy for pragmatic
inference. In Schiffrin, D. (ed.), Meaning, Form and Use
in Context: Linguistic Applications. Proceedings of
GURT ’84. Washington D.C.: Georgetown University
Press.
Katsos, N., Andrés Roqueta, C., Estevan, R. A. C., &
Cummins, C. (2010). Are children with Specific
Language Impairment competent with the pragmatics and
logic of quantification? Cognition, 119,43–57.
Katsos, N., & Bishop, D. V. M. (2011). Pragmatic
tolerance: implications for the acquisition of
informativeness and implicature. Cognition, 120, 67-81.
Katsos, N., & Smith, N., 2010. Pragmatic Tolerance or a
speaker–comprehender asymmetry in the acquisition of
informativeness? In Franich, K., Iserman, K.M., Keil,
L.L. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual Boston
Conference in Language Development, Cascadilla Press,
MA, USA.
Newstead, S. E. (1989). Interpretational errors in syllogistic
reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 78-91.
Newstead, S. E. (1995). Gricean implicatures and syllogistic
reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 644664.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: Experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78, 165-188.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino J. (2003). Scalar implicatures:
experiments at the semantics/pragmatics interface.
Cognition, 86, 253-282.
Papafragou, A., & Tantalou, N. (2004). Children‟s
computation of implicatures. Language Acquisition, 12,
71-82.
Pouscoulous, N., Noveck, I., Politzer, G., & Bastide, A.
(2007). A developmental investigation of processing costs
in implicature production. Language Acquisition, 14, 347376.

2191

