UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s acquisition of fraction knowledge from concrete versus generic instantiations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7r4080rq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kaminski, Jennifer
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s acquisition of fraction knowledge from concrete versus generic
instantiations
Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
210A Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
The goal of this experiment was to investigate elementary
school children’s ability to acquire basic fraction knowledge.
The degree of concreteness of instantiations of proportions was
varied between subjects. First-grade children learned to label
proportions of objects with fraction.
Proportions were
presented either as concrete, colorful flowers or as generic
black and white circles. Following instruction, participants
were given a test of learning and an immediate or delayed test
of transfer involving proportions of novel objects. Those who
learned with the generic materials scored higher on learning
and transfer than those who learned with the concrete materials.
Differences between learning conditions were attenuated for
the delayed transfer test. These findings suggest that concrete,
perceptually rich instantiations of fractions may hinder
children’s acquisition of basic fraction knowledge in
comparison to simple generic instantiations of fractions.
Keywords: Psychology; Education;
Relations, Mathematics Education.

Learning,

Transfer;

Introduction
Mathematical concepts are often difficult for children to
acquire. One response to this challenge is to introduce
concepts to students through concrete instantiations which
include perceptually rich, familiar material. The use of
concrete material is widespread in education (see McNeil &
Uttal, 2009 for discussion). Concrete instantiations of
mathematics may involve familiar contexts and can be
visually appealing and engaging. For example, simple
arithmetic concepts are often instantiated through sets of
familiar objects, such as two apples plus three apples equals
five apples. Such material may spark interest in the learning
task and maintain attention on the learning material.
However, a primary goal of learning mathematics is the
ability to apply mathematics to new situations. Therefore,
successful acquisition of mathematical knowledge implies
that the learner has not only acquired knowledge of the
mathematical relations in the context of learning, but also
has the ability to transfer the mathematical knowledge to
novel isomorphic situations. There is evidence that concrete
instantiations can hinder transfer of learning. Adults who
learned a novel mathematical concept from a generic,
perceptually sparse instantiation were better able to transfer

this knowledge to a novel isomorph than those who learned
the same concept from a concrete instantiation (Kaminski,
Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2008; Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler,
2005; see also Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003; Goldstone &
son, 2005 for related findings).
In comparison to more abstract, generic instantiations,
concrete instantiations of a given concept communicate
more extraneous information. For example, a photograph of
a person communicates more nonessential information than
a simple stick figure drawing (see Kaminski & Sloutsky,
2011 for a discussion). Similarly, instantiating addition as
the sum of apples communicates more information than
instantiating it as the sum of tally marks. This additional
information (e.g. the appearance, taste, etc. of apples) is
extraneous to the mathematics and may present an obstacle
for learning for the following reason.
Mathematical
concepts are defined by relational structure. Relations are
less salient than objects (e.g. Gentner, 1988). Instantiating
mathematical concepts through concrete material, in
comparison to a more generic format, may increase the
salience of superficial aspects of the learning material and
consequently divert the learner’s attention from the to-belearned relational structure (see Goldstone, Medin, &
Gentner, 1991 for a similar argument regarding similarity
judgments), thus hindering learning.
Therefore, it appears that generic instantiations of
mathematical concepts have an advantage over concrete
instantiations with respect to transfer. However it could be
argued that this advantage is limited to older learners. After
all, in educational practice, older students are expected to
learn and reason with abstract instantiations including
symbols, equations, and other standard notation. It may be
that younger learners (e.g. elementary school students) may
need concrete instantiations to begin to acquire abstract
knowledge.
In addition to the notion that concrete material may be
more engaging for the learner, support for the use of
concrete instantiations to teach abstract concepts to young
children is often tied to theories of learning and
development. Some developmental theories (Montessori,
1917; Piaget, 1970) posit that young children’s thinking is
inherently concrete and that they are not capable of
reasoning about abstract concepts using symbols. According

1750

to these theories, children proceed through developmental
stages in which their reasoning becomes more abstract and
less dependent on concrete material. Other theories (e.g.,
Bruner, 1966) tie the ability to reason about abstract
material not to developmental stages but to levels of
knowledge. From this perspective, all novices, regardless of
age, would need concrete instantiations to begin to acquire
knowledge of an abstract concept. Both accounts suggest
that learning should begin by instantiating the mathematical
concept through concrete, familiar material.
However, if the difficulty transferring knowledge from
concrete instantiations is due to extraneous information
diverting attention from the relevant relational structure,
then concrete instantiations may be at least as detrimental
for children’s learning as they are for adults. Children have
difficulty controlling their attentional focus and filtering
irrelevant, potentially distracting information (Kemler,
1982; Shepp & Swartz, 1976; Smith & Kemler, 1978, see
also Hanania & Smith, 2010). For example, Shepp and
Swartz (1976) instructed 6- and 9-year-olds to sort items
according to shape, with color being an irrelevant
dimension. It was found that 6-year-olds (but not 9-yearolds) were slower when color varied independently of shape
than when color co-varied with shape or did not vary at all.
Therefore, the task-irrelevant dimension affected
performance of younger, but not older participants.
There is also evidence that concrete, perceptually rich
material can hinder preschool children’s ability to perform
simple relational tasks in comparison to performance with
generic material. One line of evidence comes from studies
of children’s early symbol use. Successful symbol use
requires the detection and transfer of common relations. For
example, to effectively use a map as a symbol for a real
location, one must recognize the common relations between
entities on the map and their real-world analogs. Two- and
three-year-old children are more successful transferring
location information from a picture to the real world than
from a 3-dimensional scale model to the real world
(DeLoache, 1995a, 1995b). These findings suggest that
preschool children have difficulty using concrete,
perceptually rich objects as symbols than using less concrete
objects as symbols.
In addition, preschool children are better able to detect
relations of monotonic increase and monotonic decrease in
size between displays that involve simple perceptually
sparse objects than concrete, perceptually rich objects
(Gentner, Ratterman, Markman, & Kotovsky, 1995;
Kaminski, & Sloutsky, 2010). It has also been demonstrated
that kindergarten children are better able to recognize
common proportions across displays of different objects
when first given instruction with generic, perceptually
sparse objects than when given instruction with concrete,
perceptually rich objects (Kaminski & Sloutsky, 2009).
Taken together there is evidence that concrete, perceptually
rich material may hinder the recognition of relational
structure for kindergarteners and preschool children.

Less is known about how concreteness affects young
school-aged children’s acquisition of relational knowledge
that is part of standard mathematics content. While concrete
instantiations of mathematics may communicate distracting
extraneous information, it is possible that school-aged
children have developed sufficient inhibitory control to
focus on the relevant relations and not be distracted by
extraneous aspects of concrete material. If this is the case,
then concrete instantiations will not hinder learning of
mathematical concepts and may even facilitate learning by
making the material more interesting for children.
However, while executive function is maturing throughout
childhood, the complexity of the relations we expect
children to learn is increasing.
Higher-order mathematical concepts involve more
complex relations than simpler mathematical concepts. For
example, the concept of addition is relationally more
complex than the concept of set cardinality (i.e. the use of a
natural number to represent the number of elements in a
set). Preschool children learn the concept of set cardinality,
while school-age children learn the concept of addition
which entails determining the cardinality of the union of two
sets. Similarly, the concept of multiplication is relationally
more complex than the concept of addition because
multiplication is defined as repeated addition. It may be that
when children reach a level of development at which they
are capable of attending to some relations in the context of
extraneous information, they may not be able to attend to
more complex relations in the presence of the same
extraneous information. As a result, the acquisition of more
complex relations from concrete instantiations may be more
susceptible to diverted attention than acquisition of simpler
relations. Therefore, we propose that concreteness in the
presence of more complex relations, such as arithmetic
relations, can hinder knowledge acquisition in comparison
to more generic instantiations of the same concepts.

Overview
The purpose of the present research was to test the
hypothesis that concreteness of the learning material will
hinder young school-aged children’s acquisition of
mathematical knowledge. The present study examined
initial learning and subsequent transfer of basic fraction
knowledge when instruction involved either a concrete,
perceptually rich instantiation versus a generic, perceptually
sparse instantiation. First-grade students were taught to
label proportions of discrete objects with fractions. Transfer
was measured as students’ ability to label proportion of
novel objects with fractions. For half the participants,
transfer was tested immediately after instruction. For the
other half of participants, transfer was tested after a twoweek delay.

1751

Experiment
Method
Participants Participants were 64 first-grade students
recruited from middle-class, suburban schools in the
Columbus, Ohio area (34 girls and 30 boys, M = 7.3 years,
SD = .40 years).
Materials and Design The experiment had a 2 (Learning
condition: Concrete vs. Generic) by 2 (Transfer Test:
Immediate vs. Delayed) between-subjects design. Participants
were randomly assigned to one of the two learning conditions
and one of the two transfer test times. The timing of the
transfer test was a between-subject factor to control for any
potential testing effects on delayed transfer.
The task was to label proportions of discrete objects with
fractions. The experiment had two phases. The first phase
consisted of training and a test of learning. Training
consisted of four examples of how to label a proportion of
objects with a fraction, followed by six questions with
corrective feedback. In the Generic condition, all training
examples were proportions of black circles out of black and
white circles. In the Concrete condition, all training examples
were proportions as purple flowers out of purple and orange
flowers. Figure 1 presents one of the examples used in
training for both the Generic and Concrete conditions.
Following training, participants were given an eightquestion test of learning which presented novel proportions
in the same format as the training (i.e. circles for the
Generic condition and flowers for the Concrete condition).
Questions were multiple-choice. Four questions presented a
proportion and participants were asked to select a fraction
that described the proportion. The remaining four questions
presented a fraction and participants were asked to select a
collection of objects for which the proportion matched the
fraction. Four response choices were given: (1) the correct
response, (2) correct numerator, but incorrect denominator,
(3) correct denominator, but incorrect numerator, and (4)
incorrect numerator and incorrect denominator. The order of
the answer choices was counterbalanced across question
trials.

The second phase of the experiment was a transfer task in
which participants were given 24 multiple-choice questions
involving novel objects. For half of the participants the
transfer test was given immediately after phase 1 (i.e.
training and testing of learning) and for the other half of
participants the transfer test was given two weeks after
phase 1. Twelve questions presented a collection of objects
and participants selected a fraction that described a specified
proportion of the objects (see Figure 2); the other twelve
questions presented a fraction and participants selected a
corresponding collection of objects that showed a proportion
matching the fraction (see Figure 3). For each question, there
were four possible response choices, as described for the
training questions. The questions involved proportions with
denominators (i.e. total number of items in a display) ranging
from 2 to 10. Many different items were used for response
choices and included: red and blue cars, blue and green
shoes, red and green fish, green and red bugs, bears with
and without flags, cupcakes with and without sprinkles,
slices of pizza (present or missing), light windows and dark
windows of a house, partially full bus seats, partially full
pencil box, partially full paint bucket and partially
remaining chocolate bar.
Procedure All training and test questions were presented on
the computer. During training, the experimenter gave a
definition of proportion and explained that fractions can
describe proportions. For example, in the Generic condition
when showing the example of 2/5 (see Generic condition of
Figure 1), the experimenter stated while gesturing to the
circles, “The proportion of black circles in this group is 2/5
because there are five circles all together, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and
two of them are black, 1, 2”. Explanations in the Concrete
condition were completely isomorphic to those of the
Generic condition. Participants proceeded through the test
questions at their own pace. The experimenter recorded their
responses through the computer.

Figure 1: Example of labeling a proportion with a
fraction from the training phase (Generic condition on
left, Concrete condition on right).

Figure 2: Example of a transfer test question for which
participants needed to choose a fraction that matched the
proportion shown.

1752

Concrete
Generic

100
90
80
70
60
50

Learning

Immediate
Transfer

Delayed
Transfer

Figure 4: Mean Test Scores (% Correct).
Note: Error bars represent standard error of mean.
Chance score is 25%.

Figure 3: Example of a transfer test question for which
participants needed to choose a proportion that matched
the fraction shown.

Results
Two participants, one from the Concrete Delayed condition
and one from the Generic Immediate condition, were
removed from the analysis because their learning scores were
more than 2.5 standard deviations below the mean score in
their conditions.
In both the Concrete and Generic conditions, children
successfully learned. Learning scores in both conditions were
well above a chance score of 25% (see Figure 4), one-sample
t-tests, ts > 18.0, ps < 0.001. However, participants in the
Generic condition scored significantly higher than those in
the Concrete condition (M = 92.1%, SD = 10.1% for Generic
and M = 81.2%, SD = 17.7% for Concrete), independent
samples t-test, t(60) > 2.93, p < .006, Cohen’s d = .752
Transfer test scores were also above chance in both
learning conditions (Concrete and Generic) and transfer test
time conditions (Immediate and Delayed) (see Figure 4), onesample t-tests ts > 13.0, ps < 0.001. However, there was a
significant difference in transfer scores between the learning
conditions on the immediate transfer test, independent
samples ts(29) > 2.39, p < .024, Cohen’s d = .895.
Participants in the Generic condition scored higher than those
in the Concrete condition. The difference in transfer scores
attenuated considerably on the delayed transfer test,
independent samples t(29) = .704, p = .487, Cohen’s d = .200.
An analysis of variance was performed with transfer test
score as the dependent variable, learning condition and
transfer test time as fixed factors and learning score as a
covariate. The results reveal a significant effect of learning
score, F(1, 57) = 24.2, p < .001, p2 = .298, and no significant
effect of learning condition, F(1, 57) = .366, p = .548, and no
effect of transfer time, F(1, 57) = .815, p = .371. There was a
moderate interaction between learning condition and transfer
time F(1, 57) = 2.90, p = .094 (see Figure 4). For both
immediate and delayed testing, transfer scores were

positively correlated with learning scores, Pearson
Correlations, r(29) = .600, p < .001 and r(29) = .554, p < .002
respectively. These findings suggest that transfer is a function
of learning such that higher levels of learning result in higher
levels of transfer.
Taken together the results of this experiment suggest that
learning basic fraction knowledge from a concrete
instantiation, in comparison to a more generic instantiation,
can hinder initial learning which may in turn hinder
subsequent transfer to novel material. With time, the negative
effect of concreteness on transfer appears to be attenuated.

General Discussion
This research considered first-grade children’s ability to
acquire basic knowledge of the concept of fraction.
Participants were instructed on how to label proportions of
objects with fractions. Instruction presented proportions
either through generic black and white shapes or through
colorful, familiar objects. Participants were tested on their
ability to label proportions of novel objects with fractions.
Participants who received instruction with either type of
material successfully learned and applied their knowledge to
novel objects. However, those who were instructed with the
generic instantiation scored 10% higher on tests of learning
and immediate transfer to novel objects than those who were
instructed with the concrete instantiation. The difference in
transfer scores due to instruction with the concrete versus
generic learning material diminished when the transfer test
was delayed for two weeks. Yet both immediate and
delayed transfer test scores were strongly correlated with
learning scores.
The results of this study support the hypothesis that
concreteness of the learning material can hinder children’s
acquisition of mathematical knowledge. In particular, it
appears that instruction involving concrete instantiations of
proportions hinders initial learning and consequently
hinders subsequent transfer in comparison to instruction
involving generic instantiations of proportion. Instruction of
basic fraction notation using generic material may help
students gain a solid knowledge foundation which may in

1753

turn benefit them when learning more advanced
mathematical concepts involving fractions.
Although
concrete instantiations are often colorful and visually
appealing, bland, generic instantiations are learnable by
children and can offer an advantage for learning and
subsequent transfer of mathematical knowledge.
These findings suggest that although aspects of executive
function, including the ability to control attentional focus
and inhibit irrelevant information, mature considerably in
the preschool years, extraneous information included in
concrete educational material may be difficult for
elementary school children to ignore.
Learning of
mathematical concepts may be hindered because less
attentional resources have been allocated to the relevant tobe-learned relations.
With respect to actual pedagogical practice, mathematics
instruction is generally not limited to using only one
instantiation of a concept and frequently involves multiple
instantiations, including formal symbolization as well as
familiar contextualization.
Concrete and abstract
instantiations of mathematical may both have advantages.
However, it is not clear a priori when and how to include
concrete instantiations and generic instantiations in
instruction. For example, there appears to be a trade-off
between grounded, concrete instantiations and abstract,
symbolic instantiations when solving algebra problems
where grounded, concrete formats facilitate solving simple
problems and abstract, symbolic formats facilitate solving
more complex problems (Koedinger, Alibali, & Nathan,
2008; Koedinger & Nathan, 2004). The results of the
present study provide evidence of an advantage for generic
material for acquiring knowledge of basic fraction notation.
The challenge for researchers and educators is to develop a
theoretical basis for the timing and use of both concrete and
generic instantiations in instruction of mathematical
concepts in general.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the Institute of
Educational Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education
(#R305B070407.) to V. M. Sloutsky and J. A. Kaminski.

References
Bruner, J. S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction.
Cambridge Mass: Harvard University Press.
DeLoache, J. S. (1995a). Symbolic functioning in very
young children: Understanding of pictures and models.
Child Development, 62, 736-752.
DeLoache, J. S. (1995b). Early understanding and use of
symbols: The model model. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 4, 109-113.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.

Gentner, D., Ratterman, M. J., Markman, A., & Kotovsky,
L. (1995). Two forces in the development of relational
similarity. In T. J. Simon & G. S. Halford (Eds.),
Developing cognitive competence (pp. 263-314).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldstone, R. L., Medin, D. L., & Gentner, D. (1991).
Relational similarity and the nonindependence of features
in similarity judgments. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 222–
264.
Goldstone, R. L. & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46(4), 414-466.
Goldstone, R. L. & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14,
69-110.
Hanania, R., & Smith, L. B. (2010). Selective attention and
attention switching. Developmental Science, 13, 622-635.
Kaminski, J. A., & Sloutsky (2009). The effect of
concreteness on children’s ability to detect common
proportion. In N. Taatgen, H. can Rijn, L. Schomaker, &
J. Nerbonne (Eds.), Proceedings of the XXXI Annual
Cognitive Science Society. Amsterdam, the Netherlands:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kaminski, J. A., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2010). Concreteness
and relational matching in preschoolers. In S. Ohlsson,
& R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the XXXII
Annual Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kaminski, J. A., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2011). Representation
and transfer of abstract mathematical concepts in
adolescence and young adulthood. In V. F. Reyna, S. B.
Chapman, M. R. Dougherty, & J. Confrey (Eds.), The
adolescent brain: Learning, reasoning, and decision
making (pp. 67-93). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2008).
The advantage of abstract examples in learning math,
Science, 320, 454-455.
Kemler, D. G. (1982). Cognitive development in the schools
years: Foundations and directions. In J. Worrell (Ed.),
Psychological Development in the Elementary School
Years (pp. 233-268). New York: Academic Press.
Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2008).
Trade-offs
between
grounded
and
abstract
representations: Evidence from algebra problem solving.
Cognitive Science, 32, 366-397.
Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M. J. (2004). The real story
behind story problems: Effects of representation on
quantitative reasoning. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
13, 129–164.
McNeil, N. M., & Uttal, D. H. (2009). Rethinking the use of
concrete material in learning: Perspectives from
development and education. Child Development
Perspectives.
Montessori, M. (1917). The advanced Montessori method.
New York: Frederick A. Stokes.

1754

Piaget, J. (1970). Science of education and the psychology
of the child. New York: Orion Press.
Shepp, B. E., & Swartz, K. B. (1976). Selective attention
and the processing of integral and nonintegral
dimensions: A developmental study. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 22, 73-85.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and transfer.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.
Smith, L. B., & Kemler, D. G. (1978). Levels of
experienced dimensionality in children and adults.
Cognitive Psychology, 10, 502-532.

1755

