UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Choosing quantity over quality: syntax guides interpretive preferences for novel
superlatives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9v53v2fj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Wellwood, Alexis
Odic, Darko
Halberda, Justin
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Choosing quantity over quality: syntax guides interpretive preferences
for novel superlatives
Alexis Wellwood (wellwood@umd.edu)

Darko Odic (darko.odic@jhu.edu)

Department of Linguistics
1401 Marie Mount Hall
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Justin Halberda (halberda@jhu.edu)

Jeffrey Lidz (jlidz@umd.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Department of Linguistics
1401 Marie Mount Hall
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Abstract
Acquiring the correct meanings of number words (e.g., seven,
forty-two) is challenging, as such words fail to describe salient
properties of individuals or objects in their environment, referring rather to properties of sets of such objects or individuals. Understanding how children succeed in this task requires
a precise understanding not only of the kinds of data children
have available to them, but also of the character of the biases
and expectations that they bring to the learning task. Previous
research has revealed a critical role for language itself in how
children acquire number word meanings, however attempts to
pinpoint precisely the strong linguistic cues has proved challenging. We propose a novel “syntactic bootstrapping” hypothesis in which categorizing a novel word as a determiner
leads to quantity-based interpretations. The results of a word
learning task with 4 year olds indicates that this hypothesis is
on the right track.
Keywords: Number, quantity, language acquisition, learning,
determiners, adjectives, quantifiers, syntax.

Words for quantities
While it is uncontroversial that young children necessarily
make use linguistic and extralinguistic information when they
set about learning the meaning of novel words, the idea that
some pairing of “situation and sound” is sufficient has been
repeatedly questioned (e.g., Landau & Gleitman 1985, Waxman & Lidz 2006). An especially difficult problem for any
view that posits a simple mapping from a portion of experience to the meaning of a novel word has been the acquisition
of number words (e.g., five, sixty-seven). This is particularly
challenging as numbers refer to properties of sets of objects
rather than to properties of any object in particular (Frege
1893; Bloom & Wynn, 1997). Understanding how number
words are learned must be informed not only by a precise
understanding of the kinds of data children have available to
them, but also of the character of the biases and expectations
they bring to the learning task.
In this paper, we consider the question of how children decide that a novel word describes numerosity and not some
other salient property. To take a simplified example of the
problem, consider the novel word gleeb in (1).
(1)

The gleeb cows are by the barn.

The novel word gleeb appearing in an adjectival position may
describe any number of properties relevant to the cows, for

instance their color (e.g., they may be blue), texture (e.g., especially soft), size (e.g., for cows, quite big), or even their
number (e.g., approximately many, or exactly seven). Under what circumstances would a child prefer to assume that
number is the intended property? Finding such circumstances
would aid researchers in finding the unique biases and expectations children must bring to the task in order to accurately
acquire number words.
Research on the acquisition of exact number words suggests that language itself must provide critical support for the
child to map new words onto such abstract meanings. Wynn
(1992; see also Condry & Spelke 2008) found that children
at 2;6, who do not yet understand the relationship between
the words in the count list and exact cardinalities, nevertheless understand that the number words describe numerosities. This result is striking, as it takes children another full
year to gain the knowledge that which exact quantities are intended (Wynn 1992, Carey 2009). Bloom and Wynn (1997)
examined the distribution of the numerals in the CHiLDES
database of child-directed speech to determine what syntactic cues might prompt quantity-based interpretations. They
proposed that the appearance of an item in the partitive frame
(e.g., as X in X of the cows) was a strong cue to number word
meaning. The plausibility of such a view is bolstered by the
linguistics literature: partitivity has been said to signal to the
semantic role of quantification (Jackendoff 1977).
This proposal was recently investigated by Syrett, Musolino and Gelman (2012). Conducting their own corpus
study, they pointed out that a great variety of non-quantityreferring expressions occur in the partitive frame (2), so perhaps we should not expect it to be a strong cue to numerical
meanings.
(2)

a. Amount: all, two, seven, most, some
b. Segment: back, front, edge, side, top
c. Measure: mile, hour, pound, bucket

Regardless, if the partitive were a strong cue, then a novel
word embedded in the partitive should lead children to pick a
quantity-based interpretation even when the environment supports both this and an alternative interpretation. That is, in a
novel word learning task, the novel word pim appearing with

1126

the partitive (as in pim of the trains) should be analyzed as
referring to the quantity TWO but not the quality RED1 when
both interpretations were supported. Syrett et al found that
the partitive predicted quantity-based judgments only in restricted cases,2 casting doubt on the robustness of a “syntactic
bootstrapping” account based on the partitive as a strong cue.
The puzzle raised by Wynn’s (1992) original finding remains. Indeed, it appears to raise the question whether it may
be necessary to understand how children decide that novel
words describe quantities at all before we can understand
how they learn the meanings of words for exact numerosity
(see also Barner, Chow & Yang 2009 for discussion). The
numerals pattern with a larger class of expressions in natural language called quantifiers (i.e., the Amount terms in (2)),
which share a similar syntactic distribution. If a child could
figure out (as Bloom & Wynn suggested) that a certain bit of
syntax corresponded in a stable fashion with the semantics
of quantity, they might have a foothold on deciding a novel
word referred to numerosity. To get a sense of the problem,
consider the sentences in (3a) and (3b) with the novel word
gleebest against the image in Figure 1.
(3)

a.

The gleebest cows are by the barn.

b.

Gleebest of the cows are by the barn.

For adults, gleebest in (3a) could in principle describe something about the numerosity or some other property of the cows
by the barn in contrast to those in the field. Indeed, the meaning one perceives is similar to that conveyed either by the
familiar most or e.g. spottiest. However, if adults were exposed to the novel word in the syntactic context given in (3b),
they would never suppose it to designate something about the
spottiness of the cows by the barn, only their numerosity.
Adults, however, have had a lifetime of language experience. Under what conditions would a child still in the process
of mastering their native tongue hypothesize that gleebest
means MOST as opposed to SPOTTIEST? Would their pattern of preferences be the same if presented with either of the
sentences in (3a) or (3b)?
While the evidence for the partitive frame (...of the cows)
as a strong cue to quantity-based meanings is mixed, we think
pairs of sentences like the above suggest that a stronger cue
might be whether something occurs to the left of X. Of the
classes of counterexamples provided by Syrett et al given in
(2), we may note that only amount terms can appear without
a determiner (a or the) on the left:
(4)

a.

Two/most of the cows lowed.

b.

* Back/side of the fridge is blue.

c.

* Mile/hour of the race was hard.

1 We follow custom in using italics for linguistic expressions and
small caps as shorthand for their meanings.
2 Only when it was used at test; when the partitive was used during training but not at test, children were at chance at picking the
quantity interpretation.

Figure 1: The gleebest cows are by the barn.
Such data illustrate an important linguistic generalization.
Amount terms, or quantifiers, can occur in a privileged syntactic position (e.g., Barwise & Cooper 1981): that of determiners, instantiating the category D. Unlike the partitive
frame, Ds have a stable syntax-semantics mapping: their interpretation only references quantities, never qualities, of individuals (van Benthem 1989, Gajewski 2002).3 Observing
this pattern leads us to a novel hypothesis: if a child categorizes a novel word as D, she will understand that word to have
a quantity- rather than quality-based meaning.
A test of this would be to make both numerosity and spottiness salient, and test children’s preferences for interpreting
a novel word across syntactic contexts. To construct such a
test, we turn to superlatives. As we will see, superlatives (the
result of combining a word like heavy with the morpheme
-est) allow for a direct comparison of the hypothesis that syntactic category, and not partitivity, is a strong cue to positing
quantity-based meanings.
Combining a word with a quality-based meaning like heavy
with the morpheme -est allows the formation of expressions
like the heaviest animals, with a meaning like THE ANIMALS
THAT ARE HEAVIER THAN ANY OTHERS . Similarly, combining many with -est4 gives the most animals, with a meaning like THE ANIMALS THAT ARE MORE NUMEROUS THAN
ANY OTHERS . Importantly for our purposes, both of these
types of superlatives surface in the position of an adjective
(5a) (where the instantiates the syntactic category D), but only
the quantity-based superlative most can appear bare on its left,
instantiating D (contrast (5b) with (5c):
(5)

a.

The heaviest/most animals are happy.

b.

Most of the animals are happy.

c.

* Heaviest of the animals are happy.

3 As a simple rule to determine which word in a string is D, take
X in X of the cows to be D unless the precedes X. Since the cannot
appear without an element to its right before of (cp. *the of the
cows), it instantiates D whenever it is present. In the most cows, the
instantiates D, but most instantiates D in most of the cows.
4 It is widely assumed that most is the superlative of many,
following Bresnan 1973; cf. Bobaljik 2007 who argues most is
more+est.

1127

“likes”

“doesn’t like”
Figure 2: Ambiguous training cards.
This restriction can’t be conceptual: where we understand
the sentence in (5b) to mean MORE THAN HALF OF THE AN IMALS BY NUMBER ARE HAPPY , by analogy we might have expected (5c) to mean MORE THAN HALF OF THE ANIMALS BY
WEIGHT ARE HAPPY . To see what this would mean, consider a
situation in which the only animals are a cow C, a lamb L, and
a rabbit R. It is clear that (5b) is true if any two of the animals
are happy. But (5c) requires more information: if C weighs
700kg, L weighs 35kg, and R weighs 8kg, we would know
(5c) is true only if C is happy. Individuals and their particular properties matter for quality-based superlatives, where
only set cardinality matters for most. While it is clear that
no conceptual necessity rules out a determiner-like meaning
for a quality-based adjective, why it is excluded remains a
mystery.5
Lastly, regardless of whether they have quantity- or
quality-based meanings, superlatives can appear in the partitive frame:
(6)

a.
b.
c.
d.

* The spotty of the cows were by the barn.
* The many of the cows were by the barn.
The spottiest of the cows were by the barn.
The most of the cows were by the barn.

these ideas by examining children’s preferences when embedding gleebest in a variety of syntactic contexts, using a variant
of the Picky Puppet task (Waxman & Gelman 1986).

Method
In this task, the experimenter first explains that the game is
to sort cards according to whether a puppet likes them or not.
The puppet is described as picky, but friendly enough to share
the reasons for why he likes what he does. The experimenter
explains the puppet’s criterion by showing preferred and dispreferred cards along with the sentence: “The puppet said
he likes the cards where target sentence, but he doesn’t like
the ones where it’s not true that target sentence”. The target
sentence always contained the novel word gleebest (see Table
1). The experimenter explains that she doesn’t know what
gleebest means, but was hoping the child could help her figure it out. In the Training phase, the child is shown 6 training
cards (Figure 2), the ones the puppet had “already told” the
experimenter it liked or didn’t like.
Table 1: Target sentences: “The puppet likes the cards where
DP are by the barn.”
cond DP
the partitive
ADJ
the gleebest cows
X
×
CON
the gleebest of the cows X
X
DET
gleebest of the cows
×
X

In the next section, we put our hypothesis that syntactic
category cues category meanings to the test in a novel word
learning task. At the same time, we contrast this hypothesis
with that suggesting partitivity as a strong cue.

Testing superlatives
In the previous section, we hypothesized that representing a
novel word as an instance of the category D was a strong cue
to the learner that the word should be assigned a quantitybased meaning. An alternative was presented that suggested
presence of the partitive frame alone was a strong cue. We test
5 This is especially surprising, given recent proposals in the
formal semantics literature that nothing much semantically distinguishes most from spottiest (Hackl 2009). Yet, it is difficult to see
how appeal to numerosity would be possible in formulating a syntactic constraint to make sense of facts like (5b)-(5c).

While the training cards are perfectly ambiguous (the group
by the barn is both the most numerous and the most spotty),
the test cards are perfectly unambiguous.6 The same cards
(in counterbalanced order) were presented to each participant.
The form of the target sentence was our between-subjects factor, with gleebest appearing in adjectival (ADJ), confounded
(CON), and determiner (DET) positions, so our conditions feature different combinations of presence/absence of the and the
partitive, as schematized in Table 1.
6 For our test cards, the ratio of the numerosities of the cows was
inversely proportional to the ratio of the spots of the cows.

1128

QUANTITY TRUE

QUANTITY FALSE
Figure 3: Unambiguous test cards.

Results

At the beginning of the Test phase, the experimenter
handed each test card to the child with the question “Do you
think he likes this one?”. The child was to place each card below a green circle with a checkmark on it if the puppet likes
it, and below a red circle with a black X if he doesn’t like it.
At the end of the experiment, the child was probed as to what
s/he thought gleebest meant, and responses were recorded.
We hypothesized that categorizing a novel word as D restricts a child’s hypothesis about the word’s meaning to a
quantity-based interpretation. Another proposal was that the
presence of the partitive frame itself was a strong cue to such
interpretations. Thus the relevant hypotheses are schematized
in Table 2 according to whether they predict a greater-thanchance quantity-based response (indicated by +).

Across our three conditions, responses were significantly different from chance (sign tests: ADJ p < 0.0001, CON p <
0.05, DET p < 0.0001). These differences were in different
directions, however. Children sorted cards consistent with a
quantity-based interpretation in DET 72% of the time, compared to 29% in ADJ and 40% in CON. In addition, DET was
significantly different from both ADJ (t-test, p < 0.0001) and
CON (t-test, p < 0.0001). These results are presented graphically in Figure 4.
It is noteworthy that these results are not simply an averaging effect: 8 out of 12 of the children in DET sorted at least 9
out of 12 test cards consistent with a quantity-based interpretation, while only 2 out of 12 children did so in ADJ and 3 out
of 12 in AMB.

Table 2: Predicted neutral (−) versus increased quantity-based
responses (+).

100%
ADJ

CON

DET

−
−
−

−
+
−

+
+
−

quantity response (%)

Hypothesis
Category as strong cue
Partitive as a strong cue
No bootstrapping

36 children participated (range 4;0-5;2, mean 4;7), recruited from families in the University of Maryland area.
Each child was given a small gift for participating. Four additional children were tested and subsequently excluded—2
due to experimenter error, 1 due to presenting with a strong
“yes” bias (i.e., the participant indicated the puppet “liked”
11/12 of the test cards), and 1 due to a strong “no”-bias (i.e.,
they said the puppet “didn’t like” 12/12 of the test cards).
We measured the percentage of cards sorted consistent with a
quantity-based interpretation.

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
ADJ

CON

DET

Figure 4: Percent quantity responses by condition.

1129

As there were no differences between our conditions except for the syntactic context in which gleebest occurred,
these results support the idea that syntax cues children into
quantity-based meanings, with syntactic category playing a
strong role. Partitivity, on the other hand, is a fairly weak
cue: while there was a slight effect (CON had slightly higher
quantity-based responses than ADJ, p < 0.05), in neither
of these conditions did children sort cards consistent with
a quantity-based interpretation, in fact both conditions displayed lower than chance sorting of cards consistent with that
interpretation. A table summarizing the predicted versus actual results is given in Table 3.
Table 3: Predicted neutral (+) versus increased quantity
response (+): prediction met (X) versus not (×).
Hypothesis
Category as strong cue
Partitive as strong cue
No bootstrapping

ADJ

−
−
−

X
X
X

CON

−
+
−

X
×
X

DET

+
+
−

X
X
×

Of the three hypotheses sketched, only syntactic category
as a strong cue captures the results we found.

Discussion
Our results show that a syntactic bootstrapping hypothesis for
acquiring novel superlatives is supported. An additional hypothesis, that the presence of the partitive frame is a strong
cue to quantity-meanings, was not supported. These results
are important for a number of reasons. As observed in the introduction, choosing number as the relevant property from a
set of available properties is potentially challenging for children. Our results highlight the role of the child’s syntactic
representations in narrowing her hypotheses about what matters when she tries to determine the meaning of a novel word,
in particular the role of the syntactic category D as a strong
cue to quantity-based meanings.
A different but related question that this work raises is the
strength of the bias towards quality-based meanings in ADJ
and CON. Given that children had no problem deciding that
gleebest referred to numerosity in DET, we cannot assume
some inability to reason about number. One might speculate that the bias is due to the child’s distribution of known
adjective (or superlative) meanings: since many more words
in this category refer to object properties than set properties,
the prior distribution of meanings biases her towards the former, absent syntactic cues to the contrary. Future work with
younger children could examine the degree to which this bias
emerges as a function of the size of their lexicons. The line of
thought just outlined predicts that that the youngest children
would show less of a bias in this direction.

Acknowledgments

doctoral award (#752-2010-0499) to Alexis Wellwood. The
authors would especially like to thank Tim Hunter, Research
Assistants Leah Whitehill and Jessica Lee, the University of
Maryland’s infant and preschool labs, the Center for Young
Children, and the audience at the Linguistic Society of America’s 2012 annual meeting.

References
Barner, D., Chow, K., & Yang, S.-J. (2009). Finding one’s
meaning: A test of the relation between quantifiers and integers in language development. Cognitive Psychology, 58,
195-219.
Barwise, J., & Cooper, R. (1981). Generalized quantifiers and
natural language. Linguistics and Philosophy, 4, 159–219.
Benthem, J. van. (1989). Logical constants across types.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 3.
Bloom, P., & Wynn, K. (1997). Linguistic cues in the acquisition of number words. Journal of Child Language, 24,
511-533.
Bobaljik, J. D. (2007). On comparative suppletion. (University of Connecticut, m.s.)
Bresnan, J. (1973). Syntax of the comparative clause construction in English. Linguistic Inquiry, 4(3), 275–343.
Carey, S. (2009). Where our number concepts come from.
Journal of Philosophy, 106(4), 220-254.
Condry, K. F., & Spelke, E. S. (2008). The development of
language and abstract concepts: The case of natural number. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 137, 22-38.
Frege, G. (1893[1967]). Grundgesetze der arithmetik, begriffsschriftlich abgeleitet (the basic laws of arithmetic)
(English translation in M. Furth (trans.) ed.). University
of California: Berkeley.
Gajewski, J. (2002). L-analycity in natural language. Unpublished manuscript: MIT.
Hackl, M. (2009). On the grammar and processing of proportional quantifers: most versus more than half. Natural
Language Semantics, 17, 63-98.
Jackendoff, R. (1977). X0 syntax. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Landau, B., & Gleitman, L. (1985). Language and experience: Evidence from the blind child. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Syrett, K., Musolino, J., & Gelman, R. (2012). How can syntax support number word acquisition. Language Learning
and Development, 8(146-176).
Waxman, S., & Gelman, S. (1986). Preschoolers’ use of superordinate relations in classification and language. Cognitive Development, 1, 139-156.
Waxman, S., & Lidz, J. (2006). Early word learning. In
D. Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.), (6th edition ed., Vol. 2, p. 299335). Hoboken NJ: Wiley.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of the number words
and the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 220251.

This work was made possible by generous support from a
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada

1130

