UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Styles in Two Cognitive Sciences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/54766012

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Myers, James

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Styles in Two Cognitive Sciences
James Myers (Lngmyers@ccu.edu.tw)
Graduate Institute of Linguistics, National Chung Cheng University
Minhsiung, Chiayi 62102 Taiwan

Abstract
Miller (1990) suggests that communication between
linguistics and psychology is hampered for essentially
cognitive reasons: linguists favor simplifying explanations
while psychologists favor causal explanations. This paper
reformulates this suggestion as three testable hypotheses. First,
scientists vary in cognitive style from rationalist/nomological
to empiricist/mechanistic. Second, linguistics is primarily a
rationalist/nomological science, while psychology is primarily
an empiricist/mechanistic one. Strikingly, even among
nativists, linguistic and psychological research still contrast
along the rationalist/empiricist dimension. Third, cognitive
styles are relatively intractable, as suggested by empirical
evidence that they are associated with intrinsic individual
differences and by formal arguments that highlight their selfisolating nature.
Keywords: philosophy of science; epistemology; linguistics;
psychology; individual differences.

Introduction
Linguists and psychologists have often noted a persistent
lack of mutual respect across their two disciplines (JohnsonLaird, 1987; Jackendoff, 1988; Miller, 1990; Carlson, 2003).
Miller (1990, p. 321) ascribes this impasse to different ways
of thinking, which we will call cognitive style:
What is holding up the free flow of ideas back and forth
between linguists and psychologists? For what it is
worth, my own view is that linguists and psychologists
subscribe to different theories of explanation. Linguists
tend to accept simplifications as explanations. [...] For a
psychologist, on the other hand, an explanation is
something phrased in terms of cause and effect,
antecedent and subsequent, stimulus and response.
The present paper reformulates Miller's suggestion as the
hypotheses in (1)-(3), then tests them.
(1) Scientists vary in cognitive style from more
rationalist and nomological to more empiricist and
mechanistic.
(2) Linguistics is primarily a rationalist/nomological
science, while psychology is primarily an
empiricist/mechanistic one.
(3) Individual cognitive styles are relatively intractable.
By "cognitive style" we mean to cover both one's personal
epistemology (theory of knowledge) and one's metaphysics
(theory of reality). Rationalist epistemology emphasizes the
role of reason in attaining knowledge, while empiricism
emphasizes the senses. A nomological metaphysics explains

in terms of general laws, while a mechanistic explanation is
expressed in terms of causal systems.
The overarching notion explored in this paper is that
individual scientists tend to lean towards rationalism or
empiricism, and towards nomological or mechanistic
explanations, and that these leanings are reflected in their
chosen scientific (sub)disciplines. Thus we expect to see
reliable tendencies at both the individual and discipline level,
but exceptions are not impossible.
Given the brevity of this paper and the ambitious nature
of the hypotheses, this study cannot fully verify or falsify
them. Obvious limitations include our focus on just two
dimensions of scientific thinking (see, e.g., Hacking, 2002,
for others), and the poorly understood relationship between
individual and disciplinary styles (i.e., to what extent
scientific styles are cognitive or social).
Each hypothesis is taken up separately. Support comes
from published research in linguistics, psychology, and the
history and philosophy of science.

Cognitive Styles across the Sciences
Hypothesis (1) can be unpacked into three subhypotheses:
(1a) Scientists vary from nomological to mechanistic.
(1b) Scientists vary from rationalist to empiricist.
(1c) Scientists in nomological sciences tend to be more
rationalist, whereas those in mechanistic sciences
tend to be more empiricist.
Regarding (1a), physicists favor nomological explanations,
seeking the axioms underlying nature (exemplified in the
Euclid-inspired style of Newton's Principia). Philosophers
of physics sometimes write as if all science is inherently
nomological (e.g., Scheibe, 2001), but in fact, physicists are
atypical: chemists, biologists, geologists and other scientists
generally concentrate on uncovering causal mechanisms, not
general laws. As a typical example of a mechanism,
Machamer, Darden, & Craver (2000) cite the transmission
of chemical signals across a synapse, which involves
entities (neurons, neurotransmitters) and activities (the
releasing and binding of chemicals) in events that begin,
progress, and end in space and time.
The ultimate reason for cross-disciplinary differences in
explanatory metaphysics seems to be reality. The systems
studied in fundamental physics are simple enough for
simple laws to work well, and being fundamental, no lowerlevel causal explanation is possible. By contrast, chemical,
biological, and geological phenomena merely need to be
consistent with physics; historical contingences make them
impossible to deduce from physics alone.

Yet there also seems to be a cognitive aspect to the
preference for certain explanation types. Strikingly,
scientists outside physics often demand mechanisms before
accepting a pattern as scientifically significant, no matter
how robust the observations. A classic example is the
skepticism that greeted Alfred Wegener's theory of
continental drift. This theory elegantly explained the fit
between the coastlines of South America and Africa, among
numerous other observations, but it was not accepted
(revised as plate tectonics) until a plausible mechanism was
discovered many decades later (Cohen, 1985).
As for (1b), cognitive scientists are used to thinking of
rationalism as synonymous with nativism, but the focus here
is instead on what Woleński (2004) calls methodological
rationalism (apriorism; nativism is genetic rationalism), as
opposed to methodological empiricism (aposteriorism).
Rationalism in this sense is associated with deduction from
general axioms, while empiricism is associated with
induction from specific tokens. More specifically, our focus
is not on the views of professional philosophers, but the
personal epistemologies (Muis, Bendixen, & Haerle, 2006)
of practicing scientists.
Physicists are uncontroversially the most rationalist of
scientists, having always tied their work to mathematics (as
reemphasized by Galileo and Newton). Despite the physicscentric view of science among some philosophers, scientists
in other disciplines view themselves quite differently.
Surveys reviewed in Muis et al. (2006) find that while
theoretical physicists group with mathematicians in scoring
high for rationalist epistemology, chemists and biologists
score high for empiricism.
The rationalist/empiricist contrast is not identical to the
nomological/mechanistic contrast. Descartes claimed to use
pure reason to deduce a theory of physics in which magnets
attract via screw-like particles (Westfall, 1971). Similarly,
natural selection has lawlike properties (Bock, 2010), even
though arguments for it typically involve induction from
masses of observations, as in Darwin's Origin of species (in
sharp contrast to the deductive style of Newton's Principia).
Yet consistent with (1c), rationalists seem to have a
natural affinity for laws and empiricists for mechanisms.
Physicists since Newton have rejected mechanistic physics
as question-begging, and biologists tend to see natural
selection as a causal mechanism (Skipper & Millstein,
2005). More generally, while nomological approaches
appeal to rationalists by being elegant and deductive,
mechanisms appeal to empiricists because they are
imageable as diagrams, posit causal interactions of the sort
familiar from experience, and accommodate a diversity of
induction-supporting observations through the cumulative
elaboration of mechanical elements and architectures.
In a passage reminiscent of Miller (1990), Shapin (1996,
p. 117) highlights the personal nature of cognitive styles:
Do you want to capture the essence of nature and
command assent to representations of its regularities?
Do you want to subject yourself to the discipline of

describing, and perhaps generalizing about, the
behavior of medium-sized objects actually existing in
the world? [...] The one is not necessarily to be
regarded as a failed version of the other, however much
partisans may defend the virtues of their preferred
practice and condemn the vices of another.
Shapin illustrates this contrast with Newton and his
contemporary Boyle, today known as the father of
chemistry. When Newton first introduced his optical
experiments to the Royal Society, he placed his
observations in a deductive context: "I shall rather lay down
the Doctrine first and then, for its examination, give you an
instance or two of the Experiments, as a specimen of the
rest" (quoted in Shapin, 1996, p. 114, italics in the original),
adding that he had shown that the science of colors was
"mathematical" with "as much certainty in it as any other
part of optics," as "evinced by the mediation of experiments
concluding directly and without any suspicion of doubt"
(Shapin, 1996, p. 115). By contrast, Boyle's goals were
simply to describe his experiments explicitly enough for
others to experience them vicariously, if not replicate them
and observe the results first-hand. Thus he wrote that he
dared to "speak confidently and positively of very few
things, except of matters of fact" (quoted in Shapin, 1996, p.
102). He even refused to express mathematically the gas law
that today bears his name or to call it a law. Boyle also
invented today's scientific reporting style, which clearly
separates experimental description from interpretation.

Cognitive Styles in Linguistics and Psychology
To paraphrase Shapin, we do not regard linguistic
methodology as a failed version of psychological
methodology, or vice versa. Rather, hypothesis (2) merely
claims that there is a deep philosophical difference.
Miller (1990, p. 321) illustrates this difference as follows:
[A] grammarian who can replace language-specific
rewriting rules with X-bar theory and lexicalization
feels he has explained something: the work formally
done by a vast array of specific rules can now be done
with a simple schema. [...] To an experimental
psychologist, X-bar theory is not an explanation; rather,
if it is true, it is something to be explained.
More generally, linguistic explanations take the form of
nomological grammars, which many linguists believe are
themselves subject to universal laws. Evidence is slight by
psychological standards, relying on a small number of clear
cases; generality is assumed unless later shown otherwise.
By contrast, psychological explanations take the form of
processing systems, supported with empirical overkill by
linguistic standards. Psychologists also follow Boylean
reporting style, whereas linguists, like philosophers, freely
interleave examples and analyses.
The contrasting philosophies underlying these practices
are sometimes made explicit in rhetorical volleys aimed

across disciplinary borders. For example, Chomsky (2002, p.
102) claims that "the only field that has methodology
courses, to my knowledge, is psychology," implying that
psychologists still maintain the discredited notion of
empirical discovery procedures. The psychologists Edelman
& Christiansen (2003, p. 60) counter that linguists fail in
their duty "to demonstrate the psychological (behavioral),
and, eventually, the neurobiological, reality of the
theoretical constructs," i.e., to demonstrate mechanisms.
Favoring mechanisms makes psychology an entirely
typical science (outside of physics), but why does linguistics
favor the nomological approach? Even though Chomsky is
an easy target, linguists have always treated language
nomologically. Bloomfield (1926) proposed a Principia-like
axiomatic system for linguistic theory, and Chomsky (1966)
links his own approach with Renaissance grammarians, who,
in turn, built on the Aristotelian view of language as logic.
Even before Aristotle and beyond Europe, Pāṇini developed
an elaborate formal grammar of Sanskrit that presaged
generative linguistics in important ways.
One motivation for nomological linguistics may be
language itself: like physics, language is simple enough to
be fruitfully described with simple laws. Yet unlike physics,
a mechanistic approach to language is also fruitful, given
that its processing involves causes and effects. Miller (1990,
p. 321) tacitly admits the multifaceted nature of language
when he addresses the question of why linguists and
psychologists study it so differently, noting that "[s]ome
have answered this question in terms of the competenceperformance distinction: linguists and psychologists talk
about different things," while "[o]thers have answered this
question in terms of the structure-function distinction:
linguists ask different questions of the same thing."
In fact, both of the alternative explanations he cites can be
subsumed under cognitive style. Competence (grammar) is
static linguistic knowledge, described in terms of structures;
performance is language processing, described in terms of
functions. Grammar is intrinsically atemporal, despite the
confusion sometimes caused by the term "generative" (see
Neeleman & van de Koot, 2010, for a computational
argument that grammar must be atemporal). Hence grammar
cannot be modeled mechanistically, since causal
mechanisms necessarily operate in time (Machamer et al.,
2000). This obligates grammarians to use nomological
explanations, which, given hypothesis (1c), makes
grammatical research particularly appealing to rationalists.
The central role of atemporality in nomological/rationalist
approaches to language is highlighted by the turn that came
with Saussure, the first modern linguist to explicitly
advocate the primacy of synchronic grammar. The rise of
structuralist linguistics in his wake was accompanied by a
simultaneous rejection of psychological approaches to
language, exemplified by the shift from the Wundtian
philosophy of Bloomfield (1914) to the psychological
agnosticism of Bloomfield (1933).
Since cognitive style is a property of individual scientists,
methodological rationalists like Chomsky coexist in

linguistics with methodological empiricists like the corpus
linguist Geoffrey Sampson. While Chomsky (2002, p. 102)
praises "the Galilean move towards discarding recalcitrant
phenomena if you're achieving insights by doing so,"
Sampson (2001, p. 1) asks linguists "to apply the same
empirical techniques which have deepened our
understanding of other observable aspects of the universe
during the four centuries since Galileo." (Tellingly, both
invoke Galileo: as noted by Shapin, 1996, scientists tend to
take their personal cognitive style as defining science itself).
Other non-rationalist approaches to linguistics include
functionalism (e.g., Nichols, 1984), where causal
mechanisms are central.
Psychologists also vary in cognitive style, with some
attracted to nomological schools like rational analysis
(Chater & Oaksford, 1999), or, earlier, Gestalt psychology.
Yet other psychologists are quick to criticize such
approaches for being insufficiently mechanistic, as seen in
the peer commentary on Oaksford & Chater (2009), or in
the comment by Bruce, Green, & Georgeson (2003, p. 127)
that Gestalt laws have left us "with a set of descriptive
principles, but without a model of perceptual processing."
The difference in cognitive style between (grammaroriented) linguists and (most) psychologists is highlighted
by the surprising fact that even when psycholinguists are
genetic rationalists, they remain methodological empiricists.
Compare Chomsky's nativism with that of the psychologist
Steven Pinker. The poverty of the stimulus argument
(Chomsky, 1986) deduces nativism from the premises that
knowledge is rich but input to the learner is poor. This is a
rational argument: Chomsky ascribes it to Plato, implying
the irrelevance of two millennia of evidence. Moreover,
contrary to a common misunderstanding (see, e.g.,
Chomsky & Katz, 1981), Chomsky does not induce
universal grammar from grammatical universals.
By contrast, the prominence of these two arguments is
exactly reversed in Pinker (1994). Pinker does rehearse a
version of the poverty of the stimulus argument, but
immediately afterwards he adds, "Chomsky's claim was
tested in an experiment..." (p. 42). The remainder of Pinker's
book is a long catalog of empirical evidence for nativism
from a variety of sources, including cross-linguistic
universals, in a style more like Origin than Principia.
The Chomskyan Jenkins (2000, p. 31) confirms that even
if "no converging evidence at all of the kind Pinker detailed
in his book [...] had turned up yet", we would still "be
justified in accepting Chomsky's arguments that the 'basic
design of language is innate,' to use Pinker's words", since
"the argument from poverty of the stimulus [is] strong
enough".

The Intractability of Cognitive Style
Hypothesis (3) is supported by two independent arguments.
For the benefit of different types of readers, one is empirical
and one is rational. The empirical argument is based on
evidence that cognitive style is associated with intrinsic
individual differences. The rational argument is based on

formal analyses demonstrating the impossibility of choosing
between cognitive styles either empirically or rationally.

Individual Differences in Cognitive Style
The polarization of disciplinary styles can be explained in
part by the social and cognitive factors driving group
polarization more generally (Isenberg, 1986). Yet scientists
do not merely absorb the cognitive style of their mentors
and peers.
For example, the physicist Max Planck (quoted in Scheibe,
2001, p. 69) wrote:
What led me to my science and what fascinated me
from a young age was the, by no means self-evident,
fact that our laws of thought agree with the regularities
found in the succession of impressions we receive from
the external world, that it is thus possible for the human
being to gain enlightenment regarding these regularities
by means of pure thought....
Similarly, though Einstein described himself, thirty years
after the fact, as having been changed "by the problem of
gravitation" from "skeptical empiricism" into "a believing
rationalist" (quoted in van Dongen, 2010, p. 57), his
contemporary writings show that he had already rejected
traditional empiricism before starting to work on gravitation
(Howard, forthcoming).
Group dynamics also fail to explain why individual
scientists can differ in cognitive style within a science. The
physicist Dirac (1968) notes that "[w]hether one follows the
experimental or the mathematical procedure depends largely
on the subject of study, but not entirely so. It also depends
on the man" (p. 22). Among his fellow theoretical physicists,
he cites Heisenberg as exemplifying the former style, and
Schrödinger (and himself) the latter.
Is cognitive style a matter of personality? Diamond &
Royce (1980) explicitly argue that personal epistemology
does correlate with personality traits, though unfortunately
there has been little follow-up (cf. Muis et al., 2006). For
example, Pashler, McDaniel, Rohrer, & Bjork (2009) cast
serious doubt on the notion of intrinsic learning styles, but
putative contrasts like visual versus verbal learning have
nothing to do with empiricism versus rationalism.
More relevant are the many studies that reveal individual
variation in reasoning. For example, in the Wason card
selection task, where people are asked to test for violations
of conditional propositions of the form if p then q, most fail
to test cases of not-q, even though finding not-q given p
would falsify the proposition. Oaksford & Chater (2009)
review a series of experiments and mathematical models
suggesting that most people approach the Wason task using
Bayesian (i.e., essentially inductive) reasoning. This implies
that the minority who give the normatively correct answer
are using deductive reasoning. Since performing correctly is
positively correlated with general intelligence (Stanovich &
West, 2000) and working memory capacity (Copeland &

Radvansky, 2004), a facility with deduction seems to be an
intrinsic individual trait.
Cognitive style may also be linked to another feature
known to show individual variation: tolerance of uncertainty
(Neuberg, Judice, & West, 1997). Deduction provides
certainty (Euclid cannot be falsified), while induction does
not (a black swan may be lurking around the next corner).
Given this, it is unsurprising that Wilkinson & Migotsky
(1994) found that the belief that knowledge depends on
observations and data (which they label empiricism) is
associated with the belief that knowledge is relative and
context-dependent, whereas the belief that knowledge
depends on logical and analytical thinking (which they label
rationalism) is not associated with relativist tendencies.
When taken to an extreme, the intolerance of uncertainty
is a hallmark of obsessive-compulsive disorder and autism
spectrum disorders like Asperger syndrome (Sadock &
Sadock, 2007). Indeed, autism is linked to mathematical
(i.e., deductive) talent (Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright,
Burtenshaw, & Hobson, 2007), and students with familial
autism are more likely to choose a mathematics-intensive
college major (Campbell & Wang, 2012). Complementarily,
Pélissier & O'Connor (2002) found that participants
diagnosed with obsessive-compulsive disorder had
significantly more difficulty than matched controls in tasks
that required induction, whereas both groups performed
equally well with deductive tasks. Consistent with the above
findings, the rationalists Newton (James, 2003) and Dirac
(Farmelo, 2009) have been diagnosed (post hoc) with
Asperger, whereas the more empiricism-inclined Darwin
earned a very high score from historians for openness to
experience (Shermer, 2002).
In short, scientists are unconsciously pushed in one or the
other direction along the rationalism/empiricism continuum
even before their entry into science. Cognitive styles are
thus expected to be relatively immune to persuasion.

Cognitive Styles and Logical Traps
Whether rationalists or empiricists, scientists all face the
problem of induction. Since observations are always
consistent with (infinitely) many theories, scientists rely on
strategies like Ockham's razor to narrow their options.
However, even when Ockham is satisfied, rationalists are
free to favor laws and empiricists to favor mechanisms.
The implications of this problem can be investigated in
the context of formal learning theory. This approach is most
familiar to cognitive scientists in its application to language
acquisition, but it also helps inform the philosophy of
science (e.g., Kelly, 2000). One lesson is that the challenge
faced by scientists is much harder than that faced by infants.
Infants may have evolutionarily provided "inside help"
guiding them to linguistic knowledge, but scientists are not
so lucky. Even if scientific decisions are innately biased,
these biases are not guaranteed to lead to scientific truth.
Because of this distinction between children and scientists,
formal learning theory leads to opposite conclusions in the
two cases. Gold's theorem (Gold, 1967) provides a simple

illustration of this. Any finite set of strings is compatible
both with a finite language consisting solely of the attested
strings and with a language generated by rules that generate
the attested strings plus infinitely many more. However, if
the learner is biased to posit only one language type, and the
strings are generated by a previous learner with the same
bias, successful language learning is guaranteed. Some
creatures may achieve this by being innately biased towards
finite languages, but presumably humans do so via an innate
bias for infinite ones.
But now consider a different scenario. A scientist collects
utterances from a human, which we assume has an infinite
language, and from an alien with a finite language
consisting of symbol strings up to length three. The human
is observed to have many more string lengths than the alien,
but like the child learner, the scientist can only ever have
access to strings of finite length, hence finite sets of strings,
even for human utterances. If the scientist is biased towards
nomological explanations, an infinite language (e.g., the
grammar a*) will be incorrectly posited for the alien as well.
If the scientist is biased towards less analytical hypotheses
(i.e., is empiricist), the human will be ascribed an alien-like
language (i.e., a list of strings).
One may object that the scientist can escape from this
dilemma by collecting evidence about what is
ungrammatical. Unlike the child learner, the scientist may
run an experiment, for example "asking" the alien if some
string is "acceptable" (e.g., via some processing task).
Suppose the alien accepts a, aa, aaa, but rejects aaaa,
aaaaa; surely that demonstrates that it has a finite language.
Yet as Johnson (2004) points out, even negative evidence
can only come in finite sets. Rejection of aaaaa does not
preclude the acceptance of aaaaaa.
Kelly (2007) illustrates his proof that Ockham's razor
minimizes backtracking with a scenario in which an
Ockham-obeying scientist posits all and only the particles
that have been emitted by a machine so far, exactly parallel
to our string-listing empiricist. Yet the nomological analysis
is not only intuitively simple, but also requires no
backtracking. If no string longer than three is uttered for a
sufficiently long time, we can merely add a constraint to the
grammar; we are not compelled to give up the infinite a*
component. Thus both approaches obey Ockham's razor.
Nothing in the above discussion depends on specific
features of Gold's theorem; the problem arises from the
general problem of induction. Thus even in more realistic
scenarios, the two approaches cannot be distinguished either
empirically or rationally.

Conclusions
This paper has argued that linguists and psychologists talk
past each other primarily because they have different
epistemic and metaphysical commitments that are beyond
conscious control.
Miller (1990, p. 322) predicts that it will be hard for
linguists "to make clear to psychologists that simplifying
explanations can be satisfying, once you grow accustomed

to them." Despite its tentative nature, the present study has
provided ample reason to take Miller's prediction seriously.
The predominance of the empiricist/mechanistic approach
across the sciences suggests that it may be easier for
linguists to appreciate psychological explanations than the
other way around. Nevertheless, linguistics will always have
a core of nomological rationalists. Given the multifaceted
nature of language, this is perhaps just as it should be.

Acknowledgments
Research was supported by the grants NSC98-2410-H-194086-MY3 and NSC100-2410-H-194-109-MY3 from the
National Science Council (Taiwan). Comments and other
help came from Jenn-Yeu Chen, Ruey-Lin Chen, TsungYing Chen, Leo Mos, Krista Muis, Gerry Rau, Gary Shyi,
Jon Sprouse, James Tai, and four anonymous reviewers.
The usual caveats apply.

References
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Burtenshaw, A., &
Hobson, E. (2007). Mathematical talent is linked to
autism. Human Nature, 18, 125-131.
Bloomfield, L. (1914). An introduction to the study of
language. New York: Holt.
Bloomfield, L. (1926). A set of postulates for the science of
language. Language, 2, 153-164.
Bloomfield, L. (1933). Language. New York: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.
Bock, W. J. (2010). Multiple explanations in Darwinian
evolutionary theory. Acta Biotheoretica, 58, 65-79.
Bruce, V., Green, P. R., & Georgeson, M. A. (2003). Visual
perception, 4th ed. Psychology Press.
Campbell, B. C., & Wang, S. S. (2012). Familial linkage
between neuropsychiatric disorders and intellectual
interests. PloS ONE, 7 (1), 1-4.
Carlson, G. (2003). On the notion "showing something". In
J. Moore & M. Polinsky (Eds.) The nature of explanation
in linguistic theory (pp. 69-82). Center for the Study of
Language and Information.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (1999). Ten years of the rational
analysis of cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3 (2),
57-65.
Chomsky, N. (1966). Cartesian linguistics. New York:
Harper and Row.
Chomsky, N. (1986). Knowledge of language: Its nature,
origin, and use. New York: Praeger.
Chomsky, N. (2002). On nature and language. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Chomsky, N., & Katz, J. J. (1981). What the linguist is
talking about. In N. Block (Ed.) Readings in philosophy of
psychology, vol. 2 (pp. 223-237). London: Methuen.
Cohen, I. B. (1985). Revolution in science. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Copeland, D., & Radvansky, G. (2004). Working memory
and syllogistic reasoning. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology A, 57 (8), 1437-1457.

Diamond, S. R., & Royce, J. R. (1980). Cognitive abilities
as expressions of three "ways of knowing". Multivariate
Behavioral Research, 15 (1), 31-56.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1968). Methods in theoretical physics. In
From a life of physics; Evening lectures at the
International Center for Theoretical Physics, Trieste,
Italy, 19-30. A special supplement of the International
Atomic Energy Agency Bulletin, Austria.
Edelman, S., & Christiansen, M. H. (2003). How seriously
should we take Minimalist syntax? Trends in Cognitive
Science, 7 (2), 60-61.
Farmelo, G. (2009). The strangest man: The life of Paul
Dirac. London: Faber and Faber.
Gold, E. M. (1967). Language identification in the limit.
Information and Control, 10, 447-474.
Hacking, I. (2002). "Style" for historians and philosophers.
In I. Hacking (Ed.) Historical ontology (pp. 178-199).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Howard, D. (forthcoming). Einstein and the development of
twentieth-century philosophy of science. In M. Janssen &
C. Lehner (Eds.), The Cambridge companion to Einstein.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Isenberg, D. J. (1986). Group polarization: A critical review
and meta-analysis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 50 (6), 1141-1151.
Jackendoff, R. (1988). Why are they saying these things
about us? Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 6 (3),
435-442.
James, I. (2003). Singular scientists. Journal of the Royal
Society of Medicine, 96, 36-39.
Jenkins, L. (2000). Biolinguistics: Exploring the biology of
Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, K. (2004). Gold's theorem and cognitive science.
Philosophy of Science, 71 (4), 571-592.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1987). Grammar and psychology. In S.
Mogdil & C. Mogdil (Eds) Noam Chomsky: Consensus
and controversy (pp. 147-156). New York: Falmer Press.
Kelly, K. T. (2000). The logic of success. In P. Clark & K.
Hawley (Eds.) Philosophy of science today (pp. 11-38).
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kelly, K. T. (2007). Simplicity, truth, and the unending
game of science. In S. Bold, B. Löwe, T. Räsch, & J. van
Benthem (Eds.) Foundations of the formal sciences V:
Infinite games (pp. 223-270). London: College
Publications.
Machamer, P., Darden, L. & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking
about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67, 1-25.
Miller, G. A. (1990). Linguists, psychologists and the
cognitive sciences. Language, 66, 317-322.
Muis, K. R., Bendixen, L. D., & Haerle, F. C. (2006).
Domain-generality and domain-specificity in personal
epistemology research: Philosophical and empirical
reﬂections in the development of a theoretical framework.
Educational Psychology Review, 18, 3-54.
Neeleman, A., & van de Koot, H. (2010). Theoretical
validity and psychological reality of the grammatical code.
In M. Everaert, T. Lentz, H. De Mulder, Ø. Nilsen, & A.

Zondervan (Eds.), The linguistics enterprise: From
knowledge of language to knowledge in linguistics (pp.
183-212). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Neuberg, S. L., Judice, T. N., & West, S. G. (1997). What
the need for closure scale measures and what it does not:
Toward differentiating among related epistemic motives.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72 (6),
1396-1412.
Nichols, J. (1984). Functional theories of grammar. Annual
Review of Anthropology, 13, 97-117.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2009). Précis of Bayesian
rationality: The probabilistic approach to human
reasoning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32, 69-120.
Pashler, H., McDaniel, M., Rohrer, D., & Bjork, R. (2009).
Learning styles concepts and evidence. Psychological
Science in the Public Interest, 9 (3), 105-119.
Pélissier, M.-C., & O'Connor, K. P. (2002). Deductive and
inductive reasoning in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 41, 15-27.
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct: How the mind
creates language. New York: William Morrow and
Company.
Sadock, B. J., & Sadock, V. A. (2007). Kaplan and Sadock's
synopsis of psychiatry (tenth edition). Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Sampson, G. R. (2001). Empirical linguistics. London:
Continuum.
Scheibe, Erhard. (2001). Between rationalism and
empiricism: The path of physics. In Brigitte Falkenburg
(Ed.) Between rationalism and empiricism: Selected
papers in the philosophy of physics (pp. 69-86). New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Shapin, S. (1996). The scientific revolution. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Shermer, M. (2002). In Darwin's shadow: The life and
science of Alfred Russel Wallace: A biographical study on
the psychology of history. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Skipper, R. A., & Millstein, R. L. (2005). Thinking about
evolutionary mechanisms: Natural selection. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, 36(2), 327-347.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
van Dongen, J. (2010). Einstein's unification. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Westfall, R. S. (1971). The construction of modern science:
Mechanisms and mechanics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Wilkinson, W. K., & Migotosky, C. P. (1994). A factor
analytic study of epistemological style inventories.
Journal of Psychology, 128(5), 499-517.
Woleński, J. (2004). Analytic vs. synthetic and a priori vs. a
posteriori. In I. Niiniluoto, M. Sintonen & J. Woleński
(Eds.) Handbook of epistemology (pp. 781-839).
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

