UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Workload and the Motor Component of Visual Attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3b08s1vv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ralph, Jason
Gray, Wayne
Schoelles, Mike

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Workload and the Motor Component of Visual Attention
Jason Ralph, Wayne D. Gray, & Michael J. Schoelles
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
Outside the laboratory, the ability to control visual input during multiple task performance by controlling where the eyes
look and when is an obvious component of multiple task
performance. However, inside the laboratory researchers either obviate the control of the eyes by presenting information
from one task at a time or are oblivious to the need for just-intime control of the motor component of visual attention. We
investigate the effects of cognitive workload on eye movements in a paradigm that controls the demand on the eyes
as an input channel while increasing workload by increasing the demand on working memory. Despite constant visual
demands, we find that fixations become more scattered with
increasing working memory load.
Keywords: dual mechanisms of control, cognitive control,
cognitive workload

Introduction
Our ability to switch among multiple tasks has been the
subject of extensive research for many decades (Allport,
Styles, & Hsieh, 1994; Altmann & Gray, 2008; Broadbent,
1952; Cherry, 1953). People generally exhibit a multitask effect in which they are slower and commit more errors when
performing multiple concurrent tasks than a sequential series
of the same tasks. Most theories of multitasking propose a resource capacity explanation for this multi-task effect. These
theories, including Wicken’s multiple resource theory (MRT)
(Wickens, 2002; Wickens & Colcombe, 2007), and Salvucci
and Taatgen’s threaded cognition (Salvucci & Taatgen, 2008;
Salvucci & Taatgen, 2011), propose a variety of resources
which must be shared by concurrent tasks. They argue that
when the capacity of one of these resources is exhausted, the
cognitive system must wait for the bottleneck to clear, which
causes slower task execution.
MRT identifies input modalities (visual or auditory), response modalities (motor, vocal), and cognition as resources
responsible for multi-task effects (Wickens, 2002; Wickens,
1992; Wickens, Goh, Helleberg, Horrey, & Talleur, 2003).
For instance, if two tasks require visual processing, performance will be slower because the capacity of the visual processor is limited. MRT has not been instantiated in computational form but its assumptions appear compatible with other
capacity theories such that multiple tasks can be performed
without interference until some capacity limit is reached
(e.g., see Just, Carpenter, & Hemphill, 1996a, 1996b).
Threaded cognition is a model based procedural theory

of task switching, which is implemented within the ACT-R
cognitive architecture (Anderson et al., 2004). In this theory,
“concurrent multitasking emerges from the interaction of autonomous process threads in conjunction with a straightforward mechanism for resource acquisition and conflict resolution,” (Salvucci & Taatgen, 2008, p. 102). Although we see
Threaded Cognition as a major advance in the modeling of
complex cognition, at present it focuses on the control of task
switching per se, not on the control of tasks.
As detailed by the Dual Mechanisms of Control (DMC)
theory (Braver, Gray, & Burgess, 2007; Braver, 2012), the
brain’s ability to prepare ahead of time (proactive control) is
limited. Proactive control requires that the strategy and information for a task be kept active. Hence, proactive control
places strategies such as the verbal-articulatory loop (Baddeley, 2012) and updating, shifting, and inhibition (Miyake
et al., 2000) under control of the PFC and subject to limits in PFC processing. The importance of proactive control
depends on the nature of the task being performed. In situations with a limited number of stimuli and responses (i.e.,
most experimental psychology tasks), then proactive control
seems best. However, in tasks that require the subject to respond to one of a number of different stimuli in a number of
different ways (e.g., driving on the freeway during rush hour)
then reactive processing seems required. Cognitive control is
recruited by a mix of proactive and reactive influences, and
understanding how this mix changes based on task demands
is key to understanding performance of multiple tasks.
We hypothesize that differences between single-task and
multi-task performance depend on how the brain manages
the demands on proactive control. A major limiting factor in
multitasking is our ability to distribute our attention to perform multiple concurrent tasks. In visual tasks, the capacity of the eyes to focus on one part of the visual scene at a
time is a factor constraining our performance. Many tasks
require the ability to control eye movements to capture required information from the world, or to maintain sustained
focal attention.
The ability to control our eyes during task performance
is an overlooked but critical variety of control. Unless we
assume that pointing-the-eyes at potentially informative areas of visual interest is somehow both automatic and effortless, then the need to control gaze to optimize task performance adds yet another burden to our control mechanisms.
Hence, it may be possible to determine when a switch in

899

control mode has occurred by examining patterns of eye fixations. We hypothesis that effective proactive control results
in long, constant fixations on the area of the visual scene related to a task. As the demands on proactive control increase,
eye movements should become more scattered, evidenced by
short fixation durations spread across a wider area. After
presenting our paradigm and results, we return to speculative
discussion of this issue in our Discussion section.
Previous Research
In prior research, we found that performance in a dualtask paradigm was affected by requiring subjects to look in
different locations for information needed for different tasks
(Ralph, Gray, & Schoelles, 2010). Subjects performed a continuous visual tracking task while concurrently performing
an n-back style memory task. (The paradigm will be explained in detail in the methods section below.) Consistent
with an MRT prediction, subjects who received information
aurally outperformed those who received it visually. However, we could not determined whether auditory instruction
relieved the cognitive demands of the task, or simply the visual demands.
The DMC account implies that proactive control of behavior relies on a common set of PFC mechanisms. Viewing
the eye as something that needs to be controlled, we hypothesize that it is the extra control of the eye that contributes to
the auditory vs visual tasks differences, not necessarily the
differences in auditory vs visual processing (as implied by
MRT).
To test this hypothesis, the current study compares two
visual conditions which share the same visual demands, but
differ in the cognitive (working memory) requirements. This
differs from most MRT research, which typically increases
cognitive load by increasing the difficulty of visual tracking
(Wickens et al., 2003). In the current study, differences in eye
movement behavior and performance cannot be attributed to
increased demands on the eye as these demands are identical across conditions. Thus the focus of the current study is
on how increased demands for proactive control affect eye
movement strategies and performance in the absence of additional demands for the control of the eye.
The Study
The NavBack paradigm was designed to collect detailed
empirical data in a task at the approximate complexity of
those used by Wickens in testing MRT (e.g., Martin-Emerson
& Wickens, 1992, 1997). The NavBack task combines a
tracking task with a working memory task. The tracking
task requires the subject to keep an arrow centered as it jitters (i.e., moves randomly) from side to side. Concurrently,
subjects perform a continuous working memory span task,
which is similar to the n-back memory task (Gevins & Smith,
2003; Jaeggi et al., 2010; McEvoy, Smith, & Gevins, 1998).
In the high workload conditions, subjects must maintain a

list of instructions in memory of how to turn in the next three
intersections (e.g., “left”, “right”, or “forward”). After each
intersection the subject has to delete the just completed instruction and add a new instruction to the end of his mental
list. In the low workload condition, only one instruction must
be maintained.
Methods
Subjects
22 undergraduate students of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (mean age = 19) volunteered to participate in this
study for course credit. Eleven subjects were randomly assigned to each of two conditions: High Memory or Low
Memory.

Figure 1. Screenshot of the NavBack Paradigm. Subjects
must keep the arrow in the center of the road as they receive
turn instructions in the box at the upper right corner. The
arrow remained at the bottom of the screen, and the ”road”
scrolled downward, simulating forward movement. Subjects
could turn when the arrow was in the intersection.
Apparatus and Materiels
The experiment was run on an Apple Mac Mini computer (running Mac-OS 10.4) at a 1024x768 screen resolution. Eye fixation data were collected using an LC Technologies tracker at a 120 Hz sampling rate. A chin-rest was
used to stabilize head movements and ensure a fixed viewing distance of 60 cm. The NavBack software is a custom
application implemented in Lispworks 5.1.
Design
Between-Subject Condition: Memory Load. Each
memory load condition received a new direction (the turn to
make in the future) while traveling through a “city block”.
For the High Memory condition, the new instruction specified how to turn three intersections in the future. In the Low
Memory condition, the new instruction specified how to turn
at the next intersection. Hence, the memory load for the High
vs Low Memory conditions was three versus one items.

900

Within-Subject Condition: Instruction Presentation
Time. All subjects received the new turn instruction early,
middle, or late during their travel through a city block. The
instruction appeared for 2-s beginning either 1-s, 3.4-s, or 5s after the arrow exited the intersection and entered the next
city block. On any given episode cycle, whether the instruction was presented early, middle, or late was determined randomly.
Procedure
Each subject completed a 2-min practice session to familiarize them with the demands of the task, followed by eight
5-min experimental blocks. Each 5-min block consisted of a
continuous series of episode cycles. Each cycle began when
the tip of the arrow left an intersection and entered the next
city block (city blocks are the green areas in Figure 1). At
one of three randomly chosen times a new instruction appeared in the direction box on the upper right of the screen
(see Figure 1). Travel time through each city block was 6-s.
Although, once in the intersection, subjects could turn at
any time, minimizing the jitter score required the subject to
turn at the exact center of the intersection. The animation for
the turn added 1,500 ms to the time spent in the intersection
when subjects made left or right turns. During each episode
cycle subjects had to do two related tasks: the jitter task and
the turn direction task. The jitter task is a visual-motor task
requiring constant attention. The turn-direction task requires
monitoring for the appearance of a new turn direction while
performing the jitter task. Depending on condition subjects
needed to hold either one or three turns in memory. Each
new episode cycle required them to update the list of items
held in memory.
Jitter Task: Visual-Motor
Subjects were instructed to keep the arrow in the center
of the road (on the dotted line in Figure 1) as the arrow jittered actively from side to side, every 200 ms, based on a
pseudo-random function. Subjects corrected the arrow’s horizontal position by pressing the a and d keys on a standard
keyboard. Their goal was to keep the arrow as close to the
center of the lane as possible. The arrow’s position at the
beginning of each city block was determined by the timing
of the previous turn. If the previous turn (left or right) was
initiated at the exact vertical center of the intersection, then
the arrow began the next city block in the center of the lane.
If the turn was initiated early or late, it began the next city
block deviated from the center by an amount proportional to
the distance from the turn point to the center of the intersection. (Ss were not instructed on this aspect of the task.) The
computer logged the absolute value of the number of pixels
deviated from the center every 200 ms. We refer to this value
as “jitter score”.

Figure 2. Mean jitter scores for middle instruction city
blocks. The gray rectangle denotes when the instruction was
on-screen.
Turn Direction Task: Working Memory Updating
Concurrent with the Jitter Task, subjects were required to
keep either one or three turns in memory (e.g., left, right,
forward). At the beginning of a 5-min set, high memory subjects were presented with the initial three turns that were to
be made in the first, second, and third intersection. After the
set began, new turn directions appeared at one of the three
times described earlier. The direction presentation time was
randomly chosen for each city block.
As discussed previously, success in the high memory condition essentially required subjects to rehearse, update, and
maintain a list of three instructions. Subjects had to mentally
delete the instruction for the just completed turn and to append a new instruction at the end of their mental list. Subjects
in the low memory group had to remember only the most recently presented direction. Feedback on the correctness of
the most recent turn was available at the top left of the screen
(see Figure 1).
Results
Jitter Scores. An analysis of variance was performed
on jitter scores by memory load and instruction time and
revealed main effects of memory load F(1,20)=7.96 p<.02,
and instruction time F(2,40) = 17.31 p<.001. High memory
subjects (M=10.42 pixels SD=2.03) had higher mean jitter
scores than low memory subjects (M=8.38 pixels, SD=1.05).
Figure 2 shows the mean jitter scores throughout an average
city block (for middle instruction times). Low memory subjects outperformed high memory subjects throughout the city
block.
Turning Task. The turn results were as expected with
the Low Workload group more accurate (94.64%) than the
High Workload group (85.31%). These differences were significant (F(1,20) = 12.57 p<.01) but will not be discussed
further in this short report.

901

Fixation Locations. Analysis of the eye data was performed using the areas of interest displayed in Figure 3. Only
data recorded while the arrow was within a city block is included (e.g. not in an intersection). The data yielded several
differences in fixations between the high vs low memory conditions. Figure 4 shows the proportion of time spent looking
at the arrow, direction box, and road areas. High memory
subjects spend less time fixated on the arrow and more time
looking at the direction box throughout the city block. This
difference is most pronounced before the instruction appears
(compare Figure 5 top and bottom for those times before the
appearance of the instruction), suggesting that low memory
subjects employed a more economical strategy to monitor the
direction box for the appearance of the arrow. As Figures 4
and 5 demonstrate, compared to low memory subjects, high
memory ones devoted proportionately more time looking at
the direction box and less time looking at the arrow1 .
The fixation pattern for low memory subjects likely reflects a proactive strategy designed to maximize time spent
fixating on the arrow while maintaining the ability to monitor for instructions. It is a strategy that high memory subjects
were either unwilling or unable to pursue.

Figure 3. Areas of Interest used for the analysis of eye fixations. Shaded areas represent the arrow, direction box (upper
right), feedback (upper left), and road areas.
Eye Movements Reveal Task Priority Differences with
Workload.
Figures 4 and 5 limit the data they present to the four task
relevant areas shown in Figure 3. We find it both interesting
and important that the two conditions spent different proportions of time gazing at screen areas relevant to different parts
of the task. The low workload condition spent more time on
jitter related areas (e.g. arrow), and the high memory condition spent more time looking at areas relevant to the turning
task (e.g direction box, road).
We further examined the degree of task focus by conducting an analysis of the variability of eye fixations throughout
the screen area for the two conditions (see Figure 6). For
this analysis, we split the screen into 30x30 pixel boxes and
computed the standard deviation of the number of fixations

Figure 4. Time spent fixating on the arrow, direction box and
road areas, respectively. High Memory subjects spent more
time looking at the road and direction box.

Figure 5. Proportion of time spent fixating on the direction box (top) and arrow (bottom) for middle instruction city
blocks. The gray area represents the time period when the
instruction is on-screen.
per box for each subject. By this measure, increasing standard deviations show that subjects focus more on some of the
pixel boxes than others. The lower the standard deviation, the
more evenly spread the fixations are across all pixel boxes.
An analysis of variance performed on this measure shows
that the fixations of high memory subjects were significantly
1

Less than 4% of fixations for high memory and 3% of fixations
for low memory subjects were to the feedback area with large variations between-Ss within the same group. A one-way ANOVA on
that area was not significant.

902

more evenly distributed (i.e., more scattered) than those of
low memory subjects F(1,20)=8.31 p<.01. But, when separated into the relevant areas of interest, individual ANOVAs
showed that high memory subjects were more scattered in
the arrow area F(1,20) = 4.18 p<.05, but not in the direction
box or road areas.

Counts

Low Memory
800

205
192

600

180
167

400

154

Screen y-Axis in Pixels

141
200

128
116

High Memory

103
90

800

78
65

600

52
39

400

26
14

200

1
200

400

600

800

1000

Screen x-Axis in Pixels

Figure 6. Density plot of eye fixations on screen for Low
Memory (top) and High Memory (bottom) groups. Scale on
the right shows the density count for the number of fixations
centered at each pixel of the screen. Note that despite the
same nominal task requirements for where-to-look-when the
High Memory group scattered their fixations more across the
entire screen than did the Low Memory group.
.
Discussion
As the jitter and memory tasks do not share any obvious
resource conflicts, it is unlikely that resource based theories
of multitasking (such as MRT) would predict the effects of
memory load on jitter task performance. Likewise, as there
are only two tasks being interleaved, it is also unlikely that
Threaded Cognition would predict differences in how they
are controlled. Yet our results show a significant difference
in inattention to task relevant areas between conditions.
A general theory of cognitive control must explain the
control required to switch among multiple tasks as well as
the control required to perform each single task. For many
tasks, a bridge between these two types of control may lie
in understanding the role of eye movements. In our study,
low memory subjects performed better on the jitter task than
high memory subjects throughout the average city block. In
addition, our microanalysis revealed that visual attention on

the arrow is a very important factor in predicting jitter performance. Jitter performance in both conditions suffered in the
time period before instructions were presented (as per Figure
2), as visual attention had to be split between the arrow and
direction box.
Eye fixation data suggested major differences in the allocation of control caused by memory load. Low memory
subjects were able to remain fixated on the arrow for much
longer periods of time than high memory subjects. Fixations
to the direction box increased until an instruction appeared
for high memory subjects, but remained relatively constant
for low memory subjects2 .
The demands on the proactive working memory system
had an impact on the fixation strategy employed. The data
suggest that high memory fixations reflect a different proactive strategy meant to focus on the turn instruction at the cost
of a loss of focus on the arrow. Despite this difference in
strategy, our variability measure showed that memory load
also caused the high memory condition to lack focus on the
arrow while they were looking at it. It can be argued that
Increased memory load indirectly affected jitter performance
by causing a lack of task focus. Task that require constant
focus for optimal performance (like our jitter task) will be
particularly susceptible to this effect.
In currently planned studies, we hypothesize that these results are not a special case, but rather a demonstration of how
cognitive control affects the use of all the brain’s resources.
We can no longer assume, as Threaded Cognition does, that
task performance is only subject to the control required to
switch tasks. We must also consider the effects that overall
control demands have on how we perform each task. Recent
research points to differences in the use of proactive control
in affecting behavior in many tasks, including the attentional
blink (Taatgen, Juvina, Schipper, Borst, & Martens, 2009),
AX-CPT (Braver et al., 2007), and n-back (Szmalec, Verbruggen, Vandierendonck, & Kemps, 2011) tasks. Our future research will focus on the mode of control (e.g. proactive/reactive) to help us explain these complex multitask effects that do not fit into a strict resource (MRT) framework.
Acknowledgements
Research reported in this paper has been supported, in
part, by grant N000141010019 to Wayne Gray from the Office of Naval Research, Dr. Ray Perez, Project Officer. Julia
Van Cleve and Matt Nebel assisted in data collection.
2

We remind the reader that the data presented in Figure 5 is for
those trials on which Ss received their instruction in the middle of
the city block. These data are representative of the early and late
conditions in that those conditions also show increased fixations on
the Direction Box until the instruction is presented for both Low
and High load conditions with High > Low.

903

References
Allport, A., Styles, E. A., & Hsieh, S. (1994). Shifting intentional set: exploring the dynamic control of tasks. In C.
Umilta & M. Moscovitch (Eds.), Attention and performance iv (pp. 421–452). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Altmann, E. M., & Gray, W. D. (2008, July). An integrated
model of cognitive control in task switching. Psychological review, 115(3), 602–39. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.
115.3.602
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglas, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Quin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of
the mind. Psychological Review, 111(4), 1036–1060.
Baddeley, A. (2012). Working memory: theories, models,
and controversies. Annual Review of Psychology, 63(1),
1–29.
Braver, T. S., Gray, J. R., & Burgess, G. C. (2007). Explaining the many varieties of working memory variation:
dual mechanisms of control. In C. Conway, M. J. K. Jarrold & a. N. T. A. Miyake (Eds.). Variation in working
memory (pp. 76–106). Oxford University Press.
Braver, T. S. (2012). The variable nature of cognitive control:
a dual mechanisms framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(2), 106 –113. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2011.1
2.010
Broadbent, D. E. (1952). Speaking and listening simultaneously. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 43(4), 267–
273. doi:{10.1037/h0058014}
Cherry, E. C. (1953). Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with one and with two ears. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 25(5), 975–979.
doi:10.1121/1.1907229
Gevins, A., & Smith, M. (2003). Neurophysiological measures of cognitive workload during human-computer
interaction. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science,
4(1), 113–131.
Jaeggi, S. M., Studer-Luethi, B., Buschkuehl, M., Su, Y.-F.,
Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. J. (2010, November). The relationship between n-back performance and matrix reasoning — implications for training and transfer. Intelligence, 38(6), 625–635.
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Hemphill, D. D. (1996a).
Constraints on processing capacity: architectural or implementational? In D. Steier & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.),
Mind matters: a tribute to allen newell (pp. 141–178.).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Keller, T. A. (1996b). The
capacity theory of comprehension: new frontiers of evidence and arguments. Psychological Review, 103(4),
773–780.

Martin-Emerson, R., & Wickens, C. D. (1992). The vertical
visual field and implications for the head-up display. In
Proceedings of the 36th annual meeting of the human
factors and ergonomics society (pp. 1408–1412). Santa
Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Martin-Emerson, R., & Wickens, C. D. (1997). Superimposition, symbology, visual attention, and the head-up display. Human Factors, 39(4), 581–601.
McEvoy, L. K., Smith, M., & Gevins, A. (1998). Dynamic
cortical networks of verbal and spatial working memory:
effects of memory load and task practice. Cereb. Cortex,
7(8), 563–574.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H.,
Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D. (2000). The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to
complex ”frontal lobe” tasks: a latent variable analysis.
Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), 49–100.
Ralph, J, Gray, W., & Schoelles, M. (2010). Squeezing the
balloon: analyzing the unpredictable effects of cognitive
workload. In Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society 54th annual meeting: (pp. 299–303).
Salvucci, D. D., & Taatgen, N. a. (2008, January). Threaded
cognition: an integrated theory of concurrent multitasking. Psychological review, 115(1), 101–30.
Salvucci, D. D., & Taatgen, N. a. (2011, April). Toward a
Unified View of Cognitive Control. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3(2), 227–230.
Szmalec, A., Verbruggen, F., Vandierendonck, A., & Kemps,
E. (2011, February). Control of interference during
working memory updating. Journal of experimental psychology. Human perception and performance, 37(1),
137–51.
Taatgen, N. a., Juvina, I., Schipper, M., Borst, J. P., &
Martens, S. (2009, August). Too much control can hurt:
a threaded cognition model of the attentional blink. Cognitive psychology, 59(1), 1–29.
Wickens, C. (2002). Multiple resources and performance
prediction. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science,
3(2), 159–177.
Wickens, C., & Colcombe, A. (2007). Dual-Task Performance Consequences of Imperfect Alerting Associated
With a Cockpit Display of Traffic Information. Human
Factors, 49(5), 839–850.
Wickens, C. D. (1992). Engineering psychology and human
performance (Second). New York: HarperCollins.
Wickens, C. D., Goh, J., Helleberg, J., Horrey, W. J.,
& Talleur, D. a. (2003, January). Attentional models
of multitask pilot performance using advanced display
technology. Human factors, 45(3), 360–80.

904

