UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparison of neural responses between exogenous and endogenous rule shifting in cued
switching task; an ERPs study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2mf1p0vr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Miyajima, Maki
Toyomaki, Atuhito
Kusumi, Ichiro
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparison of Neural Responses between Exogenous and Endogenous Rule Shifting
in Cued Switching Task; an ERPs study
Maki Miyajima (miyajima.med@gmail.com)
Atsuhito Toyomaki
Ichiro Kusumi
Tsukasa Koyama
Department of Psychiatry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine
North15, West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan

Abstract
Task switching is a well-known cognitive paradigm to explore
task-set reconﬁguration processes such as rule shifting. In
particular, endogenous task switching is thought to differ
qualitatively from stimulus-triggered exogenous task
switching. However, no previous study has examined the
neural substrate of endogenous task switching. The purpose of
the present study is to explore the differences between eventrelated potential responses to exogenous and endogenous rule
switching at cue stimulus. We modified two patterns of cued
switching tasks: exogenous (bottom-up) rule switching and
endogenous (top-down) rule switching. In each task cue
stimulus was configured in order to induce switching or
maintaining rule. In Exogenous switching tasks, late positive
deflection was larger in the switch rule condition than in the
maintain rule condition. However, in endogenous switching
tasks late positive deflection was unexpectedly lager in the
maintain rule condition than in the switch rule condition.
These results indicate that exogenous rule switching is explicit
stimulus-driven processes whereas endogenous rule switching
is implicitly parallel processes independent of external
stimulus.
Keywords: Switching task; Event related potentials; rule
shifting

Introduction
Executive function is thought to be one of most important
cognitive functions, and it is conceptualized as having four
components: volition, planning, purposive action, and
effective performance (Lezak, 1995). There are several
neuropsychological tests that assess executive function, such
as the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST), the Trail
Making Test, and the Tower of London task. In WCST, the
subject suppresses a no-longer-relevant task-set and replaces
it with an appropriate new task-set; this process is called set
shifting (Anderson, Damasio, Jones, & Tranel, 1991; Gold,
Carpenter, Randolph, Goldberg, & Weinberger, 1997;
Goldberg & Weinberger, 1994; Milner, 1963).
The task switching paradigm is a well-known and
sophisticated paradigm that engages these cognitive
processes and requires predictable or random alternation
between two response selection tasks (Jersild, 1927; Rogers
& Monsell, 1995). For example, participants have previously
been instructed to switch between a letter classification task

(Task A) and a digit classification task (Task B) in a
predictable sequence (e.g., AABB) or in a random sequence.
Many studies using the task switching paradigm have
observed that reaction time (RT) was reliably greater in
switching trials than in maintain trials (no-switching trials)
(Rogers & Monsell, 1995). Switch cost is estimated by
subtracting the RTs in trials requiring no switch from those
in trials requiring a switch; switch cost is thought to be an
index of the extra difficulty associated with reconfiguring
the active task-set.
Previous Event-related potential (ERP) and fMRI studies
have identified the neural substrates of task switching
processes. Some previous studies have implicated the lateral
prefrontal cortex and the parietal cortex as being centrally
involved in preparatory processing during task switching
(Johnston, Levin, Koval, & Everling, 2007; Kamigaki,
Fukushima, & Miyashita, 2009; Rowe J, 2008; Ruge, 2007).
Savine and Braver (Adam C. Savine, 2010) reported that
using incentives to modulate cognitive control specifically
enhanced task-cue-related activation of the left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex. In an ERP study, Karayanidis et al.
(Karayanidis, Coltheart, Michie, & Murphy, 2003) indicated
that switch-related positivity and switch-related negativity
were elicited by a target stimulus in switching trials. These
ERP data reflected that switch-related positivity was
unaffected by irrelevant task-cueing, whereas the amplitude
and latency of switch-related negativity were modulated by
the response-stimulus interval.
Many studies have used task switching, in which stimulustriggered, bottom-up processes to shift between rules operate
via external stimuli such as contextual stimuli, but few
studies have focused directly on endogenous, voluntary rule
shifting. Rogers and Monsell (Rogers & Monsell, 1995)
used an endogenous task switching paradigm that required
task-set alternation between trials; this paradigm places high
demands on working memory. Participants were told to
switch between “Task A” and “Task B” in a predictable
sequence (AABB). Target stimuli were presented in one of
four boxes continuously displayed on a computer screen, and
stimulus position was rotated in a clockwise direction. Thus,
on a given trial, the active task was cued by the position of
the displayed stimulus. This paradigm seems to require a
certain form of endogenous rule switching, because
participants change tasks in a predictable sequence.

2019

We believed that cognitive control of endogenous rule
shifting is more difficult than control of exogenous rule
shifting. For example, perseveration, which is a contextually
inappropriate and unintentional repetition of response, is
attributed to defective set shifting caused by frontal lobe
lesion or cognitive dysfunction, and is often observed in
patients with psychiatric disorders. Thus, people who display
perseveration find it more difficult to move on from one idea
to the next voluntarily than to follow instructions from
others. It is likely that the neural substrates characterizing
exogenous and endogenous rule shifting are different from
one another.
No previous study has examined the neural substrate of
endogenous rule shifting using tasks such as those reported
by Rogers and Monsell. Their above-mentioned paradigm is
simple, but the time point when participants switch rule
voluntary is unclear. Because contextual stimuli (four small
squares occupying quadrants of the screen) are displayed
continuously in their task and then there is no explicit cue
which requires participants to switch rule endogenously.
Therefore it seems to be difficult to measure neural
responses to endogenous rule switching. It is worthwhile to
examine differences in the neural activity elicited by
exogenous and endogenous rule shifting in detail. We
modified an existing cued switching task and configured the
cue stimuli to induce two patterns of rule switching:
exogenous (bottom-up) rule switching and endogenous (topdown) rule switching. Furthermore, we compared the neural
responses elicited by exogenous rule shifting to those
elicited by endogenous rule shifting using ERPs.

Materials and methods
Participants
Twelve right-handed student volunteers (12 male, aged 20–
34 years, mean age 24.8 years) served as participants. All
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. None
had a history of neurological or psychiatric disorders. All
participants gave written informed consent, and the study
was approved by the local research ethics committee.

Procedure
We made novel cued switching tasks and configured cue
stimuli in order to induce two patterns of rule switching:
exogenous (bottom-up) rule shifting and endogenous (topdown) rule shifting. In practice trials, the participant learned
to perform a two-choice response task accurately according
to each of two response rules (see Figure 1). The first was an
even vs. odd number classification rule, in which the
participant was required to press a button with the left hand
in response to an odd number or to press a button with the
right hand in response to an even number. The second rule
was a small vs. large number classification rule, in which the
participant was required to press a button with the left hand
in response to a number below five or to press a button with
the right hand in response to a number above five. Figure 2
shows a schematic diagram of the cued switching task in

present study. In each trial, a cue stimulus was presented for
1000 ms and was followed by a target stimulus. The target
stimulus remained on the screen until the participant pressed
one of the two buttons. In the exogenous rule switching task,
a white cue stimulus indicated that the subject should
maintain the same rule as the previous trial; the white cue
stimulus was presented in two or three consecutive trials,
and then its color changed to red, indicating that the subject
should switch to the other response rule. In the endogenous
rule switching task, the cue stimulus was always white, and
the participant was instructed to switch the response rule
voluntarily every other trial, maintaining each response rule
for two consecutive trials. Infrequently, an instruction
stimulus showing another rule was presented instead of the
cue stimulus; the instruction stimulus dictated that the
participant had to switch the response rule immediately. This
manipulation requires the participant to attend to the cue
stimulus in every trial. If the participant sees the cue
stimulus after two consecutive trials during which the same
response rule was used, this means that the participant
should switch to the other response rule endogenously. We
thought that this procedure enables to measure neural
response to endogenous rule switching effectively.

rule

odd/even
small/large

response
left
right
odd
even
below 5
above 5

Fig. 1: Response rule in present task

EEG recording and analysis
An electroencephalogram (EEG) (bandpass 0.16-30 Hz,
digitized at 500 Hz) was recorded from 55 electrodes
according to the international 10-10 system. Ag/AgCl
electrodes were used, and impedance was kept below 10 kΩ.
All electrodes were referenced to linked earlobes. An
electrooculogram (EOG) was recorded from electrodes
lateral to and below the left eye. The signals were digitized
for an epoch of 800 ms starting 200 ms prior to the
presentation of the cue and target stimulus respectively.
During the present study, we recorded large volumes of ERP
data, but we conducted a conventional ERP analysis using
only a small number of channels and achieved satisfactory
findings. We measured the mean amplitude of the ERP’s late
positive component (LPC) over 250–300 ms to cue stimulus
and LPC over 400-700 ms to target stimulus. A three-way
repeated measures ANOVA with Greenhouse-Geisser
correction was performed to compare mean LPC amplitudes
on the basis of cue modality factor (exogenous vs.
endogenous), response rule switching factor (maintain vs.
switch), and electrode site factor (Fz, Cz and Pz).

2020

ERPs data
Figure 4 shows the grand-averaged ERP waveforms elicited
by the cue stimuli in our study. Figure 5 shows mean LPC
amplitude by the cue stimuli at Pz. For the late positive
component (LPC) mean amplitude data, the ANOVA
revealed only one significant main effect, which was of
electrode site factor, F (2, 11) = 5.43, p< .05. In addition,
there was a significant interaction between cue modality
factor and switching factor, F (1, 11) = 20.31, p < .01. LPC
deflection in the exogenous task was larger in the switch
condition than in the maintain condition, but this pattern was
inverted in endogenous task; LPC amplitude in the
endogenous task was larger in the maintain condition than in
the switch condition.

Fig. 2: Schematic diagram of cued switching task

Result
Behavioral data
We measured mean reaction times (RTs) and calculated
switching costs (RT during trials in which the response rule
switches minus RT during trials in which the response rule is
maintained) for all conditions (see Figure 3). For RT data,
the ANOVA revealed only one significant main effect,
which was of switching, F (1, 11) = 35.25, p < .001. RTs in
trials when the response rule was switched were
significantly larger than RTs in trials when the response rule
was maintained. A t-test on the switching cost results
revealed no significant differences between the exogenous
and endogenous switching conditions, T (11) = -0.76, p = .46.

Fig. 4: Grand-averaged ERP waveforms in cue stimuli

Fig. 3: Behavioral data

Fig. 5: Mean LPC amplitude in the cue stimuli at Pz

2021

Figure 6 shows the grand-averaged ERP waveforms
elicited by the target stimuli in our study. Figure 7 shows
mean LPC amplitude by the target stimuli at Pz. For the late
positive component (LPC) mean amplitude data, the
ANOVA revealed significant main effect in electrode site
factor, F (2, 11) = 14.90, p < .001 and response rule
switching factor F (2, 11) = 11.43, p < .006 . In addition,
there was a significant interaction between cue modality
factor and switching factor F (1, 11) = 25.82, p < .001. In the
target stimuli, LPC deflection in the endogenous task was
larger in the maintain condition than in the switch condition
but there was no significant difference in the exogenous task.

Fig. 6: Grand-averaged ERP waveforms in target stimuli

Fig. 7: Mean LPC amplitude in the target stimuli at Pz

Discussion
The purpose of the present study is to explore the differences
between ERP responses to exogenous and endogenous rule
switching at cue stimulus onset. This study elucidated
interesting ERP waveform changes elicited by the cue
stimuli in various conditions. First we discuss the LPC
amplitude at the cue stimuli. In the exogenous switching task,
late positive component (LPC) amplitude was larger in the
switching condition than in the maintaining condition, and
thus, the ERP waveform pattern results ran parallel to the
reaction time (RT) results. It is possible that changing the
cue stimulus drives rule representation retrieval and working
memory updates, and thus contributes to increases in
positive deflection. Larger ERP deflection elicited by
changing the cue stimulus is associated with the lengthening
of RT upon presentation of the target stimulus. Surprisingly,
the pattern of ERP deflection observed in endogenous task
was reversed in the exogenous switching task. LPC
amplitude was larger in the maintaining condition than in the
switching condition when the switching criteria were
endogenous, and this pattern contrasted with RT results.
This disparate pattern of ERP waveforms in the cue
stimuli between the endogenous and exogenous tasks from
the standpoints of reaction time (RT) measurements and task
structure. We hypothesized that changing the cue stimulus in
the endogenous switching task triggers voluntary top-down
processing for response rule switching (such as memory
retrieval and working memory updates) and therefore elicits
a larger neural response, reflected by late positive
component (LPC) amplitude. Contrary to our hypothesis, the
results reflected a reduction of LPC amplitude in the
response rule switching condition. Since the response rule
was changed every two trials in the endogenous task,
preparatory or anticipatory processes for rule switching
might operate before the onset of the switching cue. In the
present study’s endogenous task, we occasionally presented
instruction stimuli instead of cue stimuli, forcing participants
to switch response rule at an unexpected time. Because of
the inclusion of the instruction stimulus, participants could
not switch the response rule thoughtlessly after two trials
using the same response rule; participants still needed to
identify the presentation of the switching cue stimulus
carefully. We think that reduction of LPC amplitude in the
switching condition indicates that the substance of the
endogenous rule shifting process finishes before cue
stimulus onset, and the cue stimulus is no more than a
confirmation of the already-prepared new response rule. In
addition, an increase in LPC amplitude during the ensuing
maintaining trial might indicate the operation of proactive
partial switching processes that anticipate the next trial.
Since the maintaining condition is the last trial during which
the participant uses an old response rule, the cue stimulus in
maintain trials represents both the preservation of the current
rule representation and its subsequent extinction. Because
participants likely exercise considerable cognitive efficiency,
processes of endogenous rule switching most likely take
place at the earliest possible time. Therefore, the cue

2022

stimulus in maintaining trials might cause the allocation of
large attentional resources to subsequent rule switching and
thus elicit large positive deflections in ERP. The switching
cue stimulus presented during the following trial might only
confirm an already-updated response rule and thus demand
fewer resources, causing a smaller positive deflection. In the
exogenous switching task, participants need to evaluate the
content of the cue stimulus in every trial, and thus,
preparatory or anticipatory rule shifting processes might not
operate before the switch trials begin.
Secondly we discuss the LPC amplitude at the target
stimuli. In the endogenous switching task, the late positive
component (LPC) amplitude was larger in the maintain
condition than in the switching condition, and this pattern
contrasted with reaction time (RT). However in the
exogenous switching task, there was no significant
difference between the switching condition and maintaining
condition (Fig.7). This result indicated discrepant pattern
similar to ERPs of cue stimulus. It is likely that additional
cognitive processes operates at target stimulus in maintain
condition in endogenous task. In maintain condition, RT was
smaller than in switch condition and thus additional process
reflected by larger LPC might not be associated with
reaction processes to target stimulus. We thought that this
process is similar to results of cue triggered ERPs in
endogenous task and associated with operation of proactive
partial switching processes that anticipate the next trial.
Contrary to ERP results, switch cost, which is the
difference in reaction time (RT) between switching and
maintaining conditions, showed no significant differences
between exogenous and endogenous switching tasks. A
previous study conducted by Rogers and Monsel indicated
that switch cost varies according to the response-stimulus
interval (Rogers & Monsell, 1995), which corresponds to the
cue-target interval in the present study. Although variation
of switch cost is thought to be associated with processes of
task-set reconfiguration (Karayanidis, et al., 2003), this is
inconsistent with ERP results in present study. In
endogenous task late positive component deflection elicited
by switching cue stimulus was reduced but RT was larger
than in maintain trial. Some previous studies indicate that
switch cost reflects not only task-set reconfiguration before
target response but also certain proactive interference (e.g.,
Karayanidis, et al., 2003). In present study the representation
of the new response rule determined by the cue stimulus in
both tasks might not be fixed perfectly in the participant’s
mind at the time of target stimulus onset. In addition
participants’ lack of experience in applying a new response
rule just after applying an old response rule might contribute
to this lengthening of RT.

Conclusion
The ERP results suggest that participants’ rule switching
strategies vary implicitly according to task structure. To the
best of our knowledge, no study has compared bottom-up
and top-down task switching processes directly. We used a
novel cued switching task to find differences between

neurophysiological responses during exogenous and
endogenous rule shifting processes. We can say that
exogenous rule switching is explicit stimulus-driven
processes whereas endogenous rule switching is implicitly
parallel processes independent of external stimulus.

Acknowledgments
We obtain the knowledge of the difference of neural
response between exogenous and endogenous rule shifting.
We are grateful to our participants and would like to
acknowledge the reviewers of this manuscript.

References
Adam C. Savine, T. S. B. (2010). Motivated Cognitive
Control: Reward Incentives Modulate Preparatory Neural
Activity during Task-Switching. Neuroscience, 30(31),
10294-10305.
Anderson, S., Damasio, H., Jones, R. D., & Tranel, D.
(1991). Wisconsin Card Sorting Test performance as a
measure of frontal lobe damage. J Clin Exp
Neuropsychol, 13, 909–922.
Gold, J., Carpenter, C., Randolph, C., Goldberg, T., &
Weinberger, D. (1997). Auditory working memory and
Wisconsin cars sorting performance in schizophrenia.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 54, 159–165.
Goldberg, T. E., & Weinberger, D. R. (1994). The effects of
clozapine on neurocognition: an overview. [Comparative
Study Review]. The Journal of clinical psychiatry, 55
Suppl B, 88-90.
Jersild. (1927). Mental set and shift (Vol. Whole No.89).
Johnston, K., Levin, H. M., Koval, M. J., & Everling, S.
(2007). Top-down control-signal dynamics in anterior
cingulate and prefrontal cortex neurons following task
switching. [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't]. Neuron,
53(3), 453-462. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.12.023
Kamigaki, T., Fukushima, T., & Miyashita, Y. (2009).
Cognitive set reconfiguration signaled by macaque
posterior parietal neurons. [Research Support, Non-U.S.
Gov't].
Neuron,
61(6),
941-951.
doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2009.01.028
Karayanidis, F., Coltheart, M., Michie, P. T., & Murphy, K.
(2003). Electrophysiological correlates of anticipatory
and poststimulus components of task switching.
Psychophysiology, 40(3), 329-348.
Lezak, M. D. (1995). Neuropsychological Assessment. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Milner, B. (1963). Effects of different brain lesions on card
sorting: the role of the frontal lobes. . Archives of
Neurology 9, 90-100.
Rogers, R., & Monsell, S. (1995). lCosts of a predictable
switch between simple cognitive tasks. J Exp Psychol
Gen 124, 207–231.
Rowe J, H. L., Eckstein D, Owen AM (2008). Rule-selection
and action-selection have a shared neuroanatomical basis
in the human prefrontal and parietal cortex. Cereb Cortex,
18, 2275-2285.

2023

Ruge, B. (2007). Neural mechanisms of cognitive control in
task switching: rules, representations, and preparation. In
W. J. Bunge SA, eds (Ed.), The neuroscience of ruleguided behavior (pp. 255-283). New York: Oxford UP.

2024

