UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conceptual Event Units of Putting and Taking in Two Unrelated Languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1v17g4sf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Defina, Rebecca
Majid, Asifa

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conceptual Event Units of Putting and Taking in Two Unrelated Languages
Rebecca Defina (rebecca.defina@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics &
International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, 6500AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Asifa Majid (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 6500AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
People automatically chunk ongoing dynamic events into
discrete units. This paper investigates whether linguistic
structure is a factor in this process. We test the claim that
describing an event with a serial verb construction will
influence a speaker’s conceptual event structure. The
grammar of Avatime (a Kwa language spoken in Ghana)
requires its speakers to describe some, but not all, placement
events using a serial verb construction which also encodes the
preceding taking event. We tested Avatime and English
speakers’ recognition memory for putting and taking events.
Avatime speakers were more likely to falsely recognize
putting and taking events from episodes associated with takeput serial verb constructions than from episodes associated
with other constructions. English speakers showed no
difference in false recognitions between episode types. This
demonstrates that memory for episodes is related to the type
of language used; and, moreover, across languages different
conceptual representations are formed for the same physical
episode, paralleling habitual linguistic practices.
Keywords: Conceptual event units; event segmentation;
serial verb constructions; linguistic relativity.

Introduction
Events occur in a continuous stream with no clear
boundaries between them. Despite this continuity, we think
and talk about events in terms of discrete and divisible units.
Previous research has largely focused on the factors
influencing the segmentation of events. This paper examines
the question from a complementary perspective: what
factors might lead event elements to be grouped together
into a single conceptual event unit.
When we perceive ongoing activity, we segment it
automatically and unconsciously (Kurby & Zacks, 2008;
Zacks et al., 2001a). The conceptual event units thus created
are structured hierarchically. Each event unit is made up of
smaller units, which in turn combine to form larger units
(Zacks, Tversky, & Iyer, 2001b). So, what counts as a single
conceptual event unit depends to some extent on which
level of granularity we are talking about. The choice of
granularity level appears to be made at the point of
reporting. Prior to that, people segment events at multiple
levels of granularity simultaneously (Zacks, Speer,
Swallow, Braver, & Reynolds, 2007).
Previous research shows that event units are determined
by at least three main factors. First, the inherent properties

of events, such as points of greater motion, have a large
effect on where event boundaries are placed (Newtson,
Engquist, & Bois, 1977; Zacks, 2004). Second, repeated cooccurrence, particularly in different contexts, encourages
event elements to be grouped together, regardless of their
inherent properties (Avrahami & Karev, 1994). Finally, the
particular event schema that the person engages for an event
affects the way they segment it (Zacks et al., 2007); for
instance, whether or not a person understood the actor’s
goal influences the way a participant segments the actor’s
behavior (Zacks, 2004). The fact that event schemas
influence conceptual event structure suggests that language
may also play a role here. This paper explores this
possibility.
Previous cross-linguistic research on the role of language
in event cognition has largely focused on differences in the
encoding of manner and path in motion events. The results
have been mixed: Some studies have found language effects
(e.g., Filipović, 2011; Finkbeiner, Nicol, Greth, &
Nakamura, 2002; Kersten et al., 2010), but others have not
(e.g., Gennari, Sloman, Malt, & Fitch, 2002; Loucks &
Pederson, 2011; Papafragou, Massey, & Gleitman, 2002).
More recently, scholars have begun to explore other aspects
of language and how they might influence event cognition,
particularly with respect to causal actions (e.g., Fausey &
Boroditsky, 2011; Wolff, Jeon, & Li, 2009). For example,
Wolff et al. (2009) found that the semantic property of
whether or not a language allowed an intermediary actor to
function as an agent affected both the syntactic and nonlinguistic partitioning of events, consistent with the proposal
that language may play a role in event segmentation.
In Wolff et al.’s (2009) study both the semantic and the
syntactic differences are potential instigators of the nonlinguistic event segmentation patterns. The current study
narrows in on the potential link between syntactic encoding
in particular and the concomitant non-linguistic partitioning
of events.
One type of syntactic structure that is particularly
interesting for event cognition is serial verb constructions
(SVCs).These constructions allow multiple verbs to be
placed within a single clause without coordination or
subordination (Aikhenvald, 2006; Durie, 1997). The
particular syntactic features vary across languages, though
there is a shared set of core, prototypical features

1470

(Aikhenvald, 2006; Foley, 2010). Though generally absent
in European languages, SVCs are common crosslinguistically. Some languages have a particularly high rate
of SVC use and these are called serializing languages.
Languages with no SVCs, such as English, are called nonserializing languages.
It has been claimed that SVCs always refer to
conceptualizations of a single event (Aikhenvald, 2006;
Comrie, 1995). Take the examples below, from Avatime, a
Ghana-Togo Mountain language from the Kwa branch of
the Niger-Congo language family. The SVC in example (1a)
describes what appears to be a single event: a man cutting
firewood with the axe he picked up for that purpose. In
contrast, the two Avatime simple, single verb clauses in
example (1b) describe a less integrated scene of a man
picking up an axe (maybe not with the immediate or sole
purpose of cutting firewood) and then cutting firewood (not
even necessarily with the axe just mentioned).
1. (a) A-kɔ̀
kàwɛ-à tsã̀ nyị-nɛ̀
̣̀
.
3S1-take axe-DEF cut firewood-DEF
‘He cut the firewood with the axe.’
(b) A-kɔ̀
kàwɛ-à. A-tsã̀
nyị-nɛ̀
̣̀
.
3S-take axe-DEF 3S- cut firewood-DEF
‘He took the axe. He cut the firewood.’

While there is a strong feeling among linguists that SVCs
should – and do – refer to single conceptual event units
(Aikhenvald, 2006; Comrie, 1995; Durie, 1997), the
relationship has not been directly tested.
The best evidence for this relationship, to date, comes
from a study conducted by Givón (1990, 1991). He tested
conceptual event units by investigating the production
process. Speakers pause when they are encoding the next
unit of speech (Goldman-Eisler, 1968). Givón thus took
pauses in speech as an indication of conceptual cohesion:
speech that was encoded together, and so between pauses,
was taken to refer to single event units. The frequencies of
speech internal pauses in different clause types were
compared across three languages of Papua New Guinea
(Kalam, Tairora and Tok Pisin), which use verb serialization
to different degrees. Givón found that pauses were no more
frequent within SVCs than they were within simple clauses
with a single verb. From this, he concluded that SVCs and
simple clauses both refer to single conceptual event units
(contra Pawley, 1987). Note that this study only tests
chunking at the linguistic level. It does not provide evidence
about cognitive event segmentation. To do that, an
independent test of conceptual event structure is required.
The present study aims to conduct just such an
independent test. It focuses on placement events in the
1
Abbreviations used: 3 ‘3rd person’, DEF ‘definite’, LOC
‘locative’, S ‘singular’, ` ‘low tone’, ´ ‘high tone’, mid tone is
unmarked.

serializing language Avatime, to test the following two
hypotheses: 1) that SVCs correspond to single conceptual
events and 2) that differences in linguistic descriptions of
events correlate with differences in conceptual event units.
In Avatime, most placement actions, like putting a cup on
a table, or a banana in a basket, must be described using
both a take verb and a put verb in an SVC2, as in example
(2). The grammar of the language requires speakers to
encode the taking part as well as the placing part of the
event, even if the person only saw the placing. Note that it is
logically necessary for an object that is being placed to have
been taken at some earlier point in time. So, it is not as
strange as it may at first appear for a language to require the
preceding taking event to also be encoded. The same
construction is also used to describe cases when both the
taking and placing events are seen. So an alternative
interpretation of (2) is: S/he took the banana and put it in
the basket.
2. A-kɔ̀
kɔ̀rantì-ɛ
kpɛ ní
kàsɔ-yà
mɛ̀
3S-take banana-DEF put LOC basket-DEF inside
‘S/he put the banana into the basket.’
There is a small set of placement events that are described
without a take-put SVC. These exceptional events include
putting an article of clothing or jewelry on a body part (in its
canonical location), and pouring liquids. These are
described using either a put verb in a simple clause (3) or a
put verb combined with a pouring manner verb in an SVC
(4). It is strongly dispreferred to describe such actions using
an SVC with a take verb.
3. A-kpɛ lìkùto-lè
3S-put hat-DEF
‘S/he put the hat on.’
4. E-nyi kùni-ò
kpɛ ní
kèzi-à
3S-pour water-DEF put
LOC bowl-DEF
‘S/he poured the water into the bowl.’

mɛ̀
inside

The patterns of placement event descriptions in Avatime,
and the claim that SVCs describe single conceptual events,
lend themselves to experimental testing. Previous research
has shown that people mentally fill in parts of event units
that they have not actually seen (Strickland & Keil, 2011).
We can build on this finding to test whether Avatime
speakers treat take-put episodes as single event units.
Specifically, if Avatime speakers see a videoclip showing a
2
As with many languages with this type of construction, the
take verb acts like an object marker and allows the two objects
(thing placed, and location where placed) to be expressed (Lord,
1993). However, unlike some languages, in Avatime the take verb
still maintains much of its original lexical semantics in these cases.
Different take verbs will even be used to mark differences in the
type of taking done.

1471

general placement action, which they would describe using
a take-put SVC, they should be more likely to falsely
recognize a corresponding taking action. In contrast, if
Avatime speakers see a videoclip showing a placement
action, which they would not describe with a take-put SVC,
such as putting on clothing or pouring a liquid, they should
not falsely recognize a corresponding taking action.
To control for the possibility that putting events and their
corresponding taking events are generally more cohesive
than the donning of clothing or pouring of liquids and their
corresponding taking events, we tested a control group of
English speakers. English speakers describe general
placement events with a single put verb which takes the
thing moved as the object and the location as a prepositional
phrase. For instance, She put the book on the table. The
pouring of liquids is described using the same structure as
general placements, but the verb is specific to pouring. For
instance, He poured water into the glass. The putting on of
clothing and jewelry is described using essentially the same
structure but the location is often not expressed. For
instance, She put the necklace on. There are no cases where
the grammar of English requires the corresponding taking
event to also be encoded. Hence, English speakers are not
predicted to have differences in false recognition rates to
these take events.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-four native speakers of Avatime, aged 11-16 (mean
14.1 years), were recruited at Vane Junior High School,
Ghana. Four Avatime speakers were tested but excluded due
to technical difficulties or for consistently answering either
yes or no for all items. Thirty-three native speakers of
English, aged 11-17 (mean 14.2 years), were recruited in the
Blue Mountains and Sydney, NSW, Australia.
All Avatime speakers were fluent in Ewe and English and
11 additionally spoke Twi. One English speaker was also
fluent in German, two spoke Spanish, one fluently and the
other moderately. Of the remaining English speakers, 9
were completely monolingual and 21 had very limited
knowledge of another language (French, German, Italian,
Japanese, Korean or Latin).

Materials
80 paired putting and taking events were filmed in a single
location inside the Max Planck Institute, Nijmegen. They
were acted out by two Dutch university students, one male
and one female. Each videoclip lasted 3-4 seconds.
A paired putting and taking episode showed the same
actor removing an object from one location and placing it in
another. For instance, in Figure 1(a) a man takes a banana
from the shelf and places it on a plate, in Figure 1(b) a
woman takes a necklace from a bag and places it on her

neck. Across episodes, the camera angle and position of the
actor in the room were kept constant.
a.

b.

Figure 1: Sample frames from the two videoclips (a) ‘man
takes banana from shelf’ and ‘man puts banana on plate’;
(b) ‘woman takes necklace from bag’, and ‘woman puts
necklace on.’
Objects and locations were selected so as to be familiar to
both Avatime and English speakers. The source location of
the taking event was always different from the goal location
of the putting event. Across episodes, the object, locations,
position of the actors, and camera angle varied.
Of the 40 episodes, half had general placement events of
the type described using take-put SVCs in Avatime, while
the other half did not (the donning of clothing and pouring).
Descriptions of the items by Avatime participants at the end
of the experiment confirmed this distinction: The placement
events in the SVC category were described using take-put
serial verb constructions 96.2% of the time (SD = 1.8). The
placement events in the Non-SVC category were described
using take-put serial verb constructions 6.5% of the time
(SD = 1.7). For ease of reference, both the putting and
taking events in an episode will be referred to as either SVC
or Non-SVC according to the type of putting event.

Design
The 40 put and take episodes, resulted in 80 individual
items, each consisting of a sole put event or take event. The
80 items were divided into two sets: only one part of a puttake episode featured in each set. Pilot testing with Avatime
speakers showed that remembering all 40 learning items in
one go was too difficult, so testing was divided into two
blocks. In each block of a given set, there were 5 SVC put
events, 5 Non-SVC put events, 5 SVC take events, and 5
Non-SVC take events. Blocks were counterbalanced across
participants. Within each block, items appeared in one of
four random orders.

Procedure
Participants were asked to watch a series of videoclips and
to remember them as best they could. They were told that

1472

they would later be shown more videos, some exactly the
same as the ones they had seen and some different, and that
their task was to tell the experimenter which videoclips were
the same and which were not.
Participants watched videoclips one at a time. The
videoclips were separated by a black screen lasting 1
second. After the learning phase, there was a 5 minute
distraction task unrelated to the experiment. Participants
were then tested for their memory of the 20 videoclips they
had just seen, plus their 20 unseen counterparts. So, if a
participant saw a girl put on a necklace in the learning
phase, they now, in the testing phase, also saw the girl
taking the necklace out of the bag. Participants indicated
whether each event was the same or different to the events
they had seen previously. After finishing testing for the first
block, participants saw the second block of 20 items and
were tested for memory of those as described above.
After completing the memory experiment, participants
viewed all the videoclips again and were asked to describe
"what the person did".
Avatime instructions were translated by a native Avatime
speaker fluent in English in consultation with the
experimenter. Instructions and responses were given
verbally in the participant’s native language. Responses
were recorded using an Olympus LS-10 flash recorder with
a headset microphone.
Participants were tested individually and the same
procedure was used for English and Avatime participants.
The whole experiment lasted approximately 45 minutes.

previously seen SVC events (M = 7.98) and Non-SVC
events (M = 8.15). There were no other interactions.
Our hypothesis concerned false recognitions to previously
unseen or new items. It was predicted that there would be a
three-way interaction between construction-type, event-type
and language. Avatime speakers would have more false
recognitions for taking events if the corresponding put event
was one that they would describe using a take-put serial
verb construction. English speakers should have the same
rates of false recognition for SVC and Non-SVC type
events. There was no statistically significant 3-way
interaction, F(1,61) = 0.01, p = 0.92, ηp2 < 0.01. However,
there was a main effect of language, F(1,61) = 14.34, p <
0.01, ηp2 = 0.19. Avatime speakers, in general, had more
false recognitions (M = 2.83) than English speakers (M =
1.58). There was also a main effect of construction-type
F(1,61) = 4.36, p = 0.04, ηp2 = 0.07. SVC events had more
false recognitions (M = 2.37) than Non-SVC events (M =
2.04). More interestingly, there was a significant interaction
between language and construction-type, F(1,61) = 4.36, p =
0.04, ηp2 = 0.07, see Figure 2. Avatime speakers had more
false recognitions for SVC type events in general (M =
3.17) than for Non-SVC type events (M = 2.50). English
speakers, on the other hand, had the same false recognition
rates for SVC (M = 1.58) and Non-SVC events (M = 1.58).
This suggests that Avatime speakers remember events
described with SVCs differently to those which are not; and
that this effect is not due to properties of the events
themselves, since English speakers fail to show a difference
across these event types.

Results
Responses to seen and new items were analyzed separately
using 2 construction-type (SVC or Non-SVC) x 2 eventtype (put or take) x 2 language (Avatime or English) x 2
block order (AB or BA) mixed ANOVAs, with construction
and event type being within-participant factors, and
language and block order between-participant factors. The
dependent variable was the number of reported recognitions.
Block order was not significant for seen (F(1,59) = 0.62, p =
0.43, ηp2 = 0.01) or new items (F(1,59) < 0.01, p = 0.94, ηp2
= 0.01), so we collapsed over this factor.
We first tested whether participants were able to correctly
recognize the items they had seen. The overall accuracy was
80.7% for Avatime speakers and 83.6% for English
speakers. The difference between language groups was not
significant, F(1, 61) = 0.92, p = 0.34, ηp2 = 0.02. There was
a main effect of event-type, F(1,61) = 9.20, p < 0.01, ηp2 =
0.13. Putting events were remembered more accurately (M
= 8.50) than taking events (M = 7.92). There was also a
main effect of construction, F(1,61) = 9.81, p < 0.01, ηp2 =
0.14, and a just significant interaction between constructiontype and language F(1,61) = 3.94, p = 0.05, ηp2 = 0.06.
English speakers remembered Non-SVC events more
accurately (M = 8.73) than SVC events (M = 7.99). Avatime
speakers showed no difference in recognition between

Figure 2: Average false recognitions as a function of
language and construction type.
Finally, there was an unpredicted interaction between
language and event type, F(1,61)= 4.51, p = 0.04, ηp2 =

1473

0.07. Avatime speakers showed more false recognitions for
put events (M = 3.08) than take events (M = 2.58). In
contrast, English speakers had slightly more false
recognitions for take events (M = 1.71) than for put events
(M = 1.44). There were no other significant interactions.

Discussion
Avatime speakers, but not English speakers, displayed more
false recognitions for put and take events from SVC
episodes than from the equivalent events in non-SVC
episodes. This is consistent with the suggestion that
language may play a role in conceptual event structure.
Avatime speakers appear to construct a single conceptual
event unit that includes the taking and putting event
segments precisely when the putting event is one that they
would describe with a take-put SVC.
Our initial prediction was that false recognitions would
occur only with the take part of the episode. This was
because it is the put event that determines whether or not an
SVC is used, and it is this use of the SVC which is predicted
to determine whether or not the take action is included in the
event unit. For example, picking up a necklace should only
be combined with its corresponding putting event if the
putting event is something like putting the necklace in a bag,
not putting it around your neck. Our results show, however,
that Avatime speakers falsely recognize both the take and
put parts of the SVC episodes regardless of which part they
saw first. This indicates that as soon as both parts have been
seen and understood to form an SVC type episode, Avatime
speakers join the taking and putting actions together into a
single conceptual event unit. Familiarity with either part
then spreads to the unit as a whole, resulting in false
recognition of the unseen part, be it a putting or a taking
action.
These results show a correlation between conceptual
event units and linguistic structure, but from these results
alone we cannot say whether language influences
conceptual structure, conceptual structure influences
language, or whether some third factor is involved. There is
some ancillary evidence that language may play a causal
role here. For example, Trueswell and Papafragou (2010)
found that people under high cognitive load directed
attention to event elements considered important in their
language; while Zacks et al. (2001b) found that there was
greater alignment between fine- and coarse-level
segmentation when speakers described events while they
segmented them, rather than describing them later. To
determine whether linguistic encoding is critically involved
in this experiment further study would be needed.
The link between SVCs and single conceptual event units
has often been suggested as a definitional criterion for SVCs
(Aikhenvald, 2006; Comrie, 1995; Durie, 1997). This paper
provides the first language external evidence in favor of this
often cited relationship. However, SVCs were only
compared with sets of separate clauses. To determine

whether or not the link between SVCs and single conceptual
event units is useful as a definitional criterion, SVCs should
be compared to other types of complex clauses as well. This
paper has shown that testing recognition memory is a viable
method for investigating the relationship between
conceptual event units and syntactic structures.
In addition to the main result discussed above, we found
three other effects. 1) Putting events were remembered more
accurately than taking events by speakers of both languages.
This is in line with predictions based on the asymmetry of
sources and goals in motion events (Regier & Zheng, 2007;
Papafragou, 2010) and research concerning put and take
lexicons (Narasimhan, Kopecka, Bowerman, Gullberg, &
Majid, in press; Regier, 1995). 2) Avatime speakers
displayed more false recognitions for put events than for
take events while English speakers showed the reverse
pattern. This is not immediately interpretable and will
require further investigation. 3) English speakers
remembered both putting and taking events from Non-SVC
episodes more accurately than those from SVC episodes.
This shows that there may be differences between the
episode types which are noticeable by English speakers,
even though they do not use SVCs. It seems likely that
actions involving clothing as well as pouring actions could
be more salient than general taking and putting actions.
Although English speakers were sensitive to the distinction
between episode types, they nevertheless performed
equivalently with respect to memory for new events. So
although there may be differences between SVC and NonSVC episodes these differences alone cannot predict our
final results.

Conclusion
This study provides the first evidence for the often claimed
connection between serial verb constructions and single
conceptual event units. It demonstrates that event elements
grouped together in language are grouped together as
conceptual event units: Avatime speakers conceptualize a
take-put episode as a single event unit exactly when the
placement event is one they would describe with a take-put
SVC but not if it is from a Non-SVC. English speakers, on
the other hand, do not distinguish the two types of events in
their syntax, nor do they demonstrate greater event cohesion
for the events described by take-put SVCs in Avatime.
Thus, speakers’ event conceptualisations parallel the
linguistic structures used to describe those events.

References
Aikhenvald, A. (2006). Serial verb constructions in
typological perspective. In A. Aikhenvald & R. Dixon
(Eds.), Serial Verb Constructions: A Crosslinguistic
Typology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Avrahami, J., & Kareev, Y. (1994). The emergence of
events. Cognition, 53, 239-261.

1474

Comrie, B. (1995). Serial verbs in Haruai (Papua New
Guinea) and their theoretical implications. In J.
Bouscaren, J. Franckel, & S. Robert (Eds.), Langues et
langage: Problèmes et raisonnement en linguistique,
mélanges offerts à Antoine Culioli. Paris: University
Presses of France.
Durie, M. (1997). Grammatical Structures in Verb
Serialization. In A. Alsina, J. Bresnan, & P. Sells (Eds.),
Complex Predicates. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Fausey, C. M., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Who dunnit?
Cross-linguistic differences in eye-witness memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18(1), 150–157.
Filipović, L. (2011). Speaking and remembering in one or
two languages: bilingual vs. monolingual lexicalisation
and memeory for motion events. International Journal of
Bilingualism, 15(4), 466–485.
Finkbeiner, M., Nicol, J., Greth, D., & Nakamura, K.
(2002). The role of language in memory for actions.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 31(5), 447–457.
Foley, W. A. (2010). Events and serial verb constructions.
In B. Baker & M. Harvey (Eds.), Complex Predicates:
Cross-Linguistic Perspectives on Event Structure.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gennari, S. P., Sloman, S., Malt, B., & Fitch, T. (2002).
Motion events in language and cognition, Cognition, 83,
49-79.
Givón, T. (1990). ‘Verb serialization in Tok Pisin and
Kalam: a comparative study of temporal packaging.’ In J.
Verhaar (Ed.) Melanesian Pidgin and Tok Pisin.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Givón, T. (1991). Serial verbs and event cognition in
Kalam: an empirical study of cultural relativity. In C.
Lefebvre (Ed.), Serial verbs: grammatical, comparative
and universal grammar. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Goldman-Eisler,
Frieda.
1968.
Psycholinguistics:
experiments in spontaneous speech. New York: Academic
Press.
Kersten, A. W., Meissner, C. A., Lechuga, J., Schwartz, B.
L., Albrechtsen, J. S., & Iglesias, A. (2010). English
Speakers Attend More Strongly Than Spanish Speakers to
Manner of Motion When Classifying Novel Objects and
Events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
139(4), 638–653.
Kurby, C. A., & Zacks, J. M. (2008). Segmentation in the
perception and memory of events. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 12(2), 72-79.
Lord, C. (1993). Historical change in serial verb
constructions. Typological studies in language.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Loucks, J., & Pederson, E. (2008). Linguistic and nonlinguistic categorization of complex motion events. In J.
Bohnemeyer & E. Pederson (Eds.), Event representation
in language and cognition, Language Culture and
Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Narasimhan, B., Kopecka, A., Bowerman, M., Gullberg, M.
& Majid, A. (in press). Putting and taking events: a crosslinguistic perspective. In A. Kopecka & B. Narasimhan
(Eds.), Events of ‘putting’ and ‘taking’: a cross-linguistic
perspective. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Newtson, D., Engquist, G., & Bois, J. (1977). The objective
basis of behaviour units. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 35(12), 847-862.
Papafragou, A. (2010). Source-goal asymmetries in motion
representation: Implications for language production and
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 34, 1064-1092.
Papafragou, A., Massey, C., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Shake,
rattle, “n” roll: the representation of motion in language
and cognition. Cognition, 84, 189–219.
Pawley, A. (1987). Encoding events in Kalam and English:
different logics for reporting experience. In R. Tomlin
(Ed.), Coherence and grounding in discourse,
Typological
Studies
in
Language.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Regier, T. (1995). A model of the Human Capacity for
Categorizing Spatial Relations. Cognitive Linguistics, 6,
63-88.
Regier, T. & Zheng, M. (2007). Attention to endpoints: A
cross-linguistic constraint on spatial meaning. Cognitive
Science 31,705-719.
Strickland, B., & Keil, F. (2011). Event completion: Event
based inferences distort memory in a matter of seconds.
Cognition, 121, 409-415.
Trueswell, J., & Papafragou, A. (2010). Perceiving and
remembering events cross-linguistically: Evidence from
dual-task paradigms. Journal of Memory and Language,
63, 64-82.
Wolff, P., Jeon, G.-H., & Li, Y. (2009). Causers in English,
Korean, and Chinese and the individuation of events.
Language and Cognition, 1(2), 167–196.
Zacks, J. M. (2004). Using movement and intentions to
understand simple events. Cognitive Science, 28, 979–
1008.
Zacks, J. M., Braver, T. S., Sheridan, M. A., Donaldson, D.
I., Snyder, A. Z., Ollinger, J. M., Buckner, R. L. &
Raichle, M. E. (2001a). Human brain activity time-locked
to perceptual event boundaries. Nature Neuroscience, 4,
651-655.
Zacks, J. M., Tversky, B., & Iyer, G. (2001b). Perceiving,
remembering and communicating structure in events.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130(1),
29-58.
Zacks, J. M., Speer, N. K., Swallow, K. M., Braver, T. S.,
Reynolds, J. R. (2007). Event perception: a mind-brain
perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 133(2), 273-293.

1475

