UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Development of Category-Based Reasoning in Preschool-Age Children: Preliminary Results
of a Longitudinal Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/296983f5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Godwin, Karrie
Matlen, Bryan
Fisher, Anna

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Development of Category-Based Reasoning in Preschool-Age Children:
Preliminary Results of a Longitudinal Study
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Bryan J. Matlen (bmatlen@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
Category-based reasoning is central to mature cognition;
yet, the developmental course of this fundamental ability
remains unclear. We designed a longitudinal study to
investigate the development of category-based reasoning.
We also took an individual differences approach to identify
possible cognitive factors that may facilitate category-based
reasoning. In this paper we report preliminary results of our
longitudinal investigation into the development of categorybased reasoning.
Keywords:

Induction.

Reasoning.

Categories.

Cognitive

Development

Introduction
A great deal of prior research has investigated the
development of category-based reasoning. This work
suggests that the fundamental ability to make inferences on
the basis of category labels (i.e., category-based reasoning)
is early developing (Gelman & Coley, 1990; Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Jaswal, 2004; Jaswal & Markman, 2007;
Welder & Graham, 2001). In a simple test of this skill,
Jaswal and Markman (2007, Experiment 1) presented 24month-old children with pairs of familiar animals (e.g., dog
and cat). The children watched as the animals engaged in
specific activities (e.g., the cat drinks milk and the dog
chews on a bone). A third hybrid-animal was then presented
(e.g., a cross between a cat and dog) and children were
asked to use the props to demonstrate which action the
hybrid animal would make (e.g., drink milk or chew on a
bone). Importantly, the hybrid animal was designed to look
more similar to one of the targets (e.g., The hybrid animal
was designed to look more similar to the cat). In the nolabel condition the hybrid was referred to generically (e.g.,
the experimenter labeled the cat-like animal as “this one”).
In the label condition the hybrid animal was labeled
counter-intuitively (e.g., the experimenter labeled the catlike animal a “dog”). In the no-label condition Jaswal and
Markman found that 24-month-olds generalized based on
perceptual similarity 69% of the time. However, in the label
condition, when perceptual similarity was pitted against
category information, perceptually-based generalizations

dropped to 37%. These results suggest children as young as
24-months of age can utilize labels to infer category
membership.
In a seminal study, Gelman and Markman (1986)
examined children’s ability to make inductive inferences
using category information that was conveyed by
synonymous labels. In this experiment, preschool-aged
children were presented with triads of objects and provided
with respective labels. The children were told that two of
the objects possessed particular properties, and the children
were asked to infer which property the third object
possessed. For example, children were presented with a
bunny and a squirrel and told that the bunny eats grass, and
the squirrel eats bugs. Subsequently, the children were
asked to determine whether the rabbit ate grass like the
bunny or bugs like the squirrel. Gelman and Markman
found that children made category-based inductions 63% of
the time, which is slightly above chance, and posited that
preschool children are sensitive to the cues synonymous
labels provide about category membership.
Despite these intriguing findings, there is mounting
evidence demonstrating that the course of category-based
reasoning follows a more protracted developmental course
(Fisher, 2010; Fisher, Matlen, & Godwin, 2011). For
example, Fisher et al. (2011) found that children’s ability to
make inductive inferences using synonyms is limited to a
small set of semantically-similar words that co-occur in
child-directed speech according to the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, 2000). In particular, Fisher et al. found that
most 4-year-old children were able to perform categorybased inferences with synonyms that are likely to co-occur
in child-directed speech (e.g., bunny-rabbit, puppy-dog);
however, they were unlikely to make category-based
inferences with non co-occurring synonyms (e.g., alligatorcrocodile, rock-stone). This pattern of results was found
with both natural kinds and artifacts. Additionally,
children’s reliance on category information was found to
improve gradually with age. Although 5-year-olds
evidenced improvement in their reliance on category
information compared to 4-year-olds, the majority of
children did not reliably utilize category information

1608

conveyed by non-co-occurring semantically-similar labels
until six years of age.
If category-based reasoning has a protracted
developmental course, an important question to be
addressed is identifying what actually develops that enables
children to utilize labels as windows into categories and
reliably use this information in the course of induction.
One possibility is that advances in category-based
reasoning are facilitated by changes in how children
organize knowledge. There is evidence that children begin
to organize concepts into networks by 21 months (AriasTrejo & Plunkett, 2009). There is also evidence that
conceptual organization changes over the course of
development, with associative networks emerging prior to
semantic networks (McCauley, Weil, & Sperber, 1976;
Plaut & Booth, 2000). It is also possible that development of
executive functioning may facilitate category-based
reasoning by allowing children to disengage their attention
from – often misleading or irrelevant – surface similarities
and consider deeper relational similarities (Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2005; Sloutsky, 2010).
The goal of the present research is to examine possible
cognitive factors contributing to the development of
category-based reasoning. Towards this goal we designed a
longitudinal investigation taking an individual differences
approach. Specifically, we collected measures of children’s
category-based reasoning at Time 1, verbal working
memory, IQ, and semantic knowledge organization.
Collection of additional measurements (i.e., inhibitory
control, non-verbal working memory, semantic priming, and
category-based reasoning at Time 2) is currently in
progress. In what follows we report the preliminary results
of this study.

Method

were hiding behind doors. This design was employed to
encourage children’s reliance on category information
conveyed via labels. This procedure has been successfully
used in prior research (Fisher et al., 2011). On every trial
children were told what was hiding behind each door.

Figure 1: Schematic depiction of the category-based
reasoning task. All instructions were given verbally by the
experimenter.
Then, children were told that the target had a novel-property
and they were asked to generalize the property to one of the
test items (the category-choice or lure).

Participants

Table 1: Linguistic Stimuli for the Category-Based
Reasoning Task

Participants were 43 four-year-old children from a local
preschool (Mage=4.32 years, SD=0.28 years, 20 females, 23
males).

Target
Rock
Alligator
Rug
Rat
Hill
Sea
Sofa
Shoe
Lamb

Materials & Procedure
Children were tested individually in a quiet room adjacent
to their classroom by a trained research assistant. The tasks
were administered across 6 sessions over the course of
approximately 2 weeks. A detailed description of each task
is provided below.
Category-Based Reasoning Task
The category-based reasoning task consisted of a triad
induction task. Visual Stimuli were sets of three identical
doors which were presented on a computer; see Figure 1.
Verbal stimuli included 9 label triads: 3 triads referring to
animate natural kinds, 3 triads referring to inanimate natural
kinds, and 3 triads referring to artifacts (see Table 1). The
properties participants were asked to generalize consisted of
two-syllable blank predicates. Each trial was comprised of a
target item, a category-choice, and an unrelated lure (e.g.,
rock-stone-grass). The children were told that the objects

Category
Choice
Stone
Crocodile
Carpet
Mouse
Mountain
Ocean
Couch
Boot
Sheep

Lure

Property

Grass
Butterfly
Window
Fish
Flower
Apple
Cup
Car
Frog

Higa
Omat
Koski
Lignin
Erwin
Manchin
Creighan
Troxel
Matlen

The trials were presented in one of two orders: all trials
were randomized for order 1, and for order 2 the
presentation was reversed. Presentation order was
counterbalanced across participants. The reasoning task was
administered during session 2 and again in session 4 to
assess stability in children’s generalization performance.
Picture Identification Task
The picture identification task served to assess children’s
familiarity with the labels used in the reasoning task. Verbal

1609

stimuli included 27 labels (the target, category-choice, and
lure from the reasoning task). Visual stimuli consisted of a
set of 108 pictures presented on a computer. All instructions
and labels were given by hypothesis-blind experimenters.
The picture identification task is similar to the Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn & Dunn, 1997). On each
trial children were asked to point to the object labeled by the
experimenter from 4 pictorial response options (the target
and 3 lures). The trials were presented in one of two orders.
Presentation order was counterbalanced across participants.
Intelligence Test
IQ materials consisted of a commercially purchased
intelligence test, the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale
of Intelligence (WPPSI). The IQ test was administered in
order to assess if children’s reasoning performance was
related to their general intelligence and/or a particular
intelligence component. Eight of the WPPSI subscales were
administered over 3 testing sessions in order to obtain an
index of children’s Verbal IQ, Performance IQ, Processing
Speed Quotient, and Full Scale IQ. The WPPSI was
administered by the first author of this paper and two trained
research assistants.
Verbal Working Memory Tasks
Children's verbal working memory capacity was assessed
using a simple and complex word-span task. Verbal stimuli
entailed 60 words that were arranged into 6 sets. Set length
ranged in size from a list length of 2 words to 6 words. Each
set was comprised of 3 lists of the same length.
In the simple word-span task, children listened to the
experimenter read a series of familiar count nouns, as
judged by the MacArthur Communicative Development
Inventory (Dale & Fenson, 1996). Then, children were
asked to recite the words in the same order in which they
were presented. The number of words in each set increased
monotonically after children correctly completed two out of
three trials within a given set size. For example, if children
correctly completed 2 trials with set size 2, they then moved
on to set size 3 (for a minimum of 2 trials or a maximum of
3 trials), and then set size 4 (for a minimum of 2 trials or a
maximum of 3 trials), and so on until children made two
errors within a set at which point testing stopped. The
child’s score is the longest list length he or she recited
successfully. The complex word-span task was identical to
the simple word-span task, except that children were asked
to repeat items in the reverse order in which they were
presented (e.g., If children were given the string, "duck,
house, chair", the correct response would be "chair, house,
duck"). The word lists were presented in one of two orders.
Presentation orders were counterbalanced across
participants.
The simple word-span task was included in the
assessment battery in order to assess if children’s
performance on the category-based reasoning task was
related to their general working memory capacity. The
complex word-span task was included as it was

hypothesized that the complex word-span task more closely
resembled the demands of the reasoning task itself (e.g.,
both the category-based reasoning task and the complex
word-span task contain a memory component as well as a
transformation/processing component).
Semantic Space Task
Visual stimuli included a game board consisting of a 9x9
grid. Two 1” wooden cubes served as the game pieces.
Verbal stimuli consisted of 24 animal pairs. The list of
linguistic stimuli is provided in Table 2. In the semantic
space task, children are asked to help Zibbo the Zookeeper
organize his zoo. Children are told that Zibbo wants to put
animals of the same kind close together. Children are
presented with 24 animal pairs (i.e., a target animal and a
test item). Of the 24 animal pairs, 6 dyads were
semantically-similar (e.g., lamb-sheep), 6 dyads shared a
common habitat or setting (e.g., lamb-horse), 6 dyads were
physically similar – according to size and/or color (e.g.,
lamb-swan), and 6 dyads served as filler trials. Note that the
target animal was paired with 3 different animals throughout
the game - the category-choice, a physically-similar item,
and the habitat match. On each trial, the experimenter shows
the child where Zibbo put the target animal (e.g., the
experimenter places the game piece on a designated space
on the board and tells the child, “The zookeeper put the
crocodile here”). Then, the experimenter hands the child the
second game piece and asks the child where the test item
should go (e.g., “Where do you think the grasshopper
should go?”). The board is then cleared and the
experimenter presents the next dyad. The child’s response
on each trial is recorded so the distance between the target
animal and test item can be calculated.
Placement of the 18 critical trials (i.e., semanticallysimilar dyads, physically similar dyads, or similar habitat
dyads) was pseudo randomized to eight potential squares;
see Figure 2. Each square was utilized at least twice and no
more than three times. The 6 filler trials were randomly
assigned to one of the remaining 24 squares in order to
encourage participants to use the entire game board. Trials
were presented in one of two orders and presentation orders
were counterbalanced across participants.
Table 2: List of Stimuli for the Semantic Space Task

Target
Crocodile
Chick
Lamb
Whale
Monkey
Mouse

Critical Trials
Category Physical
Choice
Similarity
Alligator
Grasshopper
Hen
Goldfish
Sheep
Swan
Dolphin
Elephant
Gorilla
Chipmunk
Rat
Hippo

Habitat
Fish
Goat
Horse
Octopus
Parrot
Pig

Filler Pairs
1. Zebra/Turkey; 2. Bear/Snake; 3. Panther/ Turtle;
4. Tiger/Butterfly; 5. Frog/Lion; 6. Giraffe/Seal

1610

Figure 2: Depiction of the game board for the semantic
space task. Red squares indicate the location of the critical
trials and the yellow squares mark the location of the filler
trials.

To investigate individual patterns of responses,
participants were classified as either category-based or noncategory-based responders. A category-based responder was
defined as a participant who gave a category-based response
on at least 7 out of 9 (78%) trials (binomial probability =
0.09). At Time 1a and 1b only a small percentage of
children were classified as category-based responders (33%
and 37% respectively).	  
To further investigate stability in children’s categorybased reasoning performance we also examined whether
children’s classification remained stable across Time 1a and
1b. We found that 67% (29 out of 43) of children were
categorized as stable across Time 1a and 1b. Of these
children only 19% (8 out 43) were classified as consistently
category-based responders, 49% (21 out of 43) were
consistently non category-based, and 33% (14 out of 43)
were considered unstable responders; See Figure 3. For the
purposes of the remaining analyses the average reasoning
score was utilized (M=0.63, SD=0.21).

The semantic space task was included in the assessment
battery to assess whether the organization of children’s
semantic space was related to their performance on the
category-based reasoning task. Specifically, we were
interested in identifying how children weight different
dimensions (e.g., semantic-similarity, physical similarity,
and habitat) and whether the distribution of weights to
various dimensions enhances or hinders children’s ability to
successfully make category-based inductions.

Results
Picture Identification
The results of the picture identification task suggest that
children possessed the prerequisite knowledge to perform
category-based induction as children were highly familiar
with the labels used in the reasoning task (M=0.92,
SD=0.14). Additionally, the correlation between children’s
performance on the picture identification task and children’s
average reasoning score was only marginally significant
(r=.28, p=0.07).
Category-Based Reasoning Task
As stated previously, performance on the category-based
reasoning task was measured twice over the course of 1
week in order to examine the stability of this measure. Mean
category-based reasoning at Time 1a and 1b were very
similar (M=0.62, SD=0.22; M=0.63, SD=0.26 respectively)
and these measures were significantly correlated (r=.483,
p=0.001). Proportions of category-based responses were
compared to chance level (0.5) using single-sample t-tests.
All mean scores (scores at Time 1a & 1b and average
reasoning score) were significantly above chance; all
t’s>3.30, all p’s<0.0022.	  

Figure 3: Proportion of children classified as consistently
category-based, consistently non-category-based, or
unstable responders.
Intelligence Test
Children’s mean composite IQ scores and their Full Scale
IQ were in the average range (MVIQ=107.36, SD=24.30;
MPIQ= 107.26, SD=14.78; MPSQ=92.78, SD=23.56;
MFSIQ=107.05, SD=15.79). Children’s Verbal IQ and
Performance IQ composite scores were significantly
correlated with their average performance on the categorybased reasoning task (r=.33, p=0.03; r=.31, p=0.05
respectively). However, Processing Quotient was not
significantly correlated with children’s average reasoning
score (r=.15, p=0.35). Children’s Full Scale IQ was also
significantly correlated with their average reasoning score
(r=.50, p=0.001).
Verbal Working Memory Tasks
Children’s performance on the simple word-span task was
better than their performance on the complex word-span
task (M=3.07, SD=1.32; M=1.28, SD=1.14 respectively). A

1611

mean score of 3.07 on the simple word-span task indicates
that on average children were able to successfully recall a
list length of 3 words. Children’s score on the simple wordspan task was found to be correlated with their average
performance on the category-based reasoning task (r=.35,
p=0.02). A mean score of 1.28 on the complex word-span
task suggests that many children obtained a score of 0 on
the task as the smallest list length was 2 words. Performance
on the complex word-span task was not significantly
correlated with children’s average induction performance
(r=.08, p=0.60), possibly due to floor effects on the complex
word-span task.
Semantic Space Task
Children’s semantic space score was calculated in the
following way: First, for each child an average score for
each category was calculated (i.e., an average score for
semantically-similar dyads, an average score for similar
habitat dyads, and an average score for physically similar
dyads). Children’s scores for similar habitat dyads and
physically similar dyads were averaged together to create an
average score for non-semantically-similar dyads. This
score was subtracted from the average score for
semantically-similar dyads to obtain a difference score.
Larger difference scores indicate that children placed
semantically-similar dyads closer together and nonsemantically-similar dyads farther apart. Smaller difference
scores indicate that children did not reliably discriminate
between semantically-similar dyads and non-semanticallysimilar dyads.
Table 3: Correlation Matrix
(Note: CB Reasoning = Category-based reasoning, Pic ID =
picture identification, SWS = simple word-span, CWS =
complex word-span, SS = semantic space, VIQ = verbal IQ,
PIQ = performance IQ, PSQ = processing speed, FSIQ =
full scale IQ)

Children’s mean score for semantically-similar dyads was
4.37 (SD=1.35). Children’s score for physically similar
dyads and similar habitats was 5.64 (SD=1.76) and 5.83
(SD=1.60) respectively. Children’s mean score for non
semantically-similar dyads was 5.74 (SD=1.51). Difference
scores ranged from -2.58 to 5.67 suggesting considerable
variability in children’s performance on this task. The
average difference score was 1.37 (SD=1.88). Children’s
performance on the semantic space task was found to be
significantly correlated with their average performance on
the category-based reasoning task (r=.46; p=0.002).
Predicting Category-Based Reasoning Performance
There were a total of 8 possible predictors of children’s
reasoning performance. As can be seen in Table 3, several
of the predictors were significantly correlated with each
other. Concerns regarding collinearity are allayed as
tolerance values for predictors entered into the regression
model were within the acceptable range. Children’s scores
on the simple word-span task, semantic space task, and
FSIQ were entered into the model as predictors. Children’s
average score on the category-based reasoning task was the
dependent variable.
The regression model significantly predicted children’s
average reasoning score, F(3, 38)=5.47, p=0.003. The R
squared value indicates that 30% of the variance in
children’s performance on the category-based reasoning
task was explained by the model. Simple word-span was not
found to be a significant predictor (β=0.08, p=0.62);
however, semantic space (β=0.26, p=0.11) and FSIQ
(β=0.31, p=0.10) were marginally significant predictors of
children’s reasoning performance.

Discussion
Overall, the results from this study, although preliminary,
point to several findings. First, the analysis of individual
patterns of response on the reasoning task replicate previous
work (Fisher et al., 2011; Godwin, Matlen, & Fisher, 2011).
Specifically, we found that when young children are
presented with non-co-occurring semantically-similar labels
only a small percentage of children spontaneously engage in
category-based reasoning.
Second, the present findings suggest that several factors
are related to children’s induction performance. We found
that children’s Full Scale IQ, Verbal IQ, Performance IQ,
simple working memory, and semantic space performance
were all significantly correlated with children’s average
reasoning score. Additionally, children’s Full scale IQ and
performance on the semantic space task were identified as
unique predictors of children’s performance on the
category-based reasoning task according to the regression
model. The correlation between semantic organization and
category-based reasoning is also consistent with related
research on the development of analogical reasoning, which
has suggested that children’s shift from focusing primarily
on perceptual similarity to relational similarity is mediated
by increases in domain knowledge (Rattermann & Gentner,

1612

1998). On-going research will examine whether other
cognitive factors (e.g., inhibitory control, non-verbal
working memory, etc.) are also related to the development
of category-based reasoning.
Third, the present study provides novel information on
the stability in children’s induction performance. This study
is the first to our knowledge to look at the stability in
children’s performance on a conceptual development
measure. The findings from this study suggest that
children’s category-based reasoning performance between
Time 1a and 1b is correlated; however, there is still a great
deal of variability in children’s performance as indicated by
the small percentage of children who were classified as
consistently category-based across the two time points.
Additionally, the longitudinal component of this study will
enrich our understanding of the stability in children’s
inductive reasoning. Once data collection is complete, we
will be able to examine whether the percentage of children
who are classified as consistently category-based increases
with age.
In conclusion, the present study contributes to our
understanding of children’s emerging ability to engage in
category-based reasoning. The contributions of this work
include identifying potential factors that may be predictive
of children’s induction performance as well as the
opportunity to investigate the stability of children’s
category-based reasoning. Future research is needed to
extend these findings and disentangle the different
hypotheses put forth to explain this fundamental aspect of
conceptual development.

Acknowledgements
We thank Malika Sinha, Laura Pacilio, Alyssa Montanaro,
Anna Loiterstein, Like Li, and Kayoung Joung for their help
collecting data. We also thank the children, parents, and
teachers who made this project possible. This work was
supported in part by a Graduate Training Grant awarded to
Carnegie Mellon University by the Department of
Education (R305B090023 and R305B040063).

References
Arias-Trejo, N. & Plunkett, K. (2009). Lexical-semantic
priming effects during infancy. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society Biological Sciences,
364, 3633-3647.
Dale, P. S., and Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 28, 125-127.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test–Third Edition. Circle Pines, MN: AGS
Publishing.
Fisher, A.V. (2010). What’s in the name? Or how rocks and
stones are different from dogs and puppies. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105, 198-212.
Fisher, A.V., Matlen, B.J., & Godwin, K.E. (2011).
Semantic similarity of labels and inductive

generalization: Taking a second look. Cognition, 118,
432-438.
Gelman, S.A. & Coley, J.D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in
2-year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26,
796-804.
Gelman, S.A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Godwin, K., Matlen, B., & Fisher, A. (2011). The influence
of co-occurrence and inheritance information on
children’s inductive generalization. In L. Carlson, C.
Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(2989-2994). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Jaswal, V.K. (2004). Don’t believe everything you hear:
Preschoolers’ sensitivity to speaker intent in category
induction. Child Development, 3, 279-300.
Jaswal, V. K. & Markman, E. M. (2007). Looks aren’t
everything: 24-month-olds’ willingness to accept
unexpected labels. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 8(1) 93-111.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
McCauley, C., Weil, C. M., & Sperber, R. D. (1976). The
development of memory structures as reflected by
semantic-priming effects. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 22, 511-518.
Plaut, D.C. & Booth, J. R. (2000). Individual and
developmental differences in semantic priming:
Empirical and computational support for a singlemechanism account of lexical processing. Psychological
Review, 107(4), 786-823.
Rattermann, M. J. & Gentner, D. (1998). More evidence for
a relational shift in the development of analogy:
Children’s performance on a causal-mapping task.
Cognitive Development, 13, 453 – 478.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2010). From perceptual categories to
concepts: What develops? Cognitive Science, 34, 1244–
1286.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2005). Similarity,
Induction, Naming, and Categorization (SINC):
Generalization or verbal inductive reasoning? Response
to Heit and Hayes. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 134, 606-611.
Welder, A.N., & Graham, S.A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

1613

