UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Different Stable Patterns between Intra- and Inter-personal Systems: Experimental Study on
Inter-limb Tapping Coordination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8pw4h1nj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kodama, Kentaro
Makino, Ryosaku
Furuyama, Nobuhiro

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Different Stable Patterns between Intra- and Inter-personal Systems:
Experimental Study on Inter-limb Tapping Coordination
Kentaro Kodama (kodamakentaro@nii.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics, School of Multidisciplinary Science,
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Ryosaku Makino (ryosaku@nii.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics, School of Multidisciplinary Science,
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Nobuhiro Furuyama (furuyama@nii.ac.jp)

Information and Society Research Division,
National Institute of Informatics, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan,
Department of Informatics, School of Multidisciplinary Science, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies,
and Graduate Schools of Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Abstract
To reveal the differences between intra- and inter-personal
systems in terms of the perceptual effect on the stability of
inter-limb coordination, the present study conducted a fingertapping experiment in in-phase and anti-phase mode. We
investigated a between-subjects factor (the intra-/interpersonal condition), and a within-subject factor (the phase
mode). In the intra-personal condition, participants
bimanually tapped their index fingers, paced by a metronome,
with the frequency gradually increasing from 1 Hz to 3 Hz. In
the inter-personal condition, pairs of participants were asked
to perform the same task, but to use their right or left index
finger, while sitting side-by-side and looking at each other’s
fingers moving. Analysis showed that the average number of
phase transitions, average time-to-transition and standard
deviation of the relative phase differed between the intrapersonal system and inter-personal system. Some results do
not agree with the predictions of theoretical model proposed
in previous studies on inter-limb coordination.
Keywords: Inter-limb coordination; Finger Tapping Task;
Perceptual Effect; Dynamical Systems Approach

Introduction
To reveal the differences between intra- and inter-personal
coordination systems, a finger-tapping experiment was
conducted in which two phase modes (in-phase and antiphase) were manipulated as a factor. The present study had
two objectives. One objective was to reveal the role of
perceptual information in inter-limb coordination. For this,
we conducted a finger-tapping experiment, comparing the
intra-personal condition with the inter-personal condition.
Because the tapping task required participants to utilize
visual, auditory, and haptic information (e.g., looking at a
moving finger, listening to auditory metronome stimuli as
well as the sounds of tapping, and touching the surface of
the desk), the effect of multi-modal perceptual information
could be examined (Kodama and Furuyama, 2010). We

investigated not only the intra-personal system, which
involves neural and mechanical coupling between limbs, but
also the inter-personal system, which involves visual
coupling through watching the other’s movements. We
could thus focus on the perceptual effect on inter-limb
coordination. The other objective was to see how generally
the existing model on human inter-limb coordination, called
the Haken-Kelso-Bunz (HKB) model, could be applied to
human inter-limb coordination in the intra-personal system
and in the inter-personal system.
The first application of self-organization theory to human
inter-limb coordination was attempted by Scott Kelso
(Kelso, 1984) and his colleagues (Haken et al., 1985). Since
then, research on this topic has developed tremendously. In
this approach, called the dynamical systems approach, the
general findings are that bimanual coordination is more
stable in the in-phase mode than in the anti-phase mode; one
of the most important observations is that phase transitions
take place unidirectionally from the anti-phase mode to the
in-phase mode when the required oscillation frequency
reaches or exceeds a critical point. These findings led to the
proposal of a theoretical model, called the Haken-KelsoBunz (HKB) model (Haken et al., 1985).
The above findings have been confirmed for interpersonal coordinated movement (e.g., swinging of
pendulums or legs) (Schmidt et al., 1990, 1998). Phase
transitions in inter-personal systems indicate that visual
information involves coordinated movement because interpersonal systems do not involve mechanical or neural
couplings between limbs, unlike intra-personal systems.
Schmidt et al. (1998) suggested that the self-organization
principle of intra-personal systems governs inter-personal
systems as well but that the coupling strength between
limbs is stronger in intra-personal systems.
However, most studies on coordinated movement have
dealt with either intra- or inter-personal coordination of a
pair of oscillators (fingers, legs, pendulums, etc.) wiggling
or swaying in the air; that is, these studies did not address

1810

the effect of haptic information in terms of contact on a
surface of an environment.
On the other hand, in finger tapping studies, Mechsner et
al. (2001) conducted an intra-personal four-finger tapping
experiment in which the perceptual bias on bimanual
coordination was investigated in terms of symmetry defined
in visual, perceptual space. Although they found a
perceptual bias on bimanual finger tapping, they did not
reflect upon the implications of their findings on the HKB
model. Some researchers (e.g., Takenaka and Ueda, 2003)
conducted tapping experiments both in intra- and interpersonal conditions. These studies, however, did not
compare the in-phase and anti-phase modes and did not
investigate the frequency effect on the stability of
movement.
As far as we can tell from a survey of the literature, no
studies have compared intra-personal and inter-personal
coordination in finger tapping from the perspective of
dynamical systems as regards the in-phase mode and antiphase mode and none has investigated the frequency effect
as a control parameter. Therefore, we conducted a fingertapping experiment to reveal the differences between intrapersonal system and inter-personal system in terms of how
multi-modal perceptual information affects the stability of
tapping movements.

Experimental Design and Procedure
The experiment was designed as a 2 × 2 factorial with one
between-subjects variable, i.e., the intra-/inter-personal
condition (Figure 1), and one within-subject variables, i.e.,
the phase mode (in-phase and anti-phase) (Figure 2).
Participants were each seated at a desk in front of the
camcorder. The task was to tap either in in-phase mode
(two fingers tapping in synchronization) or anti-phase mode
(two fingers tapping alternatively) at a pace dictated by the
auditory metronome. The participants were instructed to
keep their eyes open and watch their tapping movements
during a trial, and to complete one full movement cycle, an
extension-and-flexion cycle, for each beat of the metronome.
They were also instructed to maintain the initial mode of
coordination as much as possible, but not at the expense of
losing pace with the metronome, and not to resist if they felt
a change in the coordination pattern as a result of the
increased tapping frequency. In the anti-phase mode, they
tapped alternatively: the left finger was tapped in
synchronization with the metronome beat while the right
finger was in syncopation. Each condition was repeated four
times, and the order of the trials was arranged randomly.

Method
Participants
A total of 30 healthy right-handed participants (15 males
and 15 females) took part in the experiment, with 10
participants in the intra-personal condition and 10 pairs of
participants (i.e., 20 participants) in the inter-personal
condition. All participants were between 21 and 47 years of
age (average age=26.9). The procedure was approved by the
ethics committee at the National Institute of Informatics,
where the experiment was conducted.

Apparatus
A computer-generated metronome produced beeps, each
lasting 85 msec. The metronome frequency was increased
gradually from 1 Hz to 3 Hz over a 30-s trial after an initial
3-s period at 1 Hz. The metronome was run on a personal
computer (Apple MacBook2130/13.3), and the beep sounds
were conveyed to the participants through headphones
(Sony MDR-NC600D) at a comfortable volume adjusted for
each participant. A camcorder (TK-C1380; Victor), as part
of the motion analyzer system DKH Frame-DIAS II,
videotaped the movements of the participants’ index fingers
at 60 fields per second through the two-dimensional motion
capture function of the Frame-DIAS II. The tapping
movements and auditory stimuli were recorded on a hard
disk drive (HDD) (Sony HVR-DR-60).

1811

Figure 1: Experimental situation.
(left; intra-, right; inter-personal condition)

Figure 2: Phase mode.
(left; in-phase mode, right; anti-phase mode)

Data Analysis

Results

In order to assess the stability of the tapping movement, we
had previously analyzed the average number of phase
transitions and average time-to-transition (Kodama and
Furuyama, 2011). These indices, however, revealed only the
total stability across a trial, i.e., how many times or when a
phase transition occurred. In the present study, besides these
two indices, we conducted a quantitative analysis of relative
phase through a trial, to assess how progressively and how
much fluctuation of movement increased or decreased.
Relative phase is considered as an order parameter or, in
other words, a collective variable, which represents the
stability of a system. Thus, the phase transition should be
described as a change in the relative phase from the
perspective of the dynamical systems approach. In the
present study, to assess the effect of frequency on
performance, the relative phase was calculated and the
standard deviation of the relative phase was obtained with
respect to six 5-sec intervals.

Average number of phase transitions
Figure 3 shows the average number of phase transitions as a
function of the intra-/inter-personal condition and phase
modes. In the intra-personal condition, no transition was
observed in the in-phase or anti-phase mode conditions; that
is, there was no difference in the average number of phase
transitions between two phase modes. In the inter-personal
condition, no transition was observed in the in-phase mode
condition, but it occurred an average of 2.5 times in the antiphase one; that is, the transition occurred more often in the
anti-phase mode than in the in-phase mode. In the antiphase mode condition, transitions occurred more often in the
inter-personal system than in the intra-personal condition.

Average number of phase transitions To measure the
stability of movement in terms of temporally global stability,
the average number of phase transitions was obtained as
follows. When the right and left index fingers tapped
together within a time window of 67 msec, derived from the
video camera’s frame rate, the tapping was categorized as
being in the in-phase mode. When the time interval between
one finger’s peak of flexion (tap) and the other finger’s peak
of extension was within a time window of 67 msec, the tap
was considered to be in the anti-phase mode. We considered
that a phase transition would take place only if the taps in
the opposite phase mode occurred at least five times in a
row. The average number of phase transitions was obtained
by counting the number of phase transitions in each of the
phase mode conditions for each participant and each pair of
participants.
Average time-to-transition We calculated the average
time-to-transition in order to measure the temporally global
stability, following a previous study’s method (Riek and
Wooley, 2005). The time-to-transition of a trial in which a
phase transition occurred was defined as the interval from
the start of the trial to the first tap in the opposite phase
mode. The time-to-transition of a trial in which no transition
occurred was defined as 30 s.
Relative Phase Analysis Besides two temporally global
indices, we also calculated the relative phase between taps
using standard procedures (e.g., Carson, 1995), in order to
measure the temporally local stability of movement. To
assess the effect of frequency on performance, each trial
was separated into six equal time intervals of 5 s each (Riek
and Wooley, 2005). The standard deviation of relative
phase (SD ) was calculated in each time interval. SD 
reflects the stability of performance.

Figure 3: Average number of phase transitions.

Time-to-transition
Figure 4 plots time-to-transition as a function of the intra/inter-personal condition and phase modes. In the intrapersonal condition, the time-to-transition was 30 sec in both
modes; that is, the time-to-transition between the two modes
had no difference. In the inter-personal condition, the timeto-transition was on average 29.9 s in the in-phase mode
and 26.7 s in the anti-phase one; that is, it was shorter in the
anti-phase mode than in the in-phase one. In the anti-phase
mode condition, the time-to-transition was revealed to be
shorter in the inter-personal system than in the intrapersonal one.

1812

The simple main effect test for the intra-/inter-personal ×
phase mode interaction revealed that there was no
significant difference in SD between in-phase mode and
anti-phase mode in the intra-personal condition
(F=(1,9)=2.107, N.S.)

Discussion
Intra-personal condition

Figure 4: Average time-to-transition.

Figure 5: SD of relative phase.

SD 
Figure 5 shows the standard deviation of the relative phase
as a function of elapsed time of the trial (grouped into six
five-second duration), equivalent to the frequency of
movement. A three-way ANOVA (intra-/inter-personal
condition (2) x phase mode (2) x frequency (6)) conducted
on the SD  confirmed the main effect of the intra-/interpersonal condition (F(1,9)=48.186, p<.001), phase mode
(F(1,9)=34.097, p<.001), and frequency (F(1,9)=100.841,
p<.001). It also revealed significant interactions: intra/inter-personal × phase mode (F=(1,9)=14.338, p<.005),
intra-/inter-personal × frequency (F=(1,9)=16.996, p<.001),
phase mode × frequency (F=(1,9)=19.863, p<.001), and
intra-/inter-personal × phase mode × frequency
(F=(1,9)=28.746, p<.001).

In the intra-personal condition, neither the average number
of phase transitions, average time-to-transition nor SD 
differed between the in-phase and anti-phase modes. This
result did not agree with the prediction of the HKB model
(Haken et al., 1985) that the stability of movement is higher
in the in-phase mode than in the anti-phase one. It is
possible that the range of the metronome frequency did not
cover the critical frequency. But this is not the only
possibility that contributed the result. We need to consider
the contribution of 1) haptic feedback and 2) dynamical
relation between inter-limb coordination systems and
posture. On the basis of these two possibilities, we suggest
two hypotheses to explain why such an unexpected result
was obtained.
The first hypothesis concerns perceptual information (e.g.,
haptic information). Unlike the inter-limb coordination task
that many previous studies conducted, e.g., wiggling fingers
or swinging pendulums and legs, the participants in this
study were required to tap on the surface of a desk, so haptic
information was available at the time of the tapping. Kelso
et al. (2001) reported that haptic information can stabilize
finger extension-and-flexion movement; therefore, we
suppose that this kind of haptic information may help to
stabilize the anti-phase mode tapping movement.
The second hypothesis is that the posture may stabilize
the finger tapping movement. In the tapping task,
participants could support their postures by touching a desk,
and cancel their body sway each time they tapped, so both
the posture and limb movement might be less affected by
each fluctuation. On the other hand, in the wiggling task,
they could not cancel the body sway caused by the limb
extension-and-flexion movement, and the instability of the
posture might cause the phase transition in the anti-phase
movement.

Inter-personal condition
In the inter-personal condition, all indices of the average
number of phase transitions, average time-to-transition, and
SD  showed that the stability of movement was higher in
the in-phase mode than in the anti-phase one. This result
was in agreement with the results of the previous study
(Schmidt et al., 1998); that is, visual information might
involve organization and stabilization of coordinated finger
tapping movements. Moreover, as in the previous study
(Schmidt et al., 1998), one participant in the inter-personal

1813

tapping experiment can always perceive the metronome
beats as auditory information; that is, “on the beat” situation.
On the other hand, the other participant must always tap at
the midpoint between the metronome beats; that is “off the
beat”. The possibility still remains that the “off the beat”
participant might couple with not visual information, i.e.,
the partner’s finger’s motion, but rather auditory
information, i.e., the metronome beats. Further experiments
have to be done in order to reveal which kind of perceptual
information (e.g., visual or auditory) is involved in
organization and stabilization of the inter-personal
coordination systems.

personal coordination in a pendulum-swinging experiment,
the stability of the intra-personal coordination patterns did
not affect the emergence of inter-personal coordination, and
the emergence of inter-personal coordination did not affect
the stability of the intra-personal coordination patterns
(Coey et al., 2011). The present study did not clarify
whether or not the stability of the intra-personal
coordination patterns and the emergence of inter-personal
coordination influence each other in the finger-tapping task.
In the future, we should evaluate the possibility of such
influences by means of analyzing the stabilities of both
intra-personal and inter-personal systems.

Future direction

Conclusions

Recently, some researchers have referred to social
coordination or joint-action in the inter-personal
coordination paradigm from the cognitive perspective and
the behavioral dynamics perspective (Schmidt et al., 2010).
The cognitive perspective supposes there is a common
coding of perception and action; that is, the same
representations are used to perceive and perform an action.
Additional evidence for such a common coding comes from
discovery of mirror neurons in monkeys (Iacoboni et al.,
1999), and mirror system in humans (Calvo-Merino et al.,
2005). Although such mirror/common coding systems might
be important for forming simple inter-personal coordination
or imitating another’s behavioral patterns, it is difficult to
explain how such a coordination or synchronization occurs
in time. Even if perception and action coding occurs in
mirror systems in the brain, we cannot share those
representations directly, because the central nervous systems
are not connected to each other. Therefore, we suppose that
not only cognitive approaches based on neuroscience but
also behavioral dynamics perspectives inspired by the
dynamical systems approach are needed to reveal the
coordination mechanisms in inter-personal systems. To do
this, it will be important to identify which kind of perceptual
information is involved in organization and stabilization of
inter-personal coordinated movement. Recently, Ulzen et al.
(2010) tried to apply the HKB model to inter-personal
coordination during a treadmill walking task and confirmed
that the dynamical model for rhythmic inter-limb
coordination does not readily apply, at least not generically
or robustly, to inter-personal coordination when people are
walking side-by-side on a treadmill. These results suggested
the possibility that the HKB model does not necessarily
apply to every system.
As important as identifying the perceptual information
available in the inter-personal system, it is also important to
compare the intra-personal and inter-personal coordination
systems. Coey et al. (2011) attempted to compare these two
systems and evaluate the relationship between the stability
of intra-personal coordination and the emergence of
spontaneous inter-personal coordination. However, against
their hypothesis that the stability of the intra-personal
coordination patterns would affect the emergence of inter-

The present study investigated the differences between
intra- and inter-personal systems in terms of the perceptual
effect on the stability of inter-limb coordination in a fingertapping experiment. A between-subjects factor (intra-/interpersonal system) and a within-subject factor (phase mode)
were investigated. Standard deviation of relative phase
revealed that the stability of the tapping movement differed
for each factor and significant interactions among these
factors. The stable pattern of the intra-personal system was
different from that of the inter-personal system.
These findings require us to reconsider the perceptual
effect on inter-limb coordination and its theoretical model.
In order to classify complicated factors (e.g., the effect of
haptic information on anti-phase tapping movement in the
intra-personal system), we should conduct further
experiments in the future.

References
Calvo-Merino, B., Glaser, D., Grezes, J., Passingham, R., &
Haggard, P. (2005). Action observation and acquired
motor skills: An fMRI study with expert dancers.
Cerebral Cortex, 15, 1243–1249.
Carson, R. (1995). The dynamics of isometric bimanual
coordination. Experimental Brain Research, 105, 465–
476.
Coey, C., Varlet, M., Schmidt, R., & Richardson, M. (2011).
Effects of movement stability and congruency on the
emergence of spontaneous interpersonal coordination.
Experimental Brain Research, 211, 483–493.
Haken, H., Kelso, J., & Bunz, H. (1985). A theoretical
model of phase transitions in human hand movements.
Biological Cybernetics, 51, 347-356.
Iacoboni, M., Woods, R., Brass, M., Bekkering, H.,
Mazziotta, J., & Rizzolatti, G. (1999). Cortical
mechanisms of human imitation. Science, 286, 2526–
2528.
Kelso, J. (1984). Phase transitions and critical behavior in
human bimanual coordination. American Journal of
Physiology – Regulatory, 15, R1000-R1004.

1814

Kelso, J., Fink, P., DeLaplain, C., & Carson, R. (2001).
Haptic
information
stabilizes
and
destabilizes
coordination dynamic. Proceedings of The Royal Society
of London, 268, 1207-1213.
Kodama, K., & Furuyama, N. (2010). The effect of auditory
information on the stability of interpersonal tapping
movement. Proceedings of the 12th SICE SI2011 Annual
Conference (pp.1294-1297). Sendai, JP: Tohoku
University.
Kodama, K., & Furuyama, N. (2011). Comparing intra- and
inter-personal coordination systems: perceptual effect on
stability of finger tapping movement. Proceedings of the
2011 IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System
Integration, E7-5. Kyoto, JP: Kyoto University.
Mechsner, F., Kerzel, D., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2001).
Perceptual basis of bimanual coordination. Nature, 414,
69-73.
Riek, S., & Woolley, D. (2005). Hierarchical organisation of
neuro-anatomical constraints in interlimb coordination.
Human Movement Science, 24, 5-6, 798-814.
Schmidt, R., Bienvenu, M., Fitzpatrick, P., & Amazeen, P.
(1998). A comparison of intra-and interpersonal interlimb
coordination: Coordination breakdowns and coupling
strength. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 24, 3, 884-900.
Schmidt, R., Carello, C., & Turvey, M. (1990). Phase
transitions and critical fluctuations in the visual
coordination of rhythmic movements between people.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 16, 2, 227-247.
Schmidt, R., Fitzpatrick, P., Caron, R., & Mergeche, J.
(2010). Understanding social motor coordination. Human
Movement Science, 5, 834-45.
Takenaka, T., & Ueda, K. (2003). Cognitive psychological
approach to the temporal co-creation problem between
self and others. Proceedings of the 13th Japan Society of
Mechanical Engineers Annual Conference, 13, 17-18.
Van Ulzen, N., Lamoth, C., Daffertshofer, A., Semin, G., &
Beek, P. (2010). Stability and variability of acoustically
specified coordination patterns while walking side-byside on a treadmill: Does the seagull effect hold?
Neuroscience Letters, 474, 79-83.

1815

