UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do I know that you know what you know? Modeling testimony in causal inference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/87c2w0mk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Buchsbaum, Daphna
Bridgers, Sophie
Whalen, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do I know that you know what you know? Modeling testimony in causal inference
Daphna Buchsbaum1 , Sophie Bridgers1 , Andrew Whalen
Elizabeth Seiver, Thomas L. Griffiths, Alison Gopnik
{daphnab, sbridgers, awhalen,seiver,tom griffiths, gopnik}@berkeley.edu
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract

but has not examined in detail how we make inferences
about their credibility based on their causal statements. Here,
we explore how people combine information from causal
observations and testimony, both to make causal judgments
and to evaluate the informants themselves.
Recently, there has been a growing literature on how people, especially children, evaluate informants (e.g., Borckardt,
Sprohge, & Nash, 2003; Corriveau, Meints, & Harris, 2009;
Koenig & Harris, 2005), including how children integrate
their prior knowledge with informant testimony (e.g., Jaswal,
2010; Jaswal & Markman, 2007). Integrating testimony with
our observations is particularly challenging because multiple
aspects of informants and their testimony contribute to the
value of the information they provide, and to how much they
should be trusted in the future. These aspects include the
level of certainty informants express, their past accuracy,
and their self-knowledge – how well their certainty reflects
their true knowledge (for an exploration of a similar idea
in the context of eye-witness testimony see Tenney, Small,
Kondrad, Jaswal, & Spellman, 2011). The difficulty of combining information from what someone says and what we see
is especially apparent when an informant’s statements appear
to be incorrect. It could be that the informant is actually right,
and our own observations were inaccurate. Alternatively, the
informant may be a knowledgeable person who has simply
misspoken, or she could truly be clueless. Finally, an informant could express certainty or uncertainty about her knowledge, shedding a different light on her inaccuracy. Deciding
whether an informant has erred, and if so, why, and whether
to trust her in the future is therefore a complex problem.
Bayesian modeling provides a mechanism for explicitly
representing the contributions of different sources of information to judgments about causal structure and informant credibility. Previous work has used such models to explore the role
of social observations in causal learning (e.g., Goodman et al.,
2009), and to evaluate the role of informant knowledgeability
and helpfulness (Shafto, Eaves, Navarro, & Perfors, in press).
Here, we present a model that helps us evaluate the roles of
observed cause and effect patterns, as well as an informant’s
expressed certainty, current and past accuracy, and awareness
of her own knowledge level, when making a causal inference.
In this paper, we first review a study exploring how
preschoolers combine information from informant testimony with conflicting information from observed causal
data. Next, we introduce a computational model of causal
inference from testimony that explicitly represents the roles
of informant certainty, accuracy, and self-knowledge, as
well as direct causal observations, allowing us to assess the

We rely on both our own observations and on others’ testimony
when making causal inferences. To integrate these sources
of information we must consider an informant’s statements
about the world, her expressed level of certainty, her previous
accuracy, and perhaps her apparent self-knowledge – how
accurately she conveys her own certainty. It can be difficult
to tease apart the contributions of all these variables simply by
observing people’s causal judgments. We present a computational account of how these different cues contribute to a rational causal inference, and two experiments looking at adults’
inferences from causal demonstrations and informant testimony, focusing on cases where these sources conflict. We find
that adults are able to combine social information with their
own observations, and are sensitive to the reliability of each.
Adults are also sensitive to the accuracy, certainty, and selfknowledge of the informant, a result confirmed by comparing
predictions from models with and without these variables.

Introduction
People face challenging causal learning problems on a daily
basis. They have a variety of information they can use to help
solve these problems, including directly observed patterns of
cause and effect, and social data such as others’ statements
about existing causal relationships. Having multiple sources
available should enhance our causal reasoning, but integration can be difficult, especially when sources disagree. If an
informant’s causal statements contradict our causal observations, which source should we trust? Informants can be ignorant, mistaken, even deceptive, so one might think we should
always trust what we see over what we hear. Yet the world is
unpredictable: Observing a phenomenon once does not mean
we will reliably observe it again. How do we evaluate these
sources and determine which to rely on? We attempt to better
understand how people combine different sources of information when making causal inferences, how they integrate
their own observations with conflicting testimony, and how
this affects their future evaluation of the social informant.
Informant testimony is a key type of social information
that guides learning across domains, but the role of testimony in causal learning has not been extensively explored.
Research on how we incorporate information from the social
context into our causal judgments has shown that both
children and adults are skilled causal learners, and can use
information from social demonstration to inform their causal
inferences (e.g., Kushnir, Wellman, & Gelman, 2008; Sobel
& Sommerville, 2009; McGuigan, Makinson, & Whiten,
2011). This work has investigated how we learn by observing
other people (e.g., Goodman, Baker, & Tenenbaum, 2009;
Buchsbaum, Gopnik, Griffiths, & Shafto, 2011), and by observing different types of people (e.g., Kushnir et al., 2008),
1 These

authors contributed equally to this work.

156

contributions of each to a rational causal inference. We then
present a series of adult experiments motivated by both the
model and the child experiments. Finally, we conclude by
discussing how predictions by models including some or all
of these variables provide us with further insight into our
ability to learn from multiple sources, and the information
we use to determine when to trust what other people say.

accuracy. People may also have pre-existing assumptions
about how knowledgeable others tend to be, and how often
others make mistakes in their assertions. Finally, there is
some evidence that at least adults are sensitive to others’
self-knowledge (Tenney et al., 2011).
This social information also interacts with the individual’s
own causal observations. It can therefore be difficult to
determine which of these variables contribute to people’s
resulting causal inferences. We present an explicit model
of how these variables could interact. We then evaluate
the roles of these different variables by comparing people’s
causal judgments to those that would be normative under our
model, as well as under simpler models that do not explicitly
represent the informant’s knowledge and self-knowledge.
Our model is defined in terms of observed variables representing causal outcomes, statements by an informant about
the causal strengths of potential causes, and about her level
of certainty about her causal knowledge. The model also has
hidden variables representing the actual causal strengths of
the potential causes, the informant’s general level of knowledgeability, her specific knowledge of the individual causes,
and her level of self-knowledge – how well she knows what
she knows. We capture the complex relationships among
these variables in a graphical model (see Figure 1).
In this model, we assume that all the variables are binary
valued, as they were presented to children in the Bridgers et
al. (2011) experiments. Each cause c has a causal strength
wc , such that p(ec = 1 | c, wc ) = wc for effects ec,i where
p(wc = ρ) = γ and p(wc = 1−ρ) = 1−γ. Here, ρ is some relatively high probability of effect, corresponding to the causal
strength “almost always makes it go” in Bridgers et al. (2011),
with 1 − ρ corresponding to “almost never makes it go.”
The informant’s prediction rc about the causal strengths of
each cause depends on the true causal strength wc , and on her
knowledge of the cause kc . Here, we assume that kc ∈ {0, 1},
corresponding to two possible states of knowledge of a cause:
guessing and knowing. If kc = 1 (the informant knows about
the causal strength of c) then p(rc = wc | kc = 1, wc ) = 1 − ε,
meaning an informant with knowledge of cause c will predict
the true value of wc with probability 1 − ε, but with small error probability ε will report the incorrect value. On the other
hand, if kc = 0 and the informant is guessing about cause c,
then p(rc = wc | kc = 0, wc ) = p(rc = wc | kc = 0) = 0.5, that
is, the informant will choose uniformly at random between
the two possible causal strengths.
We assume that the probability of the informant knowing
about a particular cause depends on the informant’s global
knowledgeability g ∈ {0, 1}, with the informant having probability κ of being globally knowledgeable. If g = 1 then the
informant is globally knowledgeable and p(kc = 0 | g = 1) =
1−τ and p(kc = 1 | g = 1) = τ, that is, the informant is knowledgeable about cause c with some relatively high probability
τ. Conversely, if g = 0 and the informant is globally ignorant
then p(kc = 0 | g = 0) = τ and p(kc = 0 | g = 0) = 1 − τ.
Finally, we need to represent the informant’s statement

Children’s Causal Inferences from Testimony
Bridgers, Buchsbaum, Seiver, Gopnik, and Griffiths (2011)
presented preschoolers with either an informant who claimed
to know which of two blocks was better at activating a
machine or an informant who claimed to be guessing,
and with observed statistical data that contradicted the
informant’s claim. The study investigated which source of
information (the person or the data) children would rely
on, as well as how likely children would be to trust the
informant in a new situation. Though both informants made
incorrect predictions, the naı̈ve informant demonstrated more
self-knowledge because she knew she did not know, while
the knowledgeable informant was unaware she was mistaken.
Results from this study imply that preschoolers are sensitive to the certainty and accuracy of an informant – they were
more likely to trust the informant’s endorsement over the data
when the informant was knowledgeable than when she was
naı̈ve, and were more likely to trust the knowledgeable informant before her inaccurate statements than afterwards. However, these results also suggest that children may not be as
sensitive to an informant’s level of self-knowledge since children were as likely to trust the knowledgeable informant (who
was mistaken in her certainty) as they were to trust the naı̈ve
informant (who was correctly uncertain) in a new situation.
Intuitively, an informant’s certainty, past accuracy, and
self-knowledge should all be useful indicators of her credibility. However, it is challenging to infer the influence of each
of these variables and of the causal data simply by examining
people’s resulting inferences. For example, does children’s
failure to differentiate between the informants in Bridgers
et al. (2011) mean they lack a concept of self-knowledge
altogether or that they weigh other cues to reliability more
heavily? Given children’s performance, would adults trust
a previously inaccurate but uncertain informant over one
who was certain and inaccurate, or would they also use
a simpler strategy, for instance mistrusting anyone who
was previously incorrect? A computational model of how
people combine information from both observed data and an
informant to determine the likelihood of a causal relationship
could help clarify the factors impacting people’s resolution
of the conflict, and their decision of whether or not to trust
the informant in the future.

Modeling Causal Inference From Testimony
People may take into account a variety of social information
when making causal inferences from testimony. As noted
earlier, there is evidence that both children and adults are
sensitive to an informant’s expressed certainty and previous

157

g

η
τ

qc

Methods
ρ

Participants A total of 204 participants were recruited:
100 were UC Berkeley undergraduates who received course
credit and 104 were Mechanical Turk workers who were
compensated $0.50. Participants were randomly assigned
to one of two experimental groups: the Knowledgeable
condition (n = 103) or the Naı̈ve condition (n = 101).

ε

kc

s

δ

κ

wc

rc

Stimuli The experiment was a web-administered survey
involving text and pictures. An image of a brown-haired
woman was the informant, and an image of a blonde woman
was her assistant. The machine was an image of a green box
with a black top. The activated machine had a yellow top and
musical notes were placed around it. The blocks were a green
rectangle, a pink disk, an orange cube, and a blue cylinder.

ec,i
Nc
C

Figure 1: Causal testimony graphical model
about her knowledge of cause c. The informant’s statement
qc depends on her knowledge kc , and her level of selfknowledge s. We assume that s ∈ {0, 1}, corresponding to
two possible states of self-knowledge: accurate and inaccurate. If s = 1 (the informant has accurate self-knowledge)
then p (qc = kc | s = 1, kc ) = 1 − δ, meaning the informant
will accurately report her level of knowledge kc with probability 1 − δ, but with small error probability δ will report her
level of knowledge inaccurately.
If s = 0 and the informant has inaccurate self-knowledge
then p(qc = kc | s = 0, kc ) = p(qc = kc | s = 0) = 0.5, that is,
the informant will choose uniformly at random when stating
her knowledge of the causal system. We assume that any
given informant has probability η of having accurate selfknowledge, and 1 − η of having inaccurate self-knowledge.
We assume p(choose c) ∝ p(effect | c, obs), meaning
people choose causes in proportion to how likely they think
they are to produce the effect, given their observations
(including the informant’s statements). This is computable
from the model and the dependencies defined in our graphical
model (see Figure 1). To evaluate our model, we conducted
a series of experiments with adults, exploring whether they
can successfully use an informant’s certainty, accuracy, and
self-knowledge when making causal inferences.

Procedure First, a woman named Ann (the informant)
introduced a machine that could light up and play music
when certain blocks were placed on top. She then introduced
two different blocks and explained that one block almost
always activated the machine (the endorsed block), while
the other block almost never did (the unendorsed block). In
the Knowledgeable condition, the informant claimed that she
really knew which block was better at activating the machine,
while in the Naı̈ve condition, the informant claimed that she
was just guessing. Besides this difference, the procedure
was identical across conditions. Ann then said she needed to
leave, and her assistant Jane continued the experiment.
Jane first asked participants to rate how likely each
block would be to activate the machine on a scale from 0
(definitely will not) to 10 (definitely will) (the prior rating).
Jane demonstrated each block on the machine, providing
probabilistic evidence that contradicted Ann’s claim: the
endorsed block only activated the machine 2/6 times, while
the unendorsed block activated it 2/3 times.1 Participants
were then again asked to rate how likely each block would
be to activate the machine (the causal rating).
Finally, Ann returned with two new blocks, and in both
conditions, claimed she knew that one block almost always
activated the machine and that the other almost never did.
Ann then left once more, and Jane asked the participants
to rate how likely they thought these new blocks were to
activate the machine (the generalization rating).

Experiment 1: Adult Inferences from Testimony
We investigate how adults resolve a conflict between an
informant’s explanation of how a causal system works and
actual demonstrations of that system, closely following the
procedure of Bridgers et al. (2011). We hypothesized that
like preschoolers, adults would be sensitive to the certainty
and accuracy of the informant, and be more likely to trust
an informant who claimed to be knowledgeable over one
who claimed to be naı̈ve, and less likely to trust a previously
inaccurate informant. However, unlike children, we predicted that adults would be sensitive to an informant’s level
of self-knowledge, and would be more likely to extend their
trust to a previously incorrect informant who had claimed
ignorance than a previously incorrect informant who had
claimed knowledgeability.

Results and Discussion
For a summary of the results see Table 1. We analyzed causal
efficacy ratings with a 2 × 3 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA,
with endorsement (endorsed or unendorsed), and rating phase
(prior, causal, generalization) as the within subject variables,
and knowledge condition (Knowledgeable or Naı̈ve) as
the between subjects variable. There was a main effect of
endorsement – adults rated the endorsed block more highly
across phases and conditions (F(1, 1206) = 77.69, MSE =
372.1, p < 0.001). There was also an effect of endorsement
1 This pattern of probabilistic data is the same as was used in
Experiment 3 of Kushnir and Gopnik (2007).

158

Table 1: Mean ratings and standard errors for Experiment 1
Mean Rating (std err)
Endorsed Unendorsed
Prior Naı̈ve
6.46 (.24)
4.16 (.25)
Prior Knowledgeable
8.22 (.19)
1.94 (.19)
Causal Naı̈ve
4.09 (.18)
6.29 (.20)
Causal Knowledgeable 4.66 (.22)
5.18 (.23)
Gen Naı̈ve
7.20 (.25)
3.27 (.25)
Gen Knowledgeable
7.45 (.18)
2.71 (.20)

× condition (F(1, 1206) = 73.19, MSE = 350.5, p < 0.001),
with the endorsed block rated higher in the Knowledgeable
condition across phases, and of endorsement × phase (F(2,
1206) = 62.18, MSE = 297.8, p < 0.001), with the rating of
the endorsed block decreasing and of the unendorsed block
increasing in the causal phase. Finally, there was a significant
three-way interaction of endorsement × phase × condition
(F(2, 1206) = 13.89, MSE = 66.5, p < 0.001), indicating
that the degree to which the ratings change between phases
varied by the claimed knowledge level of the informant and
whether the block was endorsed.
We explored the particulars of these findings via planned
t-tests. In the prior phase of both conditions, adults were
more likely to give the endorsed block a higher rating
(paired t-tests. Knowledgeable: t(102) = 17.76, p < 0.001.
Naı̈ve: t(100) = 5.02, p < 0.001) though participants in the
Knowledgeable condition gave the endorsed block a higher
rating than those in the Naı̈ve condition (two sample t-test,
t(202) = 5.72,p < 0.001). These results suggest that before
seeing any data, adults in both conditions were likely to
trust the informant’s testimony, but were also sensitive to the
certainty expressed by the informant.
In the causal phase, there was no difference in adults’
ratings of the endorsed and unendorsed blocks in the Knowledgeable condition (paired t-test, t(102) = 1.39, p = 0.17),
while adults in the Naı̈ve condition gave the unendorsed
block a higher rating (paired t-test, t(102) = 7.18, p < 0.001).
Adults in the Knowledgeable condition gave the endorsed
block a higher rating than adults in the Naı̈ve condition
(two sample t-test, t(202) = 2.00, p < 0.05) and vice versa
for the unendorsed block (two sample t-test, t(202) = 3.62,
p < 0.001). The fact that in the causal phase adults thought
the two blocks had approximately equal causal efficacy in
the Knowledgeable condition but rated the unendorsed block
more highly in the Naı̈ve condition suggests that participants
were responding to both the observed statistical data and the
claimed knowledge level of the informant.
Finally, in the generalization phase, adults in both conditions gave the endorsed block higher ratings (paired t-tests.
Knowledgeable: t(102) = 13.21, p < 0.001. Naı̈ve: t(102)
= 8.23, p < 0.001). Unlike the previous phases, there was
no difference between conditions in ratings of the endorsed
block (two sample t-test, t(202) = 0.82, p = 0.41).
We can also compare ratings in the two no-data phases –
prior and generalization – to capture how participants’ evaluation of the informant might have changed after receiving
evidence about her accuracy in the intervening causal phase.
Adults’ ratings decrease between prior and generalization
in the Knowledgeable condition (paired t-test t(102) = 3.30,
p < 0.01), while they increase in the Naı̈ve condition (paired
t-test, t(100) = 2.12, p < 0.05). This difference suggests
that adults may actually be sensitive to an informant’s selfknowledge, increasing their trust in an informant who was
incorrect but uncertain in the past over an informant who was
incorrect but certain. Our results in the generalization phase

Table 2: Mean ratings and standard errors for Experiment 2
Mean Rating (std err)
Endorsed Unendorsed
Prior Naı̈ve
6.58 (.31)
3.68 (.32)
Prior Knowledgeable
8.61 (.18)
1.47 (.18)
Causal Naı̈ve
1.15 (.35)
9.45 (.11)
Causal Knowledgeable 2.82 (.54)
8.0 (.45)
Gen Naı̈ve
7.0 (.44)
3.47 (.47)
Gen Knowledgeable
5.88 (.52)
4.15 (.51)

imply that adults are willing to trust both informants more
or less equally regardless of their level of self-knowledge.
However, due to the stochastic nature of the data, participants
may have made excuses for the discrepancy between the data
and the knowledgeable informant’s endorsement, possibly
appealing to hidden causes such as a faulty machine part
that would explain away the conflict. In Experiment 2, we
contrasted an informant’s testimony with deterministic data
to see if increasing the apparent inaccuracy of the informant
would reveal a use of informant self-knowledge.

Experiment 2: Deterministic Data
We replicated Experiment 1 but with deterministic data, to
explore how changing the strength of the data might impact
adults’ inferences. We predicted that adults would weight
conflicting deterministic data more heavily than conflicting
probabilistic data, and would therefore prefer the unendorsed
block more often in the causal phase. We also predicted that
the stronger data would exaggerate the knowledgeable informant’s lack of self-knowledge, leading adults to consider
the naı̈ve informant’s testimony as more reliable than the
knowledgeable informant’s in the generalization phase.

Method
Participants A total of 74 participants recruited from
Mechanical Turk were compensated $0.50 and randomly
assigned to the Knowledgeable condition (n = 34) or the
Naı̈ve condition (n = 40).
Stimuli Stimuli were identical to those in Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment
1 except that the endorsed block activated the machine 0/6
times, while the unendorsed block activated it 6/6 times.

Results and Discussion
We performed the same analyses for Experiment 2 as we did
for Experiment 1. Due to limited space, we discuss only the
most relevant results here. Results are summarized in Table 2.

159

Full Model

Expt 1

Knowledgeable
Naive

Expt 2

Probability of Endorsed Block

Adult Performance

Adults in both conditions of Experiment 2 gave lower
ratings to the endorsed block in the causal phase as compared
to Experiment 1 (two sample t-tests. Knowledgeable: t(135)
= 3.77, p < 0.001. Naı̈ve: t(139) = 7.90, p < 0.001).
Adults thus were sensitive to the increased strength of the
data in the second experiment, and were less likely to trust
the knowledgeable informant’s claim over the data than
participants who observed probabilistic data.
In the generalization phase of Experiment 2, adults rated
the endorsed block in the Naı̈ve condition as more causally
efficacious than in the Knowledgeable condition, though this
effect was only marginal (t(72) = 1.69, p < 0.10). Thus,
adults in the Knowledgeable condition were less inclined to
trust the informant’s endorsement than adults in the Naı̈ve
condition. This finding suggests that differences in selfknowledge do impact adults’ evaluations of informants since
adults appeared to place more confidence in the statement of
the person whose prior certainty reflected their accuracy.
Comparing across experiments, we found that adults in the
Knowledgeable condition of Experiment 1 gave the endorsed
block a higher generalization rating than those in Experiment
2 (two sample t-test. t(135) = 3.77, p < 0.001). On the
other hand, there was no difference in adults’ generalization
ratings of the endorsed block in the Naı̈ve condition (two
sample t-test. t(135) = 0.41, p = 0.68) across experiments.
As predicted, increasing the strength of the conflicting
data magnified the knowledgeable informant’s inaccuracy.
However, since the naı̈ve informant claimed ignorance, this
change did not affect how adults evaluated future information
from this informant. In general, trust in the knowledgeable
informant decreased with increasingly conflicting data (i.e.
from situations of no conflict (prior phases) to situations of
prior conflicting data (generalization phases) to situations of
directly conflicting data (causal phases)).
Finally, comparing between phases of Experiment 2, in
the Knowledgeable condition, adults’ ratings of the endorsed
block decrease between prior and generalization phases
(paired t-test, t(33) = 4.99, p < 0.001). Thus, adults are
likely to initially trust the endorsement of an informant,
whereas they are less likely to extend that trust to a new
situation (the generalization phase) after observing evidence
that contradicts the informant’s prior claim. Conversely, in
the Naı̈ve condition there was no difference between adults’
prior and generalization phase ratings (paired t-test, t(39) =
0.79, p < 0.43). Thus, adults’ evaluation of the credibility
of the naı̈ve informant does not appear to have changed
after observing the conflicting data. This further suggests
adults are sensitive to self-knowledge when determining
the usefulness of an informant’s statement: They found a
previously uncertain, inaccurate informant more trustworthy
than a previously certain, inaccurate one.
One alternative account is that adults consider the knowledgeable informant to be deceptive rather than having poor
self-knowledge. However, if adults suspect the knowledgeable informant is deceiving them by saying the opposite

$"

$"

!#,"

!#,"

!#+"

!#+"

!#*"

!#*"

!#)"

!#)"

Lesioned Model
!#,"
!#+"
!#*"
!#)"
!#("

!#("

!#("

!#'"

!#'"

!#'"

!#&"

!#&"

!#&"

!#%"

!#%"

!#%"

!#$"

!#$"

!"

!#$"

!"

!"

$"

$"

!#,"

!#,"

!#,"

!#+"

!#+"

!#+"

!#*"

!#*"

!#)"

!#)"

!#*"
!#)"
!#("

!#("

!#("

!#'"

!#'"

!#&"

!#&"

!#'"

!#%"

!#&"
!#%"

!#%"

!#$"

!#$"

!#$"

!"

!"

Prior Causal Gen

!"

Prior Causal Gen

Prior Causal Gen

Figure 2: Adult performance vs model predictions
of what she knows, then we would expect them to go
against her endorsement in the generalization phase, rating
the unendorsed block as more causally efficacious than
the endorsed block. However, while adults’ ratings of the
endorsed block decrease in the generalization phase, they
are still greater than their ratings of the unendorsed block,
implying that adults view this informant as less reliable
rather than intentionally dishonest.

Modeling People’s Inferences
We can use our model to further test whether an informant’s
expressed certainty, accuracy, and apparent self-knowledge
inform adults’ causal judgments. We first evaluate the
model by fitting it to data from Experiment 1. In order to
be consistent with Bridgers et al. (2011), where children
were asked to choose the better block, we assumed that for
each set of ratings adults would choose the block they had
rated as most likely to be effective. We then optimized the
log likelihood of these choices under the model. The best
fitting model corresponded to model parameters of ρ = 0.91,
γ = 0.40, ε = 0.01, δ = 0.1, τ = 0.91, κ = 0.74 and η = 0.93,
(Pearson’s r=0.999, p < 0.001). However, a reasonable
range of values around these settings also fit the data well.
Of particular note are the values of κ and η, corresponding to
a belief that most people have good general knowledge, but
a substantial minority are relatively clueless, and that almost
everyone is aware of their own knowledge level, but a small
number of people tend to inaccurately assess what they know.
We tested the generalization of these model parameters by
looking at how well they predict adult performance in Experiment 2. The parameters fit to the Experiment 1 data also
provide a good fit to the results of Experiment 2 (Pearson’s
r=0.9664, p < 0.001). This suggests that our model is accurately capturing human performance, so we can use it to tease
apart the contributing variables to adult causal inferences.
We then conducted a nested model comparison, examining
whether including the informant’s global knowledgeability
and their self-knowledge adds explanatory value to the
model, by creating a series of “lesioned” models, lacking
global knowledge g and self knowledge s. This approach
controls for the additional free parameters in the more
complex model. Removing global knowledge corresponds
to a model that assumes that all informants have the same
probability of knowing about all causes, and that an in-

160

formant knowing about one cause does not make her any
more likely to know about others. Removing self-knowledge
corresponds to a model where informants’ statements of
certainty always reflect their true knowledge – if they say
they know something, then they must really know it.
Compared to a model lacking both global knowledge and
self-knowledge variables, adding global knowledge to the
model resulted in a marginally significant (χ2 (1) = 3.29, p =
.07) improvement in model fit. Adding self-knowledge on its
own did not improve model performance (χ2 (1) = 0.392, p =
0.53), however adding both self-knowledge and global
knowledge variables significantly improved model fit over
having only global knowledge (χ2 (1) = 22.04, p < 0.001), or
having neither (χ2 (1) = 25.30, p < 0.001) (see Figure 2).
Qualitatively, the addition of global knowledge and
self-knowledge only modestly improves the model fit to
Experiment 1, their biggest effect is on the fit to Experiment
2. Of particular interest in Experiment 1, the full model and
the “lesioned” model (without both variables) appear to make
similar predictions about adults’ performance in the generalization phase, suggesting that contrary to our initial intuitions,
even with a concept of self-knowledge it may still be rational
to extend trust equally to both informants. However, these
two models make different predictions for generalization
performance in Experiment 2, with the full model more
accurately capturing adults’ inferences. This supports the interpretation that in the first experiment, participants continued
to extend trust to the knowledgeable informant not because
they lacked a concept of self-knowledge but by explaining
away the informant’s apparent incorrectness, inferring that
the ambiguous data could have been “unlucky.” However,
in Experiment 2, where the data more strongly supports
the inference that the informant was incorrect, these model
results suggest that it requires both a concept of general
knowledge (“if this person was wrong before, they’re more
likely to be wrong again”), and self-knowledge (“they said
they ‘knew’ before and they didn’t, why should I think they
know now?” vs. “they said they didn’t know, so it’s okay that
they were wrong”), in order to infer that the naı̈ve informant
is more deserving of trust in the generalization phase.
Overall, our nested model comparison demonstrates that
adults take into account the informant’s past performance
when deciding how much to weight their current testimony,
and in particular that adults are sensitive to both the apparent knowledgeability of the informant and their level of
self-knowledge.

conflicts with the data. Adults were sensitive to both the
informant’s certainty and accuracy, and to how well the informant’s certainty reflected her accuracy. These findings support our intuition that self-knowledge is a valuable cue adults
can use to determine the trustworthiness of an informant’s
testimony. The close fit of the model to adult performance,
and its ability to generalize from Experiment 1 to Experiment
2, confirms that adults are rationally integrating their direct
observations with testimony from a social informant when
making causal inferences. Our model also strongly suggests
that representing self-knowledge is necessary to making
these inferences, and that adults could not be using a simpler
strategy such as only tracking previous inaccuracy. Overall,
these results provide us with further insight into how we
learn from and evaluate the sources of information available
to us and in particular, revealing that knowing that you do
not know can be just as important as knowing that you know.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by grant number FA9550-10-1-0232 from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research,
the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, NSF Grant BCS-1023875,
and the McDonnell Foundation Causal Learning Initiative.

References
Borckardt, J., Sprohge, E., & Nash, M. (2003). Effects of the inclusion and refutation of peripheral details on eyewitness credibility.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 33(10), 2187–2197.
Bridgers, S., Buchsbaum, D., Seiver, E., Gopnik, A., & Griffiths,
T. L. (2011). Which block is better at making the machine
go?: How children balance their trust in an informant vs. the
data. Poster presented at Biennial Meeting of the Cognitive
Development Society.
Buchsbaum, D., Gopnik, A., Griffiths, T. L., & Shafto, P. (2011).
Children’s imitation of causal action sequences is influenced by
statistical and pedagogical evidence. Cognition, 120(3), 331-340.
Corriveau, K., Meints, K., & Harris, P. (2009). Early tracking
of informant accuracy and inaccuracy.
British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 27(2), 331–342.
Goodman, N. D., Baker, C. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Cause
and intent: Social reasoning in causal learning. Proceedings of
the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Jaswal, V. K. (2010). Believing what you’re told: Young children’s
trust in unexpected testimony about the physical world. Cognitive
Psychology, 61, 248-272.
Jaswal, V. K., & Markman, E. M. (2007). Looks aren’t everything:
24-month-olds’willingness to accept unexpected labels. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 8(1), 93-111.
Koenig, M., & Harris, P. (2005). The role of social cognition in
early trust. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(10), 457–459.
Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2007). Conditional probability versus
spatial contiguity in causal learning: Preschoolers use new
contingency evidence to overcome prior spatial assumptions.
Developmental Psychology, 43(1), 186-196.
Kushnir, T., Wellman, H., & Gelman, S. (2008). The role of
preschoolers’ social understanding in evaluating the informativeness of causal interventions. Cognition, 107(3), 1084–1092.
McGuigan, N., Makinson, J., & Whiten, A. (2011). From overimitation to super-copying: Adults imitate causally irrelevant
aspects of tool use with higher fidelity than young children.
British Journal of Psychology, 102, 1-18.
Shafto, P., Eaves, D., Navarro, D. J., & Perfors, . A. (in press).
Epistemic trust: Modeling children’s reasoning about others’
knowledge and intent. Developmental Science.
Sobel, D. M., & Sommerville, J. (2009). Rationales in children’s
causal learning from others’ actions. Cognitive Development,
24(1), 70–79.
Tenney, E. R., Small, J. E., Kondrad, R. L., Jaswal, V. K., &
Spellman, B. A. (2011). Accuracy, confidence, and calibration:
How young children and adults assess credibility. Developmental
Psychology, 47(4), 1065-1077.

Conclusion
We examined how people combine an informant’s statements
about a causal system with direct observations of that system,
and how this influences their evaluation of the informant’s
knowledgeability and credibility. Together, Experiments
1 and 2 suggest that adults are weighting and integrating
evidence from both observed data and the informant in their
causal inferences, and that their trust in the informant is
moderated by the degree to which the informant’s testimony

161

