UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does number interference occur during sentence processing?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6b3517zw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Suckow, Katja
Van Gompel, Roger P.G.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does number interference occur during sentence processing?
Katja Suckow (k.suckow@dundee.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, The University of Dundee
Dundee, DD1 4HN, UK

Roger P.G. van Gompel (r.p.g.vangompel@dundee.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, The University of Dundee
Dundee, DD1 4HN, UK
Abstract

that interference is not just due to similarity in the type of
noun phrase but also due to similarity of other features. Van
Dyke and Lewis (2003) described how the degree of overlap between a retrieval cue and two similar linguistic items
affects the retrieval of these items. Two items (the subject
and object noun phrase) have to be retained in memory in object relatives until they can be integrated with the verb. At
the point of integration at the verb, retrieval cues are used to
identify the target item from memory. When items in memory share retrieval cues it is difficult to identify this target.
Thus, a similarity based interference effect arises for items
with retrieval cue similarity. The account of Lewis and Vasishth (2005) predicts that a similarity based interference effect arises at the embedded verb in object relatives because
two items have to be retrieved from memory instead of only
one for subject relatives. This interference effect at the verb
should be larger when these two items share retrieval cues.

Models of interference in sentence processing claim that object relative clauses are harder to process than subject relatives
due to interference between the subject and object noun phrase.
The interference effect for object relatives at the verb should be
more pronounced when the two noun phrases retrieved from
memory are similar. To test this, two eye tracking experiments
manipulated whether the number feature of the noun phrases
(singular or plural) was either the same or different. Both experiments showed the well-known relative clause effect. However, in Experiment 1 the effect of number congruency was
in the opposite direction from that predicted by interference.
Experiment 2 showed the interaction predicted by similarity
based interference at sentence wrap-up, but because this interaction was observed later than the relative clause effect and
only occurred in Experiment 2, it suggests that retrieval interference due to cue overlap is a weak effect that might be the
result of a checking procedure in syntactically complex sentences.
Keywords: sentence processing; similarity based interference;
working memory.

Introduction
There is much evidence that object relative clauses such as (1)
are more difficult to understand than subject relative clauses
such as (2) (e.g., King & Just, 1991). It is generally believed
that this difficulty stems from limitations in working memory
(Gibson, 1998; Gordon, Hendrick, & Johnson, 2001; Lewis,
1996; King & Just, 1991).
1. The banker that the accountant helps counted the money.
2. The banker that helps the accountant counted the money.
For example, King and Just (1991) found that readers with
low working memory experienced more difficulty with object than subject relatives. More recently, Lewis (1996) and
Van Dyke and Lewis (2003) have proposed an account that
assumes that working memory demands increase when two
similar linguistic items (e.g., two noun phrases) need to be
retrieved simultaneously, slowing down sentence processing.
Lewis and Vasishth (2005) proposed an ACT-R account that
explains how the processing of subject and object relatives is
affected by the similarity of the noun phrases.
Consistent with this, Gordon, Hendrick, and Johnson
(2001) found that object relatives are easier to process when
the embedded noun phrase is a name (Joe) and the head noun
a definite noun phrase (the barber) compared to when both
are definite noun phrases.
However, Van Dyke and Lewis’s (2003) and Lewis and Vasishth’s (2005) similarity based interference account claims

For example, in object relatives like (1) the two subject and
object noun phrases (the accountant and the banker) need to
be simultaneously retrieved at the embedded verb (helps). On
the other hand, only one noun phrase (the banker) needs to
be accessed at the verb (helps) in subject relatives like (2).
The similarity based interference effect that occurs with object relatives should be particularly strong when the two noun
phrases that need to be retrieved are similar. Thus, because
both the difficulty of object relatives and the difficulty of retrieving items that share retrieval cues are effects of interference at the embedded verb, they should occur at the same
time.
Van Dyke and Lewis (2003) claim that number information
is one of the retrieval cues for identifying a target. In relative
clauses, congruency in the number feature of the subject and
object noun phrase may have a strong effect on interference,
because the subject has to agree in number with the verb: The
retrieval cues of the target item (the subject noun phrase) have
to match the number cue of the search probe (the verb). If the
object has the same number as the subject and therefore also
matches the number feature of the verb, this should result in
interference when the subject and object are integrated with
the verb. Thus, according to the retrieval cue based interference account, retrieval difficulty at the verb (e.g., helps)
in object relatives should be more pronounced when the two
noun phrases in memory share the same number than when
they do not.

2357

To test this account the current study investigated whether
object relatives are harder to process when the two noun
phrases in memory share the same number retrieval cue than
when the number retrieval cues are different.
In sum, similarity-based interference models make the following three predictions for the experiments: (1) object relatives should be harder to process than subject relatives; (2)
object relatives should be particularly hard to process when
the subject and object noun phrase have the same number; (3)
because both the relative clause and number effect predicted
in (1) and (2) are due to interference when the noun phrases
are retrieved at the verb (helps), the effects should occur simultaneously.

Experiment 1
We conducted an eye movement reading experiment that
contrasted sentences containing an embedded object relative
clause with an embedded subject relative. The two initial
noun phrases were either the same or different in number.

Participants
Experiment 1 had 40 participants. All participants were nondyslexic English native speakers and members of Dundee
University. They received course credits in exchange for their
participation. Participant treatment was in accordance with
the ethical standards. The study was approved by the ethics
committee at the University of Dundee.

Materials and Design
Table 1 shows a sample item in all conditions and the areas
of interest for the eye movement analyses. Thirty-two critical sentences were created in eight different conditions. The
experiment had a 2x2x2 design with the factors (1) relative
clause type (subject vs. object relative), (2) number congruency (subject and object noun phrases same vs. different
in number) and (3) counterbalancing of number information
(NP2 singular vs. plural). Because the number counterbalancing variable was not of theoretical interest, we collapsed
across it in the analyses.
Eight lists were created. Each list contained 32 critical
items, with four items in each of the eight conditions. One
condition of each item appeared in each list. Five participants
were randomly assigned to each list. In addition to the 32
experimental items, 85 filler sentences were presented and
yes/no comprehension questions were presented after each
sentence.

Apparatus and Procedure
The experiment was carried out using the Experiment Builder
Program from SR Research on a PC. An Eyelink 1000 Desktop Mount recorded participants eye movements at a 1000Hz
sampling rate. The experiment was controlled by the Experiment Builder software on a separate PC. DataViewer (SR research) as well as R (R 2.13.1 foundation for statistical computing) were used for data analysis.

Results
Three different eye-tracking measures were analysed for each
region. First pass duration is the duration from entering an
area of interest for the first time until leaving it into any direction. This measure does not include fixations that occurred after readers had fixated a subsequent region (i.e. the region of
interest was skipped). Regression path duration is the sum of
fixations from entering the area from the left for the first time
until the first fixation outside to the right of the region occurs.
That means that there should be no fixation on a right-bound
region before entering the region in regression path duration.
Total reading time is the sum of all fixations in an interest
area.
Figure 1 shows regression path duration and total reading
time in the different interest areas for Experiment 1. Since
there were no differences between the conditions in first pass
duration, we omit the plot for this measure here.
We conducted both analyses of variance with subjects (F1)
and items (F2) as a random variable. Relative clause type and
number congruency were treated as within subject and within
item fixed variables. In addition, subject group was a fixed
between subject variable in the by-subject analyses and item
group a between item variable in the by-item analyses.
In the following results section we only report analyses of
the variables that showed significant effects by subjects or by
items.
Critical Region (helps the accountant). The analyses of
variance showed a main effect of relative clause for regression
path duration: F1(1,32) = 33.03, p < .005; F2(1,24) = 35.09,
p < .01. Reading times for object relatives were longer than
for subject relatives. Total reading time at the critical region
also showed an effect of relative clause: F(1,32) = 30.95, p <
.01; F2(1,24) = 31.86, p < .01, indicating that object relatives
took longer to read than subject relatives.
Spillover 1 Region (counted). Analyses of variance
showed a main effect of relative clause type for the regression
path duration measure, F1(1,32) = 32.68, p < .01; F2(1,24) =
57.42, p < .01. Mean reading times for object relatives were
longer than for subject relatives. The analyses also showed
a main effect of number congruency for regression path duration: F1(1,32) = 9.75, p < .01; F2(1,24) = 14.22, p < .01.
Reading times were longer when the noun phrases were different than the same in number. The analyses of regression
path duration also showed an interaction effect between relative clause type and number congruency, F1(1,32) = 5.80,
p < .05; F1(1,24) = 5.40, p < .05. Simple effect analyses
for the object relatives showed that they took longer to read
when the noun phrases were different than the same in number: F1(1,32) = 8.94, p < .01; F2(1,24) = 12.22, p < .01. In
contrast, simple effect analyses for subject relatives showed
that there was no difference between the same and different
conditions (Fs < 1). For the total reading time measure, there
was a main effect of relative clause type, F1(1,32) = 25.11, p
< .01; F2(1,24) = 15.87, p < .01. Reading times for object
relatives were longer than for the subject relatives. In addi-

2358

Table 1: Example material and areas of interest for Experiment 1
critical region
spillover 1 spillover 2
Subject relative/same number
The banker that
helps the accountant
counted
the money
The bankers that
help the accountants
counted
the money

several times.
several times.

Object relative/same number
The banker that
The bankers that

the accountant helps
the accountants helps

counted
counted

the money
the money

several times.
several times.

Subject relative/different number
The bankers that
The banker that

help the accountant
helps the accountants

counted
counted

the money
the money

several times.
several times.

Object relative/different number
The bankers that
The banker that

the accountant helps
the accountants help

counted
counted

the money
the money

several times.
several times.

1600
1400
1200

Time in ms

OR−Congruent
SR−Congurent
OR−Incong
SR−Incong

800

1000

OR−Congruent
SR−Congurent
OR−Incong
SR−Incong

1000

1500

Total Reading Time

helps the accountant

600

500

Time in ms

2000

Regression Path Duration

wrap-up

counted
the money
Interest Areas

several times.

helps the accountant

counted
the money
Interest Areas

Figure 1: Regression Path and Total Reading Times in Experiment 1

2359

several times.

tion, the analyses of the total reading time measure indicated
a marginal effect of number congruency, F1(1,32) = 3.41, p
= .07, F2(1,24) = 2.96, p = .09, with the different condition
being read slower than the same condition.
Spillover 2 Region (the money). There were no effects in the
spillover 2 region.
Wrap-up Region (several times). An analysis of variance
of the regression path duration measure showed a main effect
of relative clause type in the wrap-up region that was significant by subjects, F1(1,32) = 7.01, p < .05; but not by items,
F2(1,24) = 4.18, p = .05, with object relatives being slower
than subject relatives.

Participants
The number of participants and the selection criteria for these
participants were the same as in Experiment 1.

Materials and Design
The materials in this experiment were the same as in Experiment (1) with one difference. Instead of two spillover regions
and a wrap-up region after the critical region, there was only
one spillover region followed by a sentence wrap-up region.
Table 2 shows a sample item with the interest areas for this
experiment.

Apparatus and Procedure
Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that object relatives were harder to process than subject relative clauses in regression path and total
reading times for the critical region (help the accountant) and
the spillover 1 region (counted). There was an effect of number congruency in total reading times in the spillover 1 region, with the different number conditions being harder than
the same number conditions. A similar effect was also found
in regression path duration in the same region, though it only
occurred with object relatives. The direction of these congruency effects is opposite to that predicted by similarity based
interference models, which claim that the same number condition should be more difficult. The reversed effect may be
due to priming of number information from the first to the
second noun. Most important, this suggests that similaritybased interference due to number congruency does not appear to have a strong effect on the processing of subject or
object-relative clauses.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed an effect of relative clause type but no
effect of number interference. It is possible that number interference does occur, but that in contrast to what is predicted
by the similarity based interference account, it is a later effect. Number interference may occur after initial syntactic
analysis of the relative clause, when readers check whether
the verb also agrees with noun phrases other than the subject. This sort of mechanism is similar to the account put
forward by Sturt (2003) for a delayed effect of unaccessible antecedents in anaphor resolution. Sturt (2003) argues
that processes associated with this effect are not part of initial
anaphor interpretation but later procedures like recovery and
sentence wrap-up.
Because the region after the relative clause was relatively
long in Experiment 1, the retrieval interference effect due to
cue overlap may be spread out over the region and difficult
to detect. Therefore, the final region after the relative clause
was shortened in Experiment 2. The same materials as in Experiment 1 were tested without the final region (e.g., several
times).

The procedure and the apparatus were the same as in Experiment 1.

Results
Figure 2 shows the plots for first pass duration and total reading time and Figure ?? the plot for regression path duration in
the different interest areas. We analysed the results from first
pass duration, regression path duration and total reading time
in the same way as in Experiment 1.
Critical Region (helps the accountant). In regression path
duration, we observed a main effect of relative clause type
F1(1,32) = 17.81, p < .01; F2(1,24) = 16.91, p < .01. Object
relatives had longer reading times than subject relatives. The
total reading time measure also showed a main effect of relative clause type, F1(1,32) = 46.07, p < .01; F2(1,24) = 31.80,
p < .01. Reading times for object relatives were longer than
for subject relatives.
Spillover Region (counted). First pass duration showed a
main effect of relative clause, F1(1,32) = 8.95, p < .01;
F2(1,24) = 8.65, p < .01: Object relatives took longer than
subject relatives. In regression path duration, there was an
effect of relative clause type that was significant by subjects
F1(1,32) = 6.23, p < .05 but marginal by items F2(1,24) =
3.81, p = .06. Analyses of total reading time for this region
showed a significant main effect of relative clause F1(1,32)
= 39.00, p < .01; F2(1,24) = 26.94, p < .01. Mean reading
times for object relatives were longer than for subject relatives.
Sentence Wrap-Up region (the money.). In first pass duration, there was a marginal effect of relative clause by subjects: F1(1,32) = 3.41, p < .10 but no effect by items F2(1,24)
= 1.97. There was also an effect of number congruency by
subjects F1(1,32) = 4.42, p < .05 but not by items F2(1,24)
= 2.51, p < .15, with a longer first pass duration when the
noun phrases shared the same number cue than when they
did not. Most importantly, there was an interaction between
relative clause type and number congruency in first pass duration F1(1,32) = 4.10, p = .05; and F2(1,24) = 4.91, p < .05.
Simple effect analyses for object relative clauses showed that
they had longer reading times when the noun phrases were
the same than different in number: F1(1,32) = 6.20, p < .05;

2360

Table 2: Areas of interest for the materials used in Experiment 2.
critical

spillover

wrap-up

Subject relative
The banker(s) that

help(s) the accountant(s)

counted

the money.

Object relative
The banker(s) that

the accountant(s) help(s)

counted

the money.

2000
500

counted
Interest Areas

the money.

helps the accountant

counted
Interest Areas

1600

Total Reading Time

1200
1000
800

Time in ms

1400

OR−Congruent
SR−Congurent
OR−Incong
SR−Incong

600

helps the accountant

OR−Congruent
SR−Congurent
OR−Incong
SR−Incong

1000

500

Time in ms

600

OR−Congruent
SR−Congurent
OR−Incong
SR−Incong

400
300

Time in ms

Regression Path Duration

1500

700

First Pass Duration

helps the accountant

counted
Interest Areas

the money.

Figure 2: First Pass, Regression Path and Total Reading Times in Experiment 2

2361

the money.

F2(1,24) = 5.97, p < .05. Simple effect analyses for subject relatives showed that there was no difference between
the same and different noun phrases (Fs < 1). The analyses
of regression path duration showed a main effect of relative
clause type F1(1,32) = 22.76, p < .01; F2(1,24) = 10.70, p
< .01. Object relatives had longer reading times than subject
relatives. In the total reading time measure, we observed an
effect of relative clause F1(1,32) = 18.63, p < .01; F2(1,24)
= 16.88, p < .01. Object relatives took longer to read than
subject relatives.

Discussion
Object relatives were more difficult than subject relatives relatives in regression path duration and total reading time (in
all three regions) and in first pass duration (in the spillover
region). Most interesting, there was an interaction between
relative clause type and number congruency in first pass time
for the final wrap-up region (the money): object relatives were
more difficult when the noun phrases had the same number
than a different number, whereas there was no difference for
subject relatives. Thus, the number congruency effect appeared later than the object relative difficulty. This is surprising given the predictions made by the interference models
mentioned in the introduction. Both the relative clause effect
and the number congruency effect are claimed to be due to
memory interference that occurs when the subject and object
noun phrase are retrieved at the embedded verb. Thus, the
difficulty with object relatives and the number interference effect should have occurred in the same regions and measures.

General Discussion and Conclusion
Both Experiments 1 and 2 showed that object relatives are
more difficult than subject relatives, which is in line with
previous studies (Gibson, 1998; Gordon et al., 2001; Lewis,
1996; King & Just, 1991). This effect was found in the relative clause region (in regression path and total reading time
in Experiment 1 and Experiment 2). However, neither Experiment 1 nor Experiment 2 found evidence for number interference in early measures. In Experiment 1, sentences were
easier when the nouns had the same number than when their
number was different. This is contrary to the predictions of
similarity based interference accounts. In Experiment 2, there
was evidence for number interference in object relatives, but
this occurred during later processing, in the final region.
The observed delay of the number congruency effect in
comparison to the relative clause effect in Experiment 2 is not
consistent with memory interference models. They claim that
difficulty with object relatives (compared to subject relatives)
is due to interference that occurs when the subject and object
noun phrase are retrieved at the embedded verb. Therefore,
they predict that the number congruency effect should occur
in the relative clause region, simultaneously with the slowdown with object relative clauses.
The results suggest that the interference effect is a later
process that does not arise during structure building. One
possibility is that it is due to a checking process that occurs

when a sentence is structurally complex as is the case with
object relatives. Because this checking process occurs after
the relative clause has been constructed, it may have been
spread out over the regions following the relative clause in
Experiment 1. Because the part of the sentence following the
relative clause was long in Experiment 1, it may have been
impossible to detect the later interference effect. When the
main clause predicate was shortened in Experiment 2, we did
find evidence for later number interference.
Together, the experiments suggest that the effect of retrieval cue overlap is weak. In addition to being weak, it
occurs later than the relative clause effect, indicating that the
initial difficulty with object relatives is not due to interference. These findings are more in agreement with theories
that assume that processing difficulty with object relatives is
not due to interference, such as the locality account (Gibson,
1998), experienced-based accounts (e.g., Wells, Christiansen,
Rae, Acheson, & MacDonald, 2009) and expectation models
(Levy, 2007; Hale, 2006).

Acknowledgements
The research presented here was supported by the ESRC (Economic and Social Research Council).

References
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: Locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68, 1-76.
Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., & Johnson, M. (2001). Memory interference during language processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(6), 1411-1423.
Hale, J. (2006). Uncertainty about the rest of the sentence.
Cognitive Science, 30(4), 609-642.
King, J., & Just, M. A. (1991). Individual differences in
syntactic processing: The role of working memory. Journal
of Memory and Language, 30, 580-602.
Levy, R. (2007). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106(3), 1126-1177.
Lewis, R. L. (1996). Interference in short-term memory:
The magical number two (or three) in sentence processing.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 25(1), 93-115.
Lewis, R. L., & Vasishth, S. (2005). An activation-based
model of sentence processing as skilled memory retrieval.
Cognitive Science, 29, 375-419.
Sturt, P. (2003). The time-course of the application of binding
constraints in reference resolution. Journal of Memory and
Language, 48, 542-562.
Van Dyke, J., & Lewis, R. L. (2003). Distinguishing effects of
structure and decay on attachment and repair: A cue-based
parsing account of recovery from misanalyzed ambiguities.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 285-316.
Wells, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., Rae, D. S., Acheson, D. J.,
& MacDonald, M. C. (2009). Experience and sentence
processing: Statistical learning and relative clause comprehension. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 250-271.

2362

