UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Analogy Facilitate Transitive Inference in Young Children?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/67c4g8v9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Mutafchieva, Milena
Gotseva, Kristina
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Analogy Facilitate Transitive Inference in Young Children?
Milena Mutafchieva (mmutafchieva@nbu.bg)
Kristina Gotseva (goceva@students.nbu.bg)
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
Both transitive reasoning and analogy-making are present at
very early stage of human development and the question
arises whether the two developmental trajectories interact
with each other. We are presenting an experiment with 4
years old children to test the hypothesis that the analogymaking capabilities can scaffold and facilitate the
development of transitive inference and the empirical data
support this hypothesis.

Introduction
Transitive inference is the simplest form of deductive
reasoning that combines two premises R(a,b) and R(b,c) and
makes the conclusion that R(a,c). For example, if John is
stronger than Peter, and Peter is stronger than Bill, then
necessarily, John is stronger than Bill. Piaget (1921) was the
first psychologist who introduced the topic of transitive
inference in the developmental framework. He and his
collaborators claimed that the ability of transitive reasoning
is developed relatively late during the stage of concrete
operations (Inhelder & Piaget, 1958, 1964): first at the age
of 8 about size relations like “bigger than”, and even later
on about other relations like “heavier than”.
The developmental trajectory of transitive reasoning has
been extensively studied and disputed in the literature and
many psychologists found evidence that this ability is
present much earlier in the development than it was
assumed by Piaget. Thus since 1970s the research in the
area was dominated by the debate about the age at which
children can be considered to make transitive inferences.
According to Trabasso (1977) and Halford (1993) this age
depends on the specific procedure that tests the ability and
under certain circumstances even children at the age of 4
can exhibit this capacity. McGonigle and Chalmers (1977)
challenged the field by demonstrating that monkeys can also
make transitive inferences. More recently it has been
demonstrated that rats (Roberts & Phelps, 1994), pigeons
(von Fersen et al, 1991, Lasareva & Wasserman, 2006), and
even fishes (Grosenick, Clement & Fernald, 2007) do make
transitive inferences. It has been argued that transitive
inference is important for the survival because it allows the
animals to determine social dominance of other animals
without getting into mortal fights.
A very similar debate has also dominated the field of
analogical reasoning development. Inhelder and Piaget
(1958, 1964) claim that analogical reasoning is a type of

reasoning which develops during the formal operation stage
i.e. after 11 years of age. However, like in the field of
transitive inference, modern researchers have demonstrated
that analogy is present at very early age if not from birth
(Goswami, 1991, 2001, Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). And
again there is now some evidence that Chimpanzees (Gillan,
Premack, & Woodruff, 1981; Oden, Thompson & Premack,
2001), Baboons (Fagot & Parron, 2010), Capuchin monkeys
(Truppa et al, 2010, 2011), and even New Caledonian
Crows (Taylor et al., 2007) can make analogies.
This research suggests that both transitive inference and
analogy-making are very old evolutionary and are also
present from very early age in human beings and the
question arises whether the development of the two
capabilities interact with each other.
Kokinov (1990, 1992) suggested that in fact deductive,
inductive and analogical reasoning might be produced by
the very same mechanisms. His proposal is that the
analogical reasoning mechanisms are the basis and they are
then used for deduction and induction as well. He obtained
some experimental support for this proposal using adults.
Halford (1993) suggested that deductive reasoning
development is based on the already developed analogical
reasoning capacities, but did not present empirical evidence
for his claim. Goswami (1995) tried to find support for that
idea by providing analogies to children in the class inclusion
problem, but could not find an effect of the analogy. Based
on the two proposals above Mutafchieva and Kokinov
(2008) designed an experiment to test whether analogy can
actually help children make better transitive inferences and
obtained positive results. However, the doubt remained
whether this is really transitive reasoning. The current paper
presents an experimental study that replicates and further
extends these initial findings making sure that children are
making proper transitive inferences.
Another topic of hot debate is the methodology of
measuring transitive inference capabilities. Various authors
have suggested various procedures and it might be that they
measure different aspects of the transitive reasoning
abilities. Inhelder and Piaget (1958, 1964) used the original
definition of transitive inference with three objects where
the premises are presented as two comparisons and the
question is about the relation between the two objects
unseen together. Later on, however, Bryant and Trabasso
(1971) and McGonigle and Chalmers (1977) have used a
form of the task with 5 items in a series with extensive
training of some pairs and asking about others that are

2061

unseen before. This procedure was meant to eliminate the
potential memory problem that children can have
remembering the premises. Pears and Bryant (1990) finally
eliminated the training phase since there was severe
criticism about the role of this training plays.
Sternberg (1980) introduced another version of the three
object task, namely if A is shorter than B, and B is shorter
than C, which is the shortest? We are using this version in
our study. However, there is serious potential problem here.
As Piaget emphasised crucial for the transitive inference is
the understanding of the relativistic nature of the relations,
i.e. that relations, unlike properties which are constant
characteristic of an object (e.g. if the object is red it remains
red during the whole experiment), are dynamically changing
depending on the specific object you are comparing it to.
For example, object B may be bigger than object A and at
the same time be smaller than C, i.e. being “bigger” is not a
property of the object itself. Inhelder and Piaget (1958,
1964) claim that this ability is mastered much later in life –
in the stage of concrete operations, while prior to that stage
children think that relations are absolute properties of the
objects – properties like “larger” and “smaller” are mutually
exclusive and it is not possible to attribute them to one and
the same object.
In order to test whether children have actually obtained
this relativistic understanding of relations and thus exhibit
proper transitive inference we have designed a new
procedure in which we first show children two separate
relations like A is stronger than B, and B is stronger than C,
then we ask which is the strongest. Let suppose that the
child correctly responds that A is the strongest. Then we add
a new object D and say that D is stronger than A and ask
children which is the strongest object now. Alternatively in
half of the trials we add a new object E and say that C is
stronger that E and ask the child which is the strongest now.
If children understand correctly the nature of the transitive
inferences they have to switch to the new object D in the
former case, but keep insisting that A is the strongest in the
latter case. We believe this is a stronger and more
conservative test of transitive inferences capacity and have
introduced it in the current study.
There is another innovation in the test procedure. Since it
is natural for children, we speak of how one animal is
stronger than another one (e.g. this bear is stronger than this
bear). If the animals were visually available than no
inferences would be needed and children would visually
find the strongest animal, that is why we are presenting the
animals hidden in boxes and children have to remember that
the bear in this box is stronger than the bear in that box. In
addition, to make the task even more complicated we
presented the three boxes not in a linear order, but in a
triangular configuration. This complicates the task of
children according to the “spatial model” (DeSoto, London
& Handel, 1965, Huttenlocher, 1968) which assumes that
transitive inferences are made based on a linear spatial
mental model built in the process of understanding of the
premises. As you will see, however, the triangular
configuration is important for our manipulation and makes it
possible to compare every two objects equally easy.

Finally, the manipulation in the experiment is the
introduction of an analogy between the three (or four) boxes
in the triangle (rectangular) configuration and a train that is
taking turn. In the train the stronger animals are pulling the
next ones. In this way we are trying to ground the abstract
knowledge of children about “being stronger” with their
familiar experience of being able to pull. This is further
supported by using physical “draw-bars” between the
wagons of the train. In both the experimental and control
groups there is a second set of animals on the table which
belongs to the experimenter and these animals are not
hidden, i.e. the child can visually judge which is stronger
than which and which is the strongest. We know from
previous studies (Mutafchieva & Kokinov, 2007a, 2007b)
that the child can possibly make a mapping between the two
sets of animals (the experimenter’s and their own) and we
assume that this should facilitate the inference process. The
difference is that in the experimental group the train analogy
is introduced, while in the control group it is not.

Experiment
The goal of the present experiment was to find out
whether an analogy with a familiar domain that is grounded
in children’s physical experience (like the train analogy of
pulling) would facilitate the transitive inference while we
measure also children’s understanding of the relativistic
nature of relations.

Hypothesis
Our hypothesis was that when provided with the train
analogy children would improve their performance on the
transitive inference task and would demonstrate
understanding of the relativistic nature of relations.

Design
The experiment had a mixed design.
The between-subject factor had two levels:

Control condition: one visible and one hidden set
of objects were presented, but no analogy was provided;.

Analogy condition: one visible and one hidden set
of objects were presented, and each set was described as a
train with wagons that are connected with draw-bars.
The within-subject factor was the number of objects
participating in the object series:

First measurement – after presenting the two sets
of three objects.

Second measurement – after adding a fourth object
to each set.
Children in both conditions participated in both
measurements of the within-subject factor.
The dependent variable was the number of correct
responses to the transitive inference tasks and since there
were five trials in each session the value could vary from 0
to 5.

2062

Stimuli
Eight animals of the same type were used in each trial: 8
bears, 8 swans, 8 mice etc. In the first measurement 6
animals were presented, divided in two sets of three animals
of the same type – one set of 3 animals for the experimenter
and one for the child. There was a big, medium and small
animal in each set. The corresponding objects from the two
sets were of different absolute sizes - for example the
biggest mouse from the experimenter’s set and the biggest
mouse from the child’s set had different sizes. In the second
measurement a fourth animal of the same type was added to
each set. In addition, in the Analogy condition six draw-bars
were used to connect the wagons of the train – three for the
experimenter’s set and three for the child’s set (Figure 1a
and 1b, correspondingly).
Figure 2. Example of the stimuli used in the Analogy
condition in the first measurement before adding the fourth
object. The experimenter’s set could be seen in the upper
side of the table.

Figure 1a. Example of the stimuli used in the Analogy
condition in the first measurement. The biggest object from
the upper set was the same absolute size as the medium
object from the lower set. The objects from the child’s set
were hidden under white boxes (Fig. 2)

Figure 3. Example of the stimuli used in the Analogy
condition in the second measurement after adding the fourth
object, which in this case is smaller (weaker) than the
smallest one.

Procedure

Figure 1b. Example of the stimuli used in the Analogy
condition in the second measurement after adding the fourth
object.
In this experiment the stimuli were presented in a triangle
configuration. Different sets of stimuli were used in every
trial with different spatial arrangements and absolute sizes
as well as different animals. The objects from the child’s set
were covered with white boxes of equal size (Figure 2 and
Figure 3, correspondingly).

Each child participated in two individual experimental
sessions. Each session included three training trials and five
test trials. In the training trials the experimenter gave the
child feedback in order to make sure that he/she correctly
understood the instruction.
The instruction for the Control group in the test trials of
the first measurement session was (in Bulgarian language):
“I have three bears and you have three bears. Out of
these two of my bears this is stronger than this one (pointing
to the biggest and the medium bear in the experimenter’s
set), and from these two of my bears this is stronger than
this (pointing to the medium and the smallest bears from her
set). Out of these two of your hidden bears, this one is

2063

stronger than this one, and this one is stronger than this
one. Please tell me, where is your strongest bear hidden?”
The instruction for the second measurement for the
Control group had two versions depending on whether we
added a stronger or a weaker fourth animal. The first one
was as follows:
“Now close your eyes because I will make a trick. Now
look, I added another bear to my animals which is stronger
than this one (pointing to the formerly biggest animal from
her set). I also added another bear to your animals. The
new bear is hidden under this box and now this bear is
stronger than this one (pointing to the formerly biggest
animal from the child’s set). Now, please tell me where is
your strongest bear hidden?”
The second version for the Control group in the second
measurement was the same except the fact that the fourth
added animal was weaker than the weakest one.
The corresponding instruction for the Analogy group in
the test trials was the following:
“I have three bears and you have three bears. Out of
these two of my bears (pointing e.g. to the biggest and the
medium bear in the experimenter’s set) this one is stronger
than this one and I will put this draw-bar in such a way that
the stronger bear could pull the weaker one. Out of these
two of your hidden bears, this one is stronger than this one.
Please, put this draw-bar in such a way that the stronger
bear could pull the weaker bear. Now, out of these two of
my bears (pointing e.g. to the medium and the smallest bear
from the experimenter’s set) this one is stronger than this
one and I will put the draw-bar in such a way that the
stronger bear could pull the weaker one. Out of these two
hidden bears this is stronger than this. Please, put this
draw-bar in such a way that the stronger bear could pull the
weaker one. Now look, my bears look like a train in a turn
and your bears look like another train in a turn. Please tell
me where is your strongest bear hidden?”
The instruction for the two versions of the second
measurement for the Analogy group was the same except
that the added fourth animal was connected to the smallest
or the biggest animal by a new draw-bar. We randomized
the sequence in which the fourth strongest or weakest
animal was added. An important fact about this experiment
was that the child had never seen the objects in his/her set
and it was not possible to solve the task by remembering the
absolute sizes of the stimuli.

Participants
49 children were studied in this experiment. 25 of them
formed the Control group, 24 formed the Analogy group.
The average age of the children was 4 years and 5 months
ranging from 4 years and 1 month to 4 years and 11 months.

Results and discussion
The data are presented in Figure 4. The mean for the
Control Group in the three objects trials is 2.56 (out of 5),
and in the fourth objects trials is 2.04. There is a slight
decrease in this group. The corresponding means for the
Analogy group are 3.46 for the three objects trials and 3.58
for the four objects trials. The chance level for the three
objects trials is 1.66 and for the four objects trials is 1.25.

5
4,5
4
3,5
3
2,5
2
1,5
1
0,5
0

3,58

3,46
2,56
2,04

Control
Group
Analogy
Group

Three objects

Four objects

Figure 4. Mean scores (which vary from 0 to 5) for each
measurement for each group. There is a clear Analogy effect
F (1, 47) = 12.478, partial η2 = 0.21, р = 0.001
A repeated measures ANOVA has been run with within
group factor the number of objects and between group factor
the presence or absence of analogy. There is an effect of the
Analogy manipulation and the performance of the children
in the Analogy group is significantly better than the
performance of the children in the Control group (F (1, 47)
= 12.478, partial η2 = 0.21, р = 0.001). Pair-wise
comparison shows that there is significant difference
between the two groups in both the first measurement with
sets of three objects (F(1,47)=4.142; p=0.047) and in the
second measurement with sets of four objects
(F(1,47)=22.548; p<0.001).
Analysis of the within subject factor shows that there is
no difference between the two measurements of each child
(F(1,47)=1,267; p=0,266) which means that there is no
significant improvement or decrease of the results of each
child after adding the fourth object. Children are equally
good in solving transitive inference tasks with three and four
objects. The interaction between the two factors is also not
significant F(1, 47)=2.547, p=0.072).
Additional analysis shows that there is a significant
difference between the children’s performance in each
measurement and the corresponding chance level in both
groups. The difference between first measurement and
chance level of 1,66 in the Control group is T(24)=7,709
p<0,001, a similar difference could be found when
comparing the second measurement with the chance level of
1,25 in Control group (T(24)=12,134; p<0.001). For the
Analogy group the results are similar (T(23)=11,985;
p<0.001) when comparing the score of first measurement
with the chance level of 1,66, and (T(23)=12,716; p<0.001)
when comparing the score of the second measurement and
chance level of 1,25). These results could be interpreted that
in both measurements in both groups children are
significantly better than the chance level in solving the
transitive inference tasks.

General Discussion
The results showed that both groups are significantly
better than the chance level in both measurements which
means that children are able to solve transitive inference

2064

tasks to some degree. These findings are consistent with the
results of Bryant and Trabasso (1971) and Pears and Bryant
(1990) which showed that young children could solve
transitive tasks when memory limitations were overcome or
when the relations were visible for the child at the moment
of decision making.
We can also claim that children showed an understanding
of relativistic nature of relations because the results from the
second measurement are also significantly better than the
chance level in both groups. In three of out of 5 trials one
and the same object is “stronger than” in the first
measurement and is “weaker than” in the second
measurement. So, the child had to reverse the answer in
order to respond correctly. Children succeeded to overcome
this difficulty and demonstrated an understanding that
relations are not object’s attributes and have a relative
nature.
Most importantly, there is a main effect of the Analogy
manipulation and children in the Analogy condition
demonstrated significantly better performance than the
children in the Control condition (both with three and four
objects). This shows that analogy making could play an
important role in accumulating experience and development
of the transitive reasoning ability. This is in accordance with
Halford’s (1993) claim that deductive reasoning
development is based on analogical reasoning and with
Kokinov’s (1990, 1992) proposal that the same mechanisms
could underlie both types of reasoning.
How can we explain the specific effect of the train
analogy in this experiment? One possible explanation is that
children know that the strongest car that pulls all other cars
in the train is the locomotive which is the first wagon in the
train. Thus when asked “Where is the strongest bear
hidden?” they think of the configuration of boxes as a train
and try to find where is the locomotive. Then they use the
draw-bars in order to determine where the locomotive is.
This explanation relies of their common knowledge of trains
and the causal model of its movement. A second possible
explanation is that children are mapping their hiding boxes
to the experimenter’s set of visible animals; they determine
perceptually which the strongest visible animal there is and
map it back to the strongest animal hidden in their
corresponding box. The question is why children cannot do
this in the control condition, and the answer could be that
the analogy with the train and the visible draw-bars in both
“trains” help children in doing the mapping. This is in
accordance with the results obtained in an earlier
experiment showing that the train analogy and the use of
draw-bars help children make the analogical mapping
(Mutafchieva & Kokinov, 2007b). Finally, it could also be
argued that the analogy does not play any role here and
simply the presence of the draw-bars in both sets makes is
easier for the children to do the mapping and find which box
corresponds to the strongest animal in the experimenter’s
set. Although we cannot rule out this possibility, we believe
that this is not very probable since in this earlier experiment
(Mutafchieva & Kokinov, 2007b) the results from a

condition with draw-bars without the introduction of the
train analogy did not help children in doing the analogical
mapping and this group was indistinguishable from the
control group. Thus it seems that the draw-bars become
meaningful and usable for the children only after they are
considered as part of the causal model of the train.
It is also possible that the draw-bars simply facilitated
children in remembering the relations between the four
objects and these physical representations were visible for
the child at the moment of decision making. As explained
above, however, we believe that the draw-bars alone will
not do the tick. Especially since the children in both groups
seemed to successfully remember the premises which could
be seen from their answers to the control questions asked.
Of course, we need further experimentation in order to
distinguish between all these (and other) explanations.
The main conclusion for the moment is that children in
our experiment demonstrated an ability to make transitive
inferences and understanding of relativistic nature of
relations. In addition, the train analogy in combination with
draw-bars as physical representations of relations facilitates
this children’s ability to make transitive inferences. These
first data suggest that analogy could be an effective
mechanism for learning to do transitive inferences
supporting Halford’s theory that deductive reasoning
development is based on analogy-making development.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this paper has been supported by
the ANALOGY project (6th FP, NEST program, contract
29088) and by the European Office for Aerospace Research
and Development under grant FA8655-10-1-3061. We
would like to thank Ana Doncheva and Margarita Pavlova
for helping in the data collection process.

2065

References
Ameel, E., Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W. (2007). The
relevance of selecting what’s relevant: A dual process
approach to transitive reasoning with spatial relations.
Thinking and Reasoning, vol. 13 (2), 164-187.
Breslow, L. (1981). Reevaluation of the literature on the
development of transitive inferences. Psychological
Bulletin, 89, 325-351.
Bryant, P.E., & Trabasso, T. (1971). Transitive inferences
and memory in young children. Nature, 232, 456-458.
DeSoto, C., London, M., & Handel, S. (1965). Social
reasoning and spatial paralogic. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 2, 513-521.
Fagot, J; Parron, C (2010). Relational matching in baboons
(Papio papio) with reduced grouping requirements. JEP:
Animal Behavior Processes, 36(2), 184-193.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure–mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman &. J. P. Byrnes

(Eds.), Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gillan, D. J., Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1981).
Reasoning in the Chimpanzee .1. Analogical Reasoning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-Animal Behavior
Processes, 7(1), 1-17.
Goswami, U. (1991). Analogical reasoning: What
develops? A Review of Research and Theory. Child
Development, 62, 1-22.
Goswami, U. (1995). Transitive relational mappings in 3and 4-year-olds: The analogy of Goldilocks and the
Three Bears. Child Development, 66, 877-892.
Goswami, U. (2001). Analogical reasoning in children. In
Gentner, D. Holyoak, K. Kokinov, B. The Analogical
Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science. A Bradford
Book, The MIT Press. Cambridge.
Goswami, U., Pauen, S. (2005). The effects of family
analogy on class inclusion reasoning in young children.
Swiss Journal of Psychology, vol. 64, n 2, pp. 115-124
Grosenick, L., Clement, T. & Fernald, R. (2007). Fish can
infer social rank by observation alone. Nature, 445, pp.
429-432.
Halford, G.S. (1984). Can young children integrate
premises in transitivity and serial order tasks? Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 65-93
Halford, G. (1993). Children’s understanding: The
development of mental models. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Publishers, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Huttenlocher, I. (1968). Constructing spatial images: A
strategy in reasoning. Psychological Review, 75(6), 550560.
Inhelder, B. & Piaget, J. (1958). The Growth of Logical
Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence. New York:
Basic Books.
Inhelder, B. & Piaget, J. (1964). The Early Growth of
Logic in the Child: Classification and Seriation. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Kokinov, B. (1990). Associative Memory-Based
Reasoning: Some Experimental Results. In: Proceedings
of the 12th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. MIT, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Kokinov, B. (1992). Inference Evaluation in Deductive,
Inductive and Analogical Reasoning. In: Proceedings of
the14th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Kotovsky L, Gentner D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Dev. 67:2797--2822.
Lazareva, O.F., & Wasserman, E.A. (2006). Effect of
stimulus orderability and reinforcement history on
transitive responding in pigeons. Behavioural Processes,
72, 161-172.
McGonigle B, Chalmers M (1977). Are monkeys logical?
Nature, 267, 694-996.
Mutafchieva, M. & Kokinov, B. (2007a). Does the Family
Analogy Help Young Children To Do Relational

2066

Mapping? In: Proceedings of the European Cognitive
Science Conference. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Mutafchieva, M. & Kokinov, B. (2007b). Can Language be
Replaced? Physical Representations of Relations Instead
of Language Labels in Relational Mapping: Do They
Help Young Children? In: Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Mutafchieva, M. & Kokinov, B. (2008). Can Analogy Help
Children Make Transitive Inference? In: Proceedings of
the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Oden, D, Thompson, R., Premack, D. (2001). Can an Ape
Reason Analogically? Comprehension and Production of
Analogical Problems by Sarah, a Chimpanzee (Pan
troglodytes). In: Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B.
(eds.) The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive
Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 471-497.
Pears, R., & Bryant, P. E. (1990). Transitive inferences by
young children about spatial position. British Journal of
Psychology, 81, 497-510.
Piaget, J. (1921). Une forme verbale de la comparaison
chez l’enfant. Archive de Psychologie, 18,141 – 172.
Piaget, J. (1971). Biology and knowledge. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press
Rattermann, M.J., & Gentner, D. (1998). The effect of
language in similarity: The use of relational labels
improves young children’s performance in a mapping
task. In K. Holyoak, D. Gentner, & B. Kokinov.
Advances in Analogy Research: Integration of Theory
and Data from the Cognitive, Computational, and Neural
Sciences. New Bulgarian University, Sofia.
Roberts, W.A. & Phelps, M.T. (1994). Transitive
inferences in rats& A test of the spatial; coding
hypothesis. Psychological Science, 5(6), 368-374.
Sternberg, R.J. (1980). Representation and process in linear
syllogistic reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 109, 119-159.
Taylor, A., Hunt, G. Holzhaider, J., Gray, R. (2007).
Spontaneous Metatool Use by New Caledonian Crows.
Current Biology, 17, 1504-1507.
Trabasso T. (1977). The role of memory as a system in
making transitive inference. In R.V.Kail, Jr., & J.W.
Hagen (Eds.), Perspectives on the development of
memory and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ. Erlbaum.
Truppa V, Garofoli D, Castorina G,·Mortari E, Natale F,
Visalberghi E (2010). Identity concept learning in
matching-to-sample tasks by tufted capuchin monkeys.
Animal Cognition, 13(6), 835-848.
Truppa V, Piano Mortari E, Garofoli D, Privitera S,
Visalberghi, E. (2011) Same/Different Concept Learning
by Capuchin Monkeys in Matching-to-Sample Tasks.
PLoS ONE, 6(8): e23809.
von Fersen, L., Wynne, C.D.L., Delius, J.D., & Staddon,
J.E.R. (1991). Transitive inference formation in pigeons.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
BehaviorProcessess, 17, 334-341.

