UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
E Pluribus Multa In Unum: The Rationality Multiverse

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5bp0g99w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Besold, Tarek R.
Kuhnberger, Kai-Uwe

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

E Pluribus Multa In Unum: The Rationality Multiverse
Tarek R. Besold and Kai-Uwe Kühnberger
({tbesold | kkuehnbe}@uni-osnabrueck.de)
Institute of Cognitive Science
University of Osnabrück
49069 Osnabrück, Germany
Abstract
The paper argues for a new view on and an approach to rationality as a concept of study and modeling paradigm of human behavior. After critically reviewing classical (normative)
approaches to rationality, decision-making, and rational behavior, we present cornerstones of a positive, integrative, and
holistic conception of these cognitive capacities. A discussion
of key elements of this new view is given, and possible consequences and implications are considered.
Keywords: Rationality; Human-level intelligence; Subjectcentered model; Cognitive capabilities; Integrative model.

Introduction
With Aristotle’s famous characterization of man as a rational animal (“zoon logikon”) in his Metaphysics (Tredennick,
1933-35), and the ascription of a rational principle to the
human being in his Nicomachean Ethics (Broadie & Rowe,
2002), the idea of seeing rationality and rational behavior as
indispensable parts of our humanity has been introduced into
human self-conception, starting centuries of inquiry into the
nature and properties of this alleged conditio sine qua non.
Still millennia after Aristotle, Descartes is only one amongst
many famous scholars explicitly mentioning the question in
his writings: “But what is a man? Shall I say ’a rational animal’? No; for then I should have to inquire what an animal
is, what rationality is, and in this one question would lead
me down the slope to other harder ones (...)” (Cottingham,
Stoothoff, & Murdoch, 1984).
Nowadays, with the background of modern sciences, and
especially with the advent of cognitive science, new questions
and perspectives have been added to the question for the nature of rationality. Instead of merely studying properties and
features of its manifestation in humans and their behavior,
and measuring those against standards for rationality derived
from normative theories, prediction and modeling aspects of
theories of rationality are gaining more and more importance.
These efforts can take various forms, ranging from formal
studies of customer preferences and behavior, over cognitive
modeling of decision-making and choice processes, to rational agency projects within AI.
Nonetheless, although this shift of emphasis within the
study of rationality is clearly happening, it is a change of
priorities within the existing overall setting, but not a revolutionary process overthrowing existing paradigms, or creating
new approaches and ideas. In the following, we want to argue that the latter is what would be needed, on the one hand
for real progress with respect to the aforementioned modeling
and prediction tasks, but on the other hand also for the sake

of a deeper understanding and progress within rationality research itself.
The paper is structured as follows: The next section gives
an overview of classical accounts and paradigms within rationality research, together with well-known objections and
caveats to these standard frameworks. Then, a review of recent empirical and theoretical findings is presented, indicating a way to a new understanding and modeling of rationality and rational behavior. This new conception, for the time
being called “subject-centered rationality”, is sketched and
elaborated on in a dedicated section. The penultimate section
discusses basic features of this new stance in a juxtaposition
of (expected) standard objections and reservations with solutions and answers to the former. Concludingly, the paper is
put into a bigger context within the respective fields.

Standards in Rationality
In the following, when talking about rationality, we mostly
want to refer to the manner in which people derive conclusions when considering things deliberately in the domain of
individual problem-solving, also including the conformity of
one’s beliefs with one’s reasons for those beliefs or of one’s
actions with one’s reasons for those actions. In consequence,
at least for our considerations, beliefs and knowledge (which
are also seen as presuppositions for respective actions), that
is the epistemic aspects of rationality, are our main concerns.
Within this context, rationality is intrinsically connected to
an optimality principle, making a decision rational if it is
not just reasoned, but if it is also in certain ways optimal for
achieving a goal or solving a problem.
Several centuries of thought and investigation in relation to
rationality and its manifestations in humans and their behavior resulted in the formation of mainly four abstract general
models (most of which also bring along corresponding normative theories, and even definitions, of rationality):
• Logic-based systems (cf. e.g. (Evans, 2002)): A belief
is rational, if there is a logically valid reasoning process
to reach this belief relative to available/given background
knowledge.
• Probability-based frameworks (cf. e.g. (Griffiths, Kemp,
& Tenenbaum, 2008)): A belief is rational, if the expectation value of this belief is maximized relative to given
probability distributions of background beliefs.
• Game theory-based models (cf. e.g. (Osborne & Rubinstein, 1994)): A belief is rational, if the expected payoff of

1332

maintaining the belief is maximized relative to other possible beliefs.
• Accounts based on the use of heuristics (cf.
(Gigerenzer, Hertwig, & Pachur, 2011)).

in models of (human) rationality. Nonetheless, from our point
of view, understanding the full meaning and implications of
the commitment to a more “cognitively adequate” theory of
rationality still is in an early stage, with researchers in different disciplines, both on the more theoretical and the empirical
side, only starting to fully integrate these concepts into their
accounts of rationality and rational behavior. In the following, we want to sketch some important developments and insights, preparing the ground for the subsequent presentation
of our account of “subject-centered rationality”.

e.g.

Unfortunately, when comparing the different conceptions, it
shows that the frameworks (and also the resulting definitions
of rationality) are in many cases almost orthogonal to each
other, making them in the best case incommensurable, if not
inconsistent or even partly contradictory in their modeling assumptions. Also, in many cases the predictive power of these
classical theories of rationality turns out to be rather limited
(at least when applied to real-world examples instead of artificially simplified and constructed scenarios), as they have
more normative or postdictive-explanatory character.
Even more, although each of the listed accounts has gained
merit in modeling certain aspects of human rationality, the
generality of each such class of frameworks has at the same
time been challenged by psychological experiments or theoretical objections. On the one hand, studies by Byrne on
human reasoning with conditionals (Byrne, 1989) indicated
severe deviations from classical logic (see below), a finding
also supported by human subjects failing at a seemingly simple logical task in the famous Wason-selection task (Wason,
1966). Similarly, Tversky and Kahneman’s Linda problem
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1983) illustrates a striking violation
of the rules of probability theory. On the other hand, gamebased frameworks are questionable due to the lack of a unique
concept of optimality in game-theory which could possibly
support different “rational behaviors” for one and the same
situation (just think of the plethora of different equilibrium
concepts which have been derived from the original Nash
equilibrium, cf. e.g. (Halpern, 2008)). Finally, heuristic approaches to judgment and reasoning (Gigerenzer, 2008) are
often seen as approximations to a rational ideal and in some
cases could work in practice, but mostly lack formal transparency and explanatory power. Also, from a methodological
or philosophical point of view, severe reservations can be put
forward: Due to the open nature of the collection of heuristics
(the “heuristic toolbox”) propagated in most current accounts,
the possibility of falsification and refutation of modeling assumptions and theories is not guaranteed (as always another
heuristics could be introduced, covering cases previously not
accounted for), and a (reasonable) completion of the model
can neither be checked for, nor guaranteed at any point.

Theoretical Considerations

A More Cognitive Perspective
Already starting out with Simon’s seminal work on “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice” (Simon, 1955) more than
half a century ago, conceptually different takes on rationality
and rational behavior have been introduced into the discussion. Where logic-based, probability-based, and game-based
accounts normally do not take into account limitations and
cognitive properties of the reasoner (i.e., in our case, the human agent), the last decades have seen a growth of awareness for the importance and indispensability of these factors

In (Simon, 1955), Simon articulates a simple but groundbreaking insight: (Human) agents are bounded in their resources and computational power. Once accepted, this proposition has far reaching consequences for the entire conceptual
endeavor of formalizing and modeling rationality. All of a
sudden, internal limitations of the reasoner, like limitations
on working memory and computational power, but also external constraints, like limited time for decision-making, or
incomplete and possibly also false information, have to be accounted for when creating a framework for rationality. Where
this might not necessarily be a problem at first sight, it casts
more than just a slight shadow of doubt on some of the fundamental assumptions underlying many “classical” accounts of
rationality: It might be the case that reaching a conclusion via
modus ponens in a logic-based model, once the preconditions
are fulfilled, can computationally be realized rather simple but what if the reasoner has to deal with incomplete information? If expectations have to be maximized in a probabilitybased model, where actually do the priors come from, once
their existence cannot just be imported as given by the modeling assumptions? For many game-theoretic settings, even
modern computers have a hard time finding equilibria or optimal solutions to not overly complex problems - how then
can a mere human take the corresponding decision within a
split second?
Although these issues clearly were identified as urgent
questions, subsequent attempts at solutions mostly tried to
solve the appearing problems within the original models,
instead of putting the foundations to the proof and (possibly) having to construct entirely new models of rationality.
Nonetheless, this has changed over the course of the last
years. In a reply to Colman’s article “Cooperation, psychological game theory, and limitations of rationality in social
interaction” (Colman, 2003), Kokinov challenges traditional
views on rationality (Kokinov, 2003). Taking an initial stance
similar to Colman’s, that is agreeing that rationality fails as
both, descriptive theory of human decision-making and normative theory for good decision-making, Kokinov reaches a
different, more radical conclusion than Colman did before.
Instead of trying to fix the concept of rationality by redefining it, adding formerly unconsidered criteria for optimization
of some kind, he proposes to replace the concept of rationality as a theory in its own right by a multilevel theory based
on cognitive processes involved in decision-making. Where

1333

Colman proposes a collection of ad-hoc strategies for explaining the deviations from rationality which people exhibit in
their behavior, Kokinov proposes analogy as means of unifying the different, formerly unconnected parts of Colman’s
attempt at describing the mechanisms of decision-making. In
Kokinov’s view, the classical concept of utility making has to
be rendered as an emergent property, which will emerge in
most, but not all, cases, converting rationality itself into an
emergent phenomenon, assigning rational rules the status of
approximate explanations of human behavior.
Of course, this also defines a rather extreme position. But
also scholars in “more standard” disciplines of rationality research, as for example decision theory, have become aware
of fundamental problems with the traditional conception of
rationality. In (Gilboa, 2010), Gilboa (in accordance with an
earlier definition in (Gilboa & Schmeidler, 2001)) defines rationality as a subjective concept: “(...) a mode of behavior is
rational for a given decision maker if, when confronted with
the analysis of her behavior, the decision maker does not wish
to change it.”. This of course has far-reaching consequences.
First of all, rationality becomes subject-centered, in that what
is rational might vary with the population in question. But
probably the most important implication is the dependence
on the individual subject’s abilities and limitations. If the decision maker does not understand the analysis, or why her
behavior is not judged as rational, she cannot be judged irrational for not complying with the alleged norm of rationality.
If limited cognitive capacities do not allow the reasoner to
understand the rules he should follow in his reasoning (e.g.
the Neumann-Morgenstern theory (von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944)), but would always take the same decision again,
he has to be called rational.

Experimental Evidence
But also on the more empirical side, there is evidence galore
that cognitive capacities and limitations have a clear influence on behavior and decision-making. Evidence for a crucial role of analogy as cognitive ability in decision-making
can be found in psychological studies on decision-making
and choice processes. An overview by Markman and Moreau
(2001), based on experiments and observations from psychological studies (amongst others on consumer behavior and
political decision-making), reaches the conclusion that there
are at least two central ways how analogy-making influences
choice processes. Analogies to other domains can provide
means of representation for a choice situation, as generally
speaking the making of a decision relies on a certain degree
of familiarity with the choice setting. In many cases of this
kind, analogy plays a crucial role in structuring the representation of the choice situation, and thus may strongly influence
the outcome of a decision. Also, structural alignment (a key
process of analogy-making) plays a role when comparing the
different possible options offered by a decision situation, with
new options being learned by comparison to already known
ones. An experimental study by Kokinov (2005) demonstrated that people actually do use analogies in the process

of decision-making, with significant benefit already if only
one case is found to be analogous to the choice situation under consideration. Furthermore, evidence has been found that
there is no significant difference between close and remote
analogies in this process, and that people are not limited to
rely only on analogous cases from their own experience, but
that also cases which were only witnessed passively (e.g., by
being a bystander, or learning about a situation from reports
in the media) may have beneficial influence.
Another example can be given in form of well-known
studies on human decision-making under time pressure,
which show a change in the applied inference procedure.
In (Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 2008), the authors report that,
whilst the best predicting model of human inference for decision making in an unstressed condition was a weighted linear model integrating all available information, when time
pressure was induced, best predictions were obtained by using a simple lexicographic heuristic (Fishburn, 1974). When
speculating about the precise way in which the induced pressure influences the reasoning process, the presumed change
from a more complex strategy using complex relational structures to a simple single-attribute-based procedure, one possible explanation can again be found in research on analogymaking: In (Tohill & Holyoak, 2000), it is reported that anxiety made participants of an analogical-reasoning experiment
switch from a preference for complex relational mappings to
simple attribute-based mappings. So presupposing that analogy to already familiar situations serves as a basis for the
decision-making, this reduction of the complexity of the mapping would be in line with the observed change in strategies.

Cornerstones of “Subject-Centered
Rationality”
Continuing and expanding thoughts already started for example in (Besold et al., 2011) and (Besold et al., 2012), in
this section, we want to present some key features and cornerstones of a new account and understanding of rationality
which we call “subject-centered rationality”. What shall be
presented is not yet another model of rationality and rational behavior, but an overall view and meta-conception of rationality, defining a supporting and limiting background and
context for the construction of new models:
1. Rationality in a human context clearly has to be considered
as a subject-centered notion, demanding for the integration
of subject-related properties and constraints. This goes in
line with Simon’s and Gilboa’s already discussed positions
in that there is no use establishing models and norms which
can never be implemented or fulfilled by human reasoners
due to limitations of the agent or of its environment. Going
back to the very beginnings, taking Aristotle’s characterization of humans as rational animals as defining statement,
a framework of rationality which cannot be applied at any
moment by a human in everyday life has to be considered
as limited in its usefulness and adequacy. This means that
especially limiting constraints of human cognition, as for

1334

example the computational boundedness of human agents
and thus also the computational complexity of the rationality theory at hand, have to be accounted for.
2. The main aspect of theories and models of rationality has
to be their use and applicability as positive theories, and
not as mere normative or postdictive explanatory accounts.
A valuable and adequate account of rationality has to provide a feasible prediction of human rational behavior and
decision-making when being provided with the information the human reasoner can access at the moment of reasoning, that is, when possibly only having access to incomplete knowledge, when having to deal with ambiguities and
possible false assessments of situations, etc.
3. A feasible theory of rationality does not have to be committed to one single formal modeling paradigm, but instead of
being monolithic should pursue a holistic approach. Different formalisms and approaches to modeling should be unified and integrated into one account, providing the amalgamation of the different approaches with the union of their
respective advantages and particular strengths, whilst mitigating each others deficiencies and weaknesses. Logicbased formalisms can be used alongside probability-based
techniques alongside heuristic elements alongside models of cognitive core capacities alongside game-theoretic
means for utility maximization. This integration of means
and paradigms is governed by two guiding principles, the
appropriateness with respect to the boundedness and the
limited resources of the human reasoner, and the respect
for and reproduction of human particularities in rational
behavior and decision-making.
As should have become obvious from the above listing,
we clearly consider rationality as a concept which is not
connected to a particular formalism or theoretical modeling
paradigm, but instead see it as possibly a plethora of different
mechanisms competing, interacting and contributing to what
we externally observe as a single capacity. Of course, this
brings along challenges and questions, but from our point of
view at the same time offers even more chances and opportunities. In the following, we want to give two examples where
incorporating different (formal) paradigms into (distinct) traditional contexts has shown to be highly profitable:
With “algorithmic rationality”, Halpern and Pass (2011)
proposed a framework including computational costs in
otherwise game-theoretical notions of rationality, allowing
to directly take into account the complexity dimension of
agents’ boundedness when modeling rationality with gametheoretical means.
“Probabilistic dynamic epistemic logic” by Kooi (2003)
presents an attempt at amalgamation between probabilistic
and logical views of rationality, which can for example be
used when treating with aspects of rationality at the intersection between epistemic logic and game theory.
Also, we strongly advocate the integration of factors and
mechanisms describing the influence of cognitive capacities

and abilities into models of rationality, possibly offering entirely new perspectives and explanations for classical paradoxes of human rationality, as illustrated by the following examples:
Well-known empirical studies by Byrne (1989) question
whether human reasoning can be covered by a classical logicbased framework. Presented with the information given in
Table 1 and asked for what can be concluded from this, from
1. 46% of subjects conclude that Marian will not study late
in the library, erring with respect to classical logic (as denial
of the antecedent does not validate a negation of the consequent). Also, from 2. 96% of subjects conclude that Marian will study late in the library, whilst only 38% of subjects reach the same conclusion from 3.. Thus an introduction of another antecedent (without any indication that the
antecedent should not hold) dramatically reduced the number of subjects applying a simple modus ponens in their process of forming a conclusion. Giving the task and the findTable 1: Inferences and Conditionals (Byrne, 1989)
1. If Marian has an essay to write, she will study late in
the library. She does not have an essay to write.
2. If Marian has an essay to write, she will study late in
the library. She has an essay to write.
3. If Marian has an essay to write, she will study late in
the library. She has an essay to write. If the library stays
open, she will study late in the library.
ings a more cognitive capacities-oriented view than supported
by the logic-based framework, the results concerning conclusions drawn by the subjects can for example be explained
through analogy. People faced with the information given
in 1. will recall similar conversations they had before, using these known situations as basis for their decision on what
to conclude. According to Grice (Grice, 1975), in conversations, speakers are supposed to provide the hearer with as
much information as is needed for exchanging the necessary
information, a rule which also goes in accordance with our
everyday observation. Thus, when being given the additional
information that “Marian does not have to write an essay.”,
the set of candidate situations for establishing an analogy to
the present one will be biased towards situations in which
this information had an impact on the outcome, resulting in
the conclusion that Marian would not study late in the library
either. Regarding 2. and 3., a similar conjecture seems likely
to hold: By additionally mentioning the library, similar situations in which the library might actually have played a crucial role (e.g., by being closed) will be taken into account as
possible base domains of the analogy, causing the change in
conclusions made.
Already more than a decade ago, in the field of decision
theory and economics Gilboa and Schmeidler (1995) devel-

1335

oped an (at least partly) case-based theory and model for
decision-making under uncertainty. In their model, cases are
primitive and provide a simple axiomatization of a decision
rule that selects an act to be performed based on the act’s
past performance in similar cases. Each act is evaluated by
the sum of the utility levels that resulted from using this act
in past cases, where the degree of (dis)similarity between
the past cases and the problem at hand is accounted for by
weighting the respective utility by the value of a similarity
measure between both situations. Remarkably, this formal
approach in a natural way gives rise to (amongst others) the
notions of satisficing decisions and aspiration levels (cf. also
(Gilboa & Schmeidler, 2001) for a detailed account).

Solutions for Problems of a Subject-Centered
Notion of Rationality
Of course, a positive subject-centered approach to rationality
brings along quite some ground for reservations and skepticism. In the following, we want to address some of the most
probable objections.
Doesn’t your account collapse into pure subjectivity, making it not usable as basis for a general theory and framework
anymore? No, it does not. The idea to overcome the problem of pure subjectivity is to identify central cognitive mechanisms, limitations and properties, common to all humans,
and use those as basis for building up the theory. This is
not a commitment to any particular modeling paradigm, but
rather a strong statement assigning the positive aspects of the
model (i.e. the adequate reflection of actual human properties) a higher priority than detail decisions for how to model a
particular capacity, or overall methodological modeling consistency.
But then, how do you want to (theoretically) explain and
(practically) preserve the individual aspects of your subjectcentered modeling notion? In real life, each human comes
equipped with different gifts and talents. Distinct cognitive
capacities, although present in (almost) every human, are developed to a different extent. This also gives a cognitivelybased model of rationality the possibility to account for different individual behaviors and decisions. Although there is
an overall unified framework on a general human level, once
reliable predictions shall be made on an individual scale, the
weights and levels of developments between these different
capacities will have to be assessed and adapted.
Your account does not provide any normative power, a
key feature one would expect from a theory of rationality?
To the contrary, normativity can be introduced on two levels, allowing for a distinction between a more general form
of rationality, and a subjective one. Even more, contrary to
some of the classical approaches, it is even possible to provide a quantitative account of performance on a normative
scale. On a higher level, normativity can be introduced via
the question “Given the general cognitive mechanisms and
model, how well does the individual perform compared to
the general optimal case?”, that is, by assessing whether, tak-

ing into account goal-oriented behavior, the chosen way of
acting resulted in the best outcome possible for an ideal representative of the species. If this is the case, the respective
behavior or decision has to be considered as generally rational. If this is not the case, comparing the quality of the outcome to the performance of other individuals of the species
can provide a quantification of the quality of the decision or
behavior on a normative scale (e.g. “the subject performed at
least as rational as 80% of his species”). On the individual
level, normativity can be introduced via the question “Given
the individual distribution of properties and limitations of the
individual, how well does the subject perform compared to
the individually optimal case?”, that is, by assessing whether,
taking into account goal-oriented behavior, the chosen way of
acting resulted in the best outcome possible for the individual (a notion reminiscent of Gilboa’s already aforementioned
idea of rationality (Gilboa, 2010)). Also here, similar to the
more general case, a quantitative aspect can be introduced
to judging a behavior or decision rational: Provided that the
model has accurately been fitted to the individual, reflecting
its cognitive capacities, properties and limitations to a sufficient degree, it can be assessed to what extent the subject
made use of its theoretical capacities.

Conclusion
In the present paper, we give an account of basic principles and cornerstones of our positive conception of a theory and framework for rationality and rational behavior, envisioning a modeling paradigm which integrates different perspectives and approaches into a holistic system, giving rise to
an integrated multiverse of rationality, replacing the multiple
(mostly) mutually exclusive competing universes which there
currently are.
From our point of view, our perspective on rationality offers several advantages not only within the field of cognitive
science, but also for neighboring disciplines. A positive, predictively usable theory and framework for rationality (moreover if equipped with a quantitatively accessible notion of
normativity) would allow for manifold applications, for example within decision theory and psychology (serving as an
initial test bed for conjectures and research hypotheses), but
also in more technical fields such as human-computer interaction (allowing for more natural and better adapting interfaces
between man and machine) or artificial intelligence (greatly
contributing to an overall model of human intelligence; cf.
e.g. (Besold, 2011) for an AI-centric perspective).
Of course, there still are numerous open questions left for
future investigation: How can the given cornerstones, characterizations and properties of “subject-centered rationality” be
developed into a completely worked out meta-theory? Which
are the key particularities, properties and limitations of human cognition that have to be integrated and accounted for
by a subject-centered theory of rationality? How compatible
are the already existing “classical” frameworks for rationality
with our proposed view? How do our meta-level considera-

1336

tions relate to conceptual work done in other relevant fields
modeling (and possibly predicting) human behavior, and thus
most likely dealing with similar questions? What would be a
promising paradigm for an implementation: a highly modular bottom-up approach starting out by modeling one facet of
rationality, consecutively adding more modules later, an entirely hybrid top-down approach, applying an amalgamated
broad mixture of formalisms and a very general modeling
paradigm from the very beginning, addressing different forms
and facets of rationality by specialization within the overall
framework, or something in between?
Although these are challenging and demanding questions,
and a complete answer to any of those still is far from being visible, we are convinced that each single one of them is
worth scientific effort and attention already by itself, in their
totality moreover promising key insights into a core concept
of human intelligence and cognition.

References
Besold, T. R. (2011). Rationality in/through/for AI. In
J. Romportl, P. Ircing, E. Zackova, R. Schuster, & M. Polak
(Eds.), Proc. of Extended Abstracts of Beyond AI 2011.
Besold, T. R., Gust, H., Krumnack, U., Abdel-Fattah, A.,
Schmidt, M., & Kühnberger, K. (2011, July). An Argument
for an Analogical Perspective on Rationality & DecisionMaking. In J. van Eijck & R. Verbrugge (Eds.), Proc. of
the Workshop on Reasoning About Other Minds (RAOM2011). CEUR-WS.org, Vol. 751.
Besold, T. R., Gust, H., Krumnack, U., Schmidt, M., AbdelFattah, A., & Kühnberger, K.-U. (2012). Rationality
Through Analogy - Towards a Positive Theory and Implementation of Human-Style Rationality. In Proc. of MATHMOD 12 Vienna. (to appear)
Broadie, S., & Rowe, C. (Eds.). (2002). Aristotle Nicomachean Ethics: Translation, Introduction, and Commentary. Oxford University Press.
Byrne, R. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences with conditionals. Cognition, 31(1), 61–83.
Colman, A. M. (2003). Cooperation, psychological game
theory, and limitations of rationality in social interaction.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26(2), 139–198.
Cottingham, J., Stoothoff, R., & Murdoch, D. (Eds.). (1984).
The Philosophical Writings of Descartes (Vol. II). Cambridge University Press.
Evans, J. (2002). Logic and human reasoning: An assessment
of the deduction paradigm. Psychological Bulletin, 128,
978–996.
Fishburn, P. (1974). Lexicographics orders, utilities and decision rules: A survey. Management Science, 20, 1442–
1471.
Gigerenzer, G. (2008). Rationality for Mortals: How People
Cope with Uncertainty. Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Hertwig, R., & Pachur, T. (Eds.). (2011).
Heuristics: The Foundation of Adaptive Behavior. Oxford
University Press.

Gilboa, I. (2010). Questions in Decision Theory. Annual
Reviews in Economics, 2, 1–19.
Gilboa, I., & Schmeidler, D. (1995). Case-Based Decision
Theory. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 605–
639.
Gilboa, I., & Schmeidler, D. (2001). A Theory of Case-Based
Decisions. Cambridge University Press.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and Conversations. In P. Cole &
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech
Acts (pp. 41–58). Academic Press.
Griffiths, T., Kemp, C., & Tenenbaum, J. (2008). Bayesian
Models of Cognition. In R. Sun (Ed.), The Cambridge
Handbook of Computational Cognitive Modeling. Cambridge University Press.
Halpern, J. Y. (2008). Beyond Nash Equilibrium: Solution
Concepts for the 21st Century. In Proc. of the 27th Annual
ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing.
Halpern, J. Y., & Pass, R. (2011, June). Algorithmic Rationality: Adding Cost of Computation to Game Theory. ACM
SIGecom Exchanges, 10(2), 9-15.
Kokinov, B. (2003). Analogy in decision-making, social interaction, and emergent rationality. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 26(2), 167–169.
Kokinov, B. (2005). Can a Single Episode or a Single Story
Change our Willingness to Risk? The Role of Analogies in
Decision-Making. In B. Kokinov (Ed.), Advances in Cognitive Economics. NBU Press.
Kooi, B. P. (2003). Probabilistic Dynamic Epistemic Logic.
Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 12, 381–408.
Markman, A., & Moreau, C. (2001). Analogy and analogical comparison in choice. In D. Gentner, K. Holyoak,
& B. Kokinov (Eds.), The Analogical Mind: Perspectives
from Cognitive Science (pp. 363–399). MIT Press.
Osborne, M., & Rubinstein, A. (1994). A Course in Game
Theory. MIT Press.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (2008). Inferences under time
pressure: How opportunity costs affect strategy selection.
Acta Psychologica, 127, 258–276.
Simon, H. A. (1955, February). A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69(1),
99–118.
Tohill, J., & Holyoak, K. (2000). The impact of anxiety on
analogical reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 6(1), 27–40.
Tredennick, H. (Ed.). (1933-35). Metaphysics. Harvard University Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgement. Psychological Review, 90(4), 293–315.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory
of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton University
Press.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. Foss (Ed.), New
Horizons in Psychology. Penguin.

1337

