UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Early and Repeated Exposure to Examples Improves Creative Work

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2tv82969

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kulkarni, Chinmay
Dow, Steven
Klemmer, Scott

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Early and Repeated Exposure to Examples Improves Creative Work
Chinmay Kulkarni
Stanford University HCI Group
Stanford, CA 94305-9035 USA
chinmay@cs.stanford.edu

Steven P. Dow
Carnegie Mellon, HCI Institute
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
spdow@cs.cmu.edu

Scott R Klemmer
Stanford University HCI Group
Stanford, CA 94305-9035 USA
srk@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
This article presents the results of an online creativity experiment (N = 81) that examines the effect of example timing on
creative output. In the between-subjects experiment, participants drew animals to inhabit an alien Earth-like planet while
being exposed to examples early, late, or repeatedly during the
experiment. We find that exposure to examples increases conformity. Early exposure to examples improves creativity (measured by the number of common and novel features in drawings, and subjective ratings by independent raters). Repeated
exposure to examples interspersed with prototyping leads to
even better results. However, late exposure to examples increases conformity, but does not improve creativity.

(a) “alien drone. . . ”

(b) “balances on its circular
appendages. . . ”

(c) “buglike alien. . . ”

(d): “This round furry creature gets around either by
walking on his retractable
legs or rolling across surfaces. . . ”

Introduction
Examples are considered “a cornerstone of creative practice”
(Herring et al., 2009). Leveraging examples of prior work
is an established technique in design (Buxton & Buxton,
2007), and many design programs encourage students to use
examples of existing designs (Schön, 1985). However, the
strategies employed by designers to seek and use examples is
largely ad-hoc (Newman & Landay, 2000).
Frequently, these strategies differ in timing—in an informal survey we conducted among designers around Stanford
University, one respondent described inspirational examples
as “huge parts of my initial steps. I need to know as much
as I can about the topic before I feel comfortable moving forward.” In contrast, another said that “I don’t do this [look at
examples] at the very beginning because it gets your mind
stuck in one way of thinking.” This fear of conformity was
echoed by other participants, and one went on to say that he
looked for inspiration only when “facing a creative block.”
These different strategies suggest that examples may modify the creative process differently depending on the point in
the design process at which they are presented. This leads
to the practical question: what are the tradeoffs of looking
at examples earlier or later in the design process? Furthermore, even if there is an “ideal” time to view examples, some
designers feel ubiquitous information access and their own
“thirst for knowledge” bombards them constantly with examples (Herring et al., 2009). How does this repeated exposure
to examples affect the creative process?
This article presents the results of an online creativity experiment we conducted on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants in the experiment generated drawings of alien creatures as a creative task. The pervasive use of sketches to
develop and communicate conceptual designs in the creative
fields (Suwa & Tversky, 1997), and the use of similar tasks
in prior work Ward (1994) inspired the choice of the drawing
task. Focusing on drawings of alien figures makes this task

Figure 1: Sampling of drawings created in our experiment,
with excerpts of participant-provided descriptions

readily accessible to non-designers (see Figure 1 for a sampling of drawings created by participants). Participants were
randomly assigned to one of four conditions: examples early,
examples late, examples early and late, or a control condition without examples. This study’s creativity measures were
the number of uncommon and novel features in the drawings
and Likert-scale ratings by condition-blind raters. Conformity was measured by the number of critical features (features that were directly copied from examples).
This paper’s experimental results suggest that while exposure to examples increases conformity, such exposure early
in the creative process improves the creativity in the output,
while later exposure provides no such benefit. Furthermore,
exposure to examples followed by prototyping and subsequent re-exposure to the same examples improved creative
output even more. This finding may allay some fears of example bombardment. Lastly, in our experiment, participants
exposed to examples created fewer drawings, so these example driven quality improvements may come at the cost of a
lower quantity of creative work.

Related work
Examples: Bringing existing solutions to mind is crucial for
creative generation (Smith et al., 1993). The Structured Imag-

635

ination theory by Ward (1994) describes creativity as a multistep process: in the recall step, people bring to mind existing
solutions and constructs. Then, in the modification step, these
constructs are altered in novel ways. Similar analogical processes are found in other areas of cognition such as analysis
and learning (Gentner & Colhoun, 2010).

Condition
Control
Early
Late
Repeated

Designers often incorporate features from examples directly into their work (Marsh & Bower, 1993, “inadvertent
plagiarism”); but examples also “ultimately alter the nature
of the creative product” in more subtle ways (Marsh et al.,
1996). Lee et al. (2010) found that designing with examples
generally improves the quality of creative work. These findings have also led to tools for discovering, storing and retrieving examples (Kerne et al., 2008; Ritchie et al., 2011).

Task before
first session
Think
Examples
Think
Examples

Task before
second session
Think
Think
Examples
Examples

Table 1: Experimental conditions

Experiment
Our experiment had two goals. First, we wanted to see if
exposure to examples at the start of a creative process leads
to a different quality of creative output in contrast to exposure
when the creative process is underway. Second, we wanted to
to investigate the role of repeated exposure to examples.
Our initial hypothesis was that exposure to examples later
in the creative process would have the same creative benefits
but lower conformity than exposure at the start. This hypothesis was motivated by Weisberg (1999), who observed that
creative failures are more often explained by the absence of
relevant information than the presence of irrelevant information. Furthermore, the presence of one’s own ideas would
inhibit the adoption of sub-optimal ideas from late exposure
to examples (mirroring the intuitions of some designers).
In the case of repeated exposure, the activation account
would predict that, similar to showing more examples at once,
this would result in greater degree of conformity due to higher
activation of features present in examples.

The current work is an extension of Marsh et al. (1996) (itself an extension of Smith et al., 1993), so we describe Marsh
et al.’s experiment in more detail. In their experiment, participants generated drawings of non-Earth-like creatures to inhabit an alien planet similar to Earth. In the example conditions, experimenters provided participants example drawings
of aliens at the start of the experiment. Example drawings all
had certain attributes, or critical features, in common—four
legs, antennae and a tail. The proportion of these critical features incorporated into participants’ own drawings was used
as a measure of conformity. The proportion of other, noncritical, features was used as a measure of creativity. These
non-critical features were classified as either novel (not commonly found on animals, such as speakers or propellors), uncommon (such as a pouch or tentacles), or common (such as a
nose, mouth or two legs).

Participants
We solicited US-resident participants on Mechanical Turk
with a compensation of US$1.00. 81 participants responded
(27 male, 54 female; median age 34). All participants
reported a high-school diploma or a higher degree. This
between-subjects experiment randomly assigned participants
to one of four conditions.

Participants exposed to examples incorporated more critical features in their drawings, but not at the expense of novel
and uncommon features. Instead, their drawings contained
fewer common features. This suggests that while examples
increase conformity by increasing activation of critical features, they do not block retrieval of original ideas (such as
novel and uncommon features).

Procedure
The experiment comprised two drawing sessions, each lasting
7 minutes. Participants were asked to create as many drawings as they could during the drawing session. To encourage
this (and discourage participants from spending time perfecting only a few drawings), the experimental platform included
a clear-canvas tool but no line-eraser tool (Figure 2).
Each session was preceded by a condition-specific task in
which participants were either exposed to examples, or asked
to think about the aliens they planned to draw in the next session (Table 1).
At the start of the experiment, all participants saw a Web
page with instructions adapted from Marsh et al. (1996)
to account for two drawing sessions and a break (see
hci.stanford.edu/example/aliens for actual prompts
used).
For the Example task, participants were shown three example alien drawings for 90 seconds (see Figure 4). We used
drawings from (Marsh et al., 1996), p. 672 . Using the prompt

We use Marsh et al.’s feature-based evaluation metric, and
extend their work by examining how the example timing affects creative output. In addition, we study the effects of repeated exposure to examples in the creative process.
Research methods Our experiment uses a task (drawing
sketches of alien figures) that has previously been employed
to study creativity in a context of no prior training (Marsh
& Bower, 1993; Ward, 1994). Drawing tasks have also been
demonstrated to be appropriate for online experiments (Yu &
Nickerson, 2011).
This experiment was run on Amazon Mechanical Turk
(www.mturk.com), a web-based crowdsourcing plaform.
This platform has been used for experiments on affect and
creativity (Lewis et al., 2011). Mechanical Turk workers have
also been employed to provide perception responses (Heer &
Bostock, 2010), objective labels (Deng et al., 2009; Snow et
al., 2008), and subjective ratings (Dow et al., 2011).

636

Figure 2: Drawing canvas with time remaining (top right),
and an option to clear the canvas (bottom left, red)

Figure 3: Training interface for annotators. The training interface shows what features to label (“click antennae”). The
actual annotation is performed on an identical list of features.

of Marsh et al. (1996) (and Smith et al., 1993), participants
were instructed that examples were only shown to help them
create their original creations, and that we did not want them
to copy the examples in any aspect. For the Think task, participants were asked to “think about aliens” they planned to
draw in the next session for 90 seconds. In the Repeated Examples condition, participants saw the same three examples
before both drawing sessions.
After the second drawing session, participants filled out a
survey that covered demographics, artistic interest and ability
and the thought-process they followed while drawing.

Labeling features in drawings
Participants generated a total of 543 drawings. Each drawing
was labelled with the features it incorporated from the feature set of Marsh et al. (1996) (Appendix). Drawings were
annotated on Mechanical Turk, since the features were welldefined. All workers were US resident and at least 18 years
of age, and were compensated US$0.50 for the task. Workers
who participated in the experiment were disallowed from the
annotation task (and vice-versa). All annotators were blind to
experimental condition.
Workers were trained using a drawing from a pilot participant (Figure 3). Then, each worker annotated a set of seven
randomly assigned drawings. Workers also rated how creative they found the drawing on a 7-point Likert scale (each
annotator saw at least one drawing from each condition).
Lastly, annotators could flag offensive (or non-alien) drawings. Upon review, 34 flagged drawings were discarded by
the authors. Each drawing was annotated by two workers.
Disputes in annotation were resolved by the authors.

Figure 4: Example drawings provided to participants. All
examples contain critical features—four legs, antennae, and
a tail.

637

Condition
Control
Early
Late
Repeated

Critical
0.39
0.57
0.52
0.64

Common
4.21
3.91
3.82
4.20

Uncommon
0.95
1.15
0.78
1.21

Novel
0.47
0.40
0.45
0.54

Total
6.03
6.04
5.57
6.60

Drawings per session
4.00
3.00
3.68
3.00

Likert Rating
3.71
4.10
3.43
4.22

Table 2: Table of means. Means that differed from control at p < 0.05 are bold, those marginally significant (p < 0.1) are in
italics (p-values from the post-hoc analysis using mixed models, see section Results).

Results
We analyze data using a mixed-effects linear model. Since
participants drew multiple drawings per drawing session, unless noted, we consider the participant as a random effect
with a fixed intercept; and experimental condition, drawing
session (first or second), and an interaction term as fixedeffects in all our analysis below. Reported p-values are from
a Monte-Carlo (MCMC) simulation (Baayen et al., 2008).

Examples increase conformity
Following Smith et al. (1993), conformity was measured
as the number of critical features incorporated per drawing.
Without controlling for the drawing session, examples shown
at the start of the experiment increased the number of critical
features that were incorporated into drawings (t(507) = 2.06,
p < 0.05), consistent with results from (Smith et al., 1993;
Marsh et al., 1996). Participants in the Late Examples condition show higher conformity in the second drawing session
(i.e. post-exposure) [t(419) = 1.83, p = 0.07].

Early exposure increases uncommon features

Figure 5: Participants in early and repeated exposure conditions included more uncommon features compared to Late
exposure/control conditions.

The number of uncommon features per drawing increased
in the Early Examples condition (t(419) = 1.61, p = 0.06),
and in the Repeated Examples condition (t(419) = 1.72, p <
0.05), but not in the Late Examples condition (t(419) =
−0.45, p = 0.649) (Figure 5). The number of novel features
did not vary significantly across condition. Participants in
the Late exposure condition created drawings with marginally
fewer common features(t(419) = −1.33, p = 0.09) and fewer
total number of features (t(419) = −1.30, p = 0.09).

t(149) = −2.63, p < 0.05] (Figure 6). Participants in the
Late Examples condition created fewer drawings after exposure to examples (µbe f ore = 4.10, µa f ter = 3.13, t(149) = 1.91,
pinteraction < 0.05).

Discussion
Example timing affects creative output

Early and Repeated exposure leads to higher
subjective ratings

These results suggest that exposure to examples at any time
increases conformity. However, early exposure increases the
number of uncommon features and subjective ratings of creativity, while late exposure provides no such benefits. This
runs counter to both our initial hypothesis and the intuitions
of many designers who delay looking at examples in an effort to reduce fixation and think “out of the box” (Jansson &
Smith, 1991).
One possible explanation for these effects is that early exposure to examples aids the designer in understanding the
scope of acceptable solutions to a problem, and helps form
an initial representation of the creative concept (Heit, 1992).
Prototyping results in subsequent abstraction and refinement
of the initial representation (Lim et al., 2008). Without initial exposure to examples, the refined representation may dif-

Annotators rated drawings in the Early Examples and the
Repeated Examples conditions higher (t = 2.24, p < 0.05
and t = 2.65, p < 0.01, respectively). Intra-class correlation amongst raters (average, random raters) was 0.54
(F(508, 508) = 2.2, p < 0.001).

Examples reduce number of drawings
Unlike Marsh et al. (1996), participants created fewer drawings per session in all example conditions1 [Early: t(149) =
−2.50, p < 0.05; Late: t(149) = −2.14, p < 0.05, Repeated:
1 Since the number of drawings is not a repeated measure, analysis uses a fixed-effects model with interaction, the experimental
condition and the type of session being independent variables.

638

Figure 7: Participant-provided description: “An ambush
predator that does move very much, but lures prey into its
mouth using scent to make them think there is food there. It
only occasionally shifts using the pads on its bottom, which
can also suck up nutrients from the ground or water for emergencies.” Rated highly creative by our raters, this drawing has
no novel or uncommon visual features, and uses a non-visual
feature (scent).
Figure 6: Participants drew fewer drawings when examples
were shown (in the Late examples condition, participants
drew fewer drawings in the second session).

sented (including late in the design process), their inspirational value may be time-dependent.

Multiple Measures of Creativity

fer widely from the one embodied in examples, which would
make it harder to map concepts from the example to one’s
own representation. When exposure is only for a short duration (90s in our experiment), it is possible that only concepts
with high enough activation, such as critical features in our
experiment, are transferred (motivated by Boroditsky, 2007).
Another counter-intuitive experimental result is that repeated exposure to the same examples led to higher creative
quality. This may also be explained by a seeding-and-transfer
account. Initial exposure to examples prevents the refined
representation formed by prototyping from diverging greatly
from the one embodied in the examples. This refined yet similar representation would then allow the designer to learn different concepts on re-exposure to the same example.
In essence, the crucial ingredient that allows repeated exposure to improve creativity might be the prototyping that occurs between exposures.

Results from both the feature-counting measure of creativity
from prior work and the Likert-scale ratings provided by annotators are largely consistent. While the Likert ratings are
subjective, they better capture the creativity in some drawings that combine common or critical features in a novel way,
or use a non-visual feature (for e.g. see Figure 7). Using both
together provides a better characterization of creativity.

Conclusions and future work
This work demonstrates the benefits of early and repeated exposure to examples on creative work. In addition, it suggests
that conformity may be the price one pays for these gains, regardless of when examples are seen. Hopefully, these results
will encourage designers to seek examples early and often in
the design process, when they are most useful.
This experiment also demonstrates a replication (and extension) of creativity studies in an online crowdsourced environment. Crowdsourced experiments often offer a lower
cost, have a faster time to completion, and provide access
to wider populations (Heer & Bostock, 2010). This paper’s
experiment and the labeling tasks took one week on Amazon Mechanical Turk. This was possible because the labeling
scheme from Marsh et al. (1996) provided this study with a
clear taxonomy of features that could be easily labeled by
non-experts. We suggest crowdsourcing as a viable platform
both for experiments that do not need participants with specialized skills or background (or modification per participant)
and for analysis/labeling tasks that easily verifiable.
This work also raises a number of questions. First, the results of the repeated-exposure experimental condition indicate that the processes of prototyping and learning from examples may be intertwined in a creative task. Further empir-

Why did examples yield fewer drawings?
Examples play a dual role in design– first, they inspire different solutions and ways of thinking. Second, they help form
expectations about what characteristics a solution needs to
have (Herring et al., 2009). The decrease in in the number
of drawings created may be due to this second role. Seeing
examples may have signaled a higher threshold for “acceptable” drawings, resulting in participants spending more time
on each drawing, and creating fewer drawings overall.
Our data suggest that this expectation-setting role has a different behavior than the inspirational role. While the number of drawings created decreased nearly uniformly postexposure, changes in creativity measures (uncommon features and subjective ratings) were non-uniform. Therefore,
while examples may set expectations any time they are pre-

639

ical studies could characterize the precise nature of this interaction. Second, this work shows that repeated exposure to
examples is beneficial. How does the frequency of (or interval
between) such exposures affect this result? Third, designers
often spend years acquiring skills and specific domain knowledge. How do such skills and knowledge affect their interaction with examples? Furthermore, similar to cross-cultural
effects of prototyping (Kim & Hinds, 2012), are effects of
examples different in different cultures? Finally, how can the
results of this work inform the design of tools that support
creative work?

Kim, H., & Hinds, P. (2012). Harmony vs. disruption: The
effect of iterative prototyping on teams creative processes
and outcomes in the west and the east. In Proc. icic: International conf. on intercultural collaboration. ACM.
Lee, B., Srivastava, S., Kumar, R., Brafman, R., & Klemmer,
S. (2010). Designing with interactive example galleries.
In Proc of CHI: ACM conf. on human factors in computing
systems (pp. 2257–2266).
Lewis, S., Dontcheva, M., & Gerber, E. (2011). Affective
computational priming and creativity. In Proc of CHI:
ACM conf. on human factors in computing systems (pp.
735–744).
Lim, Y., Stolterman, E., & Tenenberg, J. (2008). The anatomy
of prototypes: Prototypes as filters, prototypes as manifestations of design ideas. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction (TOCHI), 15(2), 7.
Marsh, R., & Bower, G. (1993). Eliciting cryptomnesia: Unconscious plagiarism in a puzzle task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
19(3), 673.
Marsh, R., Landau, J., & Hicks, J. (1996). How examples
may (and may not) constrain creativity. Memory & Cognition.
Newman, M., & Landay, J. (2000). Sitemaps, storyboards,
and specifications: a sketch of web site design practice. In
Proc of DIS: ACM conf. on designing interactive systems
(pp. 263–274).
Ritchie, D., Kejriwal, A., & Klemmer, S. (2011). d. tour:
style-based exploration of design example galleries. In
Proc. of UIST: ACM symposium on user interface software
and technology (pp. 165–174).
Schön, D. (1985). The design studio: An exploration of
its traditions and potentials. RIBA Publications for RIBA
Building Industry Trust London.
Smith, S., Ward, T., & Schumacher, J. (1993). Constraining
effects of examples in a creative generation task. Memory
& Cognition, 21(6), 837–845.
Snow, R., O’Connor, B., Jurafsky, D., & Ng, A. (2008).
Cheap and fast—but is it good?: evaluating non-expert annotations for natural language tasks. In Proc of the conf.
on empirical methods in natural language processing (pp.
254–263).
Suwa, M., & Tversky, B. (1997). What do architects and
students perceive in their design sketches? a protocol analysis. Design studies, 18(4), 385–403.
Ward, T. (1994). Structured imagination: The role of category
structure in exemplar generation. Cognitive Psychology,
27(1), 1–40.
Weisberg, R. (1999). Creativity and knowledge: A challenge
to theories. Handbook of creativity, 226.
Yu, L., & Nickerson, J. (2011). Cooks or cobblers?: crowd
creativity through combination. In Proc of CHI: ACM conf.
on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1393–1402).

Acknowledgements
We thank the Hasso Plattner Design Thinking Research Program for supporting this work.

References
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects
and items. Journal of memory and language, 59(4), 390–
412.
Boroditsky, L. (2007). Comparison and the development of
knowledge. Cognition, 102(1), 118–128.
Buxton, B., & Buxton, W. (2007). Sketching user experiences: getting the design right and the right design. Morgan Kaufmann.
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L., Li, K., & Fei-Fei,
L. (2009). Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database. In Computer vision and pattern recognition,
2009. cvpr 2009. ieee conf on (pp. 248–255).
Dow, S., Fortuna, J., Schwartz, D., Altringer, B., Schwartz,
D., & Klemmer, S. (2011). Prototyping dynamics: sharing
multiple designs improves exploration, group rapport, and
results. In Proc of CHI: ACM conf. on human factors in
computing systems (pp. 2807–2816).
Gentner, D., & Colhoun, J. (2010). Analogical processes in
human thinking and learning. Towards a Theory of Thinking, 35–48.
Heer, J., & Bostock, M. (2010). Crowdsourcing graphical
perception: Using mechanical turk to assess visualization
design. In Proc of CHI: ACM conf. on human factors in
computing systems (pp. 203–212).
Heit, E. (1992). Categorization using chains of examples.
Cognitive Psychology, 24(3), 341–380.
Herring, S., Chang, C., Krantzler, J., & Bailey, B. (2009).
Getting inspired!: understanding how and why examples
are used in creative design practice. In Proc of CHI: ACM
conf. on human factors in computing systems (pp. 87–96).
Jansson, D., & Smith, S. (1991). Design fixation. Design
Studies, 12(1), 3–11.
Kerne, A., Koh, E., Smith, S., Webb, A., & Dworaczyk, B.
(2008). combinformation: Mixed-initiative composition of
image and text surrogates promotes information discovery.
ACM Trans on Information Systems (TOIS), 27(1), 5.

640

