UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Easing and rising of tension from presence of others in player-observer turn-taking in a
driving video game: A near-infrared spectroscopy study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8ns29705

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Oi, Misato
Saito, Hirofumi
Oi, Misato
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Easing and rising of tension from presence of others in player-observer turn-taking
in a driving video game: A near-infrared spectroscopy study
Tao Liu (liu@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Hirofumi Saito (saito@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Misato Oi (oi@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Matthew Pelowski (matthew@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive Informatics, Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan

Abstract
Social facilitation and social support literature,
diverging with regards to increasing versus decreasing
of an individual’s tension, apprehend different aspects
of “the presence of others.” To examine the neural
correlates of social presence effects, whether “the
presence of others” increases or decreases an
individual’s tension, we measured prefrontal activation
while participants performed a driving video game task
using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS). Participants
were divided into single and paired groups, and then
sub-divided according to their game proficiency (high
and low). The participant’s task was to drive from start
to goal with a default route map without an observer
(single group) or under observation by an acquainted
partner (paired group). The paired participants
alternated their player-observer roles in a turn-taking
style (Driver first and Observer second: D1-O2;
Observer first and Driver second: O1-D2). The
behavioral data demonstrated that, regardless of game
proficiency, D1 in the paired group yielded fewer errors
and longer driving time than single players, while no
differences were found between D1 and D2. The
tension evaluation scores in single players and D2 were
higher than D1. In turn, the NIRS data revealed that, in
low-proficiency players, single players and D2 who
first observed D1’s performance showed higher
activation than D1, but neither did so in highproficiency players. These results suggest that the
presence of an acquainted partner (O1) functions
positively to reduce an individual’s (D1) tension in
low-proficiency players. However, prior observation of
another’s performance may negate the positive social
presence effect leading to an increase of tension in the
subsequent task.
Keywords: presence of others; social facilitation; social
support; individual difference; prefrontal cortex (PFC); nearinfrared spectroscopy (NIRS).

Introduction
Social cognitive neuroscience is a burgeoning interdisciplinary field combining the tools of cognitive
neuroscience with questions and theories from various
social sciences such as social psychology. Classical
literature in social psychology has been primarily subsumed
under two heads: direct interpersonal influence via
interaction between persons and indirect interpersonal
influence induced by the presence of others (Allport, 1920).

The latter is a fundamental, as well as the oldest,
experimental research in social psychology. As put by
Gordon Allport (1954), “the first experimental problem …
was formulated as follows: What change in an individual’s
normal solitary performance occurs when other people are
present?” (p. 46). The present study considers this type of
question, and aims to examine the effects of social presence
on the individual’s neural state in a player-observer dyadic
situation.
Two main existing areas of research deal with different
aspects of the presence of others. One is social facilitation
that investigates how social presence affects one’s
performance in a general way. Another is social support that
focuses on the issue of how other person present relaxes an
individual in the stressful environments.
Social facilitation literature has revealed inconsistent
effects of social presence on performance; both performance
improvement and impairment are possible. For instance,
Floyd Allport (1924) demonstrated positive influence from
social presence, coining the term social facilitation to
describe the increase of response merely from the presence
of others. However, not all research shows positive effects.
Sometimes the presence of others impairs an individual’s
performance (e.g., Pessin, 1933). To explain the seemingly
conflicting results, Zajonc (1965) offered a predominant
interpretation based on the Hull-Spence drive theory.
According to Zajonc’s arousal theory, the presence of others
increases an individual’s general arousal level, which in turn
enhances the emission of dominant responses. In a simple
task, appropriate responses are typically dominant, and
accordingly the presence of others will improve
performance; whereas in a complex task, appropriate
responses are more typically not dominant, thus
performance will be impaired.
There has been general agreement with this arousal-based
explanation in the following social facilitation literature,
with considerable debate mostly centered on the source of
arousal itself—evolving several conceptualizations such as
evaluation-apprehension theory (Cottrell, 1972), monitoring
theory (Guerin & Innes, 1982), and distraction-conflict
theory (Baron, 1986; for review see Aiello & Douthitt, 2001;
Guerin, 1993; Uziel, 2007). These theories clearly differ in
their explanations for performance effects of social presence.
However, attempts to pinpoint a single exclusively accurate
theory have been proven unsuccessful (Guerin, 1993), due

1924

mainly to two reasons: 1) the existing theories are not
mutually exclusive—“the theories are unable to predict
performance effects in such a way that eliminates other
possible explanations” (Aiello & Douthitt, 2001); 2) these
theories all attempt to explain why simple task performance
is improved and complex task performance is impaired in
presence of others without objective criteria for determining
the task complexity (Uziel, 2007).
Extensive literature on social support, however, has
consistently shown that social presence not only functions to
increase an individual’s tension level, it also decreases an
individual’s tension as an emotional coping recourse (e.g.,
Cohen & Wills, 1985; Lazarus & Folkman, 1984; Lazarus,
1999). In light of stress and coping theory, when the
individual evaluates an observer as non-supportive, social
presence would cause stressful circumstances, whereas
when the individual appraises the others as supportive,
social presence would produce relaxation.
Therefore, the incongruent results in previous social
facilitation literature may be concomitant, if we accept that
the effects of presence of others may be changed positively
or negatively according to the cognitive setting that an
observer regards others such as a dynamically changing
state of the observer. For instance, proficiency in
performance of a player would be one of the most critical
factors that may change the meaning of others for the player
him or herself.
To better understand the functional formation and
mechanisms underlying the above social presence effect,
there has been a growing effort to explore these outcomes in
the presence of others via activity changes in the brain.
Using electroencephalography (EEG), Kim, Iwaki, Uno and
Fujita (2005) reported larger error-related negativity (ERN)
at three brain locations (Fz, Cz, and Pz) in children when
they performed a go/no-go task under observation by a
friend than when performed individually. The results
suggest that social presence may increase one’s tension
level and accordingly affect behavior as well as attitudes
and feelings.
In contrast, in a functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) study, Karremans, Heslenfeld, van Dillen and Van
Lange (2011) demonstrated that the presence of a supportive
partner reduced prefrontal activation due to easing of
tension when participants endured stress during a balltossing game. It should be noted that, however, the partner
in this fMRI study was not really present, but only virtually
so via imagination. One of the reasons stems from technical
limitation of brain imaging such as fMRI that is unable to
assess cortical function in ambulant participants in social
environments.
Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is also a non-invasive
method for studying functional activation by measuring
changes in the hemodynamic properties of the brain. Unlike
fMRI, NIRS has few physical constraints on participants
and is tolerant to motion artifact permitting serial
assessments of tasks in relaxed and realistic settings (Cui,
Bryant, & Reiss, 2012). In particular, Liu, Saito, and Oi

(2012) have used a 2-channel NIRS unit named as
PocketNIRS due to its portability (length: 100 mm; width:
61 mm; thickness: 18.5 mm, and weight: 100 g including
the batteries), and mobility (transmitting the hemodynamic
signals wirelessly via Bluetooth) to investigate intrapersonal
and interpersonal cognitive processes during a driving video
game. They assigned participants into one control and two
experimental groups. The participant’s task in the control
group was to drive to goal with a route-map illustrating
default turning points, while the memory group was
instructed to drive the memorized default route without map
(intrapersonal process), and the emergency group was asked
to drive with route-map but to change the default route
immediately by an extrinsically given “verbal command”
(interpersonal process). The results demonstrated an
instantly increased activation in prefrontal cortex (PFC)
during an urgent turning maneuver resulting from the
“direct” interpersonal influence via verbal command, but
not from the intrapersonal process.
With respect to social presence effects (i.e., “indirect”
interpersonal influence), using NIRS, Ito et al. (2011) have
measured prefrontal activation when participants performed
a working memory task with or without evaluative
observation by experimenters. The participant’s task was to
observe a sequence of stimuli, and to judge whether a
currently presented stimulus was identical with the one
presented n trials previously. They found that the
participants under observation by the experimenters yielded
more errors and showed higher activation in both left and
right PFC than those who performed without observation.
The results demonstrate that the presence of others, for
instance strange experimenters in their experiment,
increases an individual’s tension and influences the
prefrontal activation.
Early studies of social presence effects have mainly
employed strangers or friends as observers. In the present
study, to sustain homogeneity between single and paired
groups, the participants were recruited from new students
who took a general course of psychology, and the
participants in the paired group were matched to soften the
extreme polarization of familiarity, and to keep impartial
appraisal of the pairs of acquainted participants.
We aimed to extend from the existing literature on social
presence effect—demonstrating both the positive and the
negative aspects of social presence in one experiment. To
address these issues, we measured bilaterally the prefrontal
activation in participants when they performed the goalachievement driving task used in Liu, Saito and Oi (2012)
either without an observer (single group) or under
observation by a partner (paired group). Participants in both
the single and the paired groups were divided into two subgroups depending on their game proficiency (high and low).
The paired participants were asked to alternate their playerobserver roles in a turn-taking style (D1-O2: Driver first and
Observer second; O1-D2: Observer first Driver second),
exploring the possibility that in the first driving task the
presence of a partner (O1) may act as a supporter of D1 in

1925

unfamiliar experimental environments, whereas in the
second driving after observation of D1’s performance, O2’s
presence may change its role into a source of stress (i.e.,
non-supporter).
We tested the following three hypotheses: first, the
participants in the paired group (D1) would show lower
prefrontal activation than those in the single group due to
easing of tension resulting from presence of an acquainted
partner (positive presence effect); second, D2 would show
higher prefrontal activation in the subsequent driving than
D1 due to rising of tension based on observation of
preceding D1’s error performance (negative presence effect);
third, low-proficiency players would be somewhat more
sensitive to the social presence than the high-proficiency
players (task proficiency effect).

Method
Participants
Sixty-two right-handed students (53 males, 9 females, age:
21 ± 2.2 years) from Nagoya University participated in the
present study for the course credit. Participants were
assigned to either single or (same-gender) paired groups,
and subdivided according to their game proficiency (high
and low). The pairs partnered with each other voluntarily,
and their friendships—defined as the duration of their
acquaintance—were assessed by self-report in the post
questionnaire (friendship: 1.7 ± 1.4 years). All participants
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. They were
informed about the purpose and safety of the experiment,
and written informed consent was obtained prior to
participation. This study was approved by the local ethics
committee.

Materials and design
The same driving video game used in Liu, Saito and Oi
(2012) was employed in the present study. During the
experiment, players took a seat in front of a 32-in. monitor
either individually in the single group or with a partner
sitting beside in the paired group. The driving game was
displayed on the monitor without sound, and the players
controlled the game using a Sony game pad. Distance from
the players to the monitor was set to 120 cm.
The participants were asked to obey the traffic rules and
drive from start to goal with a default route-map without an
observer in the single group or under observation by an
acquainted partner in the paired group. Further, two
instructions were given to participants in the paired group: 1)
the player’s performance would be evaluated by their
partner as an observer, who needed to report the player’s
driving performance after the experiment; and 2) they would
be asked to alternate their player-observer roles in a turntaking style during the experiment. With respect to
performance, in the present study we defined driving errors
as that which lead to collision or driving on the pavement,
however, this criterion was not explained to the participants.

Procedure
Players practiced operating the game pad for 180 s, and then
they drove two training trials followed by four experimental
trials with distinct routes. A single trial consisted of a
driving phase and two rest phases (20 s each) before and
after the driving phase.

Apparatus
The PocketNIRS (DynaSense Inc., Japan), operated at 735,
810 and 850 nm wavelengths, was used to measure the
concentration changes of oxygenated hemoglobin (CoxyHb),
deoxygenated hemoglobin and total hemoglobin. Two
probes were attached to the forehead using double-sided
adhesive sheets and centered on Fp1 and Fp2 positions,
according to the international 10–20 system. Each probe
consisted of one emitter optode and one detector optode
located 3 cm apart. During the experiment two sets of
PocketNIRS triggered by one signal were employed to
measure the activation changes in paired player and
observer simultaneously. The sampling rate for each
channel was 10 Hz.

Data analysis
The NIRS data which contained more than 10% non-nearinfrared light signals was defined as noise data. All noise
data, as well as data obtained from participants who did not
follow the instructions, was excluded from further analysis.
Complete data was obtained from 15 single participants (6
high-proficiency, 9 low-proficiency), and 18 pairs of
participants (D1: 10 high, 8 low; D2: 8 high, 10 low).
We focused on CoxyHb during the driving phase in each
group, since the oxygenated hemoglobin is the most
sensitive parameter of regional cerebral blood flow (Hoshi,
Kobayashi, & Tamura, 2001). A linear baseline correction
was conducted on the NIRS raw data to remove longitudinal
signal drift using the mean value of CoxyHb during the 5 s
before the driving phase. Then z-scores were calculated
using the mean value and the standard deviation of CoxyHb
during the baseline period in four experimental trials and in
both the left and the right hemispheres, independently. To
eliminate influence of the errors made by the players during
driving on brain activation changes, the data during the error
periods was excluded from the NIRS dataset. The z-scores
were averaged finally for the driving phase over all trials,
and group-averaged z-scores for each group were obtained.

Results
Behavioral data
In the present study, we calculated the driving time and
counted the number of errors in the driving phase as the
performance indices. Statistical analysis was conducted by
means of Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS)
and the significant level was set at p < 0.05.

1926

● Single
○ D1

Error

■ Single
□ D1

*
*
*

High

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Low

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Game proficiency

○ D1
Time
● D2

□ D1
Error
■ D2

High

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Number of errors

Time

D1 vs. D2 in the paired group Figure 2 shows the driving
performance in D1 and D2 within the paired group. To
assess the effect of the prior observation of D1’s
performance on the subsequent driving of D2 under
observation by O2, we performed a two-way ANOVA on
the driving time and the error numbers independently with
observation experience (D1 and D2) and game proficiency
(high and low) as the between-participants factors. The
result revealed no significant differences for both the
driving time and the error numbers.

Driving time (sec)

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Number of errors

Driving time (sec)

Single group vs. paired group (D1) Figure 1 illustrates the
driving performance including the driving time and the
number of errors in the single and the paired (D1) groups.
To examine the effects of the presence of a partner as an
observer (O1) on the player’s (D1) performance, we
separately performed a two-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) on the driving time and error numbers with
social presence (single and paired) and game proficiency
(high and low) as the between-participants factors.

Low
Game proficiency

Fig.1 Mean driving time and number of errors in the single
and the paired (D1) groups. D1 refers to the first driver in
the paired group. Error bars represent standard deviation. *
indicates p < 0.05.
For both the driving time and the error numbers, analyses
revealed significant main effects of social presence,
respectively [F(1,29) = 4.49, p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.13; F(1,29) =
4.36, p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.13]. The participants in the paired
group (D1) showed fewer errors and longer driving time
than those in the single group. Neither the main effects of
game proficiency nor the interactions were significant.
These results indicate that participants performed better
under observation by an acquainted partner than when alone,
regardless of their individual game proficiency.
Single vs. D2 To examine the social presence effects by O2
on D2’s performance in the subsequent driving, we applied
a two-way ANOVA [O2 presence (single vs. D2) × game
proficiency (high vs. low)]. For error numbers, no
significant differences were found between single players
and D2. For driving time, the analysis revealed a significant
interaction [F(1,29) = 5.36, p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.16]. In the
simple main effect test, D2 showed a significantly longer
driving time than the single high-proficiency players
[F(1,12) = 7.35, p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.38], but low-proficiency
players did not. No significant differences were found
between low- and high-proficiency players in either the
single players or D2. These results suggest that after prior
observation of D1’s performance, the positive effect of
social presence on performance disappeared in the
subsequent driving of D2.

Fig.2 Mean driving time and number of errors in D1 and D2.
D1 refers to the first driver in the paired group; D2 refers to
the second driver in the paired group. Error bars represent
standard deviation. * indicates p < 0.05.
Rating scores on participant’s tension level The tension
scores were obtained through a questionnaire filled out by
the participants after the experiment. The scores were on a
5-point scale (1 = not at all tense, 5 = extremely tense). The
tension index shown represents the average and standard
deviation of the participant’s response in two domains
(unsettled feeling and stress feeling). The tension index was
1.5 (± 0.6) in the single players, 1.1 (± 0.2) in D1, and 1.4 (±
0.6) in D2, respectively. Paired t-test analysis revealed that
the single players and D2 showed significantly higher
tension than D1, respectively [t(17) = 2.06, p < 0.05, 1tailed; t(21) = 1.90, p < 0.05, 1-tailed].

NIRS data
Single group vs. paired group (D1) Figure 3 shows the
average values of the z-score for CoxyHb in the driving
phase in the single and the paired (D1) groups. To examine
the social presence effect on prefrontal activation, we
performed a two-way ANOVA [social presence (2) × game
proficiency (2)] in each hemisphere separately. In both the
left and the right hemispheres, the analyses revealed
significant main effects of game proficiency [F(1,29) = 8.75,
p < 0.01, ηp2 = 0.23; F(1,29) = 7.29, p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.20,
respectively], and interactions [F(1,29) = 11.10, p < 0.005,
ηp2 = 0.28; F(1,29) = 6.24, p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.18, respectively].

1927

6
CoxyHb z score

4

Single/Left

Single/Right

Paired (D1)/Left

Paired (D1)/Right

2

lower prefrontal activation than high-proficiency players,
but did not in D2.
In the right hemisphere, the results demonstrated a
significant main effect of game proficiency [F(1,32) = 4.33,
p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.12]. Neither the main effect of observation
experience nor the interaction was significant. These results
suggest that after prior observation of D1’s performance, the
presence of O2 increased the tension level of D2 in the
subsequent task.
6
4
CoxyHb z score

In the simple main effect test, low-proficiency players
showed significantly lower prefrontal activation in the
paired group (D1) than those in the single group [F(1,15) =
11.83, p < 0.005, ηp2 = 0.44; F(1,15) = 7.44, p < 0.05, ηp2 =
0.33, respectively], but high-proficiency players did not. In
the single group no significant differences were found
between high- and low-proficiency players. Whereas in the
paired group, low-proficiency players showed significantly
lower prefrontal activation than high-proficiency players
[F(1,16) = 13.02, p < 0.005, ηp2 = 0.45; F(1,16) = 8.72, p <
0.01, ηp2 = 0.35, respectively]. These results suggest that the
presence of O1 decreased the tension level of D1 in lowproficiency players, but not in high-proficiency players.

D1/Left
D2/Left

D1/Right
D2/Right

2
*

0

*

-2
-4

*
0

-6

*

-2

High

Low
Game proficiency

-4
-6
High

Low
Game proficiency

Fig.3 Average concentration changes of oxygenated
hemoglobin (CoxyHb) in the driving phase in the single and
the paired (D1) groups. D1 refers to the first driver in the
paired group. Error bars represent standard deviation. *
indicates p < 0.05.
Single vs. D2 To examine the effects of O2’s presence on
D2’s prefrontal activation, we conducted a two-way
ANOVA [O2 presence (2) × game proficiency (2)]. In both
the left and the right hemispheres, no significant differences
were found between single players and D2. The results
suggest that the positive presence effect by O2 disappeared
in the second driving of D2 within the same player-observer
pairs.
D1 vs. D2 in the paired group Figure 4 shows the average
values of the z-score for CoxyHb in the driving phase in D1
and D2. To examine the effect of the prior observation of
D1’s performance on D2’s prefrontal activation in the
subsequent driving task, we conducted a two-way ANOVA
[observation experience (2) × game proficiency (2)] in both
the left and the right hemispheres, respectively.
In the left hemisphere, ANOVA revealed a significant
interaction between observation experience and game
proficiency [F(1,32) = 9.22, p < 0.005, ηp2 = 0.22]. No
significant main effects were found. In the simple main
effect test, low-proficiency players showed significantly
higher prefrontal activation in D2 than in D1 [F(1,16) =
6.14, p < 0.05, ηp2 = 0.28], but high-proficiency players did
not. In D1 low-proficiency players showed significantly

Fig.4 Average concentration changes of oxygenated
hemoglobin (CoxyHb) in the driving phase in D1 and D2.
D1 refers to the first driver in the paired group; D2 refers to
the second driver in the paired group. Error bars represent
standard deviation. * indicates p < 0.05.

Discussion
The present study was designed to examine the neural
substrate of social presence effects in a natural playerobserver environment. To achieve this goal, we measured
prefrontal activation in participants without an observer
(single group) and with an observer (paired group) during a
driving video game using PocketNIRS. In this regard, we
tested whether two paired groups (driver first D1 and driver
second D2) manipulated in a player-observer turn-taking
style consistently demonstrated lower prefrontal activation
than the single players, regardless of prior experience of
observation in D1 and D2.
Three main findings were obtained, and will be discussed
in turn. First, the present data demonstrated lower prefrontal
activation in the paired group (D1) than in the single group.
The result is consistent with our hypothesis suggesting that
the presence of others may serve as a supportive role
relaxing an individual (positive presence effect).
Second, in the same social environment the present data
revealed higher prefrontal activation in D2 than in D1. This
result indicates that the supportive role of the observer may
change to a non-supportive role, and increase an
individual’s tension (negative presence effect).
Third, as predicted, the above two effects were confirmed
only in low-proficiency players, but not in high-proficiency
players (task proficiency effect).

1928

A unique aspect of the present study is that we
demonstrated controversial aspects of social presence
effects within one experiment: the presence of others may
act positively to relax the individual as well as negatively to
stress the individual, depending upon how the individual
evaluates the role of the observer (supporter or nonsupporter). Previous social facilitation studies have mostly
emphasized the negative aspects of social presence leading
to rising of tension. Social presence, however, is not just a
major source of stress. Social support literature has also
demonstrated the benefits of the presence of others to the
individual’s level of tension (e.g., Cohen & Wills, 1985;
Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). Consistent with social support,
the present study confirmed that the presence of others
could reduce an individual’s tension level. It is particularly
interesting that after the prior observation of the partner’s
performance, the supportive effect of social presence
disappeared; the supportive role of the observer may change
to non-supportive role in the subsequent task.
The present study provides an important theoretical
implication. The early social facilitation and social support
literature has mainly focused on two distinct aspects of
social presence effects, respectively (e.g., Cohen and Wills,
1985; Zajonc, 1965). The present study bridges a gap
between them suggesting that research into social presence
effects would benefit from combining the ideas of two
theories and addressing the role of observer as an important
moderating variable subject to subjective appraisal of the
observer.
In conclusion, the present study suggests that research
into social presence effect would be benefited by addressing
individual differences, specifically how an individual
evaluates the role of others, as well as the individual’s task
proficiency. Further study is needed to explore the neural
correlates of the explicit role of the presence of others
during cooperation and competition.

References
Aiello, J. R., & Douthitt, E. A. (2001). Social facilitation
from Triplett to electronic performance monitoring.
Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 5,
163-180.
Allport, F. H. (1920). The influence of the group upon
association and thought. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 3, 159-182.
Allport, F. H. (1924). Social psychology. Cambridge, Mass.:
Houghton-Mifflin.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The historical background of modern
social psychology. In G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of
social psychology, Vol. 1, Cambridge, Mass.: AddisonWesley.
Baron, R. S. (1986). Distraction-conflict theory: progress
and problems. Advances in Experimental Psychology, 19,
1-40.
Bond, C. F., & Titus, L. J. (1983). Social facilitation: a
meta-analysis of 241 studies. Psychological Bulletin, 94,
265-292.

Cohen, S., & Wills, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, and
the buffering hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 310357.
Cottrell, N. B. (1972). Social facilitation. In C. G.
McClintock (Eds.), Experimental social psychology, New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Cui, X., Bryant, D. M., & Reiss, A. L. (2012). NIRS-based
hyperscanning reveals increased interpersonal coherence
in superior frontal cortex during cooperation. NeuroImage,
59, 2430-2437.
Granados, C., & Wulf, G. (2007). Enhancing motor learning
through dyad practice: contributions of observation and
dialogue. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 78,
197-203.
Guerin, B. (1993). Social facilitation. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Guerin, B., & Innes, J. M. (1982). Social facilitation and
social monitoring: a new look at Zajonc’s mere presence
hypothesis. British Journal of Social Psychology, 21, 7-18.
Hoffman, S. G., Moscovitch, D. A., Litz, B. T., Kim, H. –J.,
Davis, L. L., & Pizzagalli, D. A. (2005). The worried
mind: autonomic and prefrontal activation during
worrying. Emotion, 5, 464-475.
Hoshi, Y., Kobayashi, N., & Tamura, M. (2001).
Interpretation of near-infrared spectroscopy signals: a
study with a newly developed perfused rat brain model.
Journal of Applied Physiology, 90, 1657-1662.
Ito, H., Yamauchi, H., Kaneko, H., Yoshikawa, T., Nomura,
K., & Honjo, S. (2011). Prefrontal overactivation,
autonomic arousal, and task performance under evaluative
pressure: a near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) study.
Psychophysiology, 48, 1562-1570.
Karremans, J. C., Heslenfeld, D. J., van Dillen, L. F., & Van
Lange, P. A. M. (2011). Secure attachment partners
attenuate neural responses to social exclusion: an fMRI
investigation. International Journal of Psychophysiology,
81, 44-50.
Kim, E. Y., Iwaki, N., Uno, H., & Fujita, T. (2005). Errorrelated negativity in children: effect of an observer.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 28(3), 871-883.
Lazarus, R. S. (1999). Stress and emotion: a new synthesis.
New York: Springer.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and
coping, New York: Springer.
Liu, T., Saito, H., & Oi, M. (2012). Distinctive activation
patterns under intrinsically versus extrinsically driven
cognitive loads in prefrontal cortex: a near-infrared
spectroscopy study using a driving video game.
Neuroscience Letters, 506, 220-224.
Pessin, J. (1933). The comparative effects of social and
mechanical stimulation on memorizing. American Journal
of Psychology, 45, 263-270.
Uziel, L. (2007). Individual difference in the social
facilitation effect: a review and meta-analysis. Journal of
Research in Personality, 41, 579-601.
Zajonc, R. B. (1965). Social facilitation. Science, 149, 269274.

1929

