UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of explicit knowledge on transfer of visuomotor sequence learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kt4d9ff

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Tanaka, Kanji
Watanbe, Katsumi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of explicit knowledge on transfer of visuomotor sequence learning
1

Kanji Tanaka (kanji@fennel.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp)

Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
2
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science

1

Katsumi Watanabe (kw@fennel.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp)

Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo

Abstract
Skilled, sequential movements can be acquired explicitly or
implicitly. In the present study, we examined the effects of explicit
knowledge obtained through instruction or spontaneous detection
on transfer of visuomotor sequence learning. In the first session,
participants learned a visuomotor sequence by trial and error. In
subsequent sessions, the sequence was changed according to
specific rules. Some participants received explicit instruction about
which specific rules changed, while the others did not. Knowledge
of changes via explicit instruction led to slower performance with
fewer errors; the sluggishness persisted even in the last phase of
transfer learning. On the other hand, knowledge discovered
independently by the participants produced slower performance in
the initial phase of learning with fewer errors, but their
performance speed eventually reached the same level as that of the
unaware participants. These results suggest that explicit knowledge
may help to reduce errors in the initial phase of visuomotor
sequence learning but may interfere with increasing speed,
particularly when the knowledge is given rather than found.
Keywords: Sequence learning; Explicit knowledge; Transfer;
Interference

Introduction
Skilled sequential movements, such as typing on a
keyboard, dialing a phone number, or playing the piano,
have key roles in motor behavior in daily life. Many studies
have examined how people acquire or improve such
sequential behaviors. One of the most common ways to
investigate the acquisition of sequential learning is called
the Serial Reaction Time (SRT) task (Nissen & Bullemer,
1987). In this task, participants press one of four aligned
buttons that are associated with visual stimuli at different
positions. In several experimental blocks, a specific
sequence was repeated or partly repeated, but participants
were not informed of the repetition and did not notice the
structure of the sequence (because the sequence was long
enough; for example, see Reed & Johnson, 1994; Reber &
Squire, 1988). Nevertheless, a reduction in response time
occurs without awareness of the sequence structure. In
another paradigm, participants first learn a sequence of
finger movements and then performance is measured in
terms of speed and accuracy (i.e., this paradigm focuses on
improvement in performance rather than acquisition) (Karni
et al., 1998; Walker et al., 2003).

Explicit knowledge (e.g., whether or not participants notice
a repeated sequence and whether or not they were instructed
about the sequence explicitly) likely leads to various
changes in performance and learning processes in terms of
speed and accuracy. In general, implicit learning in the SRT
task facilitates response even when participants do not
notice a specific sequence (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987).
Curran and Keele (1993) assigned participants into three
groups: the intentional, more aware, and less aware groups.
In the intentional group, the participants were instructed
about the repeated sequence before completing the task. The
authors defined the participants who were aware of the
repeated sequence as the more-aware group and those who
were not aware of the sequence as the less-aware group.
Participants in that study conducted a single task first, then a
dual task. In the single-task blocks, participants were
required to press certain buttons when an X appeared on the
screen. In the dual-task blocks, a tone sounded several times
within the 200-ms stimulus-response interval of the primary
task, and the tones were composed of low and high pitches.
The participants were instructed to count the number of
high-pitched tones while ignoring the low-pitched tones.
The results showed that all three groups differed in terms of
performance time in the single task: explicit knowledge
conveyed intentionally before starting the task led to faster
performance during the task. However, in the dual task, the
groups did not differ in terms of performance times. They
interpreted the results as signifying that awareness affects
sequence learning only when attention is fully available;
when attention was divided, additional knowledge gained by
the aware and intentional groups was not conveyed to the
non-attentional mechanism. Similarly, in a previous study
(Moisello et al., 2011), participants performed visuomotor
sequence learning of a finger opposition task, and response
time (i.e., the interval between stimulus presentation and the
onset of the corresponding touch) and touch duration (i.e.,
the contact time between thumb and another finger) were
measured for each finger opposition movement of the
sequence. The results indicated that sequence learning
induced a double-faced effect on motor performance: the
participants who were instructed explicitly about a sequence
decreased their reaction times, but increased their touch
duration, which was regarded as the combination of a
sensory phase and a motor preparation phase. Thus, whether

1036

explicit knowledge enhances or interferes with performance
in sequential learning is still under debate.
In the present study, we examined the effects of explicit
knowledge on transfer of visuomotor sequence learning by
using another sequential learning paradigm employing
instruction or spontaneous detection. The task we employed
was a sequential button press task that was originally
devised for monkeys as participants (Hikosaka et al., 1995;
Rand et al., 1998) and subsequently used on humans
(Hikosaka et al., 1995, 1996, 2002; Sakai et al., 1998, 2003)
and with which performance improvements in terms of
speed and accuracy can be measured separately (Hikosaka
et al., 1995, 1996, 2002; Sakai et al., 1998, 2003; Watanabe
et al., 2006, 2010). In the first session, participants were
required to complete a visuomotor sequence learning task
without any instruction (i.e., by trial and error). In the
subsequent sessions, the sequence was altered according to a
specific rule; either the first and the third responses were
switched (reversed) or the first and the second responses
were switched (partially reversed). Some participants were
explicitly instructed about the specific rule changes before
performing the task, while the others did not receive explicit
instructions. We also examined whether participants who
spontaneously noticed the specific rules without instruction
used their knowledge to change their performance.

discover by trial and error. Upon success, the LEDs turned
off one by one and a different triplet of LEDs was
illuminated; the participant was again required to discover
the correct order and press the buttons accordingly. When
the participant pressed an incorrect button, all the LED
buttons were briefly illuminated, a beep sounded, and then
the trial was aborted. The participant then had to restart the
trial by pressing the home key. A total of seven sets, which
we call the “hyperset,” were presented in a fixed order for
trial completion. A trial was considered successful when the
participant completed an entire hyperset (seven sets). The
same hyperset was repeated until the participant completed
it successfully for 20 trials (called a “block”). Participants
were asked to perform the task as quickly and as accurately
as possible. We prepared three hypersets, called
“original,” ”reversed,” and “partially reversed.” The original
hyperset was randomly generated for each participant. For
each set, the triplet of buttons were defined [1][2][3] in the
to-be-pressed order. In other hypersets, the spatial
configurations of the sets were not changed, but the
sequences of correct button presses were changed. In the
reversed hypersets, the participants needed to press the
buttons in the order [3][2][1] (i.e., the first and the third
buttons were switched). In the partially reversed hypersets,
they needed to press the buttons in the order [2][1][3] (i.e.,
the first and second buttons were switched).

Method
Participants
Thirty-seven right-handed participants (23 male, 14
female; mean age = 21.02 years, standard deviation = 2.39)
participated in the experiment. They were divided into two
groups: the explicit-instruction group (14 participants; 8
male, 6 female) and the no-instruction group (23
participants; 15 male, 8 female). All participants had normal
or corrected-to-normal visual acuity, normal motor
functioning, and were naïve to the purpose of the study. All
participants gave written informed consent prior to
participation. All procedures were conducted in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Procedure
The participants performed a sequential button press task,
which we call “3 × 7 task.” We used essentially the same
experimental paradigm as previous studies (e.g., Sakai et al.,
2003; Watanabe et al., 2006, 2010). Sixteen LED buttons
(10 mm × 10 mm each) were mounted on a panel in a 4 × 4
matrix and were separated from each other by 8-mm spaces.
At the bottom of the panel was another LED button, which
was used as the “home” key. The participant used his/her
right index finger to press the buttons. The home key was
turned on at the beginning of each trial. When the
participant pressed the home key for 500 ms, 3 out of the 16
target LEDs turned on simultaneously, which we called the
“set.” The participant was required to press the illuminated
buttons in the correct order, which he/she was required to

Figure 1. Schematic flow of the experiment. Participants
were instructed to learn the correct order of button presses
by trial and error. The LED buttons were square-shaped (10
mm × 10 mm) and 8 mm apart.
The participants conducted one session using the original
hypersets, followed by two sessions using the reversed and
the partially reversed hypersets. The order of the final two
test sessions was counterbalanced across participants. The
three sessions were separated by a 5-minute break. In the
explicit-instruction group, the rules of the reversed and the
partially reversed orderings were explicitly told to
participants before the beginning of each session. In the noinstruction group, they were told that the sets were
randomly assigned. For the no-instruction group, the
participants were asked whether they had noticed anything
peculiar after each session. If the answer was yes, then they
were questioned further and asked if they had noticed the
rules of changes in the hypersets. Then, participants who
noticed the rules were defined as the aware group, and those
who did not notice the rules were defined as the unaware
group. Hence, we eventually had three groups: the explicit,
aware, and unaware groups.

1037

(b) Average number of errors before the successful
completion of each trial.

Data Analysis
We used two measures to assess the accuracy and speed of
performance in each block. As a measure of accuracy, we
counted the number of errors before correctly completing
each trial. To evaluate speed, we measured the time that
elapsed from the moment the home key was pressed to the
moment the third button of the final (7th) set was pressed
for each successful trial. Similar parameters were employed
in previous studies and proved to be useful (Hikosaka et al.,
1999, 2002; Watanabe et al., 2006, 2010). We calculated
average performance using each hyperset by assessing five
sections of cumulative successes (i.e., 1st to 4th, 5th to 8th,
9th to 12th, 13th to 16th, and 17th to 20th). For the reversed
and partially reversed hypersets, we normalized
performance time by using each participant's performance in
the last section (i.e., mean performance from the 17th to
20th trials) in which the original hypersets were used as the
baseline. Mean performance times of the five sections using
the reversed and partially reversed hypersets were
subtracted from performance times at baseline.

Results
Learning session with original hyperset
A significant decrease was found in both the accuracy
(the number of completion failures) and speed measures
(averaged completion time for successful trials) in the first
session with the original hyperset irrespective of the group
(Figure 2), indicating that learning did occur [ANOVA; F(4,
140) = 51.44, p < 0.0001; for both measures]. The accuracy
measure decreased rapidly in the first few completed trials
while the speed measure decreased more gradually. These
results are in accordance with those of previous studies
(Hikosaka et al., 1995, 1996, 2002; Sakai et al., 1998, 2003;
Watanabe et al., 2006).

Comparison between explicit-instruction and noinstruction groups
First, we examined the effects of explicit instruction on
the 3 × 7 task. Explicit instruction slowed down
performance. The partially reversed hypersets also slowed
performance. A three-way ANOVA revealed significant
main effects of instruction (F(1, 35) = 13.84, p < 0.001;
explicit > no-instruction), hyperset (F(1, 35) = 40.78, p <
0.0001; partially reversed > reversed), and trial section (F(4,
140) = 145.85, p < 0.0001; post hoc, Shaffer’s method, 1st >
2nd > 3rd > 4th > 5th). A significant interaction was also
found between instruction and trial section (F(4, 140) =
30.34, p < 0.001).
On the other hand, explicit instruction had a positive
effect on the accuracy measure, but only for the first
sections using the reversed and partially reversed hypersets.
A three-way ANOVA revealed significant main effects of
instruction (F(1, 35) = 8.35, p < 0.01; no-instruction >
explicit), hyperset (F(1, 35) = 12.44, p < 0.01; partially
reversed > reversed), and trial section (F(4, 140) = 29.15, p
< 0.001; post hoc, Shaffer’s method, 1st > all other sections).
A significant interaction was also found between instruction
and trial section (F(4, 140) = 12.33, p < 0.001).

Comparison between aware and unaware groups
Among 23 participants in the no-instruction group, 8
participants spontaneously noticed the specific rules of both
the reversed and the partially reversed hypersets during the
experiment; hence, they were classified as the “aware”
group. The other 15 participants did not notice either of the
rules during the experiment and were classified as the
“unaware” group.
Figure 2. Performance changes in the first block with the
learning hyperset. Error bars show the standard error of the
means. (a) Average performance time for successful trials.

1038

0.001; post hoc, Shaffer’s method, 1st > all other sections).
A significant interaction between instruction and trial
section was also found (F(4, 84) = 8.87, p < 0.001).

Figure 3. Performance of the explicit and no-instruction
groups in the second and third sessions using the reversed
and partially reversed hypersets. Error bars show the
standard error of the means. (a) Average normalized
performance times. (b) Average number of errors before the
successful completion of each trial.
Figure 4a shows the mean normalized performance times
of the aware and unaware groups. The aware group
exhibited slower normalized performance times when using
both the reversed and partially reversed hypersets. A threeway ANOVA revealed significant main effects of
instruction (F(1, 21) = 4.99, p < 0.05; aware > unaware),
hyperset (F(1, 21) = 16.83, p < 0.001; partially reversed >
reversed), and trial section (F(4, 84) = 116.51, p < 0.0001;
post hoc, Shaffer’s method, 1st > 2nd > 3rd > 4th = 5th). A
significant interaction between instruction and trial section
was also revealed (F(4, 84) = 10.34, p < 0.0001). The
number of errors observed was higher in the aware group’s
first section compared to the unaware group’s first section
(Figure 4b). A three-way ANOVA revealed significant main
effects of instruction (F(1, 21) = 8.43, p < 0.01; unaware >
aware), hyperset (F(1, 21) = 13.49, p < 0.01; partially
reversed > reversed), and trial section (F(4, 84) = 35.20, p <

Figure 4. Performance of the aware and unaware groups
in the second and third sessions using the reversed and
partially reversed hypersets. Error bars show the standard
error of the means. (a) Average normalized performance
times. (b) Average number of errors before the successful
completion of each trial.

Discussion
In the present study, we examined the effects of the
acquisition of explicit knowledge though instruction or
spontaneous detection on transfer of visuomotor sequence
learning. Knowledge of changes via explicit instruction led
to slower performance with fewer errors, and this
sluggishness persisted even in the last phase of learning. On
the other hand, knowledge discovered spontaneously by
participants produced slower performance in the initial
phase of learning with fewer errors, but performance speed
tended to peak at the same level as that of the unaware
participants (using the partially reversed hyperset). These

1039

results suggest that explicit knowledge may help to reduce
errors in the initial phase but may interfere with increasing
speed, particularly when the knowledge is given rather than
found.
The participants who spontaneously noticed the presence
of the rules showed slower performance than those who did
not notice the rules in the initial phase of the session, which
they performed with fewer errors. The lack of influence of
explicit knowledge on the later stages of learning is
consistent with the two-loop model of visuomotor sequence
learning (Nakahara et al., 2001) and with previous studies
(Watanabe et al., 2006). Watanabe et al. (2006) examined
the influence of explicit knowledge of stimulus
configuration (workspace) in visuomotor sequence learning,
and their experimental paradigm was essentially the same as
that of the present study. After the first session (i.e., learning
a specific visuomotor sequence by trial and error), the
workspace was rotated for the second session without
notifying the participants. It is noteworthy that participants
who noticed the rules of rotation did not improve in terms of
performance time, though they were able to use their
explicit knowledge of the rotation. In the task employed in
the present study, explicit knowledge of the sequence is
critical for performing and proceeding through the task (as
in other learning paradigms that involve explicit instructions
of sequences; Jueptner et al., 1997a, 1997b; Karni et al.,
1995). For other types of procedural learning, including
rotary movement pursuit and mirror tracing, explicit
knowledge has little effect on the accuracy and/or speed of
task performance (e.g., Heindel et al., 1989). Differences in
the necessity of explicit knowledge may explain this
discrepancy between results.
Slower performance by participants who received explicit
instruction might appear contradictory with the results of
previous studies. In the SRT task, explicit knowledge given
before the task could lead to faster performance during the
task (Curran & Keele, 1993). One possible interpretation is
that the role of explicit knowledge may differ in different
paradigms of sequential learning because spatial sequence is
learned by trial and error in the 3 × 7 task, whereas spatial
sequence is defined in a stimulus-driven way in the SRT
task (Curran & Keele, 1993; Nissen & Bullemer, 1987;
Willingham et al., 1989). Another possible interpretation is
that the effects of explicit knowledge may depend on the
demands of the task. Curran and Keele (1993) showed that
explicit knowledge of a to-be-learned sequence led to faster
performance in a single task but not in a dual task, and they
implied that explicit knowledge facilitated sequence
learning only when attention was fully available. In the
present study, the participants were required to complete a
task without instruction first, and then the participants in the
explicit-instruction group conducted the task with explicit
knowledge of the rule changes. In other words, the
participants were required to maintain the prior order and
the instruction to reverse the original hyperset, whereas
participants in the SRT task were required only to retain
information about which button to press. This difference

also might be related to the capacity limit of working
memory. Previous work showed that if an individual is
asked to hold words in working memory and to judge
whether a probe word was one of the retained words,
response time increased with memory set size (e.g., McElree
& Dosher, 1989; Sternberg, 1969). In the present study, the
performance speed of the explicit-instruction group did not
reach an equal level to that of the no-instruction group even
in the final phase. Thus, explicit knowledge given by
another person thoroughly hindered performance speed for
the duration of the experiment. As for individual differences
in hindrance, participants who have high working memory
capacities might not be influenced, and vice versa.
Clarification of this proposal would require further
investigation.
The present findings can be exemplified by a more
familiar hypothetical case. Assume that you are dialing a
phone number that you know well. In this case, you can dial
it quickly. If you are asked to dial a new phone number that
is actually the reverse of the well-known phone number, and
you do not notice this fact, you will become able to dial it
fast. If you notice that the new phone number is the reverse
of the well-known phone number on your own, it would
slow your learning, but you will eventually be able to dial
the new number quickly. However, if you are explicitly
asked to dial the reverse of the well-known phone number,
you will not be able to dial the reversed phone number as
quickly as the original phone number. It is noteworthy that
in the final phase, the performance speed in the explicitinstruction group did not reach the same level as that in the
no-instruction group. This could be because attentional
resources need to be partly devoted to holding explicit
knowledge, which reduces the efficacy of learning.
However, further investigation is warranted in order to
elucidate how explicit knowledge interferes with learning.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for JSPS
Fellows and Japan Science and Technology Agency.

References
Curran, T., Keele, S. W. (1993). Attentional and
nonattentional forms of sequence learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 19, 189-202.
Heindel, W. C., Salmon, D. P., Shults, C. W., Walicke, P.
A., & Butters, N. (1989). Neuropsychological evidence
for multiple implicit memory systems: a comparison of
Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s, and Parkinson’s disease
patients. Journal of Neuroscience, 9, 582-587.
Hikosaka, O., Rand, M. K., Miyachi, S., & Miyashita, K.
(1995). Learning of sequential movements in the monkey:
process of learning and retention of memory. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 74, 1652-1661.
Hikosaka, O., Sakai, K., Miyauchi, S., Takino, R., Sasaki,
Y., & Putz, B. (1996). Activation of human

1040

presupplementary motor area in learning of sequential
procedures: a functional MRI study. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 76, 617-621.
Hikosaka, O., Nakamura, K., Sakai, K., Nakahara, H. (2002).
Central mechanisms of motor skill learning. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 12, 217-222.
Jueptner, M., Stephan, K., Frith, C., Brooks, D., Frackowiak,
R., & Passingham, R. (1997a). The anatomy of motor
learning. I. Frontal cortex and attention to action. Journal
of Neurophysiology. 77, 1313-1324.
Jueptner, M., Stephan, K., Frith, C., Brooks, D., Frackowiak,
R., & Passingham, R. (1997b). The anatomy of motor
learning. II. Subcortical structures and learning by trial
and error. Journal of Neurophysiology, 3, 1325-1337.
Karni, A., Meyer, G., Jezzard, P., Adams, M. M., Turner, R.,
& Ungerleider, L. G. (1995). Functional MRI evidence
for adult motor cortex plasticity during motor skill
learning. Nature, 377, 155-158.
McElree, B., & Dosher, B. A. (1989). Serial position and set
size in short-term memory: The time course of
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 118, 346-373.
Moisello, C., Avanzino, L., Tacchino, A., Ruggeri, P.,
Ghilardi, M. F., & Bove, M. (2011). Motor sequence
learning: acquisition of explicit knowledge is concomitant
to changes in motor strategy of finger opposition
movements. Brain research bulletin, 85(3-4), 104-108.
Nakahara, H., Doya, K., Hikosaka, O. (2001). Parallel
cortico-basal ganglia mechanisms for acquisition and
execution of visuomotor sequences: a computational
approach. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13, 626647.
Nissen, M. J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional
requirements of learning: evidence from performance
measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Rand, M. K., Hikosaka, O., Miyachi, S., Lu, X., &
Miyashita, K. (1998). Characteristics of a long-term
procedural skill in the monkey. Experimental Brain
Research, 118, 293-297.
Reber, P. J., & Squire, L. R. (1998). Encapsulation of
implicit and explicit memory in sequence learning.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11, 248–263.
Reed, J., & Johnson, P. (1994). Assessing implicit learning
with indirect tests: Determining what is learned about
sequence structure. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 585–594.
Sakai, K., Hikosaka, O., Miyachi, S., Takino, R., Sasaki, Y.,
& Putz, B. (1998). Transition of brain activation from
frontal to parietal areas in visuomotor sequence learning.
Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 1877-1840.
Sakai, K., Kitaguchi, K., & Hikosaka, O. (2003). Chunking
during human visuomotor learning. Experimental Brain
Research, 152, 229-242.
Sternberg, S. (1969). High-speed scanning in human
memory. Science, 153, 652-654.
Watanabe, K., Ikeda, H., Hikosaka, O. (2006). Effects of
explicit knowledge of workspace rotation in visuomotor

sequence learning, Experimental Brain Research, 174,
673-678.
Watanabe, K., Ikeda, H., Miyao, M. (2010) Learning
efficacy of explicit visuomotor sequences in children with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and Asperger
syndrome, Experimental Brain Research, 203, 233-239.
Willingham, D. B., Nissen, M. J., Bullemer, P. (1989). On
the development of procedural knowledge. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 15, 1047-1060.
Walker, M.P., Brakefield, T., Hobson, J. A., Stickgold, R.
(2003). Dissociable stages of human memory
consolidation and reconsolidation. Nature, 425, 616-620.

1041

