UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Discourse Goals on the Process of Metaphor Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7874054b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Utsumi, Akira
Nakamura, Kota
Sakamoto, Maki

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Discourse Goals on the Process of Metaphor Production
Akira Utsumi (utsumi@inf.uec.ac.jp)
Kota Nakamura (kota@utm.inf.uec.ac.jp)
Maki Sakamoto (sakamoto@inf.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan
Abstract
Only a few attempts have so far been made at exploring the
process of metaphor production, although a large number of
studies have addressed metaphor comprehension. Therefore,
in this paper, we address the problem of how people generate
metaphors or identify an apt vehicle for a given topic of metaphors. Specifically, we examine how the process and product of metaphor production differ between two discourse goals
of metaphor, namely an explanatory purpose (e.g., to clarify)
and a literary purpose (e.g., to aesthetically pleasing). Experiment 1 analysed the metaphors (or vehicles) generated in the
metaphor production task, and demonstrated that people identified more prototypical exemplars of the property attributed to
the topic as a vehicle for explanatory metaphors than for literary metaphors. In addition, it was found that explanatory metaphors were more apt and conventional, and had high topicvehicle similarity than literary metaphors, while literary metaphors were more familiar and imageable than explanatory metaphors. Experiment 2 used a priming paradigm to assess the
online availability of prototypical and less prototypical members of the topic property during metaphor production. The result was that both prototypical and less prototypical members
were activated in producing literary metaphors, while neither
members were activated in the production of explanatory metaphors. These findings indicate that the process of metaphor
production is affected by discourse goals of metaphor, and suggest that only prototypical members of the category are rapidly
searched for a vehicle during the production of explanatory
metaphors, while both prototypical and less prototypical members are searched to generate literary metaphors.
Keywords: Metaphor production; Discourse goal; Priming

Introduction
Metaphor has been a main topic of research in cognitive science, because metaphorical expressions are frequently observed in our everyday use of language. Hence, a large
number of studies have been made on how people comprehend metaphors (e.g., Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Gibbs, 2008;
Glucksberg, 2001; Utsumi, 2011). In contrast, only a few
studies have addressed the process of metaphor production
(for a notable exception, see, for example, Chiappe & Chiappe, 2007; Katz, 1989). This paucity of research on metaphor production is especially problematic, given that by its
very nature a metaphor is an intentional, linguistic device employed to convey ideas that might be otherwise inexpressible.
To ameliorate this situation, in this paper, we empirically explore the process of metaphor production.
Previous studies on metaphor production analysed the
products of metaphor production (i.e., metaphorical expressions produced) in terms of the qualitative dimensions of metaphors and/or individual differences. Concerning the qualitative dimensions of metaphor products, Fainsilber and Ortony
(1987) demonstrated that descriptions of emotional states

contained more metaphorical language than did descriptions
of actions. Katz (1989) examined the properties of metaphor
vehicles by asking participants to choose, from a set of alternatives, a vehicle that completes a given sentence frame
of science) as comprehensi(e.g., Chemistry is the
ble and apt metaphors. The result was that participants were
likely to choose the vehicles that were moderately distant
from the topic and referred to concrete domains. Concerning individual differences, it was demonstrated that the quantity and quality of metaphor products were affected by individual differences such as writing experience (experienced or
novice) (Williams-Whitney, Mio, & Whitney, 1992), reasoning and imagery ability (Katz, 1989), gender (male or female)
(Hussey & Katz, 2006), and working memory capacity (Chiappe & Chiappe, 2007). For example, Chiappe and Chiappe
(2007) demonstrated that people with high working memory
capacity produced more apt metaphors than did low capacity
individuals.
Although shedding light on the specific aspects of metaphor production, these studies did not address one important
aspect of metaphor production, namely discourse goals of
metaphor. Because metaphors (and other figurative language)
are intentionally used to accomplish certain communication
goals (Roberts & Kreuz, 1994), it is obviously crucial to explore the effects of discourse goals on the process of metaphor production. Discourse goals that are accomplished by
the use of metaphorical expressions can be classified broadly
into two classes: explanatory and literary purposes (Steen,
1994; Utsumi, 2005). These two goals are quite different and
sometimes incompatible with each other; explanatory metaphors are used to clarify certain properties of the topic, while
literary metaphors are used to evoke an aesthetically pleasing feeling by enriching the meanings conveyed by the metaphors. It naturally follows that discourse goals are likely to
affect the process of generating metaphors, or more specifically choosing the vehicles of metaphors. This paper aims at
examining how the process and product of metaphor production differ between these two discourse goals.
In metaphor production, people often have in mind a topic
that they want to express and some properties that they intend
to attribute to the topic. They must identify an appropriate
or apt vehicle to convey the intended meaning (i.e., the information that the topic has the property). Hence, metaphor
production essentially involves the process of searching for or
retrieving an apt vehicle. According to the categorization (or
attributive category) theory of metaphor (Glucksberg, 2001;
Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990), apt vehicles must not only have
the intended property but also be a prototypical exemplar of

2475

that property. For example, consider the topic “rumor” and
the property “quickly spreads from person to person.” People
have to identify an appropriate vehicle to express by metaphor that a rumor quickly spreads from person to person. This
property is true of a number of things such as “virus,” “swine
flu,” and “louse,” but a virus is a prototypical exemplar of
the category “things that quickly spread from person to person.” Hence, the metaphor “The rumor is a virus” seems to
be more apt than “The rumor is a swine flu” and “The rumor
is a louse.”
The research question to be answered here is how people
identify or select a vehicle that accomplishes their communication purposes. This question can be rephrased as how the
process of searching a set of things (i.e., search space) for
a vehicle differs according to whether explanatory metaphors
or literary metaphors are intended. To tackle this problem, we
consider the observed differences between explanatory and
literary metaphors. Some studies have found that semantic
aptness (Steen, 1994; Utsumi, 2005), clarity (Gentner, 1982),
and interpretive richness (Gentner, 1982; Utsumi, 2005) are
distinctive properties for distinguishing between explanatory
and literary metaphors. Explanatory metaphors are more apt
(or appropriate) and clearer than literary metaphors, while
literary metaphors are interpretively richer than explanatory
metaphors. These findings suggest that semantically apt and
clear vehicles may be preferably searched for in producing
explanatory metaphors, while less apt vehicles that enrich the
metaphorical meaning may be searched for in producing literary metaphors. According to the attributive category theory, vehicles of apt metaphors are prototypical members of
the category characterized by the intended property of the
topic (Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990). On the other hand, for
a metaphor to be semantically rich and involve a number of
metaphorical interpretations, its vehicle must be less prototypical because highly prototypical vehicles evoke only the
intended property.
From these discussions, we can derive the following hypothesis about the process of metaphor production:
Hypothesis about process: Only prototypical members
of the category are searched for a vehicle during the production of explanatory metaphors, while less prototypical members are also considered to generate literary
metaphors.
This hypothesis presupposes that people first search prototypical members of the category before searching less prototypical members, regardless of discourse goals (e.g., Giora, 2003;
Rosch & Mervis, 1975). Hence, this hypothesis implies that
when producing explanatory metaphors, they do not have to
search less prototypical members, because prototypical members are sufficient for apt vehicles. However, when producing literary metaphors, people have to search less prototypical
members after prototypical members are activated.
The hypothesis about process implies another hypothesis
about the metaphors (or vehicles) produced.
Hypothesis about products: More prototypical and apt
vehicles are chosen for explanatory metaphors than for
literary metaphors.

Considering that prototypicality and other related properties
such as conventionality and familiarity can be classified into
a more general notion of salience (Giora, 2003), it is also predicted that conventional and familiar vehicles are preferably
chosen for explanatory metaphors. In addition, metaphor aptness refers to the extent to which the vehicle’s metaphoric
category captures an important feature of the topic, and thus
it reflects the similarity between the vehicle and topic of a metaphor (e.g., Chiappe & Kennedy, 1999). Hence, we also predict that vehicles chosen for explanatory metaphors are more
similar to the topic than those chosen for literary metaphors.
In this paper, we test these hypotheses through two experiments, namely, an offline generation experiment and an online priming experiment. In the metaphor generation experiment (i.e., Experiment 1), we examined the validity of the
hypothesis about products by analysing the vehicles generated for explanatory or literary metaphors. We compared the
vehicles for explanatory metaphors and literary metaphors in
terms of several factors: vehicle prototypicality, metaphor
conventionality, metaphor aptness, topic-vehicle similarity,
vehicle familiarity, vehicle word frequency, and vehicle imageability. In the online priming experiment (i.e., Experiment 2), we used a priming paradigm to test the hypothesis
about the internal process of metaphor production, particularly to examine what words (or concepts) are activated during identifying an appropriate vehicle. In the priming experiment, participants were presented with a topic (i.e., an incomplete metaphorical sentence) and its property as a prime
and asked to determine a vehicle appropriate for a given discourse goal. Afterwards, a target word was presented and
participants were asked to make a lexical decision about it.
The target conditions were a word that was highly prototypical of the category made up of the property, a word that was
less prototypical of the category, and a control word unrelated
to the property.
It must be noted here that the previous studies mentioned
earlier analysed only the products of metaphor production using an offline paper-and-pencil experiment paradigm; they
did not directly examine the online processes of metaphor
production. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study to apply an online priming paradigm to the study of
metaphor production.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we tested the hypothesis about the product
by collecting metaphor vehicles in a metaphor generation task
and the ratings of their properties in a vehicle rating task.

Method
Participants Forty undergraduate and graduate students
participated as volunteers. All participants were native speakers of Japanese.
Materials Twenty pairs of a topic and a property to be attributed to the topic were used for the experiment. Topic
words were selected from Japanese abstract nouns comprising two kanji characters, and their properties were expressed
in a Japanese short phrase referring to a salient feature of the

2476

topic. In order to eliminate an undesirable effect of the abstractness of the topic words on the process of categorization
(Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990), we equalized the degree of abstractness of the topic words by choosing them from abstract
categories of words at almost the same depth (i.e., depth of 7
or 8) in the hierarchical structure of the Japanese thesaurus.
For example, the topic word “plan” (“keikaku” in Japanese)
was paired with the property “does not always go as scheduled” (“yotei doori-ni ikanai” in Japanese).
Procedure This experiment comprised two tasks, namely a
metaphor generation task and a vehicle rating task.
The metaphor generation task was conducted by 20 participants. Each participant was assigned all the 20 topic-property
pairs, one half of which were used to generate explanatory
metaphors and the other half of which were used to generate
literary metaphors. Topic-vehicle pairs were counterbalanced
across conditions so that each pair appeared 10 times in both
conditions. The presentation order of the pairs in each group
was randomized for each participant. Participants, who were
run individually, were seated in front of a computer screen.
They were first given an overall instruction of the experiment
and presented with four practice trials (two for explanatory
metaphors and two for literary metaphors) followed by two
groups of 10 experimental trials. In the explanatory metaphor
condition, participants were instructed to generate a vehicle
that clearly explains the given property of the topic, while in
the literary metaphor condition they were instructed to generate a metaphor aesthetically pleasing enough to use in literary works. On each trial, they were presented with a sentence
frame including a topic (e.g., “A plan is (like) a
”) and
a property (“does not always go as scheduled”) in the center of the screen, and asked to generate an apt vehicle that
completes the sentence at their own pace. When participants
came up with a suitable vehicle, they indicated it by pressing the appropriate key on the keyboard. Afterwards, they
typed the vehicle as quickly as possible. Reaction times were
measured from the onset of the topic-property pair until the
appropriate key was pressed (metaphor production time), and
from the key press until the input of the vehicle was completed (vehicle typing time).
In the vehicle rating task, another 20 participants were presented with all the 20 topic-property pairs and their vehicles
generated (i.e., metaphors and their property attributed to the
topic) in the metaphor generation task. They were asked to
rate each metaphor or vehicle on the following four 7-point
scales: vehicle prototypicality (7 = prototypical, 1 = not at
all prototypical), metaphor conventionality (7 = conventional,
1 = novel), metaphor aptness (7 = apt, 1 = not at all apt), and
topic-vehicle similarity (7 = similar, 1 = dissimilar).

Results and Discussion
First, we analysed the metaphor production time for explanatory and literary metaphors in the metaphor generation task.
We eliminated from the analysis extreme outliners (i.e., production times shorter than 2s or longer than 40s, and production times of the trial whose vehicle typing times were longer
than 30s), and averaged the remaining production times. As

Table 1: Means (M) and standard deviations (SD) of seven
factors of explanatory and literary metaphors in Experiment 1
Explanatory
Factor
M
SD
Vehicle prototypicality***
5.14 0.64
Metaphor conventionality*** 4.21 0.90
Metaphor aptness*
5.16 0.67
Topic-vehicle similarity***
3.98 0.43
Vehicle familiarity*
5.90 0.33
Vehicle word frequency
3.14 0.52
Vehicle imageability*
5.05 0.33
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

Literary
M
SD
4.70 0.43
3.31 0.60
4.86 0.42
3.60 0.59
6.09 0.28
3.17 0.54
5.32 0.44

a result, literary metaphors (M=77.39s, SD=50.18s) took
longer to generate than explanatory metaphors (M=55.82s,
SD=29.74s). This difference was marginally significant in
the participant analysis, Fp (1, 19) = 4.18, p = .055, although
not significant in the item analysis, Fi (1, 19) = 2.13, p > .1.
(Note that, in all the ANOVAs reported in this paper, the data
were analyzed by participants F p and by items Fi .) This result
is consistent with the hypothesis about the production process, in that people must search less prototypical members of
the category after searching prototypical members, and consequently require more time to generate literary metaphors
than explanatory metaphors. Note, however, that this result
may not be reliable enough to warrant the hypothesis, because
we had no efficient methods for confirming that participants
really spent all the time producing metaphors. (Hence, Experiment 2 was conducted to collect reliable data on the internal
process of metaphor production.)
We then compared the explanatory and literary metaphors
generated in terms of four factors (i.e., vehicle prototypicality, metaphor conventionality, metaphor aptness, and topicvehicle similarity). Table 1 shows the mean rating values of
these four factors for explanatory and literary metaphors. Explanatory metaphors were rated as significantly higher on all
the four factors than literary metaphors, F p (1, 19) = 44.24,
p < .001, Fi (1, 19) = 9.44, p < .01 for vehicle prototypicality; Fp (1, 19) = 1256.76, p < .001, Fi (1, 19) = 16.76, p <
.001 for metaphor conventionality; F p (1, 19) = 4.76, p <
.051, Fi (1, 19) = 3.70, p = 0.70 for metaphor aptness; and
Fp (1, 19) = 23.53, p < .001, Fi (1, 19) = 8.49, p < .01 for
topic-vehicle similarity. These results are entirely consistent
with the hypothesis about products, confirming that more prototypical and apt vehicles are chosen for explanatory metaphors than for literary metaphors.
Furthermore, we exploratorily analysed three additional
factors of vehicle words — i.e., vehicle word familiarity,
vehicle word frequency, and vehicle word imageability —
that may differ between explanatory and literary metaphors.
These values were derived from the database of Japanese lexical properties “Nihongo No Goi Tokusei.” In this database,
the familiarity and imageability of a word were given as the
mean rating scores on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 to 7, and
the frequency of a word was given as the number of times the
word occurred in a newspaper corpus. In the analysis, these

2477

ple, the pair of the topic “all-night activity” (“tetsuya”) and its
property “unhealthy” (“karada ni aku eikyo wo ataeru”) was
combined with the HPT “drug” (“mayaku”), the LPT “edacity” (“oogui”), and the CNT “speech” (“enzetsu”). In addition, another 20 topic-property pairs were prepared and used
as filler sentences for nonword targets.

scores were used for vehicle familiarity and imageability, and
the common logarithm of the frequency score was used for
vehicle word frequency. The last three rows of Table 1 show
the mean values of these three factors across vehicle words.
Two out of three factors were significantly different; the vehicles of literary metaphors were more familiar and imageable
than those of explanatory metaphors, Fi (1, 19) = 5.25, p<.05
for vehicle familiarity; and Fi (1, 19) = 5.52, p < .05 for vehicle imageability. The finding on vehicle imageability is intuitively acceptable, because literary works often evoke mental
imagery, although Katz, Paivio, and Marschark (1985) found
an opposite result that the vehicles of poetic metaphors were
less imageable. On the other hand, the finding of vehicle familiarity is seemingly surprising, but can be explained by the
assumption that the use of familiar words as a vehicle may
enrich the interpretation of metaphors. Note that this finding
is consistent with the finding of Katz et al. (1985) that poetic
metaphors were rated as being more familiar.

Norming study For each of the 30 topic-property pairs, six
words (comprising two kanji characters) were prepared that
referred to an object or a concept with that property but different degree of prototypicality. Ten undergraduate students
rated these words on the 7-point scale of prototypicality ranging from 1 (not at all prototypical) to 7 (prototypical). For
each topic-property pair, the word with the highest rating
was selected as an HPT, and the word rated as the lowest
of the words with the prototypicality degree of 4 (i.e., the
midpoint) or higher was selected as an LPT. The prototypicality rating of the HPTs (M = 5.91, SD = 0.51) was significantly higher than that of the LPTs (M = 4.37, SD = 0.35),
F(1, 29) = 211.23, p < .001, confirming that LPTs and HPTs
were appropriately selected.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we tested the prediction about the metaphor
production process using a priming paradigm, in which an incomplete metaphorical sentence was presented first with the
property to be attributed to the topic, and the task was to
make a lexical decision about a target word presented after
the metaphorical sentence. The target conditions were a word
highly prototypical of the category characterized by the property (HPT), a word less prototypical of the category (LPT),
and a control target (CNT) that is unrelated to the metaphor.
Faster lexical decisions in comparison with the CNT indicate online activation. If only the prototypical members of
the category are searched for a metaphor vehicle, the HPT
would be faster to make a lexical decision than the CNT, but
the LPT would not be faster. If less prototypical members are
also searched, both the LPT and HPT would be faster than the
CNT. Hence, if our hypothesis about the process is right, only
the HPT would be facilitated when explanatory metaphors are
intended, while both the HPT and LPT would be facilitated
when literary metaphors are generated.

Procedure A within-participants design was used with
each participant processing all the 50 topic-property pairs
(i.e., 30 pairs with word targets and 20 pairs with nonword
targets) under all conditions. The 50 pairs were equally divided into two groups, each of which comprised 15 pairs
with word targets and 10 pairs with nonword targets. One
group was used to generate explanatory metaphors and another group was used to generate literary metaphors. Topicvehicle pairs with word targets were counterbalanced across
all conditions (i.e., two conditions of discourse goal and three
target conditions) so that each pair appeared an equal number of times in all conditions. The presentation order of two
groups of discourse goals (i.e., whether explanatory or literary metaphors were generated first) and the order of the pairs
in each group were randomized for each participant.
Participants, who were run individually, were seated in
front of a computer screen. They were first given an overall instruction of the experiment and then presented with four
practice trials (two for explanatory metaphors and two for literary metaphors) followed by two groups of 25 experimental trials. On each trial, they were presented with a sentence
frame with a topic in the subject position (“A plan is (like) a
”) and a property (“does not always go as scheduled”)
as a prime in the center of the screen for 7000 ms and asked
to consider an appropriate vehicle word to fill in the blank. A
target word (HPT, LPT, CNT, or nonword) was then presented
500ms after the offset of the topic-property pair. Participants
were asked to decide whether the target word was a word or
a nonword as quickly as possible; they indicated decision by
pressing the appropriate key on the keyboard. Finally, they
typed the vehicle that occurred to them before the lexical decision. Reaction times were measured from the onset of the
target word until the appropriate key was pressed.

Method
Participants Fifty-four undergraduate and graduate students participated as volunteers. All participants were native
speakers of Japanese.
Materials Thirty Japanese pairs of a topic and a property
attributed to the topic (including all the 20 pairs used in Experiment 1) were used as primes. For each prime pair, three
target words (i.e., HPT, LPT, and CNT) comprising two kanji
characters were prepared. The HPTs and LPTs were selected
on the basis of ratings collected from independent groups of
participants in a norming study. The CNTs were selected randomly from a dictionary so that they were unrelated to both
the topic and the property, and their word frequency was approximately equal to that of the HPTs and LPTs. 1 For exam1 The

Results and Discussion

mean logarithms of word frequency score were 3.41 for
the HPT, 3.62 for the LPT, and 3.60 for the CNT. They were not
significantly different, F(2, 58) = 0.492.

Only reaction times of correct decision were used in the analysis. In addition, reaction times greater than 10,000ms were

2478

Table 2: Means (M) and standard deviations (SD) of correct lexical decision times in milliseconds for Experiment 2
HPT (High Prototypicality)

LPT (Low Prototypicality)

CNT (Control)

M

SD

DIF

M

SD

DIF

M

SD

Explanatory

1450

550

51

1474

584

27

1501

727

Literary

1431

475

155

1303

420

283

1586

743

Metaphor condition

Note. DIF = difference from control target.

General Discussion

eliminated from the analysis.
Table 2 shows mean lexical decision times and standard deviations for the correct “yes” responses. The time difference
(DIF) from the CNT indicates the extent of a priming effect.
In the explanatory metaphor condition, the HPT produced a
moderate priming effect (51ms faster than the CNT), but the
LPT showed only a small priming effect (27ms faster). On
the other hand, in the literary metaphor condition, both targets showed a much larger priming effect. In particular, the
priming effect of the LPT (283ms) was larger than that of the
HPT (155ms), indicating that less prototypical exemplars of
the category were activated during the production of literary
metaphors. These results are entirely consistent with our hypothesis that only prototypical members of the category are
searched for a vehicle during the production of explanatory
metaphors, while less prototypical members are also considered to generate literary metaphors.
To confirm these differences statistically, we conducted a
two-way ANOVA of Target (HPT, LPT, or CNT) × Discourse
goal (explanatory or literary) on lexical decision times. These
two factors were within participants and within items. First
of all, the main effect of Discourse goal was not significant in
either analyses, but the main effect of Target was significant
in the participant analysis, Fp (2, 106) = 4.54, p < .05. Posthoc pairwise comparisons showed that the priming effect of
the LPT was significant (p<.05) and the priming effect of the
HPT was marginally significant (p = .051). This result indicates that discourse goals did not affect the overall processing
time of lexical decision and the priming effect was observed
in this experiment. It confirms that this priming experiment
was successful and the priming methodology can be applied
effectively to the study of metaphor production.
The most important result was that the interaction between two factors was significant in the participant analysis,
Fp (2, 106) = 3.40, p<.05, although not significant in the item
analysis. The nature of this interaction was that, the simple
main effect of Target was significant in the literary metaphor
condition, Fp (1, 159) = 4.57, p < .05, but not significant in
the explanatory metaphor condition. Post-hoc pairwise comparisons (p < .05) revealed that both the LPT (M=1303ms)
and HPT (M=1431ms) were significantly faster than the CNT
(M =1586ms). Again, these results are consistent with the
hypothesis of this paper, although the absence of a significant priming effect of the HPT in the explanatory metaphor
condition was not consistent with the hypothesis.

The two experiments reported in this paper provided empirical evidence in favor of our view that discourse goals of metaphor affect the process of metaphor production. Specifically, we focused on two types of metaphors — i.e., explanatory metaphors and literary metaphors — that accomplish different discourse goals, and demonstrated that the production
of literary metaphors required activation of both prototypical
and less prototypical members of the category characterized
by the topic property, while the production of explanatory
metaphors did not. This processing difference leads to the
finding on the products that explanatory metaphors generated
in the metaphor production experiment were more prototypical than literary metaphors. In addition, it was found that
explanatory metaphors were more conventional and apt, and
had higher topic-vehicle similarity, while the generated vehicles for literary metaphors were more familiar and imageable.
The finding that less prototypical members of the category
were activated during the processing of literary metaphors
and as a result less prototypical vehicles are selected for literary metaphors is especially interesting, because it indicates
that some metaphors cannot be explained by the attributive
category theory of metaphor (Glucksberg, 2001; Glucksberg
& Keysar, 1990). We have demonstrated elsewhere that the
comprehension of predicative metaphors (i.e., figurative expressions that involve the metaphorical use of a verb or an adjective) cannot be explained by the attributive category theory
of metaphor, and proposed an indirect categorization theory
of metaphor (Utsumi & Sakamoto, 2007, 2011). The finding
of this study suggests a possibility that some nominal metaphors (in particular, literary metaphors) may be processed by
an indirect categorization or other mechanisms.
On the other hand, the finding that prototypical members
were not activated during the production of explanatory metaphors is not consistent with the hypothesis. One possible
explanation of this result would be that the process of identifying a vehicle for explanatory metaphors was so rapid that
prototypical members were no longer activated 7500 ms after the onset of the prime. To test this possibility, we must
repeat a priming experiment by varying the stimulus-onset
asynchrony (SOA) of prime and target, which is left for future research.
The discourse goals of metaphorical or figurative expressions are affected by their grammatical form, i.e., whether
figurative comparisons are expressed in metaphor form “An
X is a Y” or in simile form “An X is like a Y.” Glucksberg
and Keysar (1990) argued that metaphors are more forceful

2479

than similes and alert an addressee that a specific set of properties is intended. Roberts and Kreuz (1994) demonstrated
that metaphors and similes differ in that metaphors are used
to add interest, but similes are used to deemphasize. If the discourse goals really affect the process of metaphor production
as demonstrated in this paper, these pragmatic differences between metaphor and simile imply that the grammatical form
has an important influence on the process of metaphor production. Furthermore, a number of studies have revealed that
several properties addressed in Experiment 1 (e.g., aptness,
conventionality, topic-vehicle similarity) determine the preferred form of figurative comparison (e.g., Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Chiappe & Kennedy, 1999; Jones & Estes, 2006).
Hence, the finding of Experiment 1 may serve to explain the
relation between the grammatical form and the production
process.
Computational modeling is also an efficient methodology
for the study of metaphor production. Recently, computational studies based on a semantic space model such as latent
semantic analysis (LSA) have addressed metaphors and shed
new light on the process of metaphor comprehension (e.g.,
Kintsch, 2000; Utsumi, 2011; Utsumi & Sakamoto, 2007).
In particular, the predication algorithm in a semantic space
model proposed by Kintsch (2000) can embody the attributive
category theory, and has been shown to achieve good performance of simulating the process of metaphor comprehension.
It follows that the study of metaphor production can also benefit from the same computational modeling framework. For
example, the predication algorithm computes the meanings of
metaphors by combining neighbors of the vehicle (i.e., word
vectors similar to the vehicle vector) with the topic and the
vehicle. The process of metaphor production can also be
modeled in the same way; an appropriate vehicle can be selected from the neighbors of the vector for the metaphorical
meaning expressed by a given topic-vehicle pair, and a search
space can be manipulated by varying the number of and quality of neighbor vectors. Indeed, Chiappe and Chiappe (2007)
attempted to explain their findings on metaphor production
using the predication algorithm.
These research topics for advancing the study of metaphor
production are worth pursuing in further research.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research B (No.23300098) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

References
Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of metaphor.
Psychological Review, 112(1), 193–216.
Chiappe, D., & Chiappe, P. (2007). The role of working memory in metaphor production and comprehension.
Journal of Memory and Language, 56, 172–188.
Chiappe, D., & Kennedy, J. (1999). Aptness predicts preference for metaphors or similes, as well as recall bias. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 668–676.
Fainsilber, L., & Ortony, A. (1987). Metaphorical uses of

language in the expression of emotions. Metaphor and
Symbolic Activity, 2(4), 239–250.
Gentner, D. (1982). Are scientific analogies metaphors? In
D. Miall (Ed.), Metaphor: Problems and perspectives (pp.
106–132). Sussex, England: The Harvester Press.
Gibbs, R. W. (Ed.). (2008). The cambridge handbook of
metaphor and thought. Cambridge University Press.
Giora, R. (2003). On our mind: Salience, context, and figurative language. Oxford University Press.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language:
From metaphors to idioms. Oxford University Press.
Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical comparisons: Beyond similarity. Psychological Review, 97, 3–18.
Hussey, K. A., & Katz, A. N. (2006). Metaphor production
in online conversation: Gender and friendship status. Discourse Processes, 42(1), 75–98.
Jones, L., & Estes, Z. (2006). Roosters, robins, and alarm
clocks: Aptness and conventionality in metaphor comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 18–32.
Katz, A. (1989). On choosing the vehicles of metaphors:
Referential concreteness, semantic distances, and individual differences. Journal of Memory and Language, 28,
486–499.
Katz, A., Paivio, A., & Marschark, M. (1985). Poetic comparisons: Psychological dimensions of metaphoric processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 14(4), 365–
383.
Kintsch, W. (2000). Metaphor comprehension: A computational theory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7(2), 257–
266.
Roberts, R., & Kreuz, R. (1994). Why do people use figurative language? Psychological Science, 5(3), 159–163.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. (1975). Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573–605.
Steen, G. (1994). Understanding metaphor in literature: An
empirical approach. Longman Publishing Group.
Utsumi, A. (2005). The role of feature emergence in metaphor appreciation. Metaphor and Symbol, 20(3), 151–172.
Utsumi, A. (2011). Computational exploration of metaphor
comprehension processes using a semantic space model.
Cognitive Science, 35(2), 251–296.
Utsumi, A., & Sakamoto, M. (2007). Computational
evidence for two-stage categorization as a process of
adjective metaphor comprehension. In Proceedings of
the Second European Cognitive Science Conference (EuroCogSci2007) (pp. 77–82).
Utsumi, A., & Sakamoto, M. (2011). Indirect categorization as a process of predicative metaphor comprehension.
Metaphor and Symbol, 26(4), 299–313.
Williams-Whitney, D., Mio, J., & Whitney, P. (1992). Metaphor production in creative writing. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 21(6), 497–509.

2480

