UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Learning Order and Previous Language Experience in Novel Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7ng916n2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Woods, Elizabeth
Yoshida, Hanako

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Learning Order and Previous Language Experience in Novel Word
Learning
Elizabeth A. Woods (ewoods@uh.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Houston, 126 Heyne Building
Houston, TX 77204-5022 USA

Hanako Yoshida (hyoshida@uh.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Houston, 126 Heyne Building
Houston, TX 77204-5022 USA
Abstract

paradigm in which monolingual and bilingual adults
(Experiment 1) and children (Experiment 2) are taught two
novel languages either simultaneously or sequentially.

Although bilingual language research has increased considerably
over the past few decades, there is still much controversy
regarding the mechanisms of bilingual language acquisition. The
present work aims to provide insights into potential mechanisms
of bilingual language learning by utilizing a novel word-learning
paradigm in which monolingual and bilingual adults
(Experiment 1) and children (Experiment 2) are taught two
novel languages either simultaneously or sequentially. Results
suggest that bilingual language learning may be occurring in a
domain specific manner dependent on learning order, previous
language experience, and the participant’s age.

Previous Language Experience & Word Learning

Keywords: novel word learning; order effects; second language
acquisition; bilingualism

Introduction

Given the increasing prevalence of bilingualism in the
world, it is crucial to understand how individuals learn
multiple languages and what method of language instruction
facilitates learning. Although bilingual language research
has increased considerably over the past few decades, there
is still much controversy regarding the underlying
mechanisms of bilingual language acquisition (BLA). The
present paper seeks to shed light on potential mechanisms of
BLA by comparing monolingual and bilingual adults
(Experiment 1) and children (Experiment 2), who are taught
two novel languages either simultaneously or sequentially.
This is one of the first papers that experimentally
manipulates order of acquisition (OoA) by directly
comparing simultaneous and sequential language learning.
In addition, the present paper examines the effect of
previous language experience on novel word learning by
directly comparing monolingual and bilingual participants.
Recent research suggests that growing-up bilingual has
measurable positive effects on cognitive flexibility
(Bialystok, Barac, & Blaye, 2010; Bialystok & Martin,
2004; Bialystok & Viswanathan, 2009; Carlson & Meltzoff,
2008; Kovács & Mehler, 2009; Mezzacappa, 2004) and
possibly even novel word learning (Kaushanskaya &
Marian, 2009; Yoshida et al., 2011). However, the specific
nature of the bilingual cognitive advantage has not been
fully addressed. The present work provides insights into
these theoretical issues by utilizing a novel word-learning

There is increasing evidence to suggest that monolinguals
and bilinguals may employ different strategies or have
different biases for word learning. In particular, one such
bias is the Mutual Exclusivity (ME) principle. The standard
artificial word-learning task that is used to test ME presents
a well-known object with a well-known name (e.g., a cup)
and a novel unnamed object and then asks participants to
select an object, using a novel label (e.g., “Find the dax”).
Monolinguals consistently map the novel label to the novel
object (Markman, 1989; Markman & Wachtel, 1988).
However, bilinguals do not perform as consistently. Many
studies have reported that ME may develop later or to a
lesser extent in bilinguals (Au & Glusman, 1990; ByersHeinlein & Werker, 2009; Davidson, Jergovic, Imami, &
Theodos, 1997; Davidson & Tell, 2005; Houston-Price et
al., 2010; Merriman & Kutlesic, 1993). Others suggest that
by 30 months old, bilinguals show ME effects as strong as
those of monolinguals (Frank & Poulin-Dubois, 2002).
Clearly, there are many important questions that remain in
the study of early word learning in monolinguals and
bilinguals.

Order of Acquisition

It is well established that the timing of language exposure
can have a substantial impact on how well a language is
learned and maintained. Although there are differences of
opinion as to the exact age, the general consensus is that
there is a sensitive period sometime before puberty, after
which language acquisition becomes more difficult (Flege &
MacKay, 2004; Johnson & Newport, 1989; Kuhl et al.,
1992; Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996; Werker & Tees, 1983;
Yamada, 1995). Based on this notion, bilinguals are often
classified as being an early or late bilingual, depending on
the age of acquisition (AoA) of the second language. There
is also evidence regarding AoA effects in experimental
studies (Cortese & Khanna, 2007; Morrison & Ellis, 2000;
Pérez, 2007) and connectionist networks (Ellis & Lambon
Ralph, 2000; Lambon Ralph & Ehsan, 2006; Monaghan &

2546

Ellis, 2002) to suggest that early-acquired information is
processed faster than later acquired information. Although
research regarding AoA and sensitive periods
overwhelmingly suggests that learning earlier is better, there
is still much controversy regarding the mechanism behind
this early advantage.
One explanation that has not been given much
consideration is that a more basic mechanism such as order
of learning may be responsible for this early advantage
(Burling & Yoshida, 2011). Recent experimental paradigms
have found that early-learned items are retained better than
later-learned items, even when difficulty and age and
amount of exposure are controlled (Izura et al., 2011;
Stewart & Ellis, 2008). This suggests that AoA effects could
actually be due to more basic order effects. The present
work further examines this possibility of order effects by
comparing simultaneous and sequential learning of two
novel languages.
The bilingual literature readily discusses OoA; bilinguals
who acquire both languages from birth are referred to as
simultaneous bilinguals and those who learn one language
before the other are referred to as sequential bilinguals.
Simultaneous and sequential bilingualism are even
conceptualized as two different mechanisms – Bilingual
First Language Acquisition and Second Language
Acquisition respectively (for a review see Genesee &
Nicoladis, 2007; Paradis, 2007) – suggesting that
simultaneous and sequential language learning are
qualitatively different. Although these studies provide an
important step towards understanding the different types of
bilingualism retrospectively, the majority do not
experimentally manipulate simultaneous and sequential dual
language learning. In addition, BLA is often confounded by
the fact that all simultaneous bilinguals are early bilinguals,
and many sequential bilinguals are late bilinguals. Given
that early learning is thought to be superior, it is important
to compare simultaneous and sequential language learning
when both occur early. The present work addresses these
difficulties by experimentally testing adults (Experiment 1)
and children (Experiment 2) who are in the active process of
acquiring two new languages in two different mock
bilingual environments.

1a.

1b.

Figure 1. Example training trials from the simultaneous
condition (a) and sequential condition (b).

Figure 2. Sample training design for two word-object pairs
in the simultaneous condition (on the top) and the sequential
condition (on the bottom) for Experiment 1 and 2.

Experiment 1

The purpose of Experiment 1 was to determine how the two
factors of order of acquisition (OoA) and previous language
experience influence word learning in adults. To accomplish
this, we utilized a novel word-learning paradigm that
imitated a bilingual environment by exposing monolingual
and bilingual adults to two novel languages. Participants
were randomly assigned to learn these two novel languages
either one after the other (Sequential Condition) or at the
same time (Simultaneous Condition). Participants were
instructed that they would be learning new words from two
friendly aliens that were from different planets and spoke
different languages. They were then introduced to the aliens
and underwent 16 training trials followed by 16 testing
trials.

Participants

Eighty adults (Mage = 24.06 years, SD = 4.20) were recruited
from the University of Houston in Houston, Texas and were
asked to fill out a consent form and demographic
questionnaire that included questions about their language
history. Based on their responses, participants were
identified as bilingual or monolingual and were randomly
assigned to either the simultaneous or sequential condition.
This yielded four groups of adults: Simultaneous Bilingual
(N = 21), Simultaneous Monolingual (N = 19), Sequential
Bilingual (N = 20), and Sequential Monolingual (N = 20).
Consistent with the Houston population, monolinguals
were monolingual English speakers, and bilingual
participants represented a variety of language groups,
including Arabic-English, French-English, German-English,
Japanese-English, Malayalam-English, Mandarin-English,
Spanish-English, and Vietnamese-English. Similarly,
bilinguals included those who learned both languages from
birth, both languages early in life but sequentially, and

2547

second language learners who learned their second language
long after their first. This allows the results of the present
study to be extended to a broader bilingual population.

Materials

Sixteen novel word-object pairs were created by assigning
each of 16 novel words to one of eight novel objects so that
each object had two labels – one in each language. Objects
were digital photographs of three-dimensional items created
in our lab from craft materials; words were selected from a
non-word database (Horst, 2009), produced and recorded by
a female native English speaker, and presented auditorily to
participants. Sounds were intentionally selected to be as
similar as possible across the two languages in order to
increase experimental control for the particular question of
order effects. Words in each language were matched for
length and number of syllables. Alien characters were threedimensional digital cartoon figures selected from an online
graphics database.

Training

Sequential Condition Training Phase 1 included 8 training
trials, each of which presented a single novel object on the
screen paired with an auditory phrase (i.e. “This is a Dax!
See the Dax?”). Each trial lasted 5 seconds with both the
auditory phrase and the object presented at trial onset, and
the object remaining on the screen for the entire trial. This
was immediately followed by Training Phase 2, which
continued in the same manner, but with a set of 8 new words
for the same objects. By the end of these two phases of
training, each of the 8 objects had been on the screen for 10
seconds, and each of the 16 words had been heard twice.
Simultaneous Condition Training Phase 1 occurred in the
same manner as the sequential condition, except that on
each training trial the object was paired with two novel
names within the same auditory phrase (i.e. “This is a Dax
and this is a Mig!”). Training Phase 2 was an exact
replication of phase 1 for this condition. By the end of these
two phases of training, each of the 8 objects had been on the
screen for 10 seconds, and each of the 16 words had been
heard twice.

Testing

Testing included 16 trials, one for each word-object pair
presented during training. Each testing trial consisted of a
four-choice forced alternative test that instructed the
participant to select a particular object (i.e. “Point to the
Dax!”). All target and non-target stimuli had been presented
during training. Testing trials were randomized so that
word-object pairs from phases 1 and 2 were tested
intermixed. Participants received positive or negative
auditory feedback on each testing trial based on their
response.

Figure 3. Experiment 1 results of adults’ learning of novel
word-object pairs.

Results

Overall, adults learned approximately half (M = 49.69%, SD
= 17.37) of the word-object pairs, and all four groups of
adults performed significantly above chance level. See
Figure 3 for more details. To determine the influence of
order of language acquisition and previous language
experience on learning, a fixed effects ANOVA with factors
of order (sequential, simultaneous) and language status
(monolingual, bilingual) was conducted. Only a main effect
of order was found, F (1,76) = 5.95, p = .017, with an
advantage for simultaneous learning over sequential
learning. No main effect of language status or an interaction
of order with language status was found. These findings
suggest that regardless of previous language experience,
adults learned the languages better when they were
presented simultaneously.

Experiment 2

Results from Experiment 1 suggest that when two languages
are taught simultaneously, adults retain a greater number of
words than when taught sequentially. In addition, previous
language experience did not influence adults’ performance.
However, given that children process and learn information
differently from adults (Hudson, Kam, & Newport, 2005;
Hudson, Kam, & Newport, 2009; Ramscar et al., 2011), and
may use different word learning strategies than adults, this
raises the question of how order of acquisition and previous
language experience influence word learning in children. To
accomplish this, we utilized a shortened version of the novel
word-learning paradigm in Experiment 1.

Participants

Seventy-nine children ages 36 to 72 months (Mage = 51.78
months, SD = 11.9) were recruited from the local
communities and preschools in Houston, Texas. Parents
completed a consent form and demographic questionnaire
that included questions about their child’s language history.
Based on their responses, participants were identified as

2548

bilingual or monolingual and were randomly assigned to
either the simultaneous or sequential condition. This yielded
four groups of children: Simultaneous Bilingual (N = 17),
Simultaneous Monolingual (N = 23), Sequential Bilingual
(N = 17), and Sequential Monolingual (N = 22). Similar to
Experiment 1, bilingual participants represented a variety of
language groups and language backgrounds. However, since
all participants were 6 years of age or younger, both
languages were learned relatively early in life.

Materials

Stimuli were a subset of the stimuli from Experiment 1 and
included 8 novel words and 4 novel objects (each object had
two labels – one in each language).

Procedure

Procedures followed in the same manner as that of
Experiment 1, but with a total of 8 training trials instead of
16 and 8 testing trials instead of 16.

Results

Overall, children learned one-third (M = 33.07%, SD =
16.63) of the word-object pairs, and three of the four groups
of children performed significantly above chance level. See
Figure 4 for more details. To determine the influence of
order of acquisition and previous language experience on
learning, a fixed effects ANOVA with factors of order
(sequential,
simultaneous)
and
language
status
(monolingual, bilingual) was conducted. No main effects
were found, but an interaction effect of order by language
status was found, F (1,75) = 4.40, p = .039. This suggests
that the effect of order of acquisition on novel word learning
was dependent on previous language experience. Post hoc
simple main effects analyses revealed that monolinguals
scored significantly higher than bilinguals in the sequential
condition, but there were no differences between
monolinguals and bilinguals in the simultaneous condition.

Figure 4. Experiment 2 results of children’s learning of
novel word-object pairs.

General Discussion

These findings have implications for our understanding of
the mechanisms underlying word learning in general, and
how those mechanisms might differ in monolinguals and
bilinguals, and adults and children. In particular, our results
suggest that word learning may be occurring in a domain
specific manner dependent on order of learning, previous
language experience, and participant’s age.
In regards to the effect of order of learning, adults learned
a greater percent of the words in the simultaneous condition
than in the sequential condition. This is consistent with
previous research regarding sensitive periods (Flege &
MacKay, 2004; Johnson & Newport, 1989; Kuhl et al.,
1992; Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996; Werker & Tees, 1983;
Yamada, 1995), AoA effects (Cortese & Khanna, 2007;
Ellis & Lambon Ralph, 2000; Lambon Ralph & Ehsan,
2006; Monaghan & Ellis, 2002; Morrison & Ellis, 2000;
Pérez, 2007), and OoA effects (Izura et al., 2011; Stewart &
Ellis, 2008), all of which suggest that learning information
earlier is better. This simultaneous advantage could also
potentially be a result of more distributed learning (see
Cepeda, et al., 2006) since information in the simultaneous
condition was repeated across two training sessions instead
of repeated within a single training session.
However, the effect of order was different for children. In
the case of Experiment 2, learning order interacted with
children’s previous language experience. Monolingual
children scored significantly higher than bilingual children
in the sequential condition, but there were no differences
between monolinguals and bilinguals in the simultaneous
condition. Learning order still mattered for children, but the
ideal type of acquisition was dependent on their previous
language experience.
The effect of previous language experience also differed
in children and adults. Experiment 1 revealed no differences
between monolingual and bilingual adults in terms of the
percent of words learned. However, in Experiment 2,
monolingual children performed better than bilingual
children in the sequential condition. These results seem
inconsistent with previous research that would suggest a
possible bilingual advantage for language learning
(Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009; Yoshida et al., 2011).
However, the current work essentially entailed associative
learning of word-object pairs, whereas previous studies that
have found a bilingual cognitive advantage typically
involved attentional shifting or competition resolution.
Thus, it may be that any bilingual cognitive advantages are
highly task specific, and that the current task did not tap into
the cognitive skills for which bilinguals typically show an
advantage. Future research should continue to evaluate
monolinguals’ and bilinguals’ performance on various types
of learning tasks.
Given that the effects of learning order and previous
language experience had differential effects in adults and
children, it may be that different learning mechanisms are
driving bilingual language learning in adults and children.

2549

This is consistent with previous research suggesting that
adults and children process information in qualitatively
different ways (Hudson, Kam, & Newport, 2005; Hudson,
Kam, & Newport, 2009; Ramscar et al., 2011). Additional
developmental work is needed to determine how and why
these learning mechanisms may change across development.
The present work highlights the potential importance of
order in learning and the differential effects that it may have
for language learning in monolinguals and bilinguals, as
well as in adults and children. As seen here, bilingual
language learning may be highly dependent on the specific
type of learning environment as well as other factors that
were not directly addressed in the present work, such as the
relationship between the two languages and the individual’s
specific linguistic background (Bialystok, McBride-Chang,
& Luk, 2005; Cummins, 1979; Müller, 1998; Müller &
Hulk, 2001). Although the current stimuli were designed to
be similar across languages for purposes of experimental
control, this is not akin to a natural language learning
environment in which languages are phonologically distinct
from one another. Bilingual children in particular may be
highly sensitive to such linguistic cues given their
experience with these cues signaling which language is
being used. These matters merit further investigation to
advance general learning theories as well as theories of
bilingual language acquisition.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported in part by a National Institutes
of Health grant (R01 HD058620), the Foundation for Child
Development, and the University of Houston’s Grants to
Enhance and Advance Research (GEAR) program. We
thank the children and parents who participated in this
study.

References

Au, T. K., & Glusman, M. (1990). The principle of mutual
exclusivity in word learning: To honor or not to honor?
Child development, 61, 1474–1490.
Bialystok, E., Barac, R., & Blaye, A. (2010). Word mapping
and executive functioning in young monolingual and
bilingual children. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 11(4), 485-508.
Bialystok, E., & Martin, M. M. (2004). Attention and
inhibition in bilingual children: Evidence from the
dimensional change card sort task. Developmental
Science, 7, 325-339.
Bialystok, E., McBride-Chang, C., & Luk, G. (2005).
Bilingualism, language proficiency, and learning to read
in two writing systems. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 97 (4), 580-590.
Bialystok, E., & Viswanathan, M. (2009). Components of
executive control with advantages for bilingual children
in two cultures. Cognition, 112, 494–500.
Burling, J., & Yoshida, H. (2011). A Developmental

Perspective on Order and Learning: Temporal Effects on
Cued Attention. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2937-2942). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Byers-Heinlein, K., & Werker, J. F. (2009). Monolingual,
bilingual, trilingual: Infants’ language experience
influences the development of a word learning heuristic.
Developmental Science, 12(5), 815-823.
Carlson, S. M. & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Bilingual
experience and executive functioning in young children.
Developmental Science, 11(2), 282–298.
Cepeda, N. J., Pashler, H., Vul, E., Wixted, J., & Rohrer, D.
(2006). Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A
review and quantitative synthesis. Psychological Bulletin,
132, 354-380
Cortese, M. J., & Khanna, M. M. (2007). Age of acquisition
predicts naming and lexical-decision performance above
and beyond 22 other predictor variables: An analysis of 2,
342 words. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60, 1072–1082.
Cummins, J. (1979). Linguistic interdependence and the
educational development of bilingual children. Review of
Educational Research, 49, 222-251.
Davidson, D., Jergovic, D., Imami, Z., & Theodos, V.
(1997). Monolingual and bilingual children's use of the
mutual exclusivity constraint. Journal of Child Language,
24, 3–24.
Davidson, D. & Tell, D. (2005). Monolingual and bilingual
children’s use of mutual exclusivity in the naming of
whole objects. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
92, 25–45.
Ellis, A. W., & Lambon Ralph, M. (2000). Age of
acquisition effects in adult lexical processing reflect loss
of plasticity in maturing systems: Insights from
connectionist networks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26,
1103–1123.
Flege, J. E., and MacKay, I. R. A. (2004). Perceiving
vowels in a second language,. Studies of Second
Language Acquisition, 26, 1–34.
Frank, I., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2002). Young monolingual
and bilingual children’s responses to violation of the
Mutual Exclusivity Principle. International Journal of
Bilingualism, 6(2), 125-146.
Genesee, F., & Nicoladis, E. (2007). Bilingual acquisition.
In E. Hoff & M. Shatz (eds.), Handbook of Language
Development, 324-342. Oxford, Eng.: Blackwell.
Houston-Price, C., Caloghiris, Z., & Raviglione, E. (2010).
Language experience shapes the development of the
mutual exclusivity bias. Infancy, 15(2), 125-150.
Hudson Kam, C. L. & Newport E. L. (2005). Regularizing
unpredictable variation: The roles of adult and child
learners in language formation and change. Language

2550

Learning and Development, 1, 151-195.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2009). Getting it
right by getting it wrong: When learners change
languages. Cognitive Psychology, 59, 30-66.
Izura, C., Pérez, M., Agallou, E., Wright, V. C., Marín, J.,
Stadthagen-González, H., & Ellis, A. W. (2011).
Age/order of acquisition effects and the cumulative
learning of foreign words: A word training study. Journal
of Memory and Language, 64, 32-58.
Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period
effects in second language learning: The influence of
maturational state on the acquisition of English as a
second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60-99.
Kaushanskaya, M., & Marian, V. (2009). The bilingual
advantage in novel word learning. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 16, 705-710.
Kuhl, P. K., Williams, K. A., Lacerda, F., Stevens, K. N.,
and Lindblom, B. (1992). Linguistic experience alters
phonetic perception in infants by 6 months of age.
Science, 255, 606–608.
Kovács, Á. M., & Mehler, J. (2009). Cognitive gains in 7month-old bilingual infants. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
106, 6556–6560.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., & Ehsan, S. (2006). Age of
acquisition effects depend on the mapping between
representations and the frequency of occurrence:
Empirical and computational evidence. Visual Cognition,
13, 928–948.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and Naming in
Children: Problems of Induction. MIT Press.
Markman, E. M. & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children's use of
mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121–157
Merriman, W. E. & Kutlesic, V. (1993). Bilingual and
monolingual children’s use of two lexical acquisition
heuristics. Applied Psycholinguistics, 14, 229–249.
Mezzacappa, E. (2004). Alerting, orienting, and executive
attention:
Developmental
properties
and
sociodemographic correlates in an epidemiological
sample of young, urban children. Child Development, 75,
1373–1386.
Monaghan, J., & Ellis, A. W. (2002). What, exactly,
interacts with spelling sound consistency in word
naming? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28, 183–206.
Morrison, C. M., & Ellis, A. W. (2000). Real age of
acquisition effects in word naming and lexical decision.
British Journal of Psychology, 91, 167–180.
Müller, N. (1998). Transfer in Bilingual First Language
Acquisition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1
(3), 151-171.

Müller, N. & Hulk, A. (2001). Crosslinguistic Influence in
Bilingual Language Acquisition: Italian and French as
Recipient Languages. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 4 (1), 1-21.
Paradis, J. (2007). Second language acquisition in
childhood. In E. Hoff and M. Shatz (Eds.), Handbook of
Language
Development (pp.
387-406).
Oxford:
Blackwell.
Pérez, M. A. (2007). Age of acquisition persists as the main
factor in picture naming when cumulative word frequency
and frequency trajectory are controlled. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 32–42.
Ramscar, M., Dye, M., Klein, J., Ruiz, L.D., Aguirre, N. &
Sadaat, L. (2011). Informativity versus logic: Children
and adults take different approaches to word learning. In
L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T.F. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 3326-3331). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Stewart, N., & Ellis, A. W. (2008). Order of acquisition in
learning perceptual categories: A laboratory analogue of
the age of acquisition effect? Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15(1), 70-74.
Weber-Fox, C. M., & Neville, H. J. (1996). Maturational
constraints on functional specializations for language
processing: ERP and behavioral evidence in bilingual
speakers. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 8, 231–256.
Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (1983). Developmental changes
across childhood in the perception of normative speech
sounds. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 37, 278-286.
Yamada, R. A. (1995). Age and acquisition of second
language speech sounds. Perception of American English
/r/ and /l/ by native speakers of Japanese. In Speech
Perception and Linguistic Experience: Issues in Crosslanguage Research. W. Strange York, Timonium, MD,
pp. 305–320.
Yoshida, H., Tran, D. N., Benitez, V., & Kuwabara, M.
(2011). Inhibition and Adjective Learning in Bilingual
and Monolingual Children. Frontiers in Developmental
Psychology, 2:210.

2551

