UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Elaborate Descriptive Information in Indoor Route Instructions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2f68g8pr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Mast, Vivien
Jian, Cui
Zhekova, Desislava

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Elaborate Descriptive Information in Indoor Route Instructions
Vivien Mast (viv@tzi.de)
Cui Jian (ken@informatik.uni-bremen.de)
Desislava Zhekova (zhekova@uni-bremen.de)
I5-[DiaSpace], SFB/TR8 Spatial Cognition, University of Bremen
Cartesium, Enrique-Schmidt-Straße 5, 28359 Bremen, Germany
Abstract
The following paper presents the enhancement of indoor route
instructions with descriptive generation strategies. We consider the latter to be highly important for the quality and helpfulness of automatically generated indoor route instructions.
We conducted an experiment showing that participants receiving route instructions enriched with elaborate descriptive information instead of step-by-step procedural information for
crucial route segments performed better in objective and subjective measures than those receiving only basic prescriptive
route instructions. Based on the gained knowledge, we conclude that descriptive strategies are an important part of indoor
route instructions and should be actively considered in system
development.
Keywords: indoor route instructions; descriptive information;
wayfinding; spatial cognition; navigation

Introduction
Both navigation in indoor and outdoor environments profit
from the use of landmarks since they are distinctive, easily recognizable and highly memorable (Sorrows & Hirtle,
1999). Humans select landmarks for their distinguishing
characteristics (Presson & Montello, 1988). Although the importance of landmarks in route instructions is well established
(Allen, 1997; Denis, 1997; Richter, 2007; Raubal & Winter,
2002), most research in automatic generation of route instructions focuses on one aspect of landmarks, namely to indicate
the location at which a reorientation should take place in a
network of paths. The main assumption of this approach is
that good route instructions contain tightly coupled descriptive and prescriptive information. Therefore, current systems
rely almost entirely on what Denis (1997) classified as Type 2
utterances – utterances coupling an action with a landmark.
This leads to highly concise route instructions, but also limits
the amount of descriptive information for each reorientation
point to the mentioning of one landmark, possibly locating it
with respect to the user.
While this approach is particularly useful for car navigation
(Brenner & Elias, 2003) which occurs in network space, i.e.
along a street network where clearly identifiable nodes (intersections) are connected by edges (streets), in pedestrian navigation the case is different. Pedestrian navigation includes
many areas that belong to scene space: open areas which
are characterized by the absence of clearly identifiable nodes
and edges (Rüetschi, 2007; Schuldes et al., 2011). In network space, wayfinding consists mainly of selecting a path
at each decision point, whereas in scene space, wayfinding is
characterized by activities such as searching, exploring, and

matching. There are no clear paths to choose from, but large
spaces, where piloting between landmarks is necessary. Oriented search might be used if the expected landmark cannot
be seen (Allen, 1999). In such areas, route graph representations, and the resulting procedural information do not correspond very well to the needs of the wayfinder, as the function of landmarks changes from identifying a turning point to
more vague orientational aid. Indoor navigation has elements
of both network and scene spaces. In addition, indoor spaces
are characterized by a very limited amount of different landmark types and a lack of highly salient landmarks. Usually
landmarks consist mainly of doors, corridors and staircases,
only very few of which are highly distinctive in comparison
to outdoor landmarks which can be very diverse (a church, a
petrol station, multiple intersections of different types, etc.).
For this reason, the central roles of landmarks, i.e. signaling where actions should take place, as well as confirmation,
are difficult to obtain in indoor scenarios. Additionally, this
increases the difficulty of memorization, as it leads to instructions which contain a series of highly similar utterances.
A possible solution for these problems is the integration of
more elaborate descriptive information into indoor route instructions. This can be realised by basing instructions on a
scene space representation of space, and using a descriptive
strategy for generating route instructions for those areas that
can be characterized as scene space: Instead of superimposing abstract network representations onto open space areas,
thereby producing a number of turning points and paths for an
area which is viewed by a wayfinder as a coherent whole, this
scene is described as one entity, and the location of the scene
exit is described with respect to the scene. We assume that by
introducing more elaborate descriptive information into indoor route instructions we can gain configurations of landmarks that can serve as highly salient landmarks, where simple landmarks will yield no sufficient differentiation. Moreover, we expect that the scene descriptions will enable more
efficient localization of scene exits in the descriptions, minimizing the number of prescriptive statements. In contrast, the
imposition of abstract networks onto open spaces will yield
extra turns. We expect route instructions which integrate the
descriptive approach to make it easier for participants to build
up a mental image of the route in advance, leading to better
memorization and increased confidence. In addition, mixing
scene descriptions with prescriptive statements should yield
more diverse route instructions, thereby additionally support-

1972

ing memorization.
While our route instruction system has already been successfully evaluated (Cuayáhuitl, Dethlefs, Richter, Tenbrink,
& Bateman, 2010), the goal of the present study is to explore the boundaries and potential for further development of
the system by using a particularly difficult route which contains areas for which we consider the current (standard) approach lacking. For this purpose we first conduct and present
an experiment which compares the wayfinding performance
of participants receiving instructions, based either on solely
procedural strategies as used by the system, or on a systematic mixture of procedural and descriptive strategies which
the system currently does not provide. The results are presented and discussed with respect to the insights that can be
gained for the development of route direction systems using
natural language generation. In conclusion we propose directions that future research in the area could take.

Experimental Setup
The experiment was conducted in GW2, a building at the University of Bremen which is notorious for its complexity. Each
of the four floors has a different layout consisting of one or
two main areas. The route (figure 1) was specifically chosen
to be long and difficult, contain many turns and lead through
a large portion of the 3rd level of the building. Secondly, it
should contain two areas (A and B in figure 1) characterized
by scene space rather than by network space. In both cases a
diagonal crossing of the open area was necessary.
In our experiment the participants made use of an indoor
route direction system called Infokiosk, developed as part of
the I5-DiaSpace1 project. Infokiosk (Cuayáhuitl et al., 2010)
is a multimodal interactive spoken dialogue system for indoor
wayfinding in complex buildings. It was developed based
on a general computational dialogue system architecture and
framework named DAISIE (Ross & Bateman, 2009), and can
be described with the following three key components: 1) Dialogue management with a formal unified dialogue modeling
approach combining information state update theories with
generalized dialogue models (Shi, Jian, & Rachuy, 2011).
2) Route instruction generation with a combined computational model for generating unambiguous high-level contextspecific route instructions (Richter, 2007). 3) Natural language generation with the probabilistic context-free representational underspecification framework (Belz, 2008) and the
KPML natural language generation system (Bateman, 1997).
In the basic condition, the participants received route instructions generated automatically by Infokiosk. The instructions contained only procedural sentences in imperative
mood, directly linking body turn actions to landmarks. An artificial route graph based on network space was superimposed
onto the two open areas (figure 1, dotted grey lines), and they
were described accordingly. Example (1) shows an instance
of the instructions generated by the system in the basic condition for area A in figure 1:

Figure 1: The selected route for the experiment. Grey dotted
lines show the superimposed route graph for the basic condition.

(1)

“. . . go straight on until the third turning point on the
left. Turn left, and go straight until the first glass door
on the right. Turn to the right,. . . ”

At the current stage, representations appropriate to the descriptive strategy, and the generation of the corresponding
utterances are not supported by the Infokiosk. The integration of that capability in the system is not straightforward and
should only be approached if such elements do show to improve wayfinding in indoor environments. Thus, in the descriptive condition, the participants received hand-crafted instructions by interaction with the dialogue system. In these
instructions, imperative and declarative clauses were used,
and the two scene space areas were described with full scene
descriptions containing an introduction to the general structure of the area, one or more intermediary landmarks, or configurations of landmarks, and a localization of the goal exit
with respect to the intermediary landmarks. Example (2)
shows the instructions received for area A in figure 1 in the
DC.
(2)

1 http://www.diaspace.org/

1973

“. . . straight on until you reach a big hall area. In the
middle of the hallway there is a staircase. Behind the

confidence, related to egocentric strategies”, Wilcoxon rank
sum test (two-sided): W = 88, p = 0.32); “Survey strategy”
(Wilcoxon rank sum test (two-sided): W = 99.5, p = 0.60);
“Knowledge of cardinal directions” (Wilcoxon rank sum test
(two-sided): W = 74.5, p = 0.10).

staircase there are two glass doors which are partly
hidden by concrete pillars. Go through the left door.”
It must be emphasized that the difference between the two
conditions is not merely quantitative in nature, i.e. including
a higher amount of descriptive information in the instructions.
There is a qualitative difference, as the basic condition relies
on superimposing an artificial route graph on areas characterized as scene space, giving a high amount of procedural
information which precisely specifies the path for crossing
an open area while reducing descriptive information to the
minimum. In the descriptive condition, however, scene space
areas are considered as holistic scenes with an entry point and
an exit point. The scenes are described as seen from the entry
point, and the position of the exit point is identified with respect to the described scene without any procedural information mentioning the path to take to get there. The descriptive
instruction is only slightly more verbose (98 words, as compared to approx. 85 in the basic condition), but a different
kind of information is chosen for verbalization.

Procedure

Participants
32 participants were tested. Two participants had to be excluded from the overall evaluation, because they found the
goal by accident due to its location close to their position in
the route. These participants explicitly stated that they expected the goal to be at a different position and were not using
a search strategy, but saw the final goal by mere coincidence.
The remaining 30 participants were used for evaluation, 15 in
each of the two conditions (basic vs. descriptive). The participants were mostly first semester students at the University
of Bremen. All had native or near-native competence of German and were between 19 and 31 years old (mean: 22). There
were 21 female and 9 male participants.
The participants had little or no prior knowledge of the
building. On a 7-point Likert scale, scores for the basic condition ranged from 1 to 4 (median 2; mean 2.3; standard deviation (sd) 0.88) while in the descriptive condition the range
was from 1 to 3 (median 2; mean 1.6; sd 0.63). Scores for
the basic condition were significantly higher than for the descriptive condition. (Wilcoxon rank sum test (one-sided): W
= 161, p = 0.02)2 .
The experiment was conducted with respect to a route on
the 3rd level of the building. Most participants had been to the
3rd level either never, or less than five times before the experiment with no difference between the two groups (Wilcoxon
rank sum test (two-sided): W = 123.5, p-value = 0.64). Five
participants (3 in the basic condition, 2 in the descriptive condition) reported having been to that particular floor more than
five times.
There was no significant difference for spatial abilities between both conditions, as measured by the Questionnaire on
Spatial Strategies (Münzer & Hölscher, 2011) (“Global self2 As the data was not normally distributed, a non-parametric test
was chosen. The same applies for all the following statistical tests
where non-parametric methods were chosen.

The overall procedure consisted of several steps that we describe in the current section.
First, participants were brought to the starting point via a
route that did not cross the target route – they reached the
starting point by entering the floor directly from the elevator.
Then, all participants were asked to fill in a short prequestionnaire concerning age and prior knowledge of GW2.
After the pre-questionnaire the experimenter instructed the
participants. Their goal was to find the room of a given person and for that they were only allowed to use the help of the
Infokiosk. The participants were strongly encouraged to acquire the information solely using natural language. Handling
of the microphone was explained in a short briefing. At this
stage, participants were told that they should follow the route
given to them by the system from their own memory, as far
as this was possible. They were not informed that they would
be able to recheck the instructions en-route. In this way, we
enforced that they attempt full comprehension and memory
of the route instructions in advance.
Right after the dialogue with the system, the participants
were asked to answer 3 questions regarding perceived helpfulness of the system, confidence that they would find their
goal, and how well they could visually imagine the route.
In the next step of the procedure they were instructed that
they should follow the given route as closely as possible from
memory, but that they could recheck a printout of the instructions as often as they wanted. The experimenter informed
them that in case of doubt it was preferable to recheck the
instructions than take a wrong turn.
The participants followed the route accompanied by the instructor. The experimenter did not answer any clarification
questions (except for the initial perspective from which the
instructions were given, i.e. “the system has explained the
route as from the position in which you were seated when you
received the instructions”), but whenever participants were
indicating they were unsure about the route to follow, asked
clarification questions, or explicitly stated that they were lost
or had forgotten the instructions, the experimenter informed
the participants that it was no problem at all to recheck the
instructions as often as they wanted. Whenever participants
explicitly stated doubts that they were going to be able to find
the goal, the experimenter informed them that it was possible
for them to give up if they wanted to.
At last, after finding the goal (or giving up), the participants
were asked to give a retrospective report of their wayfinding
and any doubts or problems that had occurred at the decision
points. They were brought back to the starting point to fill in a
final questionnaire about their performance and the perceived

1974

Table 1: Participants’ task success in both conditions.
participants
BC
DC
failed
7
0
succeeded
8
15

helpfulness of the system, and the Questionnaire on Spatial
Strategies by Münzer and Hölscher (2011).

Hypotheses
With respect to objective performance measures we expected
the descriptive condition to improve task performance, yielding a higher task success rate, a lower number of wrong route
segments travelled and a lower number of total route segments travelled. We also expected the descriptive condition to
improve memorization, leading to less frequent consultation
of instruction printouts.
With respect to subjective performance measures, the descriptive condition was expected to lead to higher self-ratings
for confidence of being able to find the goal, subjective helpfulness of the instructions, and mental imagery.

Annotation
In order to evaluate task success, the experimenter followed
the participants in the wayfinding task and made a protocol of
the path travelled and any instruction consultations. With respect to the used annotation scheme, the path was divided into
segments, where each segment consists of the path between
two decision points. At the end, every wrong segment that the
participant travelled was counted. Only those segments were
counted where the participant either travelled a segment that
was not part of the intended route, or walked in the wrong
direction along a segment that was part of the intended route.
Wrong segments that were travelled several times in a task
were counted several times accordingly. In order to be able
to count the number of instruction consultations, participants
were only given the instructions if they explicitly requested
this and were not allowed to move while holding the instruction sheet. If participants had not moved at all between two
consultations, this was counted as one consultation.

Results
Task Success
Task success is an objective performance measure indicating
the number of participants that managed to find the target.
As indicated in table 1, in the basic condition 7 out of 15
participants for that setting did not find the goal at all. Yet, in
the descriptive condition all 15 participants managed to find
the goal. The resulting difference is significant (Pearson’s
Chi-squared test with Yates’ continuity correction: X-squared
= 6.7081, df = 1, p = 0.01). This result strongly supports our
hypothesis that enriching route instructions with descriptive
information significantly improves wayfinding success.

Wrong Segments Traveled
Another objective performance measure that we considered is
the number of wrong segments traveled during the wayfinding process. In the descriptive condition there were overall
82 wrongly traveled segments, with single participants travelling from 0 to 31 wrong segments (mean:5.47, sd: 8.51),
while in the basic condition there were 169 wrongly travelled
segments altogether, single participants’ error scores ranging
from 0 to 27 (mean: 11.27, sd: 7.34).
In the descriptive condition, one participant contributed
over 35% of overall wrong segments (31 out of 82) due to
an exceptional misunderstanding that was not reproduced by
any of the other participants. But even including this exceptional case, there remains a significant difference, indicating that participants receiving the basic instructions travelled
more wrong segments than those receiving the descriptive instructions (Wilcoxon rank sum test one-sided, with continuity
correction: W = 166.5, p = 0.01).

Number of Instruction Consultations
The number of instruction consultations during wayfinding
is as well an objective performance measure. It indicates
how easy the given system instructions were to understand
and memorize. The participants in the basic condition consulted the instructions en-route 74 times overall, ranging from
1 to 10 consultations (mean: 4.93, sd: 2.76) while the participants in the descriptive condition rechecked the instructions
only 31 times, individual scores ranging from 0 to 6 (mean:
2.07, sd: 1.53). Participants in the basic condition consulted
the instructions significantly more often than those in the descriptive condition (Wilcoxon rank sum test one-sided, with
continuity correction: W = 180.5, p = 0.002).

Confidence
As subjective performance measure we considered the participants’ confidence. Immediately after they had finished the
dialogue with the system, participants were asked how confident they felt that they would find their goal. This was before they were informed that they would be able to consult
a printout of the instructions en-route. For this reason, confidence levels were generally fairly low, reflecting the difficulty of the task. In the basic condition, they ranged from
1 to 5 on a 7-point Likert scale (median: 3, mean: 3.13, sd:
1.30), while ranges in the descriptive condition were from
1 to 6 (median: 4, mean: 4.13, sd: 1.41). Confidence in the
basic condition was significantly lower than in the descriptive
condition (Wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity correction,
one-sided: W = 70, p = 0.04).

Mental Imagery
The level of mental imagery across all participants in both
conditions shows the effect of the descriptions in both conditions on the participants’ capability to envision the environment. Asked directly after the dialogue with the system, how
well they could visually imagine the described route, participants in the basic condition gave scores from 1 to 5 on a

1975

7-point Likert scale, (median: 3, mean: 2.93, sd: 1.39). Participants in the descriptive condition gave scores from 1 to 7
(median: 5, mean: 4.6, sd: 1.59). The difference is highly
significant, indicating that participants in the descriptive condition could visually imagine the route better than those in
the basic condition (Wilcoxon rank sum test, one-sided: W =
49.5, p-value = 0.004).

Perceived helpfulness of the instructions
The scores participants gave for the helpfulness of the instructions given by the system show an interesting effect. Both
conditions were perceived as equally helpful directly after receiving the instructions - in both conditions, scores ranged
from 2 to 7 on a 7-point Likert scale with a median of 5
(basic condition: mean: 4.6, sd: 1.55; descriptive condition:
mean: 4.73, sd: 1.58; Wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity correction, two-sided: W = 110, p-value = 0.47). After
navigating the route, however, this changed. In the final questionnaire, scores for helpfulness in the basic condition ranged
from 1 to 7 with a median of 3 (mean: 3.54, sd: 1.81), constituting a significant drop in comparison with pre-navigation
scores (Wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity correction,
one-sided: 155.5, p-value = 0.036).
For the descriptive condition, on the other hand, they
stayed at the same high level, ranging from 3 to 7 with a median of 5 (mean: 5.27, sd: 1.49). Thus, the perceived helpfulness after navigation is significantly higher in the descriptive
condition than in the basic condition (Wilcoxon rank sum test
with continuity correction, one-sided: W = 51, p = 0.005).

Discussion
The results clearly show that descriptive strategies can improve wayfinding in indoor environments. Participants in the
descriptive condition had a higher success rate and walked
the route with less wrong segments traveled than those in the
basic condition. They also needed to consult the instructions
less often. This is most likely due to the fact that the different
structure of the environment, as compared to street networks,
leads to differences in wayfinding strategies, and therefore
different needs with respect to route instructions.
An important finding of this experiment is, that descriptive
elements not only improve objective performance measures,
but also subjective ones. The improvement of participants’
confidence and mental imagery in the descriptive condition
is a factor that is important for cognitively ergonomic route
instructions. Humans should not only find their goal with automatically generated instructions, they should also feel comfortable and secure while doing so. The scores for perceived
helpfulness of the system show an interesting effect: before
wayfinding participants rate the instructions as equally helpful in both conditions, which is in contrast to the other subjective measures. After wayfinding the values change, resulting in a significantly higher value for the descriptive condition, matching objective performance and the other subjective measures. This might be due to the fact that before performance participants were not as secure about their quality

judgement as after, and possibly answers were influenced by
their wish to be polite.
There are several reasons that might account for the better
performance of subjects that were given the descriptive instructions. Firstly, the significantly higher values for mental
imagery before setting off suggest that better mental imagery
might be one of the factors that helped participants find their
way more easily. Visuo-spatial imagery is an important factor in understanding and memorizing route directions (Denis
& Fernandez, submitted). In addition, successful mental imagery involves deep semantic processing and the formation
of a coherent situation model which have been shown to improve memory performance (Craik & Tulving, 1975; Kintsch,
1994). The greater difficulty of participants in the basic condition to visually imagine the route in advance indicates that
these participants were not able to construct as good a situation model as those in the descriptive condition.
Another central aspect that was verified by statements of
several participants in the retrospective reports is that configurations of landmarks can improve error-recovery and confidence en-route, acting as substitutes for highly-salient landmarks which rarely exist in indoor environments.
Finally, it is probable that the highly repetitive style which
results from generating only prescriptive utterances yields
a Ranschburg effect: The occurrence of several tokens of
the same type in the input within a short time is known to
have a negative effect on memorization (Jahnke & Bower,
1986; Kanwisher, 1987, compare). The Ranschburg effect
has mainly been studied in series of unrelated numbers or
words, but it is highly probable that the underlying mechanisms have an effect on the memorization of a series of
highly similar sentences containing repeated instances of certain words, as seen in the basic condition of this experiment.
The more varied linguistic structure and semantic content of
the descriptive instructions neutralize this effect, thereby improving memorization.

Conclusion and Future Work
Our work shows that the use of elaborate descriptive information into indoor route instructions can significantly improve the quality of automatically generated instructions. The
reported results indicate that both objective and subjective
performance measures rank the use of descriptive strategies
higher than the the condition in which only the prescriptive
strategy was used. It needs to be shown, however, that the improvement remains significantly large when using computergenerated instructions based on the descriptive approach.
Also, buildings differ with respect to their structure. While
this approach may be very useful for buildings that contain
a high proportion of open spaces, it may not be necessary
for buildings that consist entirely of long and narrow corridors with clearly identifiable intersections and can therefore
be represented sufficiently by network space. It would be insightful to compare the two different approaches over a wider
variety of routes in order to investigate how the two strategies

1976

can best be combined, and how they interrelate with issues of
conciseness: How much descriptive information is necessary,
and at which points in a route should this type of information
be provided? How do route length and dominance of scene
space characteristics interact to favor one or the other type of
instructions? It should also be examined whether the findings
hold for pedestrian navigation in general.
Although we have hinted at some mechanisms that might
underlie the performance improvements, a more detailed
analysis of these mechanisms should be undertaken, in order
to be able to clearly distinguish which aspects of the descriptions improve comprehension and memorization in which
ways.
Natural language route direction systems for indoor (and
pedestrian) navigation should take these results into account
and find ways of modeling spatial information that allow for
a more flexible combination of prescriptive and descriptive
information.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition (Deutsche Forschungegemeinschaft, DFG). We would
also like to thank the I5-[DiaSpace] project group, and especially Thora Tenbrink for support and insightful discussions.

References
Allen, G. (1997). From Knowledge to Words to Wayfinding: Issues in the Production and Comprehension of Route
Directions. In S. Hirtle & A. Frank (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory A Theoretical Basis for GIS (pp. 363–372).
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Allen, G. (1999). Spatial Abilities, Cognitive Maps, and
Wayfinding: Bases for Individual Differences in Spatial
Cognition and Behavior. In R. G. Golledge (Ed.), Wayfinding Behavior (pp. 46–80). Baltimore, London: John Hopkins University Press.
Bateman, J. A. (1997). Enabling Technology for Multilingual Natural Language Generation: the KPML Development Environment. Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 3(1), 15–55.
Belz, A. (2008). Automatic Generation of Weather Forecast Texts Using Comprehensive Probabilistic GenerationSpace Models. Natural Language Engineering, 1, 1–26.
Brenner, C., & Elias, B. (2003). Extracting Landmarks for
Car Navigation Systems Using Existing GIS Databases and
Laser Scanning. In H. Ebner, C. Heipke, H. Mayer, &
K. Pakzad (Eds.), Proceedings of Photogrammetric Image
Analysis (pp. 131–136).
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of Processing
and the Retention of Words in Episodic Memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 268–294.
Cuayáhuitl, H., Dethlefs, N., Richter, K.-F., Tenbrink, T.,
& Bateman, J. (2010). A Dialogue System for Indoor
Wayfinding Using Text-Based Natural Language. International Journal of Computational Linguistics and Applications, 1(1-2), 285–304.

Denis, M. (1997). The Description of Routes: A Cognitive
Approach to the Production of Spatial Discourse. Cahiers
Psychologie Cognitive, 16(4), 409–458.
Denis, M., & Fernandez, G. (submitted). The processing of
Landmarks in Route Directions. In T. Tenbrink, J. Wiener,
& C. Claramunt (Eds.), Representing Space in Cognition:
Interrelations of Behavior, Language, and Formal Models.
Jahnke, J. C., & Bower, R. E. (1986). Are There Two Ranschburg Effects? The American Journal of Psychology,
99(2), 275–288.
Kanwisher, N. G. (1987). Repetition Blindness: Type Recognition Without Token Individuation. Cognition, 27, 117–
143.
Kintsch, W. (1994). Text Comprehension, Memory, and
Learning. American Psychologist, 49, 294–303.
Münzer, S., & Hölscher, C. (2011). Entwicklung und Validierung eines Fragebogens zu räumlichen Strategien (Development and Validation of a Self-report Measure of Environmental Spatial Strategies). Diagnostica, 57(3), 111–
125.
Presson, C. C., & Montello, D. R. (1988). Points of Reference in Spatial Cognition: Stalking the Elusive Landmark.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6(4), 378–
381.
Raubal, M., & Winter, S. (2002). Enriching Wayfinding
Instructions with Local Landmarks. In M. Egenhofer &
D. Mark (Eds.), Geographic Information Science (p. 243259). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Richter, K.-F. (2007). A Uniform Handling of Different
Landmark Types in Route Directions. In Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Spatial Information Theory (pp. 373–389). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Ross, R. J., & Bateman, J. A. (2009). Daisie: Information
State Dialogues for Situated Systems. In V. Matouek &
P. Mautner (Eds.), Text, Speech and Dialogue (pp. 379–
386). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Rüetschi, U.-J. (2007). Wayfinding in Scene Space: Modelling Transfers in Public Transport. phd-thesis, University
of Zürich.
Schuldes, S., Boland, K., Roth, M., Strube, M., Krömker, S.,
& Frank, A. (2011). Modeling Spatial Knowledge for Generating Verbal and Visual Route Directions. In A. König,
A. Dengel, K. Hinkelmann, K. Kise, R. J. Howlett, &
L. C. Jain (Eds.), KES(4) (pp. 366–377). Springer.
Shi, H., Jian, C., & Rachuy, C. (2011). Evaluation of a Unified Dialogue Model for Human-Computer Interaction. International Journal of Computational Linguistics and Applications, 2(1-2).
Sorrows, M. E., & Hirtle, S. C. (1999). The Nature of Landmarks for Real and Electronic Spaces. In C. Freksa &
D. Mark (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory (pp. 37–50).
Berlin: Springer.

1977

