UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Embodied Communication Practices in Instructive Interaction between Musicians

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mp9735m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Tolins, Jackson

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Embodied Communication Practices in Instructive Interaction between Musicians
Jackson Tolins (jackson.tolins@colorado.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Hellems 290, 295 UCB
Boulder, CO 80302 USA
Abstract
Musicians, in the discussion and teaching of their art,
commonly make use of vocalizations in order to demonstrate
a particular melody or musical phrase. In the present study,
we consider the use of these vocalizations as part of embodied
depictions, and the role that these embodied communication
practices play in music instruction. Data drawn from video
recordings of private lessons between a clarinetist and his
instructor demonstrate that these enactments are used in order
to (re-)represent the experience of both performing and
listening. The music instructor makes use of these embodied
depictions for a number of actions central to teaching the art,
including assessment, direction, and displays of
understanding. In considering body-based communicative
practices as an instructive tool, we consider both simulation
and social action based cognitive perspectives through
application in the analysis of goal-oriented interaction.
Keywords: Instruction; Embodied Cognition; Non-lexical
Speech; Social Actions; Gesture; Body; Music Education.

Introduction
For musicians, the ability to talk to each other about what is
essentially a non-linguistic domain (music) plays a vital role
in the teaching, rehearsing, and performing of their art. The
requirements of the structured activity of music instruction
motivate the musicians to make frequent use of ‘nonsense’
syllables during interaction; for example ‘it sounds really
effective, but it sounds a little bit urrllliiaa’. These nonlexical vocalizations appear to be a crucial and commonly
used resource, for both teacher and student, in music
instruction, despite the large and well-established technical
vocabulary available. From a traditional linguistic view,
these vocalizations are semantically null, and cannot by
used as arbitrary and conventional referencing symbols
(Goodwin, Goodwin & Olsher 2002). Yet in the situated
activity of the music lesson, much of the instruction is
achieved through their use. How is this accomplished?
Understood within a framework of embodied cognition,
which emphasizes the role of modal representations
(Barsalou 2008), these ‘nonsense’ syllables become much
more; they represent a means of sharing direct perceptual
experience, providing the participants of the interaction the
ability to make use of the mental machinery involved in
perception and simulation for the purposes of learning and
development.
The purpose of the current paper is to demonstrate that the
interactive goals of the lesson, namely the teaching and
learning of music performance, are achieved by and
motivate the use of these embodied vocalizations as
perceptually parallel direct experiences of the music under
discussion. Combined with gestures, body movements,

prosodic contours, and interaction with the physical
environment, the nonsensical speech sounds depict the
music under discussion. By taking the framework of
embodied cognition, through which behavior is understood
in relation to the perception- and action-based systems of
the body (Barsalou, 2003; Barsalou, 2008), the vocalizations
can be understood as a means of grounding the interactive
goals of the lesson in direct experience.

Embodied Cognition and Instruction
Theories of embodied cognition, which have been invoked
in a wide range of fields, focus on the explaining cognitive
phenomena through an understanding of agent-environment
dynamics. In contrast to cognitivist and computational
paradigms, embodied cognition replaces the study of
amodal symbolic representation and processing with the
study of mental simulations and situated action as the basis
of cognition. They provide an especially appropriate
foundation for the study of the instruction and education of
a non-verbal art such as music. In many types of
instructional
settings,
body-based
communication
techniques anchor complex ideas and increase
comprehension (Iverson & Goldin-Meadow, 1998; GoldinMeadow, Kim, & Singer, 1999). For a paradigm in which
cognition is situated socially and cognitive work is offloaded onto the environment (Wilson, 2002), the use of
multimodal communication practices in an educational
setting aides in establishing appropriate learning and
problem-solving behaviors (Nathan, 2008). For example,
both children who are instructed to manipulate physical
objects while reading mathematical story problems, and
those instructed to imagine the manipulation have higher
gains in problem solving ability than their non-imagining
counterparts (Glenberg, Jaworski, Rischal, & Levin, 2007).
The paradigm of embodied cognition has been applied
successfully to the study of body-based and situated
mathematics education (see e.g. Lakoff & Nuñez, 1997;
Nuñez, Edwards, & Matos, 1999). These researchers have
focused on the embodied conceptual system from which
mathematical reasoning arises, as well as the role played by
the situated social contexts in which learning occur. These
studies demonstrate that difficult concepts in a domain such
as mathematics can be explained, in a manner beneficial to
improving curriculum, through an understanding of the
relationship between our perceptual experiences and our
conceptual structures.
Similar to math education, an instructive setting such as a
music lesson provides researchers interested in grounded
cognition theories a naturalistic source of data through
which to study both embodied communicative practices and

2446

the social actions achieved through their use. Music
performance requires a number of physical, sequential, and
emotive skills, the learning of which takes place over many
years of instruction. The ethnographic study of music
instruction offers a window into the role features of
embodied cognition play in the development of non-verbal
skills in the interaction between student and mentor.

Music and Language
In the data collected for the present study, the musicians are
clarinetists. For a clarinet, sound is produced by the
vibration of a wooden reed fitted to the underside of the
mouthpiece. In order to produce this vibration on the
clarinet, the clarinetist forces air through the instrument with
their breath in a manner that mirrors the production of
speech. In a manner also similar to speech, the tongue is
used in order to stop the vibration of the reed and thus
produce gaps of various sizes between notes. By changing
the way in which the tongue touches the reed, thereby
stilling it, different styles and strengths of separation
between notes can be achieved The use of vocalizations in
the embodied depictions can be viewed, then, as mimicking
the sensations of performing on the clarinet, from the
exhalation of air from the lungs to the use of the tongue at
various locations and with various pressures throughout the
mouth.
Recent research has also demonstrated that the online
processing of music and language overlaps (Patel, 2008;
Fedorenko, Patel, Casasanto, Winawer, & Gibson, 2009),
indicating that listening to a vocalized depiction of music
may be a more similar experience to directly listening to
instrumental music than has been previously thought. This
would allow for the musicians to substitute the direct
experience of music played on the clarinet with the nonlexical speech sounds of the vocalizations.

Vocalizations as Overt Simulation
Previous work on non-conventional, non-lexical speech
sounds has focused almost exclusively in two arenas: nonlinguistic quotes and the use of non-lexical speech sounds
by aphasics. Goodwin et al (2002) demonstrated how an
aphasic man was able to utilize nonsense syllables in order
to communicate effectively with those around him. Similar
work on the use of non-lexical vocalizations as a
communicative tool for agrammatic aphasics has been done
by Wilkinson and colleagues (2010), who showed that the
use of embodied enactment is an effective interactional
means to achieve social actions with limited lexical and
grammatical resources. Non-linguistic quotations, on the
other hand, (“the car went vrrrm”), are typically described
in particular syntactic constructions in the literature
(Hudson,
1985),
commonly
as
non-linguistic
demonstrations in which the speaker depicts, rather than
describes, their referents (Clark & Gerrig, 1990).
Given the similarities between both experiencing and
performing music and experiencing and performing speech
sounds, it becomes possible for the musicians to take

advantage of this similarity for the rehearsal of their art.
Indeed, many music teachers will recommend mental
rehearsal through making use of any opportunity, such as a
walk across campus, to mentally play through a piece.
Research into the role of simulation and imagined actions in
the planning and execution of actions, such as playing an
instrument, has flourished within the last 20 years
(Jeannerod, 2001; Barsalou 2010). These studies
demonstrate that the covert rehearsal of actions takes on
many of the same characteristics as overt action, including
temporal characteristics key to music production and
experience (Decety, Jeannerod, & Prablanc, 1989). Drawing
on the cognitive processes involved in simulation of the
voice and music perception can also increase memory of
rhythmic patterns (Pich 2000).
The enactments considered below can be described as
overt, shared simulation; simulation with an interactional
purpose. The overlapping cognitive substrate activated for
both the perception and mental imagery of speech sounds
and music provides the means by which embodied
depictions of music may be substituted for the direct
experience, to the benefit of the goals of the situated
activity.

Vocalizations as Social Actions
In many activities where the focus of the interaction is a
non-verbal domain, the use of embodied communication is
invaluable. Particularly in an instructive environment, the
embodied actions considered here play an integral role in
the development of expertise (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Firth
& Wagner, 2007; Melander & Sahlstrom, 2009). By
analyzing how it is that the vocalizations are used to achieve
the specific interactional goals of the music lesson, namely
the development of the abilities of the student, we provide
strong motivation for including the study of embodied
communicative practices, as part of the study of education
and instruction. In the data collected for this study three
distinction actions were found that make use of the
vocalizations; assessment, direction, and response. Most
commonly, the embodied depictions are used as a means of
conveying a critique of a previously experienced bit of
music. The depictions are also frequently used as part of a
directive, commanding the student to follow with a
translation of the vocalization on his instrument. Lastly, the
musicians use the vocalizations in response to a bit of talk in
order to display an understanding of what has just been
described.

Assessment
Consider the non-lexical vocalization that occurs in the
following transcript. In depicting the music played by the
student, the instructor makes use of multimodal and
embodied communication practices to highlight the quality
he wishes to assess, emphasizing and exaggerating the
particular feature in a way that allows the student to
perceive the issue in the music as well. In this example, the
depiction is quotative in that it indexes previously

2447

performed music and gains its interactional meaning
through this reference as part of the larger action of
assessment and evaluation. Prior to the start of the
transcript, the student has just finished performing a passage
from Ned Rorem’s Poems by Sylvia Plath, which ends with
a run of short fast descending notes. The instructor, after
giving a general positive assessment, highlights this run of
notes and attempts to correct the way the student performs
them. In the transcriptions, “I” is used to indicate lines
spoken by the instructor, “S” for the student.

of his hands. Thus three different modalities - gesture,
prosody, and speech - are being integrated in the embodied
depiction.

Transcript 1
I:
I:
I:
S:
I:


S:

Now here
(points to sheet) 1
umm, make suremake sure that we hear
(blows air through instrument)
the fours. Right now it sounds reallyeffective but it sounds a little bit
urrrlllliiaa, youknowwhatI’msaying
(Hand across)
mm hmm

Figure 1: Gesture co-articulated with vocalization. The
black arrow represents the first movement path, the white
arrow the second.

The instructor uses the speech sounds that make up the
vocalization to depict the lack of clarity between the notes.
Unlike almost all other vocalizations found in the data, in
which the nonsense syllables typically consist of an open
consonant-vowel structure, one syllable for each note, the
instructor uses a combination of vowels and liquid
consonants to emphasize the slurred nature of his student’s
performance. This choice in speech sounds allows for an
embodied experience of the indistinct quality that the
instructor observed, and indeed the vocalization is the only
source of the negative assessment in the interaction. The
transition from the high vowels of [u] and [i] to the low
vowel [a] can also be seen to mirror the downward motion
of jaw required for the move from the high to low register of
the clarinet. The manipulation of the voice, in combining
speech sounds into nonsense syllables of particular pitch,
loudness, and tempo, is a key feature of the depiction.
The action achieved by the use of the non-lexical
vocalization is strengthened by the simultaneous use of
gesture. While the instructor is making the ‘urrrlllliiaa’
sound, he draws his hand across the space in front of him in
a slowly downward moving motion before rotating his
pinky finger upward in release (see figure 1). The smooth
motion of the gesture mirrors the emphasized characteristic
of the quotation, with both the vocal and spatial modalities
working together to depict the nature of the music being
critiqued (see also Bräm & Bräm 2004 for an analysis of
gesture in music-oriented interactions). His whole body also
takes part in the reenactment; while he maintains orientation
towards the sheet music, his torso and shoulders sway and
dip across to the left, following and emphasizing the motion
1

(Bold) is used to represent physical actions co-occurring with
the line directly preceding.

The distinct features of the vocalization as used for
assessment are a) the location within an instructive action
sequence, wherein the student’s previous performance is the
subject matter, and b) its use as a quotative device to both
pinpoint the trouble source in the previous performance and
to simultaneously provide a critique. Importantly the
embodied depiction itself is the only spoken negative
critique, contrasted with ‘very effective’ as part of an
explanation of ‘make sure we hear the fours’. The role of
the student in listening to such a depiction is to take on the
role of the expert, re-experiencing his performance from a
less direct standpoint that allows him to critically assess the
facets of his performance emphasized by the instructor’s
quotation, which he may then affirm, as he does in the last
line of the transcript.

Direction
Beyond assessment, the embodied depictions are used to
directly change a future performance of a piece of music.
Rather than indexing a previous experience, these directives
specify exactly how a subsequent portion of music should
be played. These directives may be used for a number of
reasons during instruction, including taking apart a difficult
passage at a slower speed for familiarization, practicing
various facets of the technical skills, and prescribing
changes to performances, as the following transcript
demonstrates. Here, the instructor presents a hypothetical
performance in his vocalization, one that does not
necessarily index any previous experience. Rather, by
making use of the depiction, the teacher offers the student
an overt simulation of the music and in doing so requests a
like performance by the student. The student may then draw
on this perceptual experience as the basis of his own
playing, which he does directly subsequently in translating
what he experienced in the vocalized simulation into
playing the clarinet.

2448

Conclusion

Transcript 2
I:



I:

The means by which the musicians make use of cognitive
parallels between the perception of their voices and the
perception of music is not easily understood in terms of a
semantics based on amodal and symbolic processing.
Instead, applying an embodied perspective we have
demonstrated that the role of simulation in perception and
action may be exploited by the interactants for the purposes
of the situated activity of instruction. An ethnographic study
of the use of embodied communicative practices in
education drives home the need for a larger investigation
into the role that embodied information processing plays in
the development of procedural and technical skills. In the
music lesson, the instructor makes use of the perceptually
grounded comprehension of auditory phenomena, such as
music and the voice, in order to commit a large number of
distinct social actions essential to developing musicality on
the part of the student. This includes the quotation of
previously shared experiences to simultaneously point out
the trouble spot and provide a critique, depicting novel
musical expressions to be translated from voice to
instrument, and displaying understanding of some bit of
talk. In contrast to previous studies that focus on the role of
embodied experience to develop abstract concepts, these
few examples demonstrate that the instructor is able to
manipulate the perceptual-experiential systems of
simulation in situ to rapidly and accurately share
perspectives that will lead to the development of his student.
Music is but one of many non-verbal domains in the arts
and other technical skills in which the study of embodied
communication practices could lead to the development of
improved education.

Just play the F, make a little
bit of a diminuendo and then think
baadaadaaDAA
leading! yapupuuPAA
(student inhales and then plays)

These directives are used for a number of purposes in the
activity of the lesson. As in the example above, they are
used to make specific changes to the performance style of
the student. They may also be in forming a deeper
understanding of the music through directing the student to
play in an unfamiliar manner, such as playing a passage
with a particular subdivision of the rhythm, or at a reduced
tempo. Through presenting the student with a new
perspective on the music through the vocalization, and
directing the student to then mimic the vocalization with his
instrument, the instructor develops both the student’s
perceptual and action-based understanding of the music.

Response
Finally, a third social action makes use of the embodied
depictions in the instructional setting between the
musicians. These act as responsive displays of
understanding, and so work to depict what has just
previously been described by the co-participant. In
transcript (3) below, the student is attempting to describe the
rhythmic breakdown of a passage. The instructor responds
by vocalizing the passage under discussion as his
interpretation of the student’s description. By embodying
the music in this manner, the instructor displays his
understanding of his student’s talk in a way that allows the
student to provide uptake, which he does positively directly
after the depiction.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Barbara Fox and the members of CU
Language Project for many helpful conversations and
comments, and the musicians for their willingness to
participate.

Transcript 3
S:
S:
I:
S:
I:
S:

So right now I’m thinking more of a six
(pause)
I’m um going toyaadaadaadaadaadaadaa
(pause)
yea. diyadadadada
So you’re going for the C
Um, I mean, yea I think I’m trying to

References

Here, the instructor’s vocalization enacts his
understanding of his student’s explanation, allowing the
student to experience the music directly and confirm that the
instructor has indeed understood what was meant. That the
student then double-checks the accuracy of this vocalized
depiction by repeating it to himself demonstrates the role
these vocalizations play as perceptual anchors for their
understanding of the music.

Barsalou, L.W. (2003) Situated simulation in the human
conceptual system. Lang. Cogn. Process., 18, 512-62
Barsalou, L.W. (2008) Grounded cognition. Annu. Rev.
Psychol., 59, 617-645
Barsalou, L.W. (2010) Grounded cogntion: Past, present,
and future. Topics in Cog. Sci., 2, 716-724
Bräm, P. & Bräm T. (2004) Expressive gestures used by
classical orchestra conductors. In: Muller, C. & Posner, R.
(Eds.) The semantics and pragmatics of everyday
gestures, Weidler Buchverlag
Clark, H. & Gerrig R. (1990) Quotations as demonstrations.
Language, 66, 4, 764-805
Decety, J., Jeannerod, M., & Prablanc, C. (1989) The timing
of mentally represented actions. Behav. Brain Res., 34,
35-42

2449

Goodwin, C., Goodwin, M. H., & Olsher, D. (2002)
Producing sense with nonsense syllables: Turn and
sequence in conversations with a man with sever aphasia.
In: Ford, C. E., Fox, B., & Thompson, S. A. (Eds.) The
language of turn and sequence, Oxford University Press
Firth, A. & Wagner, J. (1997) On discourse,
communication, and (some) fundamental concepts in SLA
research. The modern language journal, 81, 3, 285-300
Glenberg, A. M., Jaworski, B., Rischal, M., & Levin, J. R.
(2007). What brains are for: Action, meaning, and
reading comprehension. In D. McNamara (Ed.), Reading
comprehension strategies: Theories, interventions,
and technologies Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Goldin-Meadow, S., Kim, S., & Singer, M. (1999) What the
adult’s hands tell the student’s mind about math. Journal
of educational psychology, 6, 138-43
Hudson, R. (1985) The limits of subcategorization.
Linguistic analysis, 15, 233-55
Iverson, J. & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1998) Why peope gesture
when they speak. Nature, 396, 228
Jeannerod, M. (2001) Neural simulation of action: A
unifying mechanism for motor cognition. NeuroImage,
14, S103-S109
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991) Situated learning: Legitimate
peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
University Press
Lakoff, G. & Nunez, R. (1997) The metaphorical structure
of mathematics: Sketching out cognitive foundations for a
mind-based mathematics. In: L. English (ed.)
Mathematical reasoning: Analogies, metaphors, and
images, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ
Melander, H. & Sahlstrom F. (2009) Learning to fly: The
progressive development of situation awareness.
Scandinavian journal of educational research, 53, 2, 151166
Nathan, M. J. (2008). An embodied cognition perspective
on symbols, gestures and grounding instruction. In M.
DeVega, A. M. Glenberg, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.),
Symbols, embodiment and meaning. Cambridge: Oxford
University Press.
Nunez, R., Edwards, L., & Fililpe Matos, J. (1999)
Embodied cognition as grounding for situatedness and
context in mathematics education. Educational studies in
mathematics, 39, 45-65
Pich, J. (2000) The role of subvocalization in rehearsal and
maintenance of rhythmic patterns. Spanish journal of
psychology, 3, 63-67
Wilkinson, R., Beeke, S., & Maxim, J. (2010) Formulating
actions and events with limited linguistic resources:
Enactment and iconicity in agrammatic aphasic talk.
Research on language and social interaction, 43, 1, 57-84
Wilson, M. (2002) Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychon. Bull. Rev., 9, 625-36

2450

