UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Enhanced Performance for Recognition of Irrelevant Target-Aligned Auditory Stimuli:
Unimodal and Cross-modal Considerations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53h6x7mh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Dewald, Andrew
Sinnett, Scott

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Enhanced Performance for Recognition of Irrelevant Target-Aligned Auditory
Stimuli: Unimodal and Cross-modal Considerations
Andrew D. Dewald (adewald@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822
Abstract

presented in the background during the letter identification
task, of which a small subset moved coherently. Despite the
coherent motion being implicit (i.e., participants were
unable to reliably detect the coherent motion), participants
were proficient at discriminating the motion (still presented
below threshold) in a later discrimination task as long as it
had previously been exposed simultaneously with the
presence of a differently colored target letter during the
identification task.
It is important to note that the initial motion presentation
was implicit. This is a key point, as when presenting the
coherent motion above threshold (i.e., 50% of the dots
moved coherently), Tsushima et al (2008) showed an
inhibition for target-aligned motions. Thus, it appears that
facilitatory and inhibitory effects might be dependent on
whether the initial presentation was presented below or
above threshold, respectively.
As the majority of this research has used a relatively noncomplex and simple stimuli (e.g., coherent motion in an
array of moving dots), we recently examined (see Dewald et
al., 2011) how a more salient stimulus, but irrelevant to the
primary task, might affect later processing during an
adapted inattentional blindness (IB) task (see for example
Rees, Ruth, Frith, & Driver, 1999; Sinnett, Costa, & SotoFaraco, 2006). Participants were required to monitor a
stream of pictures that had written words superimposed on
top of each image, and respond to immediate repetitions in
the picture steam while ignoring the word stream. A
subsequently presented surprise recognition test for the
previously ignored words demonstrated that words that had
been temporally aligned with the presence of a task-target
(i.e., an immediately repeating picture) were recognized
significantly below chance levels (i.e., inhibited), while
words that had been temporally aligned with non-targets
(i.e., a non repeating picture) were recognized at chance
levels.
It is important to note that the highly salient stimuli
(written words) were presented for 350 ms (i.e., more than
enough time for explicit perception). However, the aligned
words were nonetheless inhibited in a later surprise
recognition test. This finding dovetails with the earlier
described findings by Tsushima et al (2008), who used
target-aligned coherent motion as a stimulus and observed
an analogous inhibition of motion discrimination for target-

Task-irrelevant stimuli are later recognized at enhanced levels
providing that they had previously appeared with a taskrelevant target (Dewald & Sinnett, submitted; Seitz &
Watanabe, 2003, 2005). The present investigation explores
this notion in the auditory sensory modality. Participants
listened to a stream of auditory sounds and spoken words with
the instruction to detect repetitions in only the sound stream
(i.e., ignore the words). A surprise test measured recognition
for the previously played words. Overall, when comparing
target-aligned and non-aligned information in a later
recognition task, facilitation was observed for words that had
been aligned with target repetitions, despite equal presentation
frequency and being irrelevant to the primary repetition task.
This enhancement was mediated by the sensory modality of
presentation in the surprise recognition task. Congruent
auditory presentations between the exposure and recognition
tasks yielded improved performance, and under cross-modal
presentations the magnitude of the enhancement was greatest.

Introduction
An emerging body of research has explored how unattended
information (explicitly or implicitly presented) that appears
simultaneously with a task-target in a separate task is later
recognized in a subsequently presented surprise recognition
test (Dewald, Sinnett, & Doumas, 2011; Seitz & Watanabe,
2003, 2005; Swallow & Jiang, 2010, 2011; Tsushima,
Sasaki, & Watanabe, 2006; Tsushima, Seitz, & Watanabe,
2008). These investigations have generally consisted of a
primary task involving visually presented task-relevant and
previously irrelevant stimuli, with a later surprise
recognition test for the irrelevant stimuli. Collectively, the
findings suggest that the task-irrelevant stimuli are indeed
processed, as long as they were previously aligned with a
task-relevant target. However, two opposing patterns have
been observed, with facilitatory (see for example Seitz &
Watanabe, 2003; Watanabe, Nañez, & Seitz, 2001) or
inhibitory (see for example Tsushima et al., 2006, 2008)
effects for the previously aligned, but irrelevant material,
seemingly dependent on whether it had originally been
presented below or above, respectively, the threshold for
conscious awareness.
Seitz and Watanabe (2003) required participants to
identify differently colored target letters in a rapid serial
visual presentation (RSVP) of the letters. Importantly, an
array of randomly moving dots (irrelevant to the task) was

294

aligned motions. That is, the coherent motion was also
presented above threshold.
Other experimental paradigms have utilized different
approaches to further investigate the way that the temporal
alignment of task relevant and irrelevant information affects
the later recognition of the irrelevant stimuli. Interestingly,
despite the explicit presentation of their stimuli, the opposite
findings, have been demonstrated, with a facilitation being
observed for seemingly analogous conditions that elicited an
inhibition. For instance, Swallow and Jiang (2010; see also
Lin et al, 2010) completed a series of experiments
suggesting an “attentional boost” (i.e., facilitation) for
simultaneously presented, suprathreshold information in a
dual-task paradigm. Participants monitored a stream of
pictures of various scenes, while a series of items (small
black superimposed shapes) was simultaneously paired with
the presentation of each picture. The task was to remember
as many of the presented scenes as possible, in addition to
monitor the distractor stream of shapes for the presence of a
color change. In a subsequent forced choice recognition test
for the picture scenes, an enhanced recognition for pictures
that had been previously presented simultaneously with the
presence of a target (i.e., differently colored shape) in the
distractor stream was observed.
Of particular note to Swallow and Jiang’s (2010)
findings is that participants were required to attend to both
streams of information simultaneously. Recall that in the
paradigms utilized by Dewald et al (2011) and Tsushima et
al (2006, 2008), participants were instructed to detect a
target in one stream, but explicitly instructed not to attend
to the other stream of irrelevant information, which
constituted the information to be recognized in the
subsequent surprise test. The division of attention between
both streams of information in Swallow and Jiang’s
paradigm could be the reason why a facilitation was
observed in their results, rather than an inhibition.
A recent investigation by Dewald and Sinnett
(submitted) aimed to more closely align their paradigm with
the original procedure used by Tsushima et al (2006; see
also, Seitz & Watanabe, 2003; Watanabe et al, 2001). In
their experiment the exact same motion was paired with all
of the target letters. This is different from the paradigm used
by Swallow and Jiang (2010) or Dewald et al (2011), where
a number of different pictures or words (irrelevant items in
the primary task, but the items of interest in the subsequent
recognition test), respectively, were aligned with targets in
the primary task. In fact, the initial paradigm used by
Dewald et al (2011) had 50 different words serving as the
irrelevant stimuli during the picture repetition detection
task. Therefore, in our subsequent work (Dewlad & Sinnett,
submitted) this relatively infrequent exposure rate (each of
the 50 aligned words was presented only four times) was
increased to an exposure rate more similar to Tsushima et al
(2006, 2008). Accordingly, only a single word was aligned
with all of the targets from the primary task of detecting
picture repetitions. This enabled the number of instances
that this task-irrelevant word was presented to be greatly

increased (from two times per word per participant, to 120
times). If the premise is that explicit information is later
inhibited during a recognition task if it had been aligned
with a task-relevant target, then an inhibition should have
been observed for these items, especially given that the
paradigm better replicated the original work demonstrating
such an inhibition by Tsushima et al (2006). However, a
facilitation for aligned words was seen, suggesting that the
relationship between inhibition and facilitation is more
complex than just whether the previously aligned stimuli
were explicitly or implicitly presented. It is likely possible
that the salience of the stimuli is also important, as an
ignored written word is arguably processed to a higher level
(i.e., semantically) than the ignored coherent motion of a
moving array of dots.
Assuming that the facilitatory effect for explicitly
presented, but ignored, stimuli is driven by whether the
irrelevant stimulus is temporally aligned with the presence
of a task-relevant target, it is important to extend these
results to other sensory modalities. Despite vision being the
dominant sense in humans (Chandra, Robinson, & Sinnett,
2011; Colavita et al., 1974; Posner et al., 1980; Sinnett et
al., 2007), it is clear that the human perceptual experience is
a result of multisensory information. Thus, it is important to
explore if these inhibitory and faciltatory effects extend to
other sensory modalities, as this will further inform how
information is processed both within, and across modalities.
For instance, Sinnett et al. (2006) demonstrated that when
attentional reservoirs were depleted by a primary task,
inattentional blindness for spoken word perception was
interrupted to the same degree as visual word recognition,
however performance improved under multimodal
conditions. Furthermore, a recent investigation by Dewald
and Sinnett (2011a) extended this finding to the auditory
modality by including an additional analysis for items that
had previously appeared simultaneously with targets in the
separate task. In this case, an inhibition for spoken words
(explicitly presented) was observed. However, it should be
noted that this investigation also used a large number of
auditory words as irrelevant stimuli (i.e., identical to the
visual paradigm incorporated in Dewald et al., 2011),
therefore it is unknown if the inhibition for target-aligned
stimuli will extend to conditions with an increased exposure
rate (i.e., similar to the visual condition of Dewald &
Sinnett, submitted; see also Tsushima et al., 2006, 2008).
Addressing precisely this, we adapted the same paradigm
utilized in Dewald & Sinnett (submitted) to an auditory
presentation, with the primary task to detect target
repetitions in the sound stream, and the secondary task to
subsequently recognize the previously ignored words that
had been played simultaneously with the sounds. Critically,
only one specific spoken word was presented to participants.
This increased exposure rate lead to an enhanced
performance rather than inhibited (i.e., akin to the
attentional boost observed by Swallow & Jiang, 2010). If
visual findings (Dewald & Sinnett, submitted) extend to the
auditory modality, then we predict that the higher exposure

295

rate of the irrelevant spoken word will lead to a later
facilitation in recognition for that word, as long as it had
appeared simultaneously with an attended target in the
previous task1.
A separate but equally important aspect of this research
explores the modality in which the surprise test is presented.
The use of dual task paradigms is pervasive in the cognitive
sciences. For instance, seminal studies on dichotic listening
(Broadbent, 1958; Treisman, 1964) presented participants
with orthogonal messages to each ear, with the instruction to
only direct their attention to a single channel of information.
After this initial task, an unexpected test was given to assess
the ability to recognize or recall the information that had
been presented previously at the ignored ear. Of key
importance here is the consideration of the sensory modality
that the surprise test was presented in, respective of the
initial exposure during the primary task. For instance, in
these classic studies, the surprise test that probed
participants’ ability to process the originally presented
irrelevant information was always given in the same
modality as the original presentation during exposure in the
primary task (auditorily).
To the best of our knowledge, this congruency in
modality presentation between exposure and recognition
tests has never been systematically manipulated. Therefore,
given the recent interest in extending inattentional blindness
(see Sinnett et al., 2006) and target-alignment findings (see
Dewald & Sinnett, 2010, 2011a,b) to the auditory modality
and across modalities, it is important to explore how
presenting the surprise test in a congruent modality would
affect results, if at all. Thus, in addition to the
aforementioned goals of extending this paradigm to the
auditory modality and incorporating a higher exposure rate,
we also presented the surprise recognition test in the same
or different sensory modality, or across modalities. If
primary and secondary task modality congruence is a factor,
then we would expect improved results for congruent
matchings vs. incongruent matchings, and potentially an
additional enhancement for multimodal presentations given
that performance is generally enhanced for multisensory
presentations (see Driver & Spence, 2004).

of 4-6 letters) were selected from the MRC psycholinguistic
database (Wilson, 1988). The overall average frequency of
the 150 selected words was 120 per million, ranging
between 28 and 686. A native English speaker’s voice was
recorded reading the list three times, after which three blind
listeners chose the best exemplar of each spoken word (a
fourth listener was recruited in order to break a tie when
needed) The selected recordings were edited to have the
same length of presentation (350 ms) and average
amplitude. The sound stimuli were extracted from a
database of 100 familiar sounds and were also edited to 350
ms and similar average amplitude (see Sinnett et al., 2006).
A stream of 960 sound-word concatenated items was
created. Repeated sounds acted as the task relevant-targets.
The presentation stream was broken into eight blocks of 120
trials in which an immediate sound repetition occurred on
average one out of every eight trials, equating to 15 taskrelevant target repetitions per block.
Eight spoken words (of the original 16) were randomly
selected to overlay the 960 trial sound stream. This was
done to parallel the quantity of items and exposure to
irrelevant stimuli (see Dewald & Sinnett, submitted;
Tsushima et al., 2006) as well as the dependent measure
employed by Dewald and Sinnett (submitted; i.e., the
analogous experiment in the visual domain). The
presentation was pseudorandomized so that on average one
out of every eight trials was an immediate sound repetition
(and therefore the presentation of the same superimposed
task-irrelevant target word). Critically, only one
superimposed spoken word was aligned with all of the
immediately repeated sounds for each participant. This
single word was randomized between the eight words
between participants, so as to control for any possible
differences that may have existed regarding the saliency of
any particular word. Lastly, it is important to note that both
aligned and non-aligned words were exposed to participants
in equal amounts.
A surprise recognition test for the presented words was
administered after the completion of the repetition detection
task. The test consisted of a total of sixteen words from
which half came from the previously heard sound stream,
while the other half consisted of foil words that had never
been heard before (average frequency of 236 per million
with a range of 165-399). The word recognition tasks were
randomized and presented by DMDX software
(http://www.u.arixona.edu/jforster/dmdx.htm) one at a time,
in either the visual or auditory modality, or across
modalities. For the visual presentation the words were
written in bold, capitalized letters in Arial font at a size of
24 points, and remained on the screen until a response was
made. For auditory presentations the words were spoken
just as they were in the initial repetition detection task,
albeit without the accompanying sounds. The sound stream
and relevant surprise tasks were presented from two external
speakers, equidistant to the computer screen. Cross-modal
presentations involved the written word on the screen with
the spoken word presented simultaneously.

Method
Participants. Fifty-one participants were recruited from the
University of Hawai’i at Manoa in exchange for course
credit. Each participant completed the same auditory
repetition detection task, but were divided across three
different types of surprise recognition tests: visual only
(n=18), auditory only (n=17), or cross-modal (n=16).
Participants were naïve to the experiment and had normal or
corrected to normal hearing.
Materials. A total of 16 one to two syllable, highfrequency English words (average length of 5 letters, range
1

Note, target aligned and non-aligned words were themselves
exposed in equal proportions. The higher frequency relates to
comparisons to previous, but analogous research (see Dewald et
al., 2011; Dewald & Sinnett, 2011, submitted).

296

Procedure. Participants were required to attend to the
sound stream (i.e., they were explicitly instructed to ignore
the simultaneously presented, overlaid spoken words) and
respond to immediate sound repetitions by pressing the ‘G’
key on the keyboard of the computer. Each item in the
sound-word presentation was presented for 350 ms with a
150-ms inter-stimulus interval (ISI; silence) for a stimulus
onset asynchrony (SOA) of 500 ms. Before the first
experimental block, a training block of eight trials was
given and repeated until participants were familiar and
comfortable with the task.
Immediately after the repetition detection task, the
surprise word recognition test was administered to all
participants (modality type of surprise task dependent on
condition). Participants were instructed to press the “B” key
if they had heard the word during the repetition detection
task or, instead, the “V” key if they had not heard the word
before.

repetitions were significantly detected (Hits: 68% SE=.18
vs. Misses: 28% SE=.04, t(17)=9.42, p < .001).
Auditory surprise recognition test (AR): Overall task
performance was 71.0%, which was statistically different
from chance (t (45) = 4.47, p = .001). Contrary to the visual
condition, recognition for target-aligned words (76.4%,
SE=.10) was significantly better than non-aligned words
(58.8%, SE=.05, t (16)= 2.37, p = .05; see Figure 1). Again,
unlike the first experiment, there was no difference in
performance between target-aligned word recognition and
correct rejections of foils (target-aligned: 76.04%, SE=.10
vs. CR: 77.7%, SE=.06, t(16)=0.09, p = .967) However,
there was a significant difference between non-aligned word
recognition and correctly rejecting foil words (non-aligned:
58.8%, SE=.05 vs. CR: 77.7%, SE=.06, t(16)=2.35, p = .03).
Lastly, participants accurately detected target repetitions
(Hits: 73% SE=.10 vs. Misses: 23% SE=.11, t(16)=8.47, p
< .001).
Cross-modal surprise recognition test (CR). Overall
word recognition was 69.2%, which was statistically better
than chance (t (43) = 4.28, p = .001). Recognition for targetaligned words (81.2%, SE=.10) was significantly better than
non-aligned words (55.7%, SE=.05; t (15)= 2.59, p = .05;
see Figure 1). There was no difference in performance
between target-aligned word recognition and correct
rejections of foils (target-aligned: 81.2%, SE=.10 vs. CR:
70.8%, SE=.06, t(15)=0.82, p = .422). Again, however,
there was a significant difference between non-aligned word
recognition and correctly rejecting foil words (non-aligned:
58.7%, SE=.05 vs. CR: 70.8%, SE=.06, t(15)=2.07, p =.05).
Additionally, participants accurately detected immediate
sound target repetitions in the primary task (Hits: 75%
SE=.13 vs. Misses: 24% SE=.03, t(15)=9.23, p < .001).

Results
To assess whether recognition performance was modulated
by target alignment or the modality of presentation of the
surprise task, a two-way, repeated measures ANOVA was
conducted, with surprise test modality (auditory, visual, or
cross-modal) as a between-subjects factor, and target
alignment (target-aligned or non-aligned) as a within
subjects factor. A main effect for target alignment
confirmed that, overall, word recognition performance was
significantly better for target-aligned words (72.5%) when
compared to non-aligned words (58.8.%) (F (2, 48) = 3.54,
p = .03). No main effect was found for modality of
presentation (F (2, 48) = 1.58, p = .211). Additionally, and
of key importance to this analysis, an interaction was
observed between target-alignment and modality of
presentation (F (2, 48) = 3.08, p < .05), suggesting that the
modality of presentation in the recognition task played a
role in recognition performance between target-aligned and
non-aligned words. To further explore this interaction, each
surprise recognition condition (auditory, visual, or crossmodal) is individually analyzed below.
Visual surprise recognition test (VR): Overall task
performance for the surprise test was 65.8%, which was
statistically different from chance (t (46) = 3.08, p = .001).
More importantly, the recognition for the target-aligned
words (61.0%, SE=.11) was not statistically different from
non-aligned words (61.5%, SE=.57; t (17)= .03, p = .97; see
Figure 2). Note that the overall performance was higher due
to increased performance on correctly rejecting foils. The
correct rejection of foil words was compared with overall
performance for target-aligned and non-aligned words.
There was a significant difference between recognition for
target-aligned words and correct rejections (target-aligned:
61.0%, SE=.11 vs. CR: 79.6%, SE=.04, t(17)=2.14, p = .02)
as well as a significant difference between correctly
recognizing non-aligned words and correct rejections (nonaligned: 61.5%, SE=.57 vs. CR: 79.6%, SE=.04, t(17)=2.47,
p = .02). Lastly, confirming that participants were able to
successfully perform the initial repetition task, the target

Figure 1. Recognition percentages for Target-Aligned (grey bar)
and Non-Aligned (black bar) words dependent on the modality of
the surprise test.

297

subsequent recognition task (Dewald & Sinnett, 2011a;
Sinnett et al, 2006; see Dewald & Sinnett, 2011b for a
cross-modal example). It is possible that the incongruence
between the modality of presentation and subsequent
recognition may in some way affect the recognition of the
previously unattended items. Thus, further research should
explore whether the observed enhancement for visually
aligned words when tested with a visually presented surprise
task extends to incongruent task modality presentations (or
across modalities).
In the present experiment the cross-modal presentation
lead to the greatest magnitude of enhancement for the
previously aligned words in the surprise recognition test.
This aligns well with previous investigations of attentional
allocation across sensory modalities in perceptual and
recognition tasks, suggesting that cross-modal presentations
generally lead to superior to performance when compared to
unimodal presentations (Dewald & Sinnett, 2011b; Duncan,
Martens, & Ward, 1997; Sinnett et al, 2006; Toro, Sinnett,
& Soto-Faraco, 2005).
The possibility that the presentation modality of the
surprise test could modulate performance has yet to be fully
explored. The resulting recognition performance, observed
when the surprise task was incongruent to the initial
exposure, necessitates an investigation into the nature of
modality congruence in dual-task paradigms. Clearly, the
current findings establish that attention must be paid to
future methodologies utilizing a dual-task paradigm and the
implications of modality congruence between the primary
and secondary task. Furthermore, previous investigations
that employ incongruent modalities between exposure and
recognition must be revisited (Dewald et al, 2011, Sinnett et
al, 2006).
Combined, the present findings and previous research
offer insight into how irrelevant information is processed
when it is presented simultaneously with an attended target.
Under certain circumstances, as demonstrated here (see also
Dewald et al., 2011 Dewald & Sinnett, submitted; Seitz &
Watanabe, 2003; Tsushima et al., 2008), unattended stimuli
can be perceived and affect behavior. Here we extend
findings from previous research into the auditory sensory
modality, and show a facilitation (i.e., attentional boost) for
a highly exposed stimulus that was aligned with a target in
the previous task when compared with items that were not
aligned. More importantly however, we demonstrate that
careful consideration must be given to the modality of
presentation of dual-task paradigms in general.

Discussion
The present findings extend investigations exploring how
above threshold, but unattended information is processed
when it appears simultaneously with an attended target. We
demonstrate that in all conditions, the overall recognition of
the words in the surprise task was better than chance,
despite attention not being directed to the words. This
finding is contrary to what can be predicted from
inattentional blindness investigations in that the overall
recognition of the words should have been at chance, or
perhaps even inhibited for the irrelevant stimulus (Dewald
et al, 2011; Rees et al, 1999; Sinnett et al, 2006). It is likely
that the increased exposure to (i.e., fewer items) to the
irrelevant stimuli drove this effect. More importantly, the
interaction between target-alignment and the modality of the
surprise test was significant, driven by performance for
target-aligned words being statistically better than nonaligned words in the auditory recognition (76% vs. 58%)
and cross-modal recognition (81% vs. 55%) conditions.
Note, when comparing the magnitude of the enhancement
between these two conditions, there was (no) additional
improvement for cross-modal conditions. Accordingly, this
suggests that, at least in the present case, temporally
aligning explicitly presented, irrelevant, auditory stimuli
with relevant auditory target stimuli facilitates subsequent
recognition of the irrelevant stimuli, but only if the
recognition test is presented in the same modality as the
initial task, or across modalities. Thus, an “attentional
boost” (see Swallow & Jiang, 2010) for irrelevant stimuli
was observed, as long as they were initially presented
simultaneously with a target in the picture repetition task,
despite not receiving direct attention.
Interestingly, when the surprise recognition task was
presented in an incongruent modality from the exposure
(i.e., the visual surprise recognition task) there was no
difference between target-aligned and non-aligned words.
Previous findings have demonstrated an inhibition for both
visually aligned (Dewald et al., 2011) and auditorily aligned
words (Dewald & Sinnett, 2011a) in a dual-task paradigm,
despite not controlling for task modality congruence (i.e.,
the visual example presented information in the congruent
modality, while the auditory example also presented the
surprise test in the visual modality). However, it should be
noted that both of these examples used a much lower
exposure rate (i.e., 50 words had been aligned in the
repetition detection task rather than only one that was
repeated 120 times). This could possibly explain why we
failed to observe a difference in the visual task condition
here.
Further complicating the matter, Dewald and Sinnett
(submitted) observed an enhancement for target-aligned
words under nearly isomorphic conditions as utilized here,
with the only difference being that the initial repetition
detection task was presented in the visual modality. In fact,
all research conducted thus far, exploring the fate of
irrelevant auditory words either target-aligned or not, has
presented the words in the visual modality during the

References
Ahissar, M., & Hochstein, S. (1993). Attentional control of
early perceptual learning. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science U.S.A, 90, 5718–
5722.
Borst, A., & Egelhaaf, M. (1989). Principles of visual
motion detection. Trends in Neurosciences, 12(8),
297-306.

298

Broadbent, D.E. (1958). Perception and communication.
London: Pergamon Press.
Chandra., M., Robinson, C. W., & Sinnett, S. (2011).
Coexistence of multiple modal dominances. In L.
Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society
Cherry, E.C. (1953). Some experiments on recogniton of
speech, with one and two ears. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 25, 957-979.
Dewald, A.D., & Sinnett, S. (submitted). A window of
perception when diverting attention? Enhancing
recognition for explicitly presented, unattended,
and irrelevant visual stimuli by target alignment.
Submitted to the Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Psychology
Society.
Dewald, A.D., & Sinnett, S. (2011a). An inhibited
recognition performance for explicitly presented
target-aligned irrelevant stimuli in the auditory
modality. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Psychology Society.
Dewald, A.D. & Sinnett, S. (2011b). A multimodal
investigation of recognition performance for targetaligned but irrelevant stimuli. Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitve
Science Society.
Dewald, A.D., Sinnett, S., & Doumas, L.A.A. (2011).
Conditions of directed attention inhibit recognition
performance for explicitly presented target-aligned
irrelevant stimuli. Acta Psychologica, 138, 6067.
Duncan J, Martens S, Ward R (1997), Restricted
attentional capacity within but not between sensory
modalities. Nature 387(6635):808-10
Driver, J., & Spence, C. (2004). Cross-modal spatial
attention: Evidence from human performance.
In C. Spence & J. Driver (Eds.), Cross-modal space
and cross-modal attention. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Lin, J.Y., Pype, A.D., Murray, & Boynton, G.M. (2010).
Enhanced memory for scenes presented at
relevant points in time. PLoS Biol, 8(3), E1000337.
Rees, G., Russell, C., Frith, C. D., & Driver, J. (1999).
Inattentional blindness versus inattentional
amnesia for fixated but ignored words. Science,
286, 2504-2507.
Roelfsema, P. R., van Ooyen, A., & Watanabe, T. (2009).
Perceptual learning rules based on reinforces
and attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(2),
64-71.
Seitz, A. R., Kim, R., & Shams, L. (2006). Sound facilitates
visual learning. Current Biology, 16, 1422- 1427.
Seitz, A. R. & Watanabe, T. (2003). Psychophysics: Is
subliminal learning really passive? Nature, 422,
36.

Seitz, A. R. & Watanabe, T. (2005). A unified model for
perceptual learning. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 9 (7), 329-334.
Sinnett, S., Costa, A., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2006).
Manipulating inattentional blindness within and
across sensory modalities. Quarterly Journal of
experimental Psychology, 59(8), 1425-1442
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized
set of 260 pictures: Norms for name
agreement, image agreement, familiarity, and
visual complexity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 1
74–215.
Swallow K. M., & Jiang, Y. V. (2010). The attentional
boost effect: Transient increases in attention to
one task enhance performance in a second task.
Cognition, 115, 118-132.
Swallow K.M., & Jiang, Y. V. (2011). The role of timing in
the attentional boost effect. Attention, Perception,
and Psychophysics, 73, 389-404.
Toro, J.M., Sinnett, S., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2005). Speech
segmentation by statistical learning depends on
attention. Cognition, 97, 25-34
Triesman, A.M. (1964). Selective attention in man.
BritisishMedical Bulletin, 20, 12-16.
Tshushima, Y., Sasaki, Y., & Watanabe, T. (2006). Greater
disruption due to failure of inhibitory control
on an ambiguous distractor. Science, 314, 17861788.
Tsushima, Y., Seitz, A. R., & Watanabe, T. (2008). Taskirrelevant learning occurs only when the
irrelevant feature is weak. Current Biology,18(12),
516-517.
Watanabe, T., Náñez,Y., & Sasak, S. (2001). Perceptual
learning without perception. Nature, 413, 844–
848.
Wilson, M. D. (1988). The MRC psycholinguistic database:
Machine readable dictionary, version 2.
Behavioural Research Methods, Instruments and
Computers, 20, 6-11.

299

