UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Estimating Semantic Transparency of Constituents of English Compounds and TwoCharacter Chinese Words using Latent Semantic Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3xw4v00g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Wang, Hsueh-Cheng
Hsu, Li-Chuan
Tien, Yi-Min
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Estimating Semantic Transparency of Constituents of English Compounds and
Two-Character Chinese Words using Latent Semantic Analysis
Hsueh-Cheng Wang (hchengwang@gmail.com)
Li-Chuan Hsu (lchsu@mail.cmu.edu.tw)
Yi-Min Tien (tien@mercury.csmu.edu.tw)
Marc Pomplun (marc@cs.umb.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts at Boston,
100 Morrissey Boulevard, Boston, MA 02125 USA
Abstract
The constituents of English compounds (e.g., butter and fly
for butterfly) and two-character Chinese words may differ in
meaning from the whole word. Furthermore, the meanings of
the words containing the same constituent (e.g., butter in
“butterfingers”, or “buttermilk”) may or may not be consistent.
Estimating semantic transparency of a constituent is usually
difficult and subjective because of these uncertainties and
ambiguities. It is rather unexplored why a constituent is
considered transparent/opaque by raters, and how its
polysemy correlates to its transparency. We propose a
computational method for predicting semantic transparency
based on Latent Semantic Analysis. We computed the
primary meaning of a constituent by a clustering analysis and
compared it to the whole-word meaning. The proposed
method successfully predicted participants’ transparency
ratings, and may explain the cognitive processes in raters
when classifying semantic transparency of English
compounds and two-character Chinese words.
Keywords: compound words; semantic transparency; latent
semantic analysis; Chinese; clustering.

Introduction
A compound word is a word composed of at least two free
lexemes that refer to a new concept. Compound words with
two constituents are defined as semantically transparent
(transparent-transparent, referred to as TT, see Frisson,
Niswander-Klement, & Pollatsek, 2008) when the whole
word meaning can be grasped through its individual
constituents, such as cookbook. Compound words are
regarded as semantically opaque (opaque-opaque, OO),
when their meaning cannot be fully derived from its
constituents, e.g., cocktail. Some compound words are
considered partially opaque (opaque-transparent, OT, or
transparent-opaque, TO) when the primary meaning of one
of the constituents is related to the meaning of the
compound, such as butterfly or staircase, respectively.
Typically, transparency ratings are the most common
method to obtain transparency information. Transparency
rating experiments have used target words that differed
substantially in their estimated transparency by researchers
or a group of participants. For instance, Pollatsek and Hyönä
(2005) selected 80 compound words, 40 of which they
assumed to be semantically transparent, and the other 40 to
be opaque. They asked eight participants to rate these words
regarding their transparency using a 7-point scale (1 for

totally transparent and 7 for totally opaque), and the ratings
were clearly lower for the supposedly transparent sets than
for the supposedly opaque ones. Similarly, Frisson et al.
(2008) asked 40 participants to rate transparency in terms of
appropriate categories (e.g., opaque-transparent (OT),
transparent-opaque (TO), opaque-opaque (OO), and
transparent-transparent (TT)), and there was good
agreement between the participants’ choices and the
predefined classification by Frisson et al. (2008). The
proportion of participants’ choices agreeing with the
predefined classification was 65% for OO, 71% for OT,
65% for TO, and 86% for TT. Moreover, the proportion of
participants classifying at least one of the constituents as
opaque for the predefined opaque words was very high:
95% for OO, 93% for OT and 95% for TO. Inhoff et al.
(2008) selected “headed” and “tailed” compound words, i.e.,
compound words whose meaning was primarily defined by
their first or second constituents, respectively. They had 13
participants rate 390 compound words using an 11-point
scale ranging from 0 to 10, where 0 indicated that the
meaning of the compound was solely associated with the
meaning of the first constituent, while 10 denoted that the
meaning of the compound was solely associated with the
one of the second constituent. Compounds with mean
ratings below 4 (mean: 3.34) or above 6 (mean: 7.18) were
considered to be headed or tailed, respectively. It is
important to notice that the definition of headed and tailed
compound words might not equal the TO and OT conditions
discussed above. For example, the second constituent of a
headed compound may be opaque or transparent, as long as
its meaning is less closely related to the compound than the
meaning of the first constituent is.
Two-character Chinese words, similar to English
compound words, differ in how the meanings of the first
and second characters relate to the meaning of the word.
Some two-character Chinese words are semantically
transparent, i.e., both characters are transparently related to
the meaning of the whole word. Other words are fully
opaque, i.e., the meaning of neither constituent is related to
the meaning of the compound, or partially opaque. Table 1
lists some examples of transparent, opaque, and partially
opaque Chinese words.
According to the estimation of Zhou and Marslen-Wilson
(1995), 74% of Chinese words are made up of two
characters, although some words consist of only one

2499

character and some consist of three or more characters. A
Chinese character is a writing unit which has a single
syllable and meaning(s). It is approximately equal to a
morpheme in most cases. However, unlike English and
other alphabetic writing systems, Chinese words are written
without spaces in a sequence of characters. The concept of a
word is not as clearly defined in Chinese as it is in English,
which means that Chinese readers might somewhat disagree
where word boundaries are located (see Rayner, Li, &
Pollatsek, 2007, for a review). According to the
segmentation standard by Huang, Chen, Chen, and Chang
(1997) used by the Academia Sinica Balanced Corpus
(ASBC; Academia Sinica, 1998), not all characters
constitute one-character words. Furthermore, a Chinese
character might be shared by many words, but the meaning
of the character and those words may not be consistent.
Table 1. Examples of transparent, opaque, and partially
opaque Chinese words. The meaning of the whole word and
the primary meanings of 1st and 2nd characters are shown
in parentheses.

TT
OO
TO
OT

Whole Word
球場 (ball court)
壽司 (sushi)
智商 (I.Q.)
開水(boiled water)

1st Character
球 (ball)
壽 (age)
智 (Intelligent)
開 (open)

2nd Character
場 (court)
司 (in charge of)
商 (commerce)
水 (water)

the meaning of transparent compounds cannot be
unambiguously determined from the meanings of their
constituents (see Frisson et al., 2008). Inhoff et al. (2008)
pointed out that a semantic relationship often exists between
an opaque lexeme and its compound, for example, even
though “jailbird” typically refers to a person rather than an
animal, it can convey useful semantic information, such as
being caged or wishing to fly free. This topic was also
studied in the literature on conceptual combination (e.g.,
Wisniewski, 1996; Costello & Keane, 2000), which
indicated that one part of a compound has an exocentric
interpretation such as shape (“seahorse” is a fish whose
head is the shape of a horse’s head) or the head concept (in
the “seahorse” case the diagnostic predicate being shape).
Participants might be able to interpret constituents being
defined as opaque to a meaning related to the compound
according to some kinds of relation (e.g., shape) or the
polysemy of the constituent and compound. This
subjectivity and variability also occurs in characters of
Chinese two-character words. Therefore, a computational
model may be a way to average across subjective
differences of estimating semantic transparency.

Predicting Transparency using
Latent Semantic Analysis

Early studies of the morphological processing of Chinese
polymorphemic words asked how compound words are
represented in the mental lexicon and how their lexical
processing in visual or auditory word recognition is
performed. Recent studies investigated semantic
composition (Mok, 2009) and frequency effects (see Zhou,
Ye, Cheung, & Chen, 2009, for a review). In Mok (2009),
the experimenter pre-defined semantic transparency on a 6point scale, where 1 is opaque and 6 is transparent. A
constituent was classified transparent if the rating was equal
to or greater than 4, and opaque otherwise. Five participants
were then provided the 6-point scale again for each
constituent. Constituents with an average rating greater than
3.5 were classified as transparent, and the others were
categorized as opaque.
There are also a few unpublished studies attempting to
estimate semantic transparency of Chinese two-character
words by researchers or human raters such as Tsai (1994),
Lee, C. Y. (1995), and Lee, P. J. (2007). For example, a
five-point scale ranging from 1 to 5 was used in the study by
Lee (2007), and words were considered transparent when
the average score was below 2 while opaque when the
average score was greater than 4. Tsai (1994) categorized
opaque words into OT and TO conditions, but Lee (1995)
and Lee (2007) generalized OT, TO, or OO conditions as
opaque words (referred to as idiomatic words).
Unfortunately, estimates of semantic transparency are
often subjective and vary across raters, and sometimes even

This study proposes a computational method for
estimating transparency using Latent Semantic Analysis
(LSA). LSA is a method to represent the meaning of words
by statistical computations applied to a text corpus
(Landauer & Dumais, 1997; Landauer, McNamara, Dennis,
& Kintsch, 2007). Typically, terms are words, and a termto-document co-occurrence matrix is established from a
corpus. Then a mathematical method, singular value
decomposition (SVD), is used to reduce the dimensions of
the original matrix (see Martin & Berry, 2007). The
meaning of each term is represented as a vector in semantic
space. One can compute the semantic similiarity values for
any two terms in a given language using the LSA cosine
value, which ranges between -1 and 1, but rarely goes below
0. Randomly chosen pairs of words have a mean of 0.03 and
a standard deviation of approximately 0.08 (see Landauer et
al., 2007). An LSA web site is freely available
(http://lsa.colorado.edu/, accessed September, 2010; see
Dennis, 2007).
LSA has been successful at simulating judgments of
semantic similarity, word categorization, discourse
comprehension, essay quality (see Landauer & Dumais,
1997; Landauer et al., 2007; Jones & Mewhort, 2007, for a
review). LSA has also been used to investigate
morphological decomposition; for example, Rastle, Davis,
Marslen-Wilson
and
Tyler
(2000)
investigated
morphologically complex words with semantically
transparent embedded stems (e.g., “depart” vs. “departure”)
and opaque embedded stems (e.g., “apart” vs. “apartment”).
Furthermore, Diependaele, Dunabeitia, Morris and Keuleers

2500

(2011) used LSA to estimate transparency between full
words and constituent-embedded stems, which yields
“viewer” vs. “view” as being highly transparent and
“corner” vs. “corn” as highly opaque.
One possible method (abbreviated as C2W) of measuring
semantic transparency is, similar to Diependaele et al.
(2011), to compute the LSA cosine values between the
compound word and each of its constituents. For example,
the LSA cosine value between “staircase” and “stair” is 0.57
while the one between “staircase” and “case” is 0.07. Since
the constituent “stair” and the compound word “staircase”
result in a clearly higher cosine value, “stair” is considered
semantically transparent, while “case” is considered opaque.
However, this computation for English words may or may
not reflect how a Chinese rater classifies a constituent as
transparent/opaque for two-character Chinese words.
One possible solution is to access the primary meaning of
a constituent. The first step of our proposed idea is to find
words containing a constituent that a rater possibly
activates. Since a constituent may have several meanings,
the primary meaning of the constituent is computed by a
hierarchical clustering algorithm. Since LSA cosine values
rarely go below 0 in high-dimensional spaces, we use one
minus the absolute value of the LSA cosine as distance
function and a given threshold. The selection of this
threshold is discussed below in the Reanalysis of Previous
Data and General Discussion sections. Since word
frequency is important for word recognition and reading
(see Rayner et al., 2007), the cluster with the highest sum of
word frequency is considered the primary meaning. For
example, the transparency of constituent “butter” in
“butterfly” is determined as follows. Using the text corpus
“general reading up to 1st year college,” the LSA cosine
values
among
“butter”,
“butterfly”,
“buttercup”,
“butterfingers”, “buttermilk”, “butterscotch”, “butterfat”,
and “butterwick” are shown in Table 2. Based on the LSA
cosine values, semantic relationships can be visualized by
multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) as presented in Figure 1.
The results of the cluster analysis are demonstrated in
Figure 2. The group of “butter”, “buttercup”, “buttermilk”,
“butterscotch”, “butterfat”, and “butterwick” are considered
primary meaning for their highest sum of frequency.
According to a threshold 0.9, “butterfly” and “butterfingers”
are clustered individually. We applied “document to term”
comparison to compute the LSA cosine value between the
primary meaning cluster (i. e., a string of “butter buttercup
buttermilk butterscotch butterfat butterwick”) and
“butterfly”, and 0.04 is obtained. This approach is
abbreviated as M2W.
The M2W approach takes the polysemy of a constituent
into account and works even when a constituent is not a
stand-alone word. M2W is especially useful for the Chinese
language in which many characters do not exist as onecharacter words in the corpus (described below).
Since the LSA-based method may be able to estimate
transparency of English compounds, it could possibly be
applied to Chinese two-character words in a similar manner.

Table 2. The LSA cosine values among “butter”, “butterfly”,
“buttercup”, “butterfingers”, “buttermilk”, “butterscotch”,
“butterfat”, and “butterwick”.
butter -fly

-cup -fingers -milk -scotch

-fat -wick

1
0.04

1

0.09

0.09

1

0

-0.1

-0.1

1

0.44

-0

0.12

0.01

1

0.45

0.05

-0

0.02

0.35

1

0.12

-0

0.04

0

0.11

0.16

1

-0

0.01

0.12

-0

0.09

0.03

0.04

1

(630)
(39)
(24)
(3)
(7)
(2085)
(13)
(12)

Figure 1: The MDS result for an example of semantic
relationships for “butter” and words containing “butter”.
The frequency for each word in British National Corpus
(BNC) is shown in parentheses. The x and y axis represent
dimensions 1 and 2, respectively, of the abstract, twodimensional Euclidean output space of the MDS algorithm.

2501

butterfingers
butterfly
butterwick
buttercup
butterfat
buttermilk
butterscotch
butter
0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 2. The results of hierarchical clustering of the
example word “butter”.
Following the principle of creating semantic spaces
(Quesada, 2007), our previous studies (Wang et al., 2010;
Chen, Wang, & Ko, 2009) built an LSA semantic space of
Chinese (abbreviated as SP-C) from ASBC which contains
approximately 5 million words (or 7.6 million characters).
Texts in ASBC were collected from different topic areas and
classified using five criteria: genre, style, mode, topic, and
source, in order to make ASBC a representative sample of
modern Chinese language. Word segmentation was
performed manually according to the standard by Huang et
al. (1997). For representatives of words in the corpus, words
that occurred less than 3 times per 5 million were excluded.
A 49021 x 40463 term-to-document co-occurrence matrix
was then established. SP-C has been shown to successfully
estimate word predictability (see Wang et al., 2010) and
word association in Chinese language (see Chen, Wang, &
Ko, 2009).
The term-to-document co-occurrence matrix of SP-C was
established using the unit of words, which may be one or
more Chinese characters. The C2W approach requires
Chinese two-character words to have their constituent
characters appear as single-character words more than 3
times in the corpus. Within the 49021 words available in
SP-C, 31,637 are two-character words. For 3,921 out of
these 31,637 two-character words, either the first or second
characters are unavailable due to the frequency restriction.
Nevertheless, the M2W approach can still compute the
primary meaning of characters despite this characteristic of
Chinese. It is even possible that a Chinese reader does not
have a single-character representation in his or her mental
lexicon for non-stand-alone characters. The polysemy of a
character might be involved and the primary meaning might
be obtained during lexical access.
Table 2 shows examples of the polysemy of character “馬
” (horse). The whole-word meanings of words such as “馬
背” (horse back) and “馬鞍” (saddle) are close to “馬”
(horse), while the ones of words, e.g., “馬虎” (careless) and
“馬桶” (stool) are not. The character “馬” in the word “馬
來 ” (Malaysian, pronunciation: ma-lai) and “ 馬 國 ”
(Malaysia) refers to the abbreviation of Malaysia/Malaysian
because of its pronunciation. Figure 3 demonstrates the
clustering of character “馬” - the meaning of “馬” is “horse”
in words 1 to 4, and is related to “Malaysia” in words 8 and
9. Since the sum of frequency in ASBC for the group of
words 1 to 4 is the highest, the group of words 1 to 4 is
considered the primary meaning of character “馬”.
It is necessary to verify the proposed computational
method by comparing its results with human transparency
ratings. We evaluated how LSA estimates transparency of
English compounds using the materials of Frisson et al.
(2008). The evaluation for two-character Chinese words was
conducted by re-analyzing the materials of Tsai (1994) and
Lee (2007).

Table 2. A list of character “馬” as one-character word and
the two-character words beginning with character “馬”. C2
Meaning is the primary meaning of the second character.
WFreq is whole-word frequency in ASBC.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Word
馬
馬背
馬鞍
馬車
馬虎
馬桶
馬腳
馬來
馬國

Whole-Word Meaning
horse
horse back
saddle
carriage
careless
stool
a clue of
Malaysian
Malaysia

C2 Meaning
back
saddle
car
tiger
tub
foot
come
country

WFreq
342
14
4
37
13
23
4
11
12

9
8
6
7
5
4
3
2
1
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Figure 3. The results of hierarchical clustering of example “
馬” with numbers referring to Table 2.

Reanalysis of Previous Data
Ten opaque-opaque, 14 opaque-transparent, and 10
transparent-opaque compounds defined in Frisson et al.
(2008) were estimated by our classifiers using C2W and
M2W. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis
was performed and the area under the curve (AUC) was
used as measurement. Figure 4 illustrates the ROC curves
for C2W and M2W (threshold = 0.1, 0.8, and 1), and the
AUCs are 0.82, 0.74, 0.82, and 0.75, respectively. A
threshold too low may generate too many groups, while a
threshold too high only produces one group and therefore
causes more false alarm cases. We found that when a
compound is high-frequent and its constituent is opaque and
low-frequent, the primary meaning of the constituent might
be taken over by the compound and therefore the constituent
is incorrectly considered transparent. We suggest that C2W
could be used when the constituent is low-frequent, and an
item-level human judgment should be performed for further
analysis.

2502

Figure 4: ROC curves for C2W and M2W (threshold = 0.1,
0.8, and 1) for English readers.

Figure 5: ROC curves for human rating (Human), C2W and
M2W for Chinese readers.

For two-character Chinese words, we pre-defined 160
characters selected from the materials of Tsai (1994), Lee,
C. Y. (1995), and Lee, P. J. (2007) as either transparent (T)
or opaque (O), then those characters were rated by eleven
students who completed a college degree in Taiwan
participated. All participants were native speakers of
Chinese (traditional script). Participants were presented with
the two-character word, and asked to respond either “T” or
“O” for each constituent. The measure of human rating of
each constituent was calculated as the probability with
which participants responded “T” to the constituent, e.g.,
0.91 for 10 out 11 participants responding “T.” The means
and standard deviations of human rating (Human), C2W,
and M2W are shown in Table 3, where there are 99
transparent and 50 opaque constituents available for C2W.
Figure 5 illustrates the results of the ROC analysis, and the
AUCs of human rating, C2W, and M2W are 0.99, 0.76, and
0.85, respectively. The Spearman rank correlations (a nonparametric test) between Human and C2W and between
Human and M2W are 0.48 and 0.53, respectively. These
results suggest that M2W not only overcomes the constraint
that C2W is unable to compute transparency when
constituents are unavailable in SP-C, but also outperforms
C2W in ROC and correlation analyses. As mentioned
above, the concept of a word is not as clearly defined in
Chinese as in English, and Chinese readers might learn the
polysemy of characters implicitly from polymorphemic
words. We suggest that M2W may be a better approach than
C2W for predicting transparency of constituents of twocharacter Chinese words.

General Discussion

Table 3. The means and standard deviations (in parentheses)
of human rating (Human), C2W, and M2W.

T
O

Human
0.79 (0.19)
0.13 (0.14)

C2W
0.22 (0.17)
0.08 (0.06)

M2W
0.35 (0.27)
0.07 (0.10)

The most important outcome of the current study is its
proposed computational method of using LSA to estimate
semantic transparency, which may reflect the polysemy of
constituents and how raters access meanings. Corroborating
evidence from two different languages was presented by
testing the method with English compounds used in prior
compound word study (including Frisson et al., 2008) and
two-character Chinese words in the transparency judgment
in this study.
The results could be adapted to further Chinese reading
research using eye movements. For example, it is still being
debated how Chinese words are accessed by readers. Yan,
Tian, Bai, and Rayner (2006) investigated the effect of word
and character frequency on word processing, and they
suggested that when a two-character word is frequent and
has been seen quite often in print, it is accessed as a single
entity in the mental lexicon of Chinese readers, whereas
when it is infrequent, the word needs to be accessed via its
characters (and hence an effect of character frequency
emerges). However, some studies have argued for the
priority of characters over words (e.g., Chen, Song, Lau,
Wong, & Tang, 2003). Therefore, it is still unclear how
opaque and transparent words are processed during natural
reading. It would be valuable to address these issues using
semantic transparency and eye-movement analysis.
The current limitations of the proposed method in Chinese
might be the relatively small corpus size. Cai and Brysbaert
(2010) published SUBTLEX-CH based on a larger corpus
(47 million characters) of film and television subtitles, and
they suggested that SUBTLEX-CH is a good estimate of
daily language exposure and captures much of the variance
in word processing efficiency. It is possible that a Chinese
LSA semantic space could be established based on this
larger corpus as long as the corpus provides enough
information in terms of “documents”, i.e., a set of words
that relate to the same topic in a document. It is important to

2503

notice that the size of a corpus is not its only criterion of
being representative, but the selection of texts covering
different varieties in a corpus should also be taken into
account. Furthermore, there are traditional and simplified
scripts of Chinese, and it is important to test whether the
semantic space built by traditional Chinese is compatible
with simplified Chinese.
In addition to the selection of the threshold, since it is
related to the distance function of the clustering algorithm
and the LSA values, we suggest that an optimization test
should be performed for each semantic space. We imply that
a threshold might be involved in the transparency judgments
by human raters and that each participant might have a
different threshold for the “cut-off” of opacity. It should be
clear that the use of the proposed computational method is
not intended to replace the standard measures that are based
on human raters, but that it offers a different perspective and
an opportunity to examine the lexical processing for
estimating semantic transparency.

Acknowledgments
Portions of the data were presented at the Asia-Pacific
Conference on Vision (APCV) 2010. Thanks to Keith
Rayner, Jinmian Yang, and Marc Brysbaert for helpful
comments on this study.

References
Academia Sinica. (1998). Academia Sinica balanced corpus
(Version 3) [Electronic database]. Taipei, Taiwan.
Cai, Q. & Brysbaert, M. (2010). SUBTLEX-CH: Chinese
Word Frequencies Based on Film Subtitles. PLoS ONE
5(6): e10729. doi: 10.1371/journal.phone.0010729.
Chen, H.-C., Song,H., Lau, W. Y.,Wong, K. F. E., & Tang,
S. L. (2003). Developmental characteristics of eye
movements during reading. In C. McBride-Chang & H. C.
Chen (Eds.), Reading development in Chinese children
(pp. 157–169).Westport, CT: Praeger.
Dennis, S. (2007). How to use the LSA website. In T.
Landauer, D. McNamara, S. Dennis & W. Kintsch Eds.
Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis. Erlbaum, 57-70.
Diependaele, K., Dunabeitia, J. A., Morris, J., & Keuleers, E.
(2011). Fast morphological effects in first and second
language word recognition. Journal of Memory and
Language, 64(4), 344-358.
Frisson S., Niswander-Klement E., & Pollatsek A. (2008).
The role of semantic transparency in the processing of
English compound words. British Journal of Psychology,
99, 87-107.
Inhoff, A. W., Starr, M. S., Solomon, M. P., & Lars, P.
(2008). Eye movements during the reading of compound
words and the influence of lexeme meaning. Memory &
Cognition, 36(3), 675-687.
Jones, M. N. & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing
word meaning and order information in a composite
holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114, 1-37.

Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211–240.
Landauer, T. K., McNamara, D. S., Dennis S., & Kintsch W.
(2007). Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis, Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Lee, C. Y (1995). The representation of semantically
transparent and opaque words in mental lexicon.
Unpublished master's thesis, National Chung Cheng
University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan. (in Chinese)
Lee, P. J (2007). The representation of semantically
transparent and opaque words in mental lexicon: evidence
from eye movements. Unpublished master's thesis,
National Chung Cheng University, Taipei, Taiwan. (in
Chinese)
Martin, D. I. & Berry, M. W. (2007). Mathemetical
fundations behind latent semantic analysis. In T.
Landauer, D. McNamara, S. Dennis & W. Kintsch Eds.
Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis. Erlbaum, 35-55.
Mok, L. W. (2009). Word-superiority effect as a function of
semantic transparency of Chinese bimorphemic
compound words. Language and Cognitive Processing,
24 (7/8), 1039-1081
Pollatsek, A. & Hyönä, J. (2005). The role of semantic
transparency in the processing of Finnish compound
words. Language and Cognitive Processing, 20 (1/2),
261-290.
Quesada, J. (2007). Creating Your Own LSA Spaces. In T.
Landauer, D. McNamara, S. Dennis & W. Kintsch Eds.
Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis. Erlbaum, 71-88.
Rastle, K., Davis, M. H., Marslen-Wilson, W. D., & Tyler,
L. K. (2000). Morphological and semantic effects in
visual word recognition: A time-course study. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 15(4/5), 507-537.
Rayner, K., Li, X., & Pollatsek, A. (2007). Extending the EZ Reader model of eye movement control to Chinese
readers. Cognitive Science, 31, 1021–1033.
Tsai, C.-H. (1994). Effects of semantic transparency on the
recognition of Chinese two-character words: Evidence for
a dual-process model. Unpublished master's thesis,
National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan. (in
Chinese)
Yan, G, Tian, H., Bai, X., & Rayner, K. (2006). The effect
of word and character frequency on the eye movements of
Chinese readers. British Journal of Psychology, 97, 259268.
Wang, H. C., Pomplun, M., Ko, H. W., Chen M. L., &
Rayner, K. (2010). Estimating the effect of word
predictability on eye movements in Chinese reading using
latent semantic analysis and transitional probability,
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 63, 13741386.
Zhou, X., Ye, Z., Cheung, H., Chen, H.-C. (2009).
Processing the Chinese language. Language and
Cognitive Processing, 24 (7/8), 929-946.

2504

