UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Event Segmentation of Agent Interactions: Comparing the Whole with Its Parts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/69n6j9z8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Keonig, Bryan
Pautler, David
Herberg, Jonathan
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Event Segmentation of Agent Interactions: Comparing the Whole with Its Parts
Bryan L. Koenig1,2 (koenigbl@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg)
David Pautler1 (pautlerd@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg)
Jonathan S. Herberg1 (herbergjs@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg)
Kum Seong Wan1 (kswan@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg)
Brian Monroe1,2 (monroebm@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg)
Edwin Wirawan1 (wirawane@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg)
1

Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore

finds that motion cues are strongly correlated with
breakpoints (Hard, Tversky, & Lang, 2006). Indeed,
simple computational models can use seven motion cues to
identify agentic motives in animations of two moving
figures with accuracy levels similar to those of human
observers (Blythe, Todd, & Miller, 1999). Absolute and
relational motion cues can be quite complicated in such
stimuli, which sometimes have three figures moving in
relation to one another and the background context. We
wondered how human observers incorporate information
from each agent when viewing stimuli of multiple agents
interacting. In order to address this question, we had
participants in a default condition segment into meaningful
events a multiple-figure animation previously shown to
elicit compelling perceptions of social interactions (Heider
& Simmel, 1944). Other participants in focus conditions
segmented the same animation but only for events
meaningful for the figure specific to the condition. We
compared participants’ segmentation patterns across
conditions to test whether observers by default process all
events relevant for all agents. Alternatively, perhaps by
default observers systematically miss events that are
important for some agents or notice events that would be
overlooked when focusing on any one agent. We now
consider evidence that suggests each of these is plausible.
Research in which participants segment perceived events
for animations of moving figures suggests that movement
features such as sudden acceleration elicit the perception of
event boundaries (Hard, et al., 2006; Zacks, 2004). For
such stimuli, participants even indicate breakpoints at
similar time points when viewing multiple-agent
animations both forward and backward, and these time
points strongly correlate with objective movement features
(Hard, et al., 2006). Such findings provide support for the
notion that observers incorporate all movement cues when
perceiving events, which we label the objective movement
hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, observers
perceive ongoing interactions in terms of all movement

Abstract
How do observers perceptually organize the events of
individual agents when observing interactions among them?
Do they readily perceive all events? Do they selectively
perceive some events but not others? Do they see events
overlooked by observers focusing on the individual agents?
To explore these questions, participants viewed the Heider
and Simmel (1944) animation, which shows three moving
figures and elicits strong impressions of interacting agents.
Participants in the default condition segmented the
animation into meaningful events. Those in focus conditions
did likewise, but focusing on one of the figures. Results
indicate that participants in the default condition disregarded
many events identified in the focus conditions, but identified
only one event missed by focus-condition participants.
These findings suggest that observers of interactions do not
encode all events or gain additional insight by “seeing the
big picture”; rather, they selectively perceive some events at
the cost of overlooking others.
Keywords: Social perception; event segmentation; unit
formation; perspective taking; movement cues; animation.

Introduction
Much research has centered on how observers perceive and
understand the actions of individual agents. In a typical
experimental task, participants view an activity such as
washing dishes and mark when, in their judgment, a
meaningful event ends and another begins. These marked
time points are referred to as breakpoints, and participants
substantially agree about their placement (e.g., Zacks,
Tversky, & Iyer, 2001). Breakpoint placement is not an
arbitrary consequence of the segmentation task. Brain
activity selectively occurs during mere observation at the
same time points that participants identify as breakpoints
during a subsequent segmentation task (Zacks, Swallow,
Vettel, & McAvoy, 2006). These findings suggest that
event segmentation reflects the perceptual structure of
events.
Other research on how observers perceptually segment
the events of animations of multiple interacting figures

617

participants experience as they attempt to focus on or take
the perspective of one figure. This hypothesis predicts that
events perceived by participants in the default condition
sometimes will be missed by participants in all of the focus
conditions.

cues from all figures. This would lead to the prediction that
participants in the default condition should generate a
segmentation that includes all, and no more, of the
breakpoints identified across all focus conditions.
Zacks and Tversky (2001) note that for both event
segmentation and object perception observers must
organize parts into wholes. Heider (1958) suggested that
an analogous process – unit formation – occurs during
social perception wherein multiple agents, such as those
interacting, are perceived as a perceptual unit. If observers
perceptually group agents, the action of one agent (e.g.,
hitting) might be subsumed as a lower-level component of
a larger schematic interaction (e.g., fighting), and thereby
be disregarded. The unit formation hypothesis thus
postulates that when observers parse ongoing events in
terms of interactions they sometimes neglect agents’
individual actions. This hypothesis predicts that
participants in the default condition, when viewing a
highly salient interaction, will sometimes miss events
identified by participants in the focus conditions when the
events pertain to a figure that is part of that interaction.
Heider (1958) also suggested that unit formation
might result in observers attending to the interaction unit as
the focal point of perception (the “figure”), with agents
outside the interaction receiving little attention (the
“ground”). The distraction hypothesis therefore postulates
that observers attending to an interaction will sometimes
fail to notice events meaningful to agents who are not part
of the interaction. This hypothesis predicts that participants
in the default condition, when viewing a highly salient
interaction, will sometimes miss events identified in the
focus conditions when the events pertain to a figure that is
not part of that interaction.
Other research has shown that perspective-taking can
interfere with an objective evaluation of events. For
example, in one study people from each side of a conflict
perceived a media report of an event as biased against their
own side (Vallone, Ross, & Lepper, 1985). Similarly, fans
of each team in an important football game, when viewing
identical tapes of the game, reported events that diverged
from each other (Hastorf & Cantril, 1954). This research is
complemented by experiments suggesting that adults
sometimes have difficulty taking another’s perspective
even though all of the relevant information is available to
them (Keysar, Lin, & Barr, 2003). To our knowledge,
perspective-taking has not been evaluated using animated
figures. Nonetheless, we embody these ideas in the
perspective-taking hypothesis, which postulates that
focusing on the perspective of one figure interferes with
the overall perception of events. It seems plausible that
events noted by participants in the default condition but not
in any focus condition could be the result of difficulty

The Current Study
We designed a study to test these four hypotheses. In it
participants segmented the Heider and Simmel animation
(1944) into meaningful events. The animation shows a
house-like rectangle and three moving figures: a large
triangle, a small triangle, and a circle (T, t, & c). Observers
tend to describe the animation as a bully attacking two
innocent passersby (Heider & Simmel, 1944). By
comparing the default segmentation with those provided
for focal agents, we evaluate how observers normally view
the animation: whether perception of the whole is equal to,
greater than, or less than the sum of its parts.

Method
Participants Participants were 74 female and 51 male
American workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk, a
crowdsourcing marketplace service, who received US$
0.90 for participating. Their mean age was 32.50 years (SD
= 11.47).
Stimulus Animations For the experimental task we
modified a version of the Heider and Simmel (1944)
animation downloaded on 3 September 2010 from
Carnegie Mellon University at http://anthropomorphism.org/img/Heider_Flash.swf. We increased its frames per
second rate from 10 to 30 to make it smoother, keeping it
74 seconds long. For the practice task we created a Flash
version of the hide-and-seek animation used in Hard, et al.
(2006). It is 84 seconds long and depicts two squares and a
circle moving as if they were playing hide and seek in their
environment, which has wall-like lines. Both animations
were prepared in Adobe Flash and were monochrome, 550
pixels wide by 400 pixels high, but viewed dimensions
depended on participants’ monitor displays.
Design Participants were randomly assigned to one of four
conditions, which differed only in their segmentation
instructions. In the default condition (n = 39) participants
segmented the animation with no instructions to focus on
any specific figure. Thus, their segmentations were
potentially based on events for all of the figures. In each of
the three focus conditions, the instructions were to segment
the animation with a focus on the events for a specific
figure, that is, for the big triangle (n = 30), the little
triangle (n = 20), or the circle (n = 29).

618

Proportion of Ps segmenting

Procedure Participants completed the study over the
internet. They provided consent and demographic
information and then read instructions indicating that (a)
they would see two short animations depicting geometric
figures in motion, (b) while watching the animation they
should press the spacebar whenever one meaningful event
ended and another began, and (c) they would briefly
describe each animation after watching it. The instructions
also displayed pictures of the figures. Participants then
watched and concurrently segmented the practice
animation (i.e., hide and seek). Once it ended, participants
described what happened in each one-second interval bin
for which they had pressed the spacebar. While providing
descriptions, participants could review the animation but
they could not add or remove markers. The instructions
clarified that participants should try to provide their initial
impression of the animation (at the time of the spacebar
press). Once participants submitted descriptions for each
marker, they could continue to the experimental task.
The procedure for the experimental task was the same as
that for the practice task, except for different segmentation
instructions in the focus conditions. All participants viewed
the Heider and Simmel (1944) animation and instructions
that indicated that the animation has three moving
geometric figures, a large triangle, a small triangle, and a
circle, with pictures of all figures. In the default condition,
the segmentation instructions were the same as for the
practice animation. The circle-focus condition included the
following additional instructions: “However, this time do
so only for the circle. That is, press the spacebar whenever,
for the circle, a meaningful event ends and another
begins.” Similar instructions were added to the focus
conditions for the big triangle and the small triangle. A
blue arrow also pointed at the picture of the focal figure.
Participants segmented the animation according to their
condition’s instructions, provided descriptions as in the
practice task, logged their MTurk ID into the system, and
were debriefed.

.6
.4
.2
.0
‐.2
‐.4
‐.6

Default condition
Small‐triangle‐focused condition

1

10

20 30 40 50
1‐second bins

60

70

Figure 1. Proportions of participants who selected each
one-second interval bin as containing a breakpoint in the
default and t-focused conditions. The proportions for the
t-focused condition are shown as negative to facilitate
visual comparison.
condition should contain the breakpoints present in all
three focus conditions. If this is the case, participants in the
default condition should indicate more breakpoints than
participants in the focus conditions (assuming
segmentation patterns differed across focus conditions, and
correlations shown below indicate they did). A one-way
between-subjects ANOVA on the number of breakpoints
did not indicate a difference across conditions (M = 8.96,
SD = 5.11), F(3, 114) = 1.05, p = .373, ηp2 = .03. This lack
of a difference cannot be explained by a ceiling effect;
participants on average indicated only 15.45% of bins as
including breakpoints. Instead, these results suggest,
counter to the objective movement hypothesis, that
participants in the default condition did not segment based
on the objective movements of all three figures. Rather,
these results suggest that participants in the default
condition may have neglected some events noticed in the
focus conditions, consistent with the unit formation and
distraction
hypotheses.
Because
focus-condition
participants may have noticed some events missed in the
default condition, but missed others noticed in the default
condition, these results provide no clear evidence regarding
the perspective-taking hypothesis.

Results
If a participant pressed the spacebar during a one-second
bin we counted that bin as containing a breakpoint (for
similar approaches see, e.g., Hard, et al., 2006; Massad,
Hubbard, & Newtson, 1979). Since only T is visible at the
start and end of the experiment animation, all results
exclude the first 4 and last 12 bins, leaving 58 bins for
analysis. We also excluded the data of five participants
who indicated one or zero breakpoints while doing the
experimental task and that of two who indicated no
breakpoints in the practice task.

Agreement about Event Timing To gain further insight
into how participants perceptually integrate information of
individual agents when perceiving them interact, we
compared across conditions which one-second interval bins
participants tended to indicate as containing breakpoints.
For these analyses, we calculated for each 58 one-second
bin the proportion of participants in each condition who
indicated that the bin contained a breakpoint. Figure 1
presents the segmentation histogram for the default
condition and, for comparison, the t-focused condition. We
correlated the segmentation histogram of the default

Overall Segmentation We evaluated whether focusing
on one figure affected the number of one-second bins
participants marked as containing a breakpoint. The
objective movement hypothesis predicts that the default

619

Condition Default Big T.
Default
1
.61*
Big T.
1
Small T.
* p < .01. Note: T. = triangle.

Small T.
.48*
.41*
1

Mean (+/‐SE) number of
mentions

Table 1. Correlation coefficients across conditions
among segmentation histograms (proportions of
participants who indicated a breakpoint in each
one-second bin).
Circle
.53*
.22*
.38*

condition with that of each focus condition (see Table 1).
All three Pearson correlation coefficients were positive and
significant; however, all fell short of the lower bound of
the 95% confidence interval of the estimated correlation
coefficient for participants within the default condition
(estimated using bootstrap aggregation, i.e., sampling 2000
groups of n = 20 from the 39 default condition participants
then calculating 58 bin means for each group and pairing
groups to calculate 1000 correlation coefficients across
bins; mean r = .78, median r = .79, 95% CI: .62, .90). This
range was estimated to specify the approximate optimal
correlation that we could expect between the default
histogram and that of any other condition. The finding that
the focus condition histograms were less than optimally
correlated with the default condition histogram suggests
that our manipulation was successful in that participants in
the focus conditions were not simply responding to events
involving any figure, but instead when focusing on one
figure they perceived events differently.
The differences in magnitude across the three correlation
coefficients were not significant (maximum z = 1.14, p =
.254, using the method suggested by Meng, Rosenthal, &
Rubin, 1992), but their relative magnitudes suggest that
default-condition participants’ segmentation may have
been influenced most by T, then c, and the least by t. To
further evaluate this possibility, we did a multiple
regression analysis wherein we predicted the segmentation
histogram from the default condition by the segmentation
histograms from all three focus conditions. The results
suggest that T provided a large unique contribution to the
perception of the animation, b = .47, p < .001, 95% CI =
.27, .67, c had a medium sized unique contribution, b = .31,
p < .001, 95% CI = .15, .47, but t did not contribute any
information above and beyond that provided by T and c, b
= .16, p = .194, 95% CI = -.08, .40 (the intercept did not
differ significantly from zero, b = -.01, p = .746, 95% CI =
-.05, .04). This regression’s multiple correlation coefficient
(multiple-R = .74, F(3,57) = 22.10, p < .001) fell within the
95% CI for the estimated correlation coefficient within the
default condition, suggesting that this regression performed
near optimally. This suggests that participants in the focus
conditions indicated many if not most of the breakpoints
identified in the default condition; that is, these analyses
provided no support for the prediction of the perspective-

.20

Figure
mentioned:

Big triangle
Small triangle
Circle

.15
.10
.05
.00

Default

Big
Small
triangle triangle

Circle

Condition
Figure 2. Mean (+/- SE) number of times each
participant mentioned the figures, by condition.
taking hypothesis that events would be missed if focusing
on a specific figure. We note that exploratory regression
analyses including all two-way interactions and the threeway interaction indicated no additional significant
predictors, ps > .226.
Analyses of Breakpoint Descriptions We coded which
figures participants mentioned in their breakpoint
descriptions. As Figure 2 shows, participants in the focus
conditions mentioned their focal figure significantly more
than participants in any other condition, minimum
F(3,114) > 10.84, p < .001, ηp2 = .22. This suggests that our
manipulation was successful. Participants in the default
condition did not mention the three figures an equal
number of times, F(2, 76) = 8.32, p = .001, ηp2 = .18.
Uncorrected post hoc tests indicated that default-condition
participants mentioned T more than t, t(38) = 5.86, p <
.001; they mentioned T marginally more than c, t(38) =
2.02, p = .051; but they mentioned c and t about equally,
t(38) = 0.16, p = .124. These findings suggest that T was
the most salient figure for the default-condition
participants.
Disagreement across Conditions We also calculated for
each bin a difference score equal to the proportion of
participants in the default condition identifying the bin as
containing a breakpoint minus the maximum such
proportion among the three focus conditions (see Figure 3).
Most strikingly, nearly all difference scores were negative.
Indeed, a binomial test (p = .005) indicated fewer positive
scores than expected by chance given a .25 probability that
each of the four conditions would have the largest
proportion. Our earlier analysis indicated no significant
difference in the number of breakpoints across conditions,
whereas the current finding indicates that, when comparing
bin-by-bin, for almost all bins participants in one of the
focus conditions were more likely to indicate a breakpoint

620

Difference in proportion
of Ps segmenting

.4

Table 2. Reduced-salience events, that is, events for which
the discrepancy in the proportion of participants who
indicated a breakpoint was greater by at least .2 in any focus
condition (boldface) as compared to the default condition.
The table reports the proportions by condition, the coded
explanation for the difference (source: dist. = distraction,
unit. = unit formation), and the ongoing overall event.

.2
.0
‐.2
‐.4

1

Proportion P.
by condition
Ongoing
Bin Def. T
t
c
Source overall event
8
.10 .42 .14 .03
dist. t & c arrive
12
.05 .39 .33 .07
unit. t & T start fight
14
.03 .10 .24 .03
unit. t & T fight
17
.31 .39 .38 .59
dist. t & T fight
21
.08 .13 .29 .08
unit. t & T fight
23
.08 .16 .24 .38
dist. t & T fight
24
.08 .16 .29 .10
unit. t & T fight
28
.23 .10 .14 .45
dist. t & T fight
30
.54 .23 .48 .79
dist. t & T fight
40
.03 .13 .29 .00
dist. c & T fight
42
.03 .13 .05 .28
unit. c & T fight
47
.18 .19 .38 .31
both t joins c & T
48
.10 .19 .33 .21
both t joins c & T
50
.38 .58 .29 .28
unit. T fights c & t
62
.18 .06 .38 .28
unit. t & c leave
Note: Def. = Default condition

10 20 30 40 50 60 70
1‐second bins

Figure 3. Difference in proportion in the number of
participants indicating a breakpoint for each one-second
interval bin in the default condition with the maximum
proportion doing so from any of the focus conditions.
than participants in the default condition. This suggests
that for observers in the default condition some events had
reduced salience as compared to observers who focused on
a particular figure, consistent with the unit formation and
distraction hypotheses. By contrast, almost all events that
are salient in the default condition remain so in the focus
condition for at least one of the figures, contradicting the
perspective-taking hypothesis. Indeed, setting a .2
difference in proportions as a cutoff to identify clear-cut
differences in event salience, only one bin has a more
salient event in the default condition as compared to any of
the focus conditions. By contrast, 15 bins had events that
were more salient in at least one of the focus conditions as
compared to the default condition (see Table 2).
Corroborating our previous findings that for defaultcondition participants the figures were of unequal salience,
the three figures were not equally likely to be part of a
reduced-salience event: T was in 3 such events, c in 5, and
t in 8, multinomial test, p = .017.
Why did these 15 events have reduced salience for
participants in the default condition? To determine the
likely source of the reduced salience for each of these
events we examined which figures were mentioned in
participants’ event descriptions across conditions. For
convenience, we use the term “overlooked figure” to refer
to the figure whose event had reduced salience in the
default condition. Let us first consider which figures are
mentioned in descriptions from the focus condition for the
overlooked figure. If they predominantly mentioned the
overlooked figure and one other figure, this suggests that
the overlooked figure appeared to interact with the other
figure and therefore that the reduced salience was due to
unit formation. If these descriptions instead predominantly
mentioned only the overlooked figure, but descriptions
from the other focus conditions did not mention the
overlooked figure but did mention the other two figures,
this suggests that the other figures had a salient interaction
that distracted default participants from noticing the

overlooked figure. However, if descriptions from the focus
condition for the overlooked figure predominantly
mentioned the overlooked figure, but the other conditions
had very few descriptions, we looked to recent bins for
clarification. If descriptions from recent bins across
conditions suggested a two-figure interaction, we coded the
reduced salience as due to unit formation if the overlooked
figure was part of that interaction or as due to distraction
otherwise. Finally, two reduced-salience events had
characteristics suggesting both unit formation and
distraction. That is, descriptions from the default condition
and the focus condition for the overlooked figure
predominantly mentioned the overlooked figure and one
other figure, suggesting the overlooked figure was
interacting with the other figure and was thereby perceived
as a unit with it. On the other hand, descriptions from the
other two focus conditions predominantly mentioned both
the other two figures but not the overlooked figure,
suggesting their interaction distracted default condition
participants from seeing the overlooked figure. Using these
criteria, from 58 bins we clearly associated 7 with unit
formation, 6 with distraction, and 2 with characteristics of
both. These findings provide fairly direct support for the
unit formation hypothesis and the distraction hypothesis.

621

and further questions about the perception of interactions
to future research.

General Discussion
We investigated how observers perceptually organize the
events that are meaningful for individual agents while
observing them interacting with one another. Our results
support the notion that observers selectively perceive some
events and not others. Moreover, our results suggest that
this sometimes occurs because observers link individual
agents into larger perceptual units with the consequence
that the salience of events at the unit-level sometimes
dominates the salience of events for agents within the unit.
At other times observers appear to have missed events
important for one agent because their attention was focused
on more salient interactions between other agents. These
findings provide some empirical support for Heider’s
(1958) idea of unit formation. They also replicate the
findings of Massad, et al. (1979) that observers selectively
perceive some events and disregard others, although in
their study selective perception resulted from preinformation about what would happen in the Heider and
Simmel animation. Previous research has noted the
importance of movement features for event segmentation,
but our findings suggest that observers do not normally
perceive interaction events in terms of all movement
features for all agents. This finding suggests a caveat to the
idea that observers use all motion information. Future
research will be required to more fully determine when and
why observers fail to incorporate some motion features.
Our results suggest that participants were able to focus on
one figure as instructed, and that doing so resulted in little
difficulty due to perspective-taking. Indeed, to the extent to
which participants in the focus conditions engaged in
perspective-taking, our findings suggest this is not always
a difficult process (cf. Keysar, et al., 2003), but can occur
in a rather effortless fashion. In fact, the results indicate a
greater cost, in terms of missed events, of engaging in the
default rather than an agent-focused perspective.
The current study compared how observers segment
events when focusing holistically on all agents to how they
do so when focusing on individual agents. A future study
could more completely separate information regarding
single agents from the whole by removing all other figures
from the animation, leaving a single, isolated figure. We
could then compare segmentations of the animated solo
figures with those of default and focus conditions. This
would allow us to evaluate the relative importance for
perceptual segmentation of context-free movement cues
versus relational movement cues. Such a comparison might
provide a more direct test of the unit formation hypothesis
(Heider, 1958). We also note that participants in the default
condition may have perceived events that they failed to
report, but why they would do so more than participants in
the focus conditions is unclear. We leave such problems

Acknowledgments
We thank Barbara Tversky and Bridgette Hard for
providing their hide and seek animation. We thank Barbara
Tversky and three anonymous reviewers for insightful
comments on earlier drafts of this paper. We also thank
Swati Gupta and William Chandra Tjhi for assistance with
statistical analyses.

References
Blythe, P. W., Todd, P. M., & Miller, G. F. (1999). How
motion reveals intention: Categorizing social
interactions. In G. Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd, and the ABC
Research Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us
smart (pp. 257–286). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Hard, B. M., Tversky, B. & Lang, D. S. (2006). Making
sense of abstract events: Building event schemas.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 1221–1235.
Hastorf, A. H., & Cantril, H. (1954). They saw a game: A
case study. The Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 49,
129–134.
Heider. F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal
relations. Wiley: New York.
Heider, F., & Simmel, M. (1944). An experimental study
of apparent behavior. American Journal of Psychology,
57, 243–249.
Keysar, B., Lin, S., & Barr, D. J. (2003). Limits on theory
of mind usage in adults. Cognition, 89, 25–41.
Massad, C. M., Hubbard, M., & Newtson, D. (1979).
Selective perception of events. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 15, 513–532.
Meng, X. L., Rosenthal, R., & Rubin, D. B. (1992).
Comparing
correlated
correlation
coefficients.
Psychological Bulletin, 111, 172–175.
Vallone, R. P., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1985). The
hostile media phenomenon: Biased perception and
perceptions of media bias in coverage of the Beirut
massacre. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
49, 577–585.
Zacks, J. M. (2004). Using movement and intention to
understand simple events. Cognitive Science, 28, 979–
1008.
Zacks, J. M., Swallow, K. M., Vettel, J. M., & McAvoy,
M. P. (2006). Visual motion and the neural correlates of
event perception. Brain Research, 1076, 150–62.
Zacks, J. M., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in
perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin, 127,
3–21.

622

