UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Examining the Connection Between Dynamic and Static Spatial Skills and Video Game
Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8vc391r3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Adams, Deanne
Mayer, Rich

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Examining the Connection Between Dynamic and Static Spatial Skills and Video
Game Performance
Deanne M. Adams (adams@psych.ucsb.edu)
Richard E. Mayer (mayer@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9660

Abstract
Previous research has found a connection between
spatial cognition and success in STEM areas and that
spatial cognition skills can be trained using video
games. The present study explores whether a
relationship exists between non-trained spatial
cognition skills and video game performance. Nonvideo game players first completed four spatial
cognition tasks and then played two video games,
Tetris and Unreal Tournament (UT). Results showed
significant correlations between performance on UT
and mental rotation, paper-folding, and the Race
dynamic spatial task. In contrast, Tetris performance
only correlated with paper-folding. These results
indicate that performance on action video games such
as UT may be related to more spatial skills than
Tetris.
Keyword: spatial cognition, video games

Objective and Rationale
The goal of the present study is to examine the
relationship between video game performance and
performance on tests of static and dynamic spatial skills.
The rationale is that (a) spatial skills may be instrumental
for success in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM), and (b) video game playing may be
related to the development of spatial skills.

Spatial Cognition and STEM Areas
In a longitudinal study Wai, Lubinski, and Benbow
(2009) examined the connection between adolescents’
spatial ability and later achievement in STEM fields (i.e.,
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics).
Cognitive ability measures of mathematical, verbal, and
spatial ability for 400,000 participants from the Project
TALENT data bank of 9th-12th grades were compared to
follow-up academic data from 11 years later. Three major
conclusions were made from this study: (1) high spatial
ability was found among almost all adolescents who went
on to achieve educational and occupational credentials in
STEM areas; (2) spatial ability was critical for students in
the general population as well as those deemed

intellectually talented; and (3) restricting talent searches
to verbal and mathematical ability may miss many
spatially gifted individuals. If we wish to encourage
students to go into STEM fields the educational system
may need to adapt to include spatial measures in talent
assessment as well as to include interventions and training
that encourage the development of spatial skills.
Studies in different areas of STEM have shown
different spatial abilities are used on these tasks. For
physics, Kozhevnikov, Hegarty, and Mayer (2002) found
that there was a significant correlation between students’
spatial abilities and accuracy on kinematic problems.
Further research by Kozhevnikov, Motes, and Hegarty
(2007) found several differences between high- and lowspatial students and the answer they gave to physics
problems. High-spatial students could integrate several
motion parameters while low-spatials only considered
one. High-spatials used kinematic graphs as abstract
representations of motion while low- spatial students
interpreted graphs as being picture-like representations.
For representations of the problems, high-spatial students
could reorganize representations of spatial problems into
other corresponding representations while low-spatials
used multiple, uncoordinated representations of the same
problems. Eye-tracking also showed that high-spatial
students made eye movements that corresponded to
elements of the problem while low-spatial students did
not. The researchers suggested this is due to the highspatial individuals visualizing the correct movement
produced when the two movement components were
integrated.
To help improve performance in engineering, Sorby
and Baartmans (2000) developed a 10-week course to
help teach spatial visualization skills to freshman
engineering majors who were identified as having lower
scores on the Purdue Spatial Visualization Test: Rotations
(PSVT:R). Twenty-four students took the course while
72 acted as the control group. During the course students
were taught topics such as rotations of objects, crosssections of solids, and translation and scaling. Those who
participated in the course showed significant gains on the
PSVT:R beyond simple practice effects. Furthermore,
after later analyzing the transcripts for the all of the 96

1254

students, the researchers found that students who took the
course scored higher on later graphics courses and had
higher retention rates in the graphically oriented
engineering program.
While higher spatial ability often facilitates STEM
learning for novices, experts in the field often do no use
spatial strategies when solving problems. For example,
Stieff (2007) found that students used mental rotation
strategies when determining if molecular diagrams were
identical or enantiomers. In contrast, experts typically
used an analytical strategy to complete the task. Uttal and
Cohen (in press) propose that spatial ability actually acts
as a gateway to getting into STEM fields. While experts
develop contextualized spatial abilities and can also used
prior semantic knowledge, novices must rely on decontextualized spatial abilities. Therefore spatial training
such as Sorby and Baartmans’s (2000) can be used to help
novices develop these skills and prevent dropout.

Video Games and Spatial Cognition
Spence and Feng (2010) propose that if students possess
poor spatial skills, they will avoid learning in academic
areas that require spatial cognition, such as STEM
subjects. Similar to verbal or mathematic ability, we must
try to improve spatial ability through training either
through early education or through play. Research has
shown that video games can be used to improve spatial
cognition skills. Terlecki et al. (2008) found long lasting,
transferable effects on spatial skills after participants were
trained using Tetris. For the study, both control and
experimental subjects were given a mental rotation task
(MRT) once a week over a 12 week period. Participants
in the experimental condition also played Tetris for one
hour a week while the control participants played
Solitaire. At the end of the 12 weeks, large improvements
were found for both the repeat MRT exposure control
group and the video game training group. Participants in
the videogame training condition, however, showed
significantly greater transfer effects on the GuilfordZimmerman Spatial Visualization Task (Guilford &
Zimmerman, 1947) and the Surface Development Test
(SDT) (Ekstrom, French, & Harman, 1976).
Feng, Spence, and Pratt (2007) also found
improvement on a mental rotation task after participants
played a first-person shooter action game called Medal of
Honor: Pacific Assault. First-person shooter games
involve simulated combat in which the player competes
against other players or computer controlled enemies.
Improvement in mental rotation correlated with
improvement on a useful-field-of-view task (UFOV). The
authors suggest that the improvement in mental rotation
was due to improving lower level attention skills.
Furthermore, Subrahmanyam and Greenfield (1994), in
a study on improving both dynamic and static skills in
school aged children, found that those with the best initial

spatial skills were best at playing the video game. The
researchers proposed that strong dynamic spatial skills
helped the participants master a game while practice
strengthened weak dynamic spatial skills. The fact that
already existing strong dynamic spatial skills facilitate
game mastery relates back to Uttal and Cohen’s (in press)
argument that spatial ability can act as a gateway to
STEM areas. In these training studies
students/participants are completing these training
regimes either because they are being paid or as part of a
class exercise. In the real world there is no external
motivator to encourage individuals to continue playing
video games if they find them too difficult, perhaps due to
a lack of spatial ability, or because they find video games
unappealing in general. Studies with expert video game
players that display high spatial and visual attention skills
are also dealing with individual that were self-selected
game players (Feng et al., 2007). These individuals may
have become regular game players because they
possessed higher relative spatial skills to begin with. This
could be causing a Matthews effect in which individuals
with higher spatial skills enjoy playing action video
games therefore they play more of them and further
improve their spatial abilities. The question then becomes
whether lacking preexisting spatial ability could affect
video game performance and therefore affect the
motivation to continue playing.

Present Study
The present study examines the relationship between
performance on static spatial tasks (i.e., mental rotation
and paper-folding) and dynamic spatial tasks (i.e., race
task and interception task) on the one hand and novice
performance on commercial video games (i.e., Unreal
Tournament and Tetris) on the other. Prior research by
Terlecki et al. (2008), Feng et al. (2007) and
Subrahmanyam and Greenfield (1994), have found that
playing video games can increase performance on tasks
involving different cognitive skills. However, no study
has explored how an individual’s performance on any of
these cognitive tasks may relate to their ability to play
video games.
Participants. The participants were 69 college students
from the University of California, Santa Barbara (44
women, 25 men). Ages ranged from 18 to 27 years old
with a mean age of 19.29 years. All participants were
classified as non-video game players, meaning that that
did not regularly play commercial video games during
their free time.
Materials and Procedure. The experiment took place
over two sessions that were scheduled within two days of
one another. In the first session, participants first filled
out a survey assessing their video game usage to remove

1255

any regular video game players. Next, they completed
battery of tests including two dynamic spatial tasks and
two static spatial tasks. All tasks included in the battery
were administered on computers using electronic
versions. Static spatial ability was assessed using a
version of the Shepard and Metzler (1970) mental rotation
test (MRT) and the paper-folding test (Ekstrom et al.,,
1976). The first cognitive task that participants
completed was paper-folding. During the task, on each
item, a series of pictures is presented demonstrating how a
piece of paper is being folded. The last picture on the left
includes circles that signify where holes are punched all
the way through the folded piece of paper. To the right of
the vertical line are five figures with possible
configurations for the holes in the paper once it has been
completely unfolded. Participants indicated which of the
five figures they believed had the correct configuration by
pressing the corresponding key (i.e., 1-5). Participants
had 3 minutes for each of the 2 sets of 10 trials.
The paper-folding task was followed by the mental
rotation task, in which two 3D block figures were
presented simultaneously. The participants were asked to
indicate whether the two items were the same or different
(i.e., mirror-reversed images). On same trials the block
figure on the right hand side of the screen was a version
of the left figure rotated in depth varying by 20° intervals.
Participants completed a total of 120 trials for this task.
Dynamic spatial skills were assessed using variations of
the Race2 and Interception tasks as described by Hunt et
al. (1988). Specifics for the Race2 task were taken from
D’Oliveira (2009). During the Race task, two oval
objects (one black, one white) race. horizontally toward
their own finish lines, as exemplified in Figure 1. Three
relative speed differences between the objects were used
to vary trial difficulty. Participants completed one block
with a total of 108 trials. For the Interception task, the
goal is to hit a moving target as it passes across the top of
the screen with a ‘missile’ fired from a fixed location
along the bottom of the screen. The target appeared in
four different locations and traveled at four different
speeds. Participants completed a total of 64 trials. The
intent of the task was to measure how accurately the
participants can judge the amount of time it will take for
the ‘missile’ to intercept the target.
During the second session, participants played an hour
of a first-person shooter action video game called Unreal
Tournament 2004 (UT) as well as 45-50 minutes of the
puzzle game Tetris. Which game was played first was
counterbalanced between sets of participants.
During the 1 hour action video game session, game
play was separated into three 20 minutes intervals.
During the first two 20 minute game intervals participants
played at the lowest level of difficulty (novice). For the
last 20 minute game interval, the difficulty level was
raised to the second lowest difficult level (average). The
difficulty level determine how effective the 16 enemy

Figure 1: Sample trial from Race task adapted from
D’Oliveira (2009)
“bots” controlled by the game were at firing and tracking
down the player. In order to be successful the players
must be able to avoid enemy fire while aiming and
returning fire. The game keeps track of how many times
the player kills an enemy as well as how many times the
player is killed.
Tetris is a puzzle game in which players use 7 different
block shapes in order to create lines. Every time a
complete line is created the line disappears and the player
is awarded points. The more lines that the player
completes at a time the higher the point value awarded. If
incomplete lines fill the given area the game ends.
Participants are given one block shape at a time and have
to place it somewhere at the bottom of the play area. As
the player’s score increases, the falling rate of the blocks
increase making the game harder. The 7 block shapes can
be rotated in increments of 90 degrees. Five of the block
shapes are asymmetrical allowing for 4 different possible
configurations that can be used to complete lines.
After finishing playing each game, participants were
asked questions relating to their game satisfaction
including how much they enjoyed the game, how likely
they would play the game again, and how difficult they
found playing the game. To measure performance on UT,
total number of kills across all three games was used. For
Tetris, performance was assessed by recording the highest
score achieved while playing the game.

Results
To first examine whether the order in which the
participants played the game affected their performance
independent sample t-tests were conducted. No
significant differences were found between participants
who played UT first or second for either UT performance,
t(63) = .224, p = .823, or highest score on Tetris, t(64) =
.906, p = .368. Looking at performance on just the first
two games of Tetris, since all participants played at least
2 games, revealed that participants in the UT first group
scored significantly higher than those that played Tetris

1256

Table 1: Correlations between the game performance measures and performance on the four cognitive tasks.
Game performance

Tetris (Top Score)
Unreal
Tournament
(Total Kills)

Mental rotation

Paper folding

Total Errors

Mean RT

Score

Race
RT Combined Easy
Trials

Intercept

-.206

.002

.244*

-.196

.185

-0.267*

-0.334**

.271*

-.269*

.212

Accuracy

*Designates a significance level of .05
** Designates a significance of .01
first, t(64) = .2.087, p = .041, on their second game This
suggests that playing UT first may actually increase
performance on Tetris playing. To examine whether
performance on one video game related to performance
on the other a Pearson correlation was conducted and
revealed no significant correlation between UT kills and
highest Tetris score, r(64) = -.007, p = .957.
Static Spatial Tasks. Table 1 shows the correlation
between measures for mental rotation and paper-folding
and UT and Tetris performance. For paper-folding,
performance was assessed by combining the score for the
two segments. Participants were penalized (-.2) for
attempted items that they got wrong. As shown in the
first column of Table 1, there was a modest, positive
correlation between UT total kills and paper-folding
score, r(63) = .271, p = .032, as well as a modest,
positive correlation between high Tetris score and paperfolding score, r(64) = .244, p = .050.
Next we examined whether response time (RT)
performance on mental rotation correlated with
performance on either UT or Tetris. As shown in the
second column of Table 1, there was a moderate, negative
correlation between UT total kills and mean response time
across all mental rotation items , r(64) = - .334, p = .007.
This indicates that participants who had higher scores on
UT had faster response times for the mental rotation.
There was no significant correlation between highest
Tetris score and response time for mental rotation, r(66) =
.002, p = .990. The same pattern was obtained for error
rates on the mental rotation task: there was a significant
negative correlation between total kills in UT and error
rate for mental rotation, r(64) = -.267, p = .031, but no
significant correlation between highest score in Tetris and
error rate for mental rotation, r(66) = .002, p = .990.
Dynamic Spatial Tasks. For the race task we examined
both accuracy (indicating the correct object would win the
race) and response time (how quickly participants

determined which object would reach the goal first).
Reponses times were only used for correct trials. In
general there was a high accuracy across all participants,
especially at the higher relative speed increases (easier
trials). For Tetris, there was no significant correlation
between Tetris score and race accuracy, r(67) = .144, p =
.245, or race response times, r(67) = -.177, p = .152. For
UT, there was no significant correlation between total
kills and race accuracy, r(67) = .148, p = .239. When
looking at response times, analysis revealed a weak,
negative correlation between total kills and average
response times for the higher speed difference ratios,
r(65) = -.269, p = .030, but not the smallest speed
increase, r(65) = -.178, p = .157, or overall average
response times, r(65) = -.242, p = .052. This indicates
that at the easier levels, when the relative speed between
the two objects was greater, participants that had higher
scores on UT made faster responses on the race task.
Finally, for the intercept/missile task, performance was
measured by looking at the participant’s accuracy at
hitting the target over the 64 trials. No significant
correlation was found between missile accuracy and game
performance for either total kills in UT, r(64) = .212, p =
.091, or highest score in Tetris, r(64) = .185, p = .135.

Discussion
The results from the present study suggest that
individuals who already posses certain spatial skills, such
as indicated by faster response times for dynamic spatial
skills, mental rotation, and paper-folding, are more likely
to do better at playing an action video game such as
Unreal Tournament, whereas the connection between
spatial skills and early Tetris appears to be less
pronounced.
Unlike prior research by Terlecki et al. (2008) this
study found no connection between Tetris playing and
mental rotation. This is similar to results found by Sims
and Mayer (2002) in which there were no significant
differences between high-skill and low-skill Tetris players

1257

on any spatial tasks except for those that involved Tetris
shapes or Tetris like shapes. In a separate study they also
found that after 12 hours of training Tetris, participants
did not significantly differ on mental rotation tests from
those who had not practiced except for using different
strategies when rotating Tetris shapes. Research by Kirsh
and Maglio (1994) suggests that Tetris may not be the
best environment to increase mental rotation performance.
Tetris players often offload the mental rotation effort by
using the game mechanics to rotate the figures instead of
mentally doing the rotation. According to their model,
the player should first compute the best place to put the
Tetris piece before planning any rotation or movement to
place it. The data shows that participants actually begin
rotating the shape very early, before a possible placement
could be decided upon. Rotating a shape in the external
world is classified as an epistemic action, which are
actions that are designed to change the input to the
information-processing system and a way that an
individual can alter the external environment to provide
information needed to complete the task. In Tetris, if the
game can complete the rotations faster than it takes the
individual to do the rotations mentally, then it make sense
from a limit cognitive resources standpoint for the
individual to rely on the eternal rotation that only requires
a simple motor action to complete (Kirsh & Maglio,
1994). Therefore, if participants are not actually
practicing mental rotation during Tetris, it may not be the
best game to use to increase spatial cognition.
Our findings did show that Tetris performance
correlated significantly with paper-folding. One possible
reason for this is that while Tetris does not require skills
in mental rotation, it does require other visualization
skills. Good Tetris players may be better able to visualize
all possible configurations of the Tetris pieces therefore
being able make quicker decisions about where to place
pieces.
Both Tetris and action video games have been used to
successfully train spatial cognition skills such as mental
rotation (Terlecki et. al. 2008, Feng et al., 2007). The
results from this study lead to two questions that should
be addressed in future research. First, would playing one
type of game lead to higher, more transferable, or longer
lasting spatial skills compared to playing another? Four
measures from our static and dynamic spatial skills were
related to performance in game playing for Unreal
Tournament while only one was related to Tetris. Feng et
al. (2007) theorize that improvements in spatial tasks
depend on the skills required during the game. The action
video game improves lower-level spatial attention
capacities, which in turn improves MRT performance.
Their control condition did use a 2D puzzle game but
because the game did not sufficiently exercise spatial
attention capacities there was no benefit from playing.
This suggests that the best way to improve mental rotation
is to improve spatial skills in a way that is more

generalizable. This could involve improving lower level
cognition skills such as attention. Spence and Feng
(2010) also proposed that along with improving spatial
selective attention, one other key difference between
puzzle games like Tetris and many action video games is
the perspective. The majority of puzzle games are played
from a more allocentric perspective making the
visuomotor coordination in Tetris is less natural compared
to the more egocentric perspectives used in most first
person shooter action games. Playing an action video
game may therefore be more likely to increase spatial
ability. A comparison of two comparable training
regimes using either Tetris or an action game like Unreal
Tournament should be done to determine whether there is
any benefit to using one game over the other.
Another possible question is if both games can increase
spatial ability, as prior research has shown, could the
required level of preexisting spatial ability to play affect
whether it is a viable choice for training? As proposed by
Spence and Feng (2010), a student with poor spatial skills
may avoid tasks that require them. As mentioned
previously, this suggests the potential for a Matthew
effect with spatial cognition and video games. Those that
already possess high spatial skills do better at playing
action video games and are more likely to continue to
playing. By continuing to play these individuals increase
their spatial ability. Therefore, a game such as Tetris
which appeared to require less preexisting spatial skill to
be successful may encourage students to play more than
one like Unreal Tournament.

References
Ekstrom, R.B., French, J.W., & Harman, H.H.
(1976). Kit of factor referenced cognitive tests.
Educational Testing Service: Princeton, NJ.
Epic Games (2004) Unreal Tournament 2004 [computer
software]
Feng, J., Spence, I., & Pratt, J. (2007). Playing an
action video game reduces gender differences in spatial
cognition. Psychological Science, 18(10), 850-855.
D’Oliveira, T.C. (2009). Dynamic spatial ability: An
exploratory analysis and a confirmatory study. The
International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 14(1),
19-38.
Guilford, J., & Zimmerman, W. (1947). GuilfordZimmerman Aptitude Survey. Orange, CA: Sheridan
Psychological Services.
Hunt, E., Pellegrino, J.W., Frick, R.W., Farr, S.A., &
Alderton, D. (1988). The ability to reason about
movement in the visual field. Intelligence, 12, 77-100.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On the distinguishing
epistemic from pragmatic action. Cognitive
Science, 18, 513-549.
Kozhevnikov, M., Hegarty, M., & Mayer, R.E. (2002).

1258

Visual/spatial abilities in problem solving in physics. In
M. Ander, B. Meyer, & P. Oliver (Eds.). Diagrammatic
Representations of Reasoning . Springler-Verlag.
Kozhevnikov, M., Motes, M.A., & Hegarty, M. (2007).
Spatial visualization in physics problem solving.
Cognitive Science, 31, 549-579.
Shepard, R.N., & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation
of three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.
Sims, V.K. & Mayer, R.E. (2002). Domain
specificity of spatial expertise: The case of video game
players. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16, 97-115.
Sorby, S.A., & Baartmans, B.J. (2000). The
development and assessment of a course for enhancing
the 3-D spatial visualization skills of first year
engineering students. Journal of Engineering
Education, 301-307.
Spence, I., & Feng, J. (2010). Video games and
spatial cognition. Review of General Psychology, 14
(2), 92-104.
Stieff, M. (2007). Mental rotation and diagrammatic
reasoning in science. Learning and Instruction, 17 219234.
Subrahmanyam, K. &, Greenfield, P.M. (1994).
Effect of video game practice on spatial skills in girls
and boys. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 15, 13-32.
Terlecki, M.S., Newcombe, N.S., & Little, M.
(2008). Durable and generalized effects of spatial
experience on mental rotation: Gender difference
growth patterns. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 22,
996-1013.
Tetris Holdings, LLC. (2009). Tetris Zone [computer
software]
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C.P. (2009).
Spatial ability for STEM domains: Aligning over 50
years of cumulative psychological knowledge solidifies
its importance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 101
(4), 817-835.
Uttal, D.H. & Cohen, C.A., & (in press). Spatial thinking
and STEM educationL When, why, and how? In. B,
Ross (Ed.), Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
(Vol .57). New York: Academic Press.

1259

