UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explaining Influences Children's Reliance on Evidence and Prior Knowledge in Causal
Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0g76r7hj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Walker, Caren M.
Williams, Joseph Jay
Lombrozo, Tania
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explaining Influences Children’s Reliance on Evidence and Prior Knowledge in
Causal Induction
Caren M. Walker, Joseph Jay Williams, Tania Lombrozo, & Alison Gopnik
(caren.walker@berkeley.edu, joseph_williams@berkeley.edu, lombrozo@berkeley.edu, gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, 3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
Abstract
In two studies, we examine how prompting 5- and 6-year-olds
to explain observed outcomes influences causal learning. In
Study 1, children were presented with data consistent with
two causal regularities. Explainers outperformed controls in
generalizing the regularity that accounted for more
observations. In Study 2, this regularity was pitted against an
alternative that accounted for fewer observations but was
consistent with prior knowledge. Explainers were less likely
than controls to generalize the regularity that accounted for
more observations. These findings suggest that explaining
drives children to favor causal regularities that they expect to
generalize, where current observations and prior knowledge
both provide cues.
Keywords: Explanation; cognitive development; causal
reasoning; prior knowledge; generalization; abduction.

Since Piaget, researchers have regarded children’s
explanations as a window into cognitive development,
revealing children’s understanding of the world (e.g., Keil,
2006). More recently, however, the very process of seeking,
generating, and evaluating explanations has additionally
been proposed as a powerful mechanism for learning and
generalization, scaffolding knowledge acquisition and
contributing to theory change (e.g., Chi, DeLeeuw, Chiu, &
LaVancher, 1994; Lombrozo, 2006; Wellman, 2011). Here
we investigate the role of explanation in young children’s
causal learning, focusing on whether and how explaining
influences the relative contributions of observed evidence
and currently-held theories (“prior knowledge”).
Discovering the underlying causal structure in the world
is one of the major inductive problems that young learners
face during development. By 5 years of age, children have
already developed abstract, coherent representations of
causal relationships in a variety of domains (e.g., Carey,
1985; Gelman & Wellman, 1991). The acquisition of this
causal knowledge is supported by powerful learning
mechanisms that allow children (and adults) to infer novel
causal relationships from patterns of evidence and prior
beliefs (e.g., Gopnik, Glymour, Sobel, Schulz, Kushnir, &
Danks, 2004; Griffiths, Sobel, Tenenbaum, & Gopnik,
2011). For example, 5-year-old children can effectively
track covariational evidence to identify a novel cause, but
require stronger evidence to endorse a cause that conflicts
with their prior beliefs than one consistent with those beliefs
(Schulz, Bonawitz, & Griffiths, 2007). These findings
reveal that children integrate current observations with prior
beliefs in the process of learning and revising their causal
knowledge. Here we propose that explaining may play a

role in this integration, by influencing the relative
contributions of evidence and prior knowledge – that is, the
extent to which learners revise their beliefs in light of their
observations and prior commitments.
A first possibility, which we call the evidence hypothesis,
is that explaining a set of observations directs learners to
update their beliefs in light of those observations. As a
result, explaining will lead learners to change their beliefs
more than they would have in the absence of explaining.
This might be expected, for example, if explanation boosts
children’s engagement with a task (Siegler, 2002), thereby
making them more responsive to feedback and less likely to
disregard relevant observations. Consistent with this
possibility, a variety of studies have found that presenting
young children with feedback is less effective as a means to
changing their beliefs than having them explain as well
(e.g., Wellman, 2011). More indirect support comes from
the fact that explaining can direct children towards
anomalous data, which conflicts with their prior beliefs and
may therefore signal a need for belief revision (e.g., Legare,
2010; Legare, Gelman, & Wellman, 2010). In sum, the
evidence hypothesis predicts that explaining should make
children more responsive to observed data, leading to
greater revision in current beliefs.
A second possibility, which we call the prior knowledge
hypothesis, is that engaging in explanation invokes learners’
currently-held theories, leading them to revise their beliefs
less than they might have in the absence of explanation. In
line with this hypothesis, several researchers have proposed
that explaining encourages learners to accommodate what
they are trying to explain in the context of what they already
know (e.g., Chi et al., 1994; Lombrozo, 2006). Explaining
could thus lead children to favor hypotheses consistent with
prior knowledge, even when those hypotheses might not
have been entertained or preferred on the basis of evidence
alone. Kuhn and Katz (2009) further suggest that by
encouraging learners to consider why something is the case,
explaining can lead them to discount observed evidence
altogether. From this perspective, learners who explain
could be less inclined towards hypotheses that simply match
current evidence, either because they weight prior beliefs
more heavily or because they underweight current evidence.
A final possibility is that explaining does not affect the
role of evidence or prior knowledge uniformly across
contexts. Instead, explaining could change the criteria
employed in evaluating evidence and prior knowledge in the
course of learning, resulting in greater belief revision under
some conditions and less belief revision under others. The
version of this possibility that we explore here is the

1114

generalization hypothesis, according to which generating
explanations leads children to evaluate both evidence and
prior knowledge as cues to which patterns in their
observations are most likely to generalize to new cases. This
proposal is motivated by the theory-theory of cognitive
development (e.g., Carey, 1985; Gopnik & Wellman, 1994)
as well as recent research concerning the role of explanation
in adult learning (Williams & Lombrozo, 2010a, 2010b).
According to the theory-theory, children construct intuitive
theories that support explanation, prediction, and control,
where theories are regarded as consisting in “causalexplanatory” knowledge. In order to effectively support
prediction, successful theories must account for past
observations as well as generalize to future observations.
The process of generating explanations could therefore
influence learning by directing children to construct the
causal-explanatory beliefs that they judge most likely to
generalize, and to consult both evidence and prior
knowledge in making this assessment.
Insight into how explanation could contribute to this
process comes from subsumption and unification theories of
explanation from philosophy, according to which successful
explanations demonstrate how what is being explained can
be subsumed under a broad regularity, such as a natural law
(e.g., Friedman, 1974; Kitcher, 1989). If explaining drives
learners to understand current observations in terms of
broadly-applicable regularities, it should facilitate the
discovery and generalization of regularities that subsume the
greatest number of cases. This idea has recently been
developed as an empirical hypothesis concerning the role of
explanation in learning, called the subsumptive constraints
account, and is supported by studies with adults learning
novel categories (Williams & Lombrozo, 2010a, 2010b).
To illustrate, consider Williams and Lombrozo (2010a),
in which adults learned novel categories from observations
and were prompted to either explain each observation’s
category membership or to engage in a control task. The
categories could be differentiated by a subtle regularity that
accounted for all observations, or by a more salient
regularity that accounted for only a subset of observations.
Compared to participants in other conditions, those
prompted to explain were more likely to discover the
regularity with greater subsumptive scope (the one that
accounted for more cases), and more recent evidence
suggests that prior knowledge additionally serves to inform
these assessments (Williams & Lombrozo, 2010b, under
review). The generalization hypothesis proposes that
explanation influences children’s causal learning in a similar
way: by directing young learners to the causal hypotheses
with the greatest subsumptive scope, which is assessed on
the basis of both evidence and prior knowledge.
These candidate hypotheses are not intended as
comprehensive accounts, but rather provide a useful
framework for considering the possible mechanisms by
which explanation could influence causal induction. In the
two studies that follow, we manipulate both the observed
evidence and children’s prior knowledge in order to test

these hypotheses and assess the role of explanation in
children’s causal learning. Specifically, children learned
about a novel causal system in which some objects were
causally efficacious and others were not. Half of the
participants were prompted to explain the causal outcomes
during the training phase of the experiment, and the other
half were prompted to describe these outcomes. In Study 1,
the observed data suggested two candidate causal
regularities that were equally consistent with prior
knowledge. However, one of the two causal regularities
accounted for more of the observed data. In Study 2,
children were again presented with two candidate causal
regularities that accounted for all or a subset of the data, but
the regularity that accounted for fewer observations was
more consistent with prior knowledge. In both studies,
children were then asked to generate causal predictions in
order to assess which causal regularity was discovered,
preferred, and generalized to novel cases.
The three hypotheses outlined above generate different
predictions across these two studies. The evidence
hypothesis predicts that children will generalize according to
the regularity that covers more of their observations in both
studies. The prior knowledge hypothesis predicts that
because explaining prompts children to rely upon their
current theories, those who explain should respond no
differently in Study 1, and be more likely to form
generalizations in line with their prior knowledge in Study
2. The generalization hypothesis predicts that explainers
should consider both the data and their prior knowledge to
identify the regularity that is likely to apply most broadly,
which could lead to opposite generalizations for Studies 1
and 2. Taken together, the results will thus help characterize
the role of explanation in children’s causal learning.

Study 1: Regularities in Observed Evidence
In Study 1, we present two groups of children with the task
of learning a novel causal relationship from a series of
observations, where one group is prompted to explain each
observation (the explain condition) and the other to describe
each observation (the control condition). The observed data
suggest two causal regularities: a regularity that accounts for
100% of observations (the 100% regularity) and a regularity
that accounts for 75% of observations (the 75% regularity).
The evidence for candidate regularities is presented using a
blicket detector paradigm (e.g., Gopnik & Sobel, 2000), in
which children learn which objects have causal efficacy in
activating a machine.
Participants
Forty-two 5-year-old children (M = 64.2 months; SD = 3.6,
range: 59.9 – 72.7; 25 girls) were included, with 21 children
randomly assigned to each condition. Children were
recruited from local preschools and museums.
Materials
The machine used in the training phase of both studies was a
“blicket detector” – a box concealing a wireless doorbell.

1115

When an object “activated” the machine, the doorbell was
pressed remotely, producing a melody.
An illustration of the complete set of training blocks
appears in Figure 1A. Eight 2” wooden blocks (four “Go”
blocks and four “No-Go” blocks) were used during the
training phase. A green plastic lego plate was affixed to the
top and front of each block. Attached to each lego plate was
a single, small rectangular lego of uniform size. The two
causal regularities (100% and 75%) were represented by
different-colored legos. For the four blocks that activated
the machine (Go blocks), the 100% regularity was
represented by a green lego and the 75% regularity was
represented by a red lego. For the four blocks that did not
activate the machine (No-Go blocks), the 100% regularity
was represented by a yellow lego and the 75% regularity
was represented by a white lego. For half of the children,
the 100% regularity (the green/yellow lego) appeared on the
top of the block and the 75% regularity (the red/white lego)
appeared on the front of the block, and for half of the
children, these positions were reversed.
For the testing phase, four additional blocks were used.
These testing blocks were identical to the training blocks,
but included only one of the four lego colors on each.
Additionally, a cardboard “hiding box” was constructed,
with four cut-out windows that were covered with black felt
flaps. These windows were designed so the experimenter
could place two blocks inside the hiding box and lift two
flaps to show the participant only one of the two legos (on
the top or front) of each block.
Procedure
The experimenter introduced the machine, explaining that
some things make the machine play music and some things
do not. The child was then instructed to sort the blocks into
two piles according to whether they activated the machine.
The experimenter placed each of the eight blocks on the
machine, one at a time. After children observed each
outcome, they were asked for a verbal response. In the
explain condition, children were asked to explain the
outcome: “Why did/didn’t this block make my machine play
music?” In the control condition, children were asked to
describe the outcome: “What happened to my machine
when I put this block on it? Did it make music?” The order
of presentation of the eight blocks was semi-random (see
Figure 1A). All blocks remained visible and were grouped
on the table throughout the training and test phases of the
experiment to eliminate memory demands.
For the test phase, the machine was removed and the
experimenter introduced the “hiding box,” saying: “This is
my hiding box. I am going to put two new blocks into my
hiding box, and lift these flaps so you can only see part of
each block.” The child was told: “One of the blocks I put in
my hiding box will make my machine play music, and one
of the blocks will not. I want you to tell me which one you
think will/will not make my machine play music.”
Each test question was designed to pit one potential
causal regularity against the other. In the first set, the 100%

and 75% test items, the Go features were pit against the NoGo features for both the 100% regularity (green vs. yellow)
and the 75% regularity (red vs. white). In the next set, the
experimenter presented conflict items, in which the Go
feature from the 100% regularity (green) was pit against the
Go feature from the 75% regularity (red). Each time,
children were asked to predict which block would make the
machine play music. These questions were intended to
present a conflict between the two potential causes to
examine whether children would privilege one regularity
over the other. Each of these test questions was repeated for
a second time in which the experimenter asked the child to
indicate which block would not make the machine play
music. There was a total of six test questions in this format:
four 100% and 75% test items (two green vs. yellow; two
red vs. white) and two conflict items (two green vs. red).
Responses on the 100% and 75% test items were scored
for accuracy, where accuracy reflected the correct selection
of the Go block when asked for an item that would make the
machine go, and the No-Go block when asked for an item
that would not. Children received 1 point for selecting the
correct response and 0 points otherwise For the conflict
items, we examined whether responses conformed to the
100% regularity (selecting the green lego over the red lego)
or the 75% regularity (selecting the reverse), coding the
former as “1” and the latter as “0.” 1

Figure 1: Procedure for Studies 1 (A) and 2 (B).
Results
Whereas children in both conditions were able to learn the
100% and 75% regularities, those who were prompted to
explain during the training phase were more likely than
controls to privilege the 100% regularity over the 75%
regularity when generalizing to novel cases (see Figure 2).
We begin by reporting the results of children’s
1

Both studies additionally included certainty ratings and an
explanation selection task with findings that mirror those that we
report; we do not report these data in the interest of space.

1116

performance on the 100% and 75% test items. A repeated
measures ANOVA was conducted with each question type
(100% and 75% test items) as the repeated measure and
condition (explain vs. control) as a between-subjects
variable. Analysis revealed no difference in children’s
performance on the two question types, F(1, 40) = 0.195, p
= .661, no difference between conditions, F(1, 40) = 1.84, p
= .182, and no interaction between question type and
condition, F(1, 40) = 0.780, p = .382. Children in both the
explain condition (M = 0.87, SD = 0.23) and the control
condition (M = 0.77, SD = 0.22) were able to learn the
100% and 75% regularities during the training phase and
use this information when generalizing to novel blocks.
To analyze children’s performance on the conflict items,
a one-way ANOVA was conducted with condition (explain
vs. control) as the between-subjects variable. There was a
significant difference between conditions, F(1, 40) = 5.79, p
< .02: Children in the explain condition were more likely (M
= .667, SD = .33) than those in the control condition (M =
.405, SD = .38) to base their generalizations on the 100%
regularity. Results support the hypothesis that prompting
learners to explain helps them to discover and extend causal
regularities that account for more of their observations,
consistent with the evidence and generalization hypotheses.

Study 2: Conflicting Prior Knowledge
Study 1 was designed to assess the role of current evidence
in children’s causal learning and generalizations. However,
because the two candidate causes differed only in color
(green vs. red), children had no a priori reason to privilege
either cause. Study 2 therefore examines the influence of
explanation in causal learning when a candidate cause that
accounts for more observations is pitted against an
alternative that is more consistent with prior knowledge.
Study 2 again presented two sets of causal regularities: a
100% regularity that accounted for all observations (block
color), and a 75% regularity that accounted for most
observations and presented a plausible causal mechanism
(block size). Unlike color, relative size provides a plausible
cause – larger objects are assumed to be more causally
efficacious. This assumption was confirmed during pilot
testing. We also included two age groups in Study 2 (5- and
6-year-olds). Because 6-year-olds have more experience
with mechanical systems and have begun formal schooling,
they could hold stronger prior beliefs in this domain.
If explaining principally drives learners to favor
regularities from the data that they observe, then we would
expect to replicate the results from Study 1, with explainers
more likely to generalize according to the 100% regularity.
If, however, explaining prompts learners to privilege causes
that are more plausible in light of prior beliefs, then children
prompted to explain should be less likely to generalize
according to the 100% regularity, instead favoring the priorknowledge consistent 75% regularity.
Participants
Seventy-two children were included in Study 2, including

36 5-year-olds (M = 64.4; SD = 3.8; range = 60.1 – 71.7; 20
girls) and 36 6-year-olds (M = 78.3; SD = 4.1; range = 72.7
– 83.7; 18 girls). Eighteen 5-year-olds and 18 6-year-olds
were randomly assigned to each condition. Children were
recruited from preschools and museums.
Materials
Study 2 used the same machine as in Study 1. Training
stimuli consisted of four large, 3” wooden blocks and four
small, 1” wooden blocks. A strip of colored electrical tape
was affixed to each of the eight blocks. The four Go blocks
had a green strip and the four No-Go blocks had a yellow
strip. An illustration of the complete set of training blocks
appears in Figure 1B. In place of the hiding box, test blocks
were hidden in an opaque bag.
Procedure
While the procedure for the training phase and test questions
was similar to Study 1, there were some changes to the
procedure for the testing phase. Rather than placing the test
objects in the hiding box, the experimenter looked inside the
opaque bag and described one feature for each of two new
blocks, saying, for example, “I see a green one and I see a
yellow one. Which one will make my machine play music,
the green one or the yellow one?”
Results
As in Study 1, children in both conditions were able to learn
the 100% and 75% regularities. However, unlike in Study
1, children who were prompted to explain were significantly
less likely than controls to privilege the 100% regularity
over the 75% regularity when forming generalizations about
novel cases, instead favoring the regularity consistent with
prior knowledge (see Figure 2).
1
0.8
Control

0.6
0.4

Explain

0.2
0
Study 1 Conflict Items Study 2 Conflict Items

Figure 2: Mean proportion of responses consistent with the
100% regularity on the conflict items in Studies 1 and 2.
We first report results of children’s performance on the
100% and 75% test items. A repeated measures ANOVA
was conducted with question type (100% and 75% test
items) as the repeated measure and both age (5- vs. 6-yearolds) and condition (explain vs. control) as the betweensubjects variables.
Analysis revealed a significant
interaction between age and performance on the two
question types, F(1, 68) = 4.46, p < .05, with 6-year-olds

1117

showing higher accuracy (M = .96 SD = 0.18) than 5-yearolds (M = .79, SD = 0.33) on the 75% test items. However,
there was no main effect of condition, F (1, 68) = .73, p =
.40, and no interaction between question type and condition,
F(1, 68) = 0.04, p = .85. As in Study 1, children in both the
explain condition (M = .93, SD = .24) and the control
condition (M = .89, SD = .30) were able to learn the 100%
and 75% regularities during the training phase, and use this
information when generalizing to novel blocks.
To analyze children’s performance on the conflict items,
a univariate ANOVA was conducted with both age and
condition as the between-subjects variables. As in Study 1,
there was a significant difference between conditions on the
conflict items, F(1, 68) = 6.46, p < .02. However, results
reveal a reversal of the findings. While children in both
conditions responded in line with the 100% regularity more
often than chance, p < .05, children in the explain condition
were significantly less likely to do so (M = .64, SD = .37)
than children in the control condition (M = .83, SD = .27).
There was no difference in performance between 5- and 6year-olds, F(1, 68) = .13, p = .72, and no interaction
between age and condition, F(1, 68) = 1.18, p = .28.2

General Discussion
In two studies, young children's attempts to generate
explanations influenced which candidate cause they
privileged when generalizing to novel cases. In Study 1,
children were presented with data consistent with two causal
regularities, where one accounted for more observations.
Children who were prompted to explain were more likely
than controls to generalize according to the regularity that
accounted for more of the observed data. In Study 2, a
regularity that accounted for all observations was pitted
against an alternative that accounted for fewer observations
but was consistent with children’s prior knowledge about
plausible causes. When presented with this conflict, children
who were prompted to explain their observations were now
less likely than controls to generalize the regularity that
accounted for more of their observations, instead making
judgments in line with prior knowledge.
Taken together, these studies shed light on the
mechanisms by which explanation informs and constrains
causal learning. Our findings challenge the evidence
hypothesis, that explaining (always) makes children more
responsive to evidence. If this were the case, explaining
should have led children to base their judgments on the
regularity that was most consistent with their current
observations in both Studies 1 and 2. Our findings also
challenge the prior knowledge hypothesis, according to
which the (primary) role of explanation is to align new
information with current theories. While children prompted
2
Due to limited space, we do not report the results of qualitative
analyses examining the content of children’s explanations in
Studies 1 and 2. These results are consistent with the quantitative
data and provide additional support for our conclusions in the
General Discussion.

to explain were more likely to form a generalization in line
with their prior knowledge in Study 2, children were also
more likely to generalize according to their observations in
Study 1, indicating that the prior knowledge hypothesis is
limited at best, and false at worse. Instead, these findings
best support the generalization hypothesis, that explanation
prompts children to privilege observed regularities that they
expect to generalize most broadly, with both observations
and prior knowledge serving as cues to generalization.
The generalization hypothesis is broadly consistent with
the “theory-theory” approach to cognitive development, and
additionally provides some insight concerning how the
process of theory construction and revision occurs. Within
cognitive development, researchers have suggested that
children’s theory-like conceptual development is largely
motivated by explanation, which acts as a mechanism for
building abstract causal theories. In particular, Wellman and
Liu (2007) propose that explanations make a particular
occurrence understandable by placing it within the context
of a larger, coherent framework. In so doing, explanation
must accommodate both observations and prior beliefs.
Relatedly, explanations have been shown to encourage adult
learners to subsume the observation being explained under a
general pattern that is expected to generalize to novel cases
(Williams & Lombrozo, 2010a, 2010b). Our current
findings not only provide additional support for these ideas
by demonstrating that young children are also sensitive to
such constraints, but additionally shed light on how
explanations contribute to the formation of causal theories:
Explaining helps negotiate the critical balance between prior
beliefs and novel evidence, directing learners to regularities
that will generalize to new cases.
Important questions for future research include precisely
how explanation influences the evaluation of evidence and
prior beliefs, and whether this influence results in judgments
that are more or less closely aligned with the predictions of
normative (Bayesian) models (e.g., Griffiths et al., 2011).
For example, computational approaches to cognitive
development have proposed that the formation of multiple
levels of generalizations, or overhypotheses, enables
learners to make principled abstractions from a class of
observations, which then serves to inform future inferences
about novel cases (e.g., Kemp, Perfors, & Tenenbaum,
2007). By prompting children to evaluate which candidate
regularity generalizes most broadly, explanation could play
a role in pushing children to consider higher-order inductive
generalizations that support abstract knowledge.
The interpretation outlined thus far has focused primarily
on the impact of prompts to explain on children’s causal
judgments. However, it is also worthwhile to consider the
performance of children who were not prompted to explain.
In particular, why didn’t the control children in Study 2
spontaneously consult their prior knowledge in forming
causal judgments? Williams and Lombrozo (under review)
report similar findings in an adult population: Only learners
who were prompted to explain during learning utilized
informative labels in guiding their discovery of subtle

1118

patterns underlying novel categories. The authors suggest
that explanation can guide learners to consult prior
knowledge that would otherwise remain under-utilized.
The current work also suggests a number of future
directions. For example, while the results reported here
demonstrate the presence of an early effect of explanation
on causal learning, questions remain regarding the
development of this mechanism from infancy to adulthood.
Additionally, future research should consider how these
findings can be productively combined with previous
research on the self-explanation effect (e.g., Chi, et al.,
1994; Lombrozo, 2006; Siegler, 2002), as well as examining
educational implications of the present findings.
In sum, these two studies provide evidence for the
mechanisms by which explaining scaffolds causal learning
in early childhood and serve to inform prevailing theories of
learning. Learning by explaining challenges a simple datadriven view of knowledge acquisition in which children’s
learning is simply a function of observation and testimony.
Instead, these findings provide evidence for more complex
theories of learning in which processes such as explaining to
oneself influence how data and current theories inform
judgments. Understanding how engaging in explanation
influences learning therefore contributes to a more complete
understanding of how knowledge is acquired and revised.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Anna Akullien, Brynna Ledford, Sierra Eisen,
and Rosie Aboody, the UC Berkeley Early Childhood
Centers, Lawrence Hall of Science, and Habitot. Research
supported by a McDonnell Foundation grant to A. Gopnik
and NSF grant DRL-1056712 to T. Lombrozo.

References
Ahn, W.K., & Kalish, C. (2000). The role of mechanism
beliefs in causal reasoning. In F. Keil & R.A. Wilson
(Eds.), Explanation and cognition. (pp. 199-226).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., LaVancher, C.
(1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves
understanding. Cognitive Science,18, 439-477.
Friedman, M. (1974). Explanation and scientific
understanding. Journal of Philosophy, 71, 5-19.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and
essence: Early understandings of the non-obvious.
Cognition, 38, 213–244.
Gopnik, A. & Wellman, H.M. (1994). The "theory theory".
In L. Hirschfield and S. Gelman (Eds.) Domain
specificity in culture and cognition. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L., Kushnir, T.,
& Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in
children: Causal maps and Bayes nets. Psychological
Review, 111, 1–31.

Gopnik, A. & Sobel, D. (2000). Detecting blickets: How
Young children use information about novel causal
powers in categorization and induction. Child
Development, 71: 1205-1222.
Griffiths, T. L., Sobel, D., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gopnik, A.
(2011). Bayes and blickets: Effects of knowledge on
causal induction in children and adults. Cognitive
Science, 35(8): 1407-1455.
Keil, F. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual
Review of Psychology, 57: 227-254.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2007). Learning
overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian models.
Developmental Science, 10, 307-321.
Kitcher, P. (1989). Explanatory unification and the causal
structure of the world. In P. Kitcher and W. Salmon
(Eds.) Scientific Explanation (pp. 410-505).
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Kuhn, D. & Katz, J. (2009). Are self-explanations always
beneficial? Journal of Exp. Child Psych, 103, 386-394.
Legare, C.H. (2011). Exploring explanation: Explaining
inconsistent information guides hypothesis-testing
behavior in young children. Child Dev., 81, 929-944.
Legare, C.H., Gelman, S.A., & Wellman, H.M. (2010).
Inconsistency with prior knowledge triggers children’s
causal explanatory reasoning. Child Dev., 81, 929-944.
Lombrozo, T.L. (2006). The structure and function of
explanations. Trends in Cog. Sci., 10: 464-470.
Schulz, L.E., Bonawitz, E.B., & Griffiths, T.L. (2007). Can
being scared make your tummy ache? Naive theories,
ambiguous evidence and preschoolers' causal inferences.
Developmental Psychology, 43, 1124-1139.
Siegler, R. S. (2002). Microgenetic studies of selfexplanations. In N. Granott & J. Parziale (Eds.),
Microdevelopment: Transition processes in development
and learning (pp. 31-58). New York: Cambridge Univ.
Wellman, H.M. (2011). Reinvigorating explanations for
the study of early cognitive development. Child
Development Perspectives, 5(1): 33-38.
Wellman, H.M. & Liu, D. (2007). Causal reasoning as
informed by the early development of explanations. In
Causal Learning: Psych, Philosophy, & Computation
(Eds.) L. Schulz & A. Gopnik, pp. 261-279.
Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (2010a). The role of
explanation in discovery and generalization: evidence
from category learning. Cognitive Science, 34: 776-806.
Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (2010b). Explanation
constrains learning, and prior knowledge constrains
explanation. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX.
Williams, J. J., Lombrozo, T., & Rehder, B. (2010). Why
does explaining help learning? Insight from an
explanation impairment effect. Proceedings of 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (under review).
Explanation constrains learning and prior knowledge
constrains explanation.

1119

