UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Factors influencing children's display of surprise

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5xf1m9gn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Visser, Mandy
Krahmer, Emiel
Swerts, Marc

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Factors influencing children’s display of surprise
Mandy Vissera (Mandy.Visser@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmera (E.J.Krahmer@uvt.nl)
Marc Swertsa (M.G.J.Swerts@uvt.nl)
a

Tilburg centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities, Tilburg University,
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract

Earlier studies found a discrepancy between the display and
feeling of surprise. Therefore, we assessed what factors
influence the display of surprise in children of two age
groups: 8- and 11-year-olds. We manipulated the social
setting (children either competed or collaborated), and the
cause of surprise (a surprisingly positive or negative event).
We found that children used more features to express
negatively caused surprise, compared to positively caused
surprise and that 11-year-olds used more facial features than
8-year-olds. In a subsequent perception study, adults judged
video clips with surprised and neutral reactions, for the degree
of surprise that was displayed. We found higher ratings of
surprise for negatively vs. positively surprised children,
competing vs. collaborating children, and 11-year-olds vs. 8year-olds. These results confirm that in addition to the feeling
of surprise, its cause, the social setting, and age also affect the
display of surprise.
Keywords: Emotions; facial expression; surprise;
collaboration; competition; social development.

Introduction
According to Ekman (1997), surprise is prototypically
displayed through a combination of three facial features:
people who are surprised raise their eyebrows, open their
mouth and widen their eyes. However, when researchers try
to elicit the expression of surprise with participants, this
prototypical display is rarely shown (e.g., Reisenzein,
Bördgen, Holtbernd & Matz, 2006). There appears to be a
low emotion-facial display ratio, which means that when
participants indicate they feel surprised, they do not
frequently use the complete set of Ekman’s features to
express their emotion. We focus on two possible reasons for
this.
First, earlier research often assumes that there is only one
sort of surprise (e.g., Scherer, Zentner, and Stern, 2004).
However, some studies have shown that surprise can be
differently expressed, depending on its cause (e.g., Shepperd
& McNulty, 2002). For example, when someone is
surprised by a positive event, like giving an unexpectedly
correct answer to a difficult question, his or her facial
expression would differ from the facial expression of
someone who is surprised by a negative event, like giving
an unexpectedly incorrect answer to an easy question. This
could be a reason for not finding a general full facial
expression of surprise. Therefore, in our studies, we look at

different causes of surprise and its accompanying facial
expressions.
Second, there may be contextual effects as well, in the
sense that the expression of surprise could depend on the
setting in which it is elicited, something which is often
ignored in earlier studies. Research on surprise usually takes
place in a nonsocial situation, sometimes even deliberately,
to get a “clean” view on the expression of surprise
(Reisenzein et al., 2006). However, we think that the social
setting might be an important indicator for the expression of
surprise. People tend to exaggerate, minimize, neutralize
and fake expressions, depending on the social situation they
are in (Matsumoto, Hee Yoo, Hiramaya & Petrova, 2005).
For example, people probably express their surprise about
an incorrect answer differently in the company of a
teammate than in the company of an opponent. Such social
factors may represent a second reason for a low emotionfacial display ratio. Hence, in this research, we examine the
possible effect of the social situation on the facial
expression of surprise more closely. We created a quiz game
that could be played in two conditions, namely a
collaborative or competitive setting. In this way, the
participants’ goals and interests varied in each condition and
thus a different social context was created.
Adjusting behaviour and expressions to a social context is
something people learn gradually. Children need time to
acquire the social display rules, which means that younger
children are not as skilled in that respect, compared to older
children (Piaget, 1950). Earlier studies on children and
surprise involved mainly perception and understanding of
the emotion based on the theory of mind (e.g., Hadwin &
Perner, 1991); they rarely concerned children’s expression
of surprise. Research that did study at children’s expression
of surprise involved merely infant participants (e.g.,
Scherer, Zentner, and Stern, 2004). We think it is important
to study the expressions of surprise with older, more
socially skilled, age groups as well. Saarni (1979) showed
that children’s adjusting behavior to social contexts doubles
between the ages of 8 and 11. Therefore, we included both
age groups (8 and 11 years old) in our studies.
In sum: the aim of this research is to study children’s
expressions of surprise, caused by different events (positive
and negative events), in different social situations. To assess
the influence of social setting and age on facial expressions
of different sorts of surprise, we conducted three studies.
The aim of the first study was to examine whether

2493

participants actually experienced the different kinds of
surprise differently. In our second study, we wanted to
know whether features of the full facial display of surprise
appeared, and whether there was an effect of age and social
setting. In our third study, we focused on the perception of
the facial expressions of surprise.

unexpectedly incorrect, according to the knowledge of the
listening participant. More specifically, we aimed to elicit
reactions of two types of surprise.
Video camera

Screen

Study 1: Production of surprise
We wanted to elicit different kinds of surprise using a
natural elicitation procedure. Therefore, we created a gamebased experiment in which two participants simultaneously
had to play a knowledge quiz. In this quiz, we manipulated
various questions to induce situations in which a quiz
partner’s answer was unexpectedly correct, or unexpectedly
incorrect, in order to elicit either a surprised feeling with a
positive cause, or a surprised feeling with a negative cause.

Participant A

Participant B
Experimenter

Figure 1. Experimental setting

Method
Participants. In total, 90 children participated in this study.
We selected participants from two age groups; 8-year-old
children (42 children in total, 45% girls) and 11-year-old
children (48 children in total, 56% girls). The participants
had to play a knowledge quiz in self-selected pairs. These
pairs were randomly divided across two experimental
conditions; half of the pairs played the game in a
competitive setting and half of them in a collaborative
setting. The experiment was conducted in two primary
schools in Zoetermeer, the Netherlands. Beforehand, we
informed parents about the experiment and asked for their
signed permission for their child to participate.
Stimuli. The knowledge quiz consisted of 30 questions,
which participants had to answer by taking turns, such that
each of them responded to 15 questions. Both participants
saw a question on their respective screens, but only one
participant had to give an answer, while the other just
listened to the response. For the next question in the list,
they changed roles so that the other participant would
answer a question, and vice versa. These questions were
selected from the children’s edition of the game Triviant
Pursuit and a Dutch version of the "Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children". We made sure that both easy and hard
questions were included, in order to elicit both correct and
incorrect answers. An example of an easy question is
“Which month follows March?”, an example of a difficult
question is “What is glass made of?”
The participants were asked to sit behind two separate
computer screens, which were arranged in such a way that
they were not able to see each other or each other’s
computer screen (see Figure 1), but they were able to hear
each other’s answers. Participants were led to believe that
they both saw the same list of questions on their computer
screens. However, unknown to the participants, in order to
elicit a surprise reaction, the questions posed were different
for the two participants. In doing so, we could manipulate
various questions to create situations in which the speaking
participant’s answer was unexpectedly correct, or

First, we manipulated questions in such a way that
participants were positively surprised. We showed the
answering participant a question that was easy to answer,
while the listening participant saw a question that was
extremely difficult to answer. For example, the answering
participant was given the question: “Which year follows
1933?”, a question that is likely to be very easy to answer.
However, simultaneously, the listening participant saw the
question: “In which year was the city Tilburg established?”
which is a difficult question. So to the listening participant,
it would probably come as a positive surprise that his/her
partner would give a quick and confident sounding response
to this complex question.
Second, we also tried to elicit what we call surprise with
a negative cause. We showed an easy question to both
answering and listening participants, but these questions
were not similar. For example, the answering participant
was given the question: “Which animals live on a farm and
roll in the mud?” while the listening participant saw the
question: “Which animals live in an aquarium?” So to the
listening participant, it would probably come as a negative
surprise that his/her partner would give an incorrect answer
to a relatively easy question.
For each pair of participants, we manipulated four
questions to elicit surprise with a positive cause, and four
questions to elicit surprise with a negative cause. This
means that each participant answered two positively
manipulated questions and two negatively manipulated
questions, and listened to two positively manipulated
answers and two negatively manipulated answers.
Procedure. Before the start of the quiz game, the pairs of
participants were randomly assigned to a competitive or
collaborative condition. Participants were told that they
were going to play a knowledge quiz together and that they
had to take turn in answering the questions that appeared on
a screen. They were told to answer as many questions
correctly as possible together (collaborative setting), or that
they were playing against each other, and that they had to

2494

compete to get the most correct answers (competitive
setting). To emphasize this social setting, participants wore
same colored T-shirts in the collaborative setting, and Tshirts with different colors in the competitive setting. Apart
from the color of the T-shirts and the introduction given by
the experimenter, the procedure was exactly the same for
both conditions.
The participants’ face and upper body were filmed by a
video camera. After each answer, both participants had to
indicate how certain they were about its correctness. In this
way, we could see whether children indeed thought that the
answers given by their opponent or team member were
correct or incorrect, and check whether our manipulations
worked properly. Participants had to indicate this certainty
of correctness on a five-point Likert scale, by pointing out
specific facial representations of the items to the camera.
For example, a very unhappy face (corners of the mouth
pulled down) represented a score of 1 (very uncertain about
the correctness), and a very happy face (corners of the
mouth pulled up) represented a score of 5 (very certain
about the correctness). These facial representations of Likert
scales are fairly standard for studies involving children (e.g.,
Lockl & Schneider, 2002) and our participants
acknowledged that they are easy to use.
All pairs of participants began the experiment with a
training part to ensure they were familiar with the quiz and
the social setting they were in. This training phase consisted
of ten questions with different levels of difficulty (five for
each participant, without using any manipulations). To
stimulate participants to try their best and to emphasize the
social setting pairs were in (competition or collaboration),
they were told that (depending on the condition) the best
individual or the best team of the class would receive a
prize. In addition, after participating in the experiment, all
participants received a pencil and eraser as appreciation for
their contribution.

Results
We first checked whether our manipulations to elicit
different types of surprise had worked by computing a
difference score from the certainty scores of both answergiving and listening participants. We expected these
difference scores to diverge, in such a way that with a
negative manipulation, the answering participant was sure
that his/her answer was correct, and the listening participant
was sure the answer was incorrect. For positive
manipulations, we expected the answering participant to
believe that his/her answer was correct, and the listening
participant not to know the correct answer, which means
that the listening participants would have to be less certain
about the correctness. In the baseline condition, we expected
both participants’ certainty scores to be approximately the
same.
We used analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the
surprise manipulation (baseline, positive manipulation and
negative manipulation) as between-subjects factor and the
difference score as dependent variable. As shown in figure

2, there is an effect of the surprise manipulation, as reflected
in the differences between speaker’s and listener’s certainty
scores, F(2,43) = 80.101, p < .001. A Bonferroni post hoc
test showed that for the baseline condition (M = 0.22, SD =
0.77), the difference in speaker and listener’s certainty score
is significantly smaller, than with both the surprise
manipulations. Moreover, the difference score for positive
manipulations (M = 1.60, SD = 1.12) is in turn significantly
smaller than for negative manipulations (M = 3.07, SD =
1.32).

Figure 2. Differences in certainty scores for surprise
manipulations.

Discussion
While participants played a knowledge quiz in pairs, we
tried to elicit expressions of surprise by manipulating the
situation in which a partner’s answer would be unexpectedly
correct or unexpectedly incorrect. From comparing the
certainty scores for both manipulated questions and regular
questions, we can presume that the manipulations generated
situations that differed regarding the experienced degree of
surprise. For negative manipulations, there was a large
difference in certainty scores, positively caused surprise
resulted in a smaller discrepancy between participants’
certainty scores, and finally, certainty scores for baseline
answers hardly differed from each other.
Next, we wanted to know whether the type of surprise
had any effect on the facial expressions of the participants.
Therefore, in the next part of this research, we investigate
how children express the two differently caused emotions of
surprise and whether this differs for the two age groups and
social settings.

Study 2: Expression of surprise
The aim of the second study is to gain insight into children’s
facial expression of surprise caused by different events. We
investigate the presence of Ekman’s full facial display of
surprise in the data collected from our game based
experiment.

Method
Stimuli. We selected 96 video clips of children listening to
the answer to a question by the other participant during the

2495

quiz game, with an equal distribution of positively and
negatively caused surprise manipulations and baseline
condition (no manipulation), and with an equal distribution
across age and social settings. This gave a 3 x 2 x 2 design
(surprise x age group x social setting). We randomly
selected three questions per couple for labelling purposes.
For the positively caused surprise manipulation, we used all
video clips with reactions to the answer to the “1933”
question (in which the answering participant was given the
question: “Which year follows 1933?”, a question that is
very easy to answer. Simultaneously, the listening
participant saw the question: “In which year was the city
Tilburg established?” which is a difficult question) and for
the negative surprise manipulation, we used the reactions to
the answers to the “pigs in an aquarium” question (in which
the answering participant was given the question: “Which
animals live on a farm and roll in the mud?” while the
listening participant saw the question: “Which animals live
in an aquarium?”). As a baseline condition, we used the
reactions to a third, easy, question without manipulation.
For thirteen pairs the manipulation did not work properly,
according to the comparison of the feeling of correctness
scores of both participants, therefore we used data from 32
out of 45 pairs.
The selected video clips contained the listening
participants’ reactions to the speaking participants’ answers,
from the moment the question appeared on the screen until
the next question was shown. For the purpose of labeling,
all certainty scores presented by the children on the smileys
were blurred and the video clips were presented without any
sound.

and .69 for mouth opening). Inconsistent labels were
discussed until consensus was reached.

Results
We used an ANOVA for analyzing the appearance of
features belonging to Ekman’s (1997) full facial display of
surprise in the video clips, with our surprise manipulations,
age and social settings as between subject factors. Analysis
of the full facial display of surprise (by counting up scores
of separate features) shows an effect of the sort of surprise,
F(2,96) = 27.836, p < .001. A posthoc test (Bonferroni
method) reveals a significant difference in the appearance of
the full facial display of surprise between all three
conditions (Baseline: M = .19, SD = .134; Positive
manipulation: M = 1.00, SD = .134; Negative manipulation:
M = 1.59, SD = .134).
When we take a closer look at the features, they all
appear to be affected by the surprise manipulation. Table 1
shows that both brow movement and mouth opening are
significantly more present in manipulated conditions than in
the baseline condition, while a similar trend can be observed
for eye widening.
Table 1. Percentages of appearance features in baseline condition,
positive and negative manipulations.
Baseline
Positive
Negative
Chi2
Brow
6.2%
40.6%
68.8%
p < .001
movement
Eye
6.2%
21.8%
28.1%
p = .069
widening
Mouth
6.2%
37.5%
62.5%
p < .001
opening

We also found an effect of age on the overall appearance
of the facial display of surprise, F(1,96) = 5.255, p < .05.
Older children (M= 1.10, SD = .109) use more features to
express their surprise than younger children (M = .75, SD =
.109). We found no effect of social setting on the overall
appearance of the facial display of surprise, F(1,96) = .017,
ns.
Figure 3. Stills illustrating the three labeled features (left: eyebrow
movement, middle: eye widening and right: mouth opening)

Discussion

Labeling and annotation. Two independent labellers, who
were blind for experimental condition (age, manipulation
and social setting), manually coded all selected clips of
listening children. Following an explicit procedure, they
labeled the presence or absence of the features that represent
the full facial display of surprise. According to Ekman
(1997), this full facial display of surprise consists of three
features: 1) moving the eyebrows, 2) dropping jaw or
opening the mouth and 3) widening the eyes. For
representative examples of the labeled features, see figure 3.
Before labeling, coders had a short training phase, to make
sure both coders labeled the video clips in the same way. All
Kappa’s indicated acceptable inter coder agreement
(Kappa’s were .64 for brow movements, .70 for eye opening

We found a significant difference in the frequency of use of
the facial features between the three conditions. Participants
who were surprised by a negative cause showed most facial
features, compared with the other conditions. A closer look
at the features reveals that mainly opening of the mouth and
brow movement are used more with negatively caused
surprise than with positively caused surprise. It seems that
there is no difference in the features that are used in our
created sorts of surprise, although there is difference in their
relative frequency. We also found that older children used
more features for showing surprise. An explanation for this
could be that 11-year-old children show more surprise
because they are more aware of the social situation (Saarni,
1979). We did not find a significant difference between the
social settings. However, it is conceivable that the social

2496

setting is important for expressing surprise, since perception
of surprise is important for the function of self-presentation
in a social setting. According to Feldman Barrett, Mesquita
and Gendron (2011), facial features might carry affective
information, but emotional meaning is rather contingent on
context. Therefore, we decided to conduct a perception test
using the same video clips as in study 2.

difference in perceived surprise for the 8-year-old children
between the baseline condition and the positive
manipulation, but only a difference between these two
conditions and the negative manipulation. For the perceived
surprise of 11-year-old children there was a significant
difference between all three conditions, see figure 4.

Study 3: Perception of surprise
The third study consisted of a rating experiment to test how
video clips from study 2 are perceived in terms of different
sorts of surprise as a function of social setting and age
group.

Method
Participants: Thirty students from Tilburg University (16
female) participated as judges in the perception experiment
(age range: 18- 48 years old, M = 22.07, SD = 5.42).
Figure 4. The interaction effect between age and type of surprise,
on perceived level of surprise.

Stimuli: The same 96 video clips that were labeled for the
presence or absence of surprise features in study 2 were
used in the perception test as stimuli.
Procedure: All 96 video clips were shown to the
participants in one of two random orders. First, the
identification number of the stimulus was presented (1
through 96), followed by the actual stimulus. During an
inter-stimulus interval of three seconds the screen turned
black, and participants were asked to rate the child’s level of
surprise, on a five-point Likert scale. To ensure that
participants were familiar with the perception task, the
experiment was preceded by a short training phase.

Second, we found an interaction effect between social
setting and type of surprise on the perceived level of
surprise, F(2,28) = 26.190, p < .001. Post hoc analyses
(Bonferroni method) reveal that in collaboration, there is a
larger difference between the perception of positive and
negative surprise than in competition. In the competitive
setting, children are, overall, perceived to be more surprised
than in the collaborative setting, see figure 5.

Results
We conducted a 3 x 2 x 2 ANOVA with sort of surprise, age
and social setting as within-subject factors and the perceived
level of surprise as dependent variable.
We found a main effect of social setting on the
perceived level of surprise, F(1,29) = 72.023, p < .001.
Competing children (M = 3.93, SD = 0.48) were rated as
more surprised than collaborating children (M = 3.48, SD =
0.51). Age did not have an effect on the perceived surprise
level, F(1,29) = 3,494, ns.
We also found an effect of sort of surprise on the
perceived level of surprise, F(2,28) = 132.9, p < .001. A
Bonferroni post hoc test showed that children in the baseline
condition (M = 3.01, SD = 0.54) were perceived to be less
surprised than the children in both surprise manipulation
conditions. Children with a negatively caused surprise (M =
4.54, SD = 0.64) were perceived to be more surprised than
children with a positively caused surprise (M = 3.57, SD =
0.64).
We found two interaction effects involving sort of
surprise. First, there is an interaction between age and sort
of surprise, F (2,28) = 43.476, p < .001. After running split
analyses, were we looked at the perception of surprise for
both age groups separately, we did not find a significant

Figure 5. The interaction effect between social setting and type of
surprise, on perceived level of surprise.

Discussion
The perception test showed that surprise was perceived
differently between the three types of surprise. We found
that positive surprise was perceived as less prominent than
negative surprise. Furthermore, we found that 11-year-old
children’s expressions of surprise were perceived to be more
distinct among the different conditions. This could mean
that children express their surprise more accurately as they
grow older. We also found that competing children are
perceived to show more surprise than collaborating children,
at least for the baseline condition and positive caused
surprise.

2497

General discussion and conclusion
Earlier research has had difficulties in extracting a full facial
display of surprise with participants (Reisenzein et al.,
2006). The aim of the studies presented in the current paper
was to examine two possible reasons for this; firstly the
false assumption that there is only one kind of surprise and
secondly the lack of taking contextual factors into account.
First, we assumed that surprise could be expressed
differently, depending on its cause. We manipulated various
questions in the knowledge quiz to extract reactions of
surprise, either with a positive or negative cause. Analyzing
the difference scores of participants’ certainty judgments
showed that the manipulations worked as intended (study
1). After annotating the facial features (study 2) and
conducting a perception test (study 3), we can conclude that
we found significant differences in expressing and
perceiving surprise. Participants who were surprised by a
negative cause showed most features of the full facial
display of surprise, compared to the other conditions.
Although we did find that manipulation affected the
frequency in use of features, the different kinds of surprise
were not related to certain specific features. It seems that the
cause of the emotion leads to different degrees in surprise
expressions, instead of a different surprise expression.
Possibly, negative events cause more surprise than positive
events. We must note, however, that the created social
settings may have interfered with the concept of positive or
negative surprise. For example, in competition, an incorrect
answer on an easy question probably does not evoke an
absolutely negative feeling of surprise with the opponent, as
an error of the opponent is actually good for the other
player. However, we still think that although the naming of
the two kinds of surprise (positive versus negative) might be
somewhat inaccurate, their difference in cause remains. In
our research, we elicited feelings of surprise with two
distinctive causes, and results show us that the cause of the
surprise affects the expression of the emotion. However,
future research should consider these causes in respect of
the social settings participants are in.
Second, we wanted to study if the expression of surprise
could depend on this social setting. Therefore, our
participants played the knowledge quiz in either a
collaborative setting, or a competitive setting. From study 3
we can conclude that children in competition were
perceived to be more surprised than collaborating children.
This may be due to the fact that children in competition are
more aware of their social environment, because selfpresentation is more important in this setting. Expressing
surprise could be beneficial for the players’ progression in
the game. We can conclude that the social setting appears to
be important for the expression of surprise.
Since 11-year-old children appear to adjust to social
situations far more than 8-year-old children (Saarni, 1979),
we also expected to find age to affect expressions of
surprise. This was confirmed by our data analyses: 11-yearold children were more expressive and were perceived as
more surprised than 8-year-old children. It seems that older

children can make a more accurate distinction between
expressions of surprise with different causes than younger
children.
We can conclude that the expression of surprise is
affected by several factors, like age, social setting and the
cause of the surprise. Therefore, we think future studies
should consider these factors when studying surprise. Our
data suggest that the expression of surprise is more than a
mere reflex to an unexpected stimulus, and that it can be
moderated by contextual factors.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to the children and teachers from third and
sixth grade at primary schools Florence Nightingale and De
Tjalk in Zoetermeer for their corporation. Thanks to Martijn
Goudbeek and Marieke Hoetjes for their useful comments,
and to Hans Westerbeek and Lisanne van Weelden for their
assistance.

References
Ekman, P. (1997). Expression or communication about
emotion. In N. L. Segal, G. E. Weisfeld, & C. C. Weisfeld
(Eds.), Uniting psychology and biology: Integrative
perspectives on human development (Vol. 48, pp. 384–
392). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Feldman Barrett, L., Mesquita, B., & Gendron, M. (2011).
Context in emotion perception. Current Direction in
Psychological Science, 20, 286-290.
Hadwin, J., & Perner, J. (1991). Pleased and surprised:
Children’s cognitive theory of emotion. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 9(2), 215-234.
Lockl, K., & Schneider, W. (2002). Developmental trends in
children’s feeling-of-knowing judgments. International
Journal of Behavioural Development, 26, 327-333.
Matsumoto, D., Hee Yoo, S., Hiramaya, S., & Petrova, G.
(2005). Development and validation of a measure of
display rule knowledge: The display rule assessment
inventory. Emotion, 5(1), 23-40.
Piaget, J. (1950). The Psychology of Intelligence. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Reisenzein, R., Bördgen, S., Holtbernd, T., & Matz, D.
(2006). Evidence for strong dissociation between emotion
and facial displays: The case of surprise. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91(2), 295-315.
Saarni, C. (1979). Children’s understanding of display rules
for expressive behaviour. Developmental Psychology, 15,
424-429.
Scherer, K. R., Zentner, M. R., & Stern, D. (2004). Beyond
surprise: The puzzle of infants’ expressive reactions to
expectancy violation. Emotion, 4, 389–402.
Shepperd, J. A., & McNulty, J. K. (2002). The affective
consequences of expected and unexpected outcomes.
Psychological Science, 13, 85-88.

2498

