UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Finishing each other’s . . . Responding to incomplete contributions in dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0bz040q6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Howes, Christine
Healey, Ptarick G.T.
Purver, Matthew
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Finishing each other’s . . .
Responding to incomplete contributions in dialogue
Christine Howes, Patrick G. T. Healey, Matthew Purver, Arash Eshghi
{chrizba, ph, mpurver, arash}@eecs.qmul.ac.uk
Queen Mary University of London
Interaction, Media and Communication Research Group
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, London E1 4NS, UK
Abstract

Hypothesis 1 Cross-person completions
likely at transition relevance places

A distinguishing feature of dialogue is that contributions
can be fragmentary or incomplete. Such incomplete utterances may be later completed by another interlocutor. These cross-person compound contributions (CCs)
have been hypothesised to be more likely in predictable
contexts but the contributions of diﬀerent sources of predictability has not been systematically investigated. In
this paper we present an experiment which artiﬁcially
truncates genuine contributions in ongoing text-based
dialogues, to investigate the eﬀects of lexical, syntactic and pragmatic predictability of the truncation point
on the likelihood of one’s interlocutor supplying a continuation. We show that what is critical is the actual
and presumed accessibility of common ground, and that
while people are sensitive to syntactic predictability, this
alone is insuﬃcient to prompt a completion.
Keywords: Dialogue; compound contributions; common ground.

are

more

Second, completions should tend to occur at syntactically projectable points (e.g. compound turn constructional units Lerner, 1991).
Hypothesis 2 Cross-person completions are
likely when they are syntactically predictable.

more

A third source of predictability comes from the degree
to which the speaker and hearer share, or can be assumed
to share, common ground relevant to the CC. If the topic
of the utterance is already in the common ground then
the content of the completion is more predictable.
Hypothesis 3 Cross-person completions are more
likely when they address topics that are part of the
common ground.

Introduction

The eﬀects of these diﬀerent forms of predictability
are directly tested here for the ﬁrst time using a text
chat experiment performed with the DiET experimental
platform. The evidence points towards shared knowledge
being a key factor with other sources of predictability
also contributing.

It is well known that contributions to dialogue are often
fragmentary or in some sense unﬁnished Fernández and
Ginzburg (2002). These incomplete utterances may be
subsequently completed, either by the original speaker
following some response or interruption from an interlocutor, or, by another person (Purver et al., 2009).
These compound contributions (CCs) are a paradigmatic feature of dialogue, and cross-person CCs in particular are a key indicator of coordination between interlocutors. Although naturally occurring cross-person
CCs and their interpretations have been studied (Lerner,
1996; Purver et al., 2009), there has not previously been
a systematic, experimental, attempt to investigate the
factors that inﬂuence how a completion for an incomplete utterance may be produced. Intuitively, people’s
willingness to ﬁnish another person’s incomplete utterance will depend (at least) on how predictable the rest
of the utterance is. There are several sources of possible
predictability.
Expansions are CCs which add material (e.g. an adjunct) to an already complete syntactic element; completions are CCs which complete an incomplete element.
Conversation analytic (CA) discussions of CCs suggest
that they should preferably occur at transition relevance
places (TRPs), points that are foreseeable by the participants. Expansions are CCs with split points at TRPs,
and are more common in spoken dialogue (Howes et al.,
2011) so ought to be more likely than completions.

Method
In this experiment, to see what factors inﬂuence how
people respond to unﬁnished turns and their likelihood
of producing a continuation, a number of genuine single
contributions in dyadic text-based conversations were artiﬁcially split into two parts, using the DiET chat tool.

The DiET chat tool
The Dialogue Experimental Toolkit (DiET) chat tool is
a text-based chat interface into which interventions can
be introduced into a dialogue in real time. These interventions can take a number of forms; turns may not
be relayed, additional turns may be added, as in Healey
et al. (2003), in which spoof clariﬁcation requests are
added to the dialogue, or turns may be altered prior to
transmission. As these manipulations occur as the dialogue progresses, they cause a minimum of disruption to
the ‘ﬂow’ of the conversation.
The DiET chat tool is a custom built Java application, consisting of two main components: the server console and the user interface. The server time-stamps and

479

stores each key press, and acts as an intermediary between what participants type and what they see. All
turns are passed to the server, from where it is relayed to
the other participants. Prior to being relayed, real turns
can therefore be automatically altered by the server or
not relayed, or fake turns can be introduced.

measures: part-of-speech entropy, to capture the “syntactic” predictability of one part-of-speech (POS) following another; and lexical entropy, to capture the predictability of a particular lexical item following a speciﬁc
POS. To illustrate the diﬀerence: although determiners
are predictably followed by nouns, there are lots of different nouns: determiners therefore have a relatively low
POS entropy, and a relatively high lexical entropy.
Since predictability depends on dialogue context and
topic, entropy values were calculated from a corpus of
prior dialogues (53663 word tokens) collected using the
same tool and domain (the balloon task – see below).1
POS tags were generated using the Stanford POS tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003) with a misspellings map for
common chat abbreviations and typos. For each POS,
entropy was calculated as follows over the observed types
of the following POS S or lexical item L:


pS log(pS )
Hlex = −
pL log(pL )
Hpos = −

Character-by-character interface In the characterby-character version of the DiET chat tool, the user interface consists of a single chat window. Below this,
there is a status bar, which indicates if any participants
are actively typing (see ﬁgure 1).

S

L

During the experiment, a POS-tagger analysed the
strings in real time and triggered an intervention based
on these entropy values, and a minimum requirement
of 9 words (based on the mean length of all contributions). This manipulation produced a range of interventions with high, medium and low POS entropy, and,
independently, high, medium and low lexical entropy.

Figure 1: The DiET chat window (as viewed by Jen)
Unlike traditional chat interfaces (such as MSN Messenger), users type directly into the same window in
which they see their interlocutors’ contributions. This
means that each character that any of the participants
type is displayed in the window at the time it is entered
– i.e. users see both their own and their interlocutors’
contributions unfold in a character-by-character fashion.
Consequently, only one participant may type at a time.

Subjects and materials
The experiment was carried out on 16 pairs of students
from Queen Mary University of London who were each
paid £7.00 or given course credit for providing an hour
of their time. The task was the balloon task – an ethical
dilemma requiring agreement on which of three passengers should be thrown out of a hot air balloon that will
crash, killing all the passengers, if one is not sacriﬁced.
The choice is between a scientist, who believes he is on
the brink of discovering a cure for cancer, a woman who
is 7 months pregnant, and her husband, the pilot. This
task was chosen on the basis that it is known to stimulate discussion, leading to dialogues of a suﬃcient length
to enable an adequate number of interventions.
Subjects were seated at desktop computers in separate
rooms, asked to input their e-mail address and username
and given the task description. They were told that the
experiment was investigating the diﬀerences in communication when conducted using a text-only interface as
opposed to face-to-face, that the experiment would last
approximately 45 minutes, and that all turns would be
recorded anonymously for later analysis.

The intervention
For this experiment, single contributions were artiﬁcially
split into two parts. The ﬁrst part was transmitted to
the other participant as it was typed, with the turn truncated according to various factors as discussed below.
Following a pilot study, which showed that people were
more likely to supply a response after a ﬁller “. . . ” or
“. . . ?” than if there were no ﬁller (after a ﬁller: 18/26,
69%, no ﬁller: 12/45, 27%; χ2(1) = 12.24, p < 0.001),
the truncated ﬁrst part of the genuine turn was followed
by a text ﬁller. Subsequently, there was a delay of 12
seconds, during which the other person could respond if
they wished. Any response was trapped by the server
and not relayed to the original sender, before the rest of
the original (interrupted) contribution was transmitted.
Split points are manipulated according to measures of
a) syntactic and b) lexical predictability calculated as
each turn is produced.

Entropy

Analysis

Entropy is a measure of uncertainty: the higher the entropy, the higher the uncertainty; and the lower the entropy, the higher the predictability. Here we used two

Each intervention was annotated according to a number
of factors. Firstly, whether or not there was a response
1

480

This corpus is small, but extremely domain speciﬁc.

to the intervention during the timeout period. If there
had been, the type of response was coded according to
whether it was a compound contribution (CC), a clariﬁcation request (CR) or a yes/no response.2 These are
not mutually exclusive – example (1) is a CR constructed
as a CC, and example (2) is a CC and a yes/no answer.
The minimum POS entropy was 1.44, maximum 4.16,
mean 3.27 (standard deviation 0.87); for lexical entropy
those values are 5.59–8.14, mean 7.03 (s.d. 0.60).

There was also an interaction eﬀect of POS entropy
by lexical entropy (B = 0.237, Wald-χ2 = 5.893, p =
0.015). This eﬀect is illustrated in ﬁgure 2. Simple slopes
analysis (Aiken et al., 1991) showed that responses are
more likely in cases where both POS and lexical entropy
were high (the highly unpredictable cases) than in cases
where one or both levels of entropy were low.
IV
Antecedent end-complete (Ant)
Lexical entropy (Lex)
POS entropy (POS)
Ant × Lex
Ant × POS
Lex × POS
Lex × POS × Ant

(1) B:
also surely the guy who knows how to . . .
N:
fly?
B:
ﬂy the baloon should know how to inscrease
its height?
[DiET CCInd9 1277-80]
(2) J:
do you assess their value to society . . .
Q:
in milliseconds yes =
J:
ﬁrstim with nick qne wuwi and susie - tom
can explain how toise use the hot air balloon
before he jumps
[DiET CCInd13 2048-51]

Model eﬀects
p
Waldχ2
4.286 0.038*
0.148 0.700
0.593 0.441
3.251 0.071
2.546 0.111
6.460 0.011*
0.287 0.592

Table 1: GEE of response or not by lexical entropy, POS
entropy and antecedent end-completeness

The intervened turn was also annotated for whether
it was potentially end-complete and could therefore be
responded to as if it were a complete contribution. Antecedent end-completeness can be used as a proxy measure for pragmatic completeness, with 40 of the 241 truncated contributions appearing to end in a complete way.
The other major factor predicted to increase production of CCs was whether the subject under discussion
was known to be shared. Lexical entropy gives us a measure of the predictability of the local context, with entities and concepts more or less predictable in certain sentential contexts because of the limited domain. However,
it does not capture the potential eﬀect on the predictability of local upcoming material of the shared context established in the course of any particular conversation
between a speciﬁc pair of individuals. Each intervened
contribution was therefore classiﬁed as either contributing to an ongoing topic of discussion, or introducing a
new topic, as a loose measure of common ground.

Figure 2: Marginal means of probability of a response
by POS entropy × lexical entropy

Type of response
The results outlined above may conﬂate diﬀerent eﬀects
which are speciﬁcally associated with diﬀerent kinds of
response. Analyses were therefore carried out separately
on the diﬀerent types of responses.

Results
Of the 241 interventions, 171 elicited a response (71%).
A GEE analysis with whether or not there was a response
to the intervention as dependent variable3 with POS
and lexical entropy values as covariates, antecedent endcompleteness as a ﬁxed factor and participant as subject
eﬀect (goodness of ﬁt QIC = 294.562; see table 1) showed
a main eﬀect of antecedent end-completeness such that
responses were more likely in cases that could be considered complete on their own, showing that people are
sensitive to TRPs.

Response type
Yes/No Y
N
CR
Y
N
CC
Y
N
Total

Antecedent
end-complete
N %
Y %
20 15 12 36
118 85 21 64
39 28
2 6
99 72 31 94
62 45 10 30
76 55 23 70
138 69 33 83

Total
32 19
139 81
41 24
130 76
72 42
99 58
171 71

Table 2: Response type
The breakdown of the 171 responses is shown in table 2.4

2

These response types were chosen on the basis of an examination of the response data.
3
All models in this paper use a binary model with a logit
link function and an independent correlation structure unless
otherwise stated.

4
Note that there were no diﬀerences in types of response
according to which ﬁller type was used (‘. . . ’ or ‘. . . ?’).

481

Participants were more likely to produce a Yes/No
response if the antecedent is end-complete (χ2(1) =
8.374, p = 0.004), and they are also less likely to respond
with a clariﬁcation request (χ2(1) = 7.201, p = 0.007).
There is no diﬀerence in the proportion of responses constructed as CCs based on whether the antecedent was
end-complete or not, which is unexpected given the preference for expansions over completions in corpus studies
(Purver et al., 2009).

ues as covariates, participant as subject eﬀect and antecedent end-completeness as a ﬁxed eﬀect (goodness of
ﬁt = 234.351) showed an interaction between antecedent
end-completeness × lexical entropy (table 4).
Simple slopes analysis shows that if the next lexical
item is unpredictable then you are more likely to formulate your response as a CC if the antecedent is not endcomplete. When the antecedent is end-complete (the
solid line in ﬁgure 3), responses are more likely to be
continuations in more highly predictable contexts (as in
e.g. (4)), but when it is not end-complete CCs are more
likely in the lexically unpredictable cases (as in e.g. (5)).

CR responses
With the data ﬁltered to responses only, GEE analyses on whether or not the response was formulated as
a CR, with the POS and lexical entropy values as covariates and participant as subject eﬀect (goodness of
ﬁt = 186.828) showed a main eﬀect of POS entropy (see
table 3). Greater syntactic predictability (lower POS entropy) increased the probability of the response being a
clariﬁcation request.
IV
Lexical entropy
POS entropy
Lex × POS entropy

(4) W:
J:
W:

I feel like we should be talking . . . ?
about the prompt?
about something important.
[DiET CCInd16 2846-9]

(5) W: nope we are not god we are . . . ?
M: [M] and [W] ini lol we are [M] and [W]
u fool lol so s just shut up npw please ad
thank u for ur c kindeness
W: not making dis di decision i knw we got bre
spellintg werrorz man i r we even aloowed to talk
type in slang?
[DiET CCInd6 929-32]

Model eﬀects
p
Waldχ2
2.207 0.137
5.135 0.023*
0.176 0.674

Table 3: GEEs CRs by lexical entropy, POS entropy and
antecedent end-completeness
CRs are often formulated as CCs, as in (3) which is
particularly true where the syntactic category of the next
word was highly predictable (independently of lexical entropy). Of the 72 CCs, 21 occurred in syntactically predictable (low POS entropy) conditions with 12 of these
also being CRs. Of the other 51 CCs, only 13 were also
CRs (57% vs. 25%; χ2(1) = 6.575, p = 0.010).
(3) N:
i think susie because she is t . . .
B:
a woman?
N:
ehe least important out of the three if you
think about it . . . dr nick is a doctor and could be
really useful in the world [DiET CCInd9 1214-7]

Figure 3: Marginal means of probability of a CC response by lexical entropy × antecedent end-completeness

CC responses

Context

IV
Antecedent end-complete (Ant)
Lexical entropy (Lex)
POS entropy (POS)
Ant × Lex
Ant × POS
Lex × POS
Ant × Lex × POS

To test the hypothesis that CCs are more common where
participants share information or common ground about
the subject under discussion, planned post hoc analyses
were carried out using the topic under discussion. Of the
241 intervened contributions, 170 were about an existing
topic under discussion, whilst 71 introduced some new
topic.
Participants were no more likely to respond if the turn
was about the current topic or not; nor were they more
likely to respond with a yes/no answer, or a clariﬁcation
request. However, they were more likely to construct
their response as a CC if it was about the current topic
than if it was about something else (topic 59/121, 49%
vs. Oﬀ-topic 13/50, 26%; χ2(1) = 7.519, p = 0.006).

Model eﬀects
p
Waldχ2
1.951
0.162
3.586
0.058
0.235
0.627
15.835 <0.001**
0.018
0.894
0.344
0.558
0.005
0.945

Table 4: GEE of CCs by lexical entropy, POS entropy
and antecedent end-completeness
GEE analyses on whether or not the response was formulated as a CC, with the POS and lexical entropy val-

482

more likely to respond to unﬁnished contributions6 if
both syntactic and lexical items were unpredictable.
This is not what we would expect if a simple model
of levels of predictability were correct, as intuitively the
most predictable cases ought to elicit the most responses.
However, it is what we would expect if one of the drivers
of human communication is in locally managing and resolving potential sources of misunderstanding (as in the
interactive misalignment of Healey, 2008).
The main eﬀect of potential completeness also demonstrates that people are more comfortable responding at
all if the other person has reached a potential TRP –
backing up ﬁndings from corpus studies (Purver et al.,
2009) and conversation analysts assertion that people are
sensitive to possible endings (Schegloﬀ, 1996).

Adding topic to the GEE model with CC response as
dependent variable (QIC = 227.895, table 5)5 resulted in
a three-way interaction eﬀect of lexical entropy × POS
entropy × topic.
IV
Antecedent end-complete (Ant)
Topic
Lexical entropy (Lex)
POS entropy (POS)
Line number
Ant × Topic
Ant × Lex
Ant × POS
Topic × Lex
Topic × POS
Lex × POS
Ant × Topic × Lex
Ant × Topic × POS
Ant × Lex × POS
Topic × Lex × POS

Model
Waldχ2
0.046
0.276
2.545
0.018
2.361
0.381
3.435
0.183
2.103
0.281
0.034
0.091
0.005
0.133
8.635

eﬀects
p
0.830
0.600
0.111
0.892
0.124
0.537
0.064
0.669
0.147
0.596
0.853
0.763
0.946
0.716
0.003**

Compound contributions
Contrary to Hypotheses 1 and 2, continuations are not
more likely at TRPs or syntactically predictable points.
What is critical seems to be the actual and presumed
accessibility of common ground. If the local content of
what comes next is salient from the (presumed shared)
context then people will produce completions. They do
this by taking advantage of the syntactic structure of
the antecedent, but syntactic predictability alone is not
suﬃcient to prompt a completion.
A continuation response is more likely if the antecedent is complete but the next word is predictable (as
in e.g. (4)) or if the antecedent is incomplete, suggesting
that people complete where they can.
For the cases in which the antecedent is not endcomplete, responses were more likely to be constructed
as CCs in lexically unpredictable cases.However, if the
next lexical item is highly predictable, then it can be
interpreted as if it had actually been produced, as in
(6). This result is not as surprising as it ﬁrst appears as
in a BNC corpus study (Howes et al., 2011), only 64%
of end-incomplete contributions get continued, meaning
that 36% never do. These are cases in which the local
context is so predictable that it can be taken to be shared
without the words themselves being produced.

Table 5: GEE of type of CC responses by lexical entropy,
POS entropy, antecedent end-completeness and topic
Exploring the interaction eﬀect (ﬁgure 4) shows that
in lexically unpredictable cases, which were syntactically
predictable, participants were more likely to construct
their response as a CC if they were talking about some
topic which they had already been discussing, and which
was therefore contextually salient.

Figure 4: Marginal means of probability of a CC response by lexical entropy × POS entropy × topic

(6) T:
its not that fair on the girl doing th . . .
H:
exactly, you need to think of others
and not be so selfish :P
T:
study we should do lots of chatting although
i doubt she’ll read past the exercise what with it
not being standardised etc [DiET CCInd4 685-8]

Discussion
These results oﬀer some insights regarding the conditions
inﬂuencing whether and how conversational partners respond to an incomplete utterance, and when they can
and do construct those responses as continuations.
There is a response to 71% of the interventions, with
this proportion aﬀected by the predictability of the upcoming material. Perhaps counterintuitively, people are

Context
The three-way interaction of POS entropy by lexical entropy by topic adds weight to the notion that what is
critical to the production of a continuation in response

5

The model also included line number as an additional
covariate as it was found that participants were more likely
to introduce a new topic later on in the conversation.

6
This could be a genuine diﬀerence in text chat because
of the availability of other cues in spoken dialogue, but we
leave a discussion of this to one side.

483

to an incomplete utterance is the actual and presumed
accessibility of common ground.
If the lexical item is unpredictable then syntactic predictability aids production of CCs in cases where the
topic of the truncated contribution is shared, thus acting
as a resource which helps frame the oﬀered continuation
as such. Syntax does not however help at all in cases
where the topic is new so the gist of the contribution
cannot be predicted and the predictability of the next
word also oﬀers no clues as to a plausible continuation.
This pattern of predictability corresponds to cases in
which the high lexical entropy equates to lots of diﬀerent words of a single type, as in the determiner case,
rather than the high lexical entropy being associated
with lots of diﬀerent words of many diﬀerent types (as
with e.g. adverbs). This means that the syntactic category is highly constrained and the additional information associated with contextual salience can signiﬁcantly
narrow down an appropriate continuation.

potentially complete semantic representations.
The evidence from this experiment shows that when
people are likely to produce CCs (or produce more CCs)
is principally driven by common ground. They are possible (or more likely) when it is shared. How this is
cashed out remains to be seen, however, it is apparent
that some formal notion of context is crucial for a thorough understanding of CCs, especially if we are to ever
hope to model them appropriately in a dialogue system.

References
Aiken, L. S., West, S. G., and Reno, R. R. Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions. Sage
Publications, 1991.
Fernández, R. and Ginzburg, J. Non-sentential utterances: A corpus-based study. Traitement Automatique
des Langues, 43(2), 2002.
Healey, P. G. T. Interactive misalignment: The role of
repair in the development of group sub-languages. In
Cooper, R. and Kempson, R., editors, Language in
Flux. College Publications, 2008.
Healey, P. G. T., Purver, M., King, J., Ginzburg, J.,
and Mills, G. Experimenting with clariﬁcation in dialogue. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society. Boston, Massachusetts,
2003.
Howes, C., Purver, M., Healey, P. G. T., Mills, G. J., and
Gregoromichelaki, E. On incrementality in dialogue:
Evidence from compound contributions. Dialogue and
Discourse, 2(1):279–311, 2011.
Lerner, G. H. On the syntax of sentences-in-progress.
Language in Society, pages 441–458, 1991.
Lerner, G. H. On the “semi-permeable” character of
grammatical units in conversation: Conditional entry
into the turn space of another speaker. In Ochs, E.,
Schegloﬀ, E. A., and Thompson, S. A., editors, Interaction and Grammar, pages 238–276. Cambridge
University Press, 1996.
Purver, M., Howes, C., Gregoromichelaki, E., and
Healey, P. G. T. Split utterances in dialogue: A corpus
study. In Proceedings of the 10th Annual SIGDIAL
Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL 2009
Conference), pages 262–271. Association for Computational Linguistics, London, UK, 2009.
Schegloﬀ, E. A. Turn organization: One intersection
of grammar and interaction. In Ochs, E., Schegloﬀ,
E. A., and Thompson, S. A., editors, Interaction and
Grammar, pages 52–133. Cambridge University Press,
1996.
Toutanova, K., Klein, D., Manning, C., and Singer, Y.
Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL,
pages 252–259. 2003.

Summary
This experiment, to the best of our knowledge the ﬁrst
to ever systematically attempt to induce continuations
in an ongoing dialogue, shows that diﬀerent types of predictability have diﬀerent eﬀects on what type of response
participants produce to incomplete contributions, if any.
It shows that although syntax can be mobilised in constructing a response, it is not the crucial determinant of
whether people construct their responses as continuations to the immediately preceding contribution. Participants make use of syntactic predictability only if the
context is suﬃciently constrained. Though people respect the constraints of the syntax, diﬀerent points in
the sentence do not cause greater diﬃculty in producing something that syntactically builds oﬀ a prior turn.
However, that the grammar is a mutually available resource does not mean that it is used in the same way by
all interlocutors, as evidenced by the ﬁnding that clariﬁcation requests are more likely, and more likely to be
formulated as continuations, when the syntactic category
of the upcoming material is more predictable, as these
are cases where the syntax may be exploited to localise
the source of a potential misunderstanding.
Another of the main ﬁndings is that people are sensitive to potential turn endings. These may be syntactic
(in the antecedent end-complete cases) but they are not
necessarily so. Some cases which appear to be syntactically incomplete can be responded to as if they are
complete, provided that the continuation is highly predictable. If there are indeed cases which are interpreted
as complete when they are not – as if the hearer is supplying the missing material internally, but does not necessarily produce it, this has implications for any grammatical or dialogue model. Incomplete syntactic strings
must be not only successfully analysed, but also assigned

484

