UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Framing attention in American and Japanese comics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7cx1j5q0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Cohn, Neil
Taylor-Weiner, Amaro
Grossman, Suzanne

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Framing attention in American and Japanese comics
Neil Cohn (neilcohn@emaki.net), Amaro Taylor-Weiner, Suzanne Grossman
Department of Psychology, 490 Boston Ave
Medford, MA 02155 USA

Abstract

describe significantly more aspects of the surrounding
context (Masuda & Nisbett, 2001). Americans also tend to
notice changes to focal objects in animations that feature
slight changes to a single scene, while Asians pick up on
changes to the broader environment and relations between
objects (Masuda & Nisbett, 2006). When recalling scenes
where the background is changed from its original context,
Americans are unaffected while Asians’ memory appears
impaired (Masuda & Nisbett, 2001), and Americans’ eye
movements fixate sooner and longer on focal objects, while
Asians make more saccades to elements of the background
(Chua, Boland, & Nisbett, 2005). Additionally, when
viewing photographs of objects, fMRI studies show that
Americans have stronger activation than Asians in brain
regions associated with the storing of semantic information
about object properties (Gutchess, Welsh, Boduroglu, &
Park, 2006). All of this work supports that Americans focus
more on focal objects while Asians attend more to aspects
of environments and relationships.
Research has also suggested that preferences for attention
permeate into artistic representations. Masuda, Gonzalez,
Kwan, and Nisbett (2008) looked at a corpus of artwork,
and found that Western paintings emphasized the focal
objects and figures, while East Asian paintings emphasized
the broader context and environment. This trend was
reinforced in drawings and photographs of figures and
scenes produced by individuals from these cultures. Thus,
these cognitive preferences for attention extend into artistic
expression, and other contemporary media produced by
these cultures might be expected to show further evidence of
these trends.

Research has shown that Americans focus more on focal
objects of a scene while East Asians attend to the surrounding
environment (Nisbett, 2003; Nisbett & Miyamoto, 2005). The
panels of comic books—the sequential frames of images—
highlight aspects of a scene comparably to how attention
focuses on parts of a spatial array. Thus, comparison of
American and Japanese comics can inform cross-cultural
cognition by looking at the expressive mediums produced by
these cultures. We compared the framing of figures and
scenes in the panels of two genres of American comics
(Independent and Mainstream) with mainstream Japanese
“manga.” Both genres of American comics focused on whole
scenes as much as individual characters, while Japanese
manga individuated characters and parts of scenes. We argue
that this framing of space in comics simulates a viewer’s
integration of a visual scene, and is consistent with crosscultural differences in the direction of attention.
Keywords: Cultural Psychology; attention; comics; Japan;
manga.

Introduction
Cross-cultural research shows that East Asians and
Westerners differ in their direction of attention (Nisbett,
2003; Nisbett & Miyamoto, 2005). Beyond studying
attention through perception, cognition can also be
compared through cultural production (Morling &
Lamoreaux, 2008), as in artistic expression (Masuda,
Gonzalez, Kwan, & Nisbett, 2008). Comic books provide an
ideal place to analyze the direction of attention, because
panels act like windows onto a scene (Cohn, 2007). Thus,
analysis of panels in Asian and American comics provides a
place to look for cultural differences in cognition through
creative expression.

Comic Panels as Units of Attention
Comic books are an ideal place to examine attention in
artistic expression. Because comic panels act as windows on
a visual story, they can serve as graphic equivalents of a
“spotlight of attention” for the fictitious scene. To this end,
Cohn (2007) has described comic panels as “attention units”
that highlight parts of a scene in different ways. Within a
sequence of images, a scene may have two types of
elements: Active entities are those that repeat across panels
by engaging in the actions and events of the sequence, while
inactive entities are elements of the background. Panels can
be categorized related to these elements (and depicted in
Figure 1):

Attention across Cultures
Over the past decade, various research has shown that
Asians and Americans direct their perception to aspects of
visual scenes in different ways (Nisbett, 2003; Nisbett &
Miyamoto, 2005). On the whole, Americans focus more on
focal objects and characters with agency than on aspects of
the background, while Asians attend to aspects of the whole
environment or to characters’ relationship to the contextual
environment.
These findings have been consistent across numerous
behavioral paradigms. After viewing video scenes,
Americans mostly describe the salient objects, while Asians

240

1.
2.
3.
4.

In one of the first comparisons of American and Japanese
comics, McCloud (1993, pp. 77-81) coded types semantic
relationships between juxtaposed panels. He found that
American and European authors primarily used transitions
showing actions with clear temporal change, followed by
shifts between characters and locations. Manga similarly
showed shifts in actions, characters, and locations.
However, unlike American and
European books, manga also
transitioned to different aspects
of the environment of a scene.
McCloud
attributed
these
differences to an “artistic
culture” of Japan that focused
on “being there over getting
there.”
This hypothesis extended
McCloud’s (1993, pp. 77-81;
1996) larger proposal that
manga allow a reader to take more of a subjective viewpoint
on a story than American and European comics. He based
this on the greater focus on environmental aspects in
storytelling, more “subjective” types of motion lines (where
a reader appears to move at the same pace as a moving
object, as opposed to seeing it move in front of them), and
subjective viewpoints in panels, which show the viewpoint
of a character in the narrative. In order to test this broad
claim directly, Cohn (2011) coded a corpus of comics and
manga for this last type of subjectivity, where panels depict
the viewpoint of a character in the narrative. More
subjective panels were used in Japanese manga than
American comics. This provided evidence that manga do
indeed use more subjective viewpoints, at least across one
measurable dimension.
Cohn’s (2011) study also examined the attentional types
of panels described above. Nearly 60% of American panels
were Macros, with only 35% Monos and 5% Micros
(Amorphics were not yet theorized as a category, and were
likely mixed in Monos and Micros). However, Japanese
manga used almost as many Macros (57%) as Monos
(43%), and more Micros (10%) than American comics.
Because manga featured less than the whole scene in over
half of all panels, it implies that the Japanese are as
interested in the component parts of a scene as much as the
whole scene. These results also suggest that the narrative
structure of manga demands the inferential construction of
whole scenes more than American comics (Cohn, 2010).
These findings of more Micros in Japanese manga are also
consistent with claims by Toku (2001, 2002) that manga
influences Japanese children’s drawings. She found that
Japanese children draw far more variable viewpoints than
American children, particularly “exaggerated” close-ups.
While these studies have indicated that comic panels
differ between cultures, variability may exist by looking
within cultures. Obvious variability can be found in the
diversity of American graphic styles compared to the far
more uniform drawing style in manga. Graphic styles are

Macro – depict multiple active entities
Mono – depict single active entities
Micro – depict less than one active entity (as in a
close up)
Amorphic – depict no active entities (i.e., only
inactive entities)

Figure 1: Framing of attention in visual narrative.
These categories are distinguished by the amount of
information they contain, which decreases successively:
Macros contain more active information than Monos, which
show more than Micros, which show more than Amorphic
panels. These ways of highlighting attention are similar to,
though not the same as, types of film shots. For example, a
Macro may involve a long shot to capture the most
information possible, but a panel showing only the hands of
individuals exchanging a piece of paper would be a Macro
(because they involve multiple characters) that uses a close
up shot. In this way, close ups are also not always Micros,
but they vary based on how much information they window.

Cross-cultural Comparison of Comics
With the growing influx of Japanese manga (“comics”) into
America over the past several decades, many comparisons
have been made between the techniques of Japanese and
American authors (Cohn, 2010, 2011; McCloud, 1993,
1996). Japanese manga come from a different cultural
context than that of American comics. While comics in
America have historically appealed to a particular
subculture, manga in Japan are treated much the same as
movies, television, or textual books. Manga are widely read
by all ages, have many genres, and, in fact, are so popular
that they constitute nearly one-third of all printed material
(Gravett, 2004; Schodt, 1983). Though Japanese manga
were influenced by American authors early in their
historical development (Gravett, 2004), they developed
largely in isolation over the past 60 years. With increased
importation of manga into America starting in the 1980s, the
differences between narrative techniques that emerged from
these separate traditions have become quite salient to
readers, authors, and scholars of comics in America.

241

Methods

particularly pronounced between genres, which in America
differ greatly between the more “serious” graphic novels
and mainstream comics. Styles in genres of Japanese comics
also vary, but mostly conform to a stereotypical style of big
eyes, pointy chins and noses, and big hair. The diverse
styles used in American comics have been likened to types
of “dialects”, compared with “accents” in manga genres,
which vary on a common schema (Cohn, 2010).
Variation between genres may apply to the level of panels
as well, and can thereby inform about the framing of
attention. In an early study, Neff (1977) found that panels
use types of film shots differently between various genres of
American comics. Wide shots (Long and Medium) far
outnumbered Close shots (Close and Close ups) in panels
for all genres. However, there were far less Close shots in
Adventure and Romance comic panels than in Mystery and
Alien Beings comics. These findings imply that different
genres of American books do highlight different aspects of a
visual scene. However, the sample size in this study was
somewhat limited in scope—only two pamphlet-sized
comics were analyzed per genre—making the results hard to
generalize.
Given these precedents, the present study examined comic
panels both within and between cultures by manipulating
country of origin and genre. We compared the panels of
“mainstream” Japanese manga with the two major
populations of American comics: Mainstream and
Independent (“Indy”) books. Mainstream books from both
America and Japan were chosen because they are the most
popular and most stereotypical instances of their respective
comic cultures. American Indy books were chosen because
they feature a different artistic movement in America that
contrasts the Mainstream genres (discussed below). Thus, if
variation occurs between the structures of comics from
America, we may expect it between Mainstream and Indy
comics.
If panel types of all three populations differ, it would
imply sub-cultural “artistic” contexts vary related to
narrative techniques of particular traditions. If Japanese
panel types are similar to Mainstream comics yet different
from Indy comics, it would imply that the framing of a
scene differs based on genre, even cross-culturally. In
contrast, if American genres do not differ from each other,
yet both differ from Japanese manga, it would imply
cultural differences beyond the contexts of genre.
To this end, if both American genres do differ from
Japanese panels, we would predict the results to reflect the
findings of Masuda et al. (2008) for art and photographs by
Asians and Americans. Similar results would expect
American comics to focus more on focal objects through
Monos and Amorphics. Meanwhile, Japanese panels should
show the opposite: here we would predict more Macros to
focus on the relationships between characters in whole
scenes.

Materials
Thirty graphic books were chosen at random from a corpus
of over 200 comics donated from various comic companies.
We coded 300 panels in each book for the properties of
attentional panel type and shot type. 10 books were chosen
from each of three populations: “mainstream” Japanese
Manga, Mainstream American comics, and Indy American
comics. In order to operationalize how these populations are
identified, it is useful to discuss their differences.
Mainstream and Indy books differ greatly in graphic
styles, genres, formats, publishers, and often readership.
Mainstream comics primarily feature drawing styles
common to superhero comics (dynamic linework, muscular
figures, brighter colors), and focus on the genres of
superheroes, horror, and science fiction. Mainstream books
are also often produced by specific publishers and are
serialized in pamphlet style formats that are only sometimes
afterwards collected into books. Mainstream comics are sold
primarily through specialty comic books stores. In contrast,
Indy books use more variable graphic styles (particularly
more cartoony and “artistic” styles) with more “serious” or
dramatic genres (such as memoir, drama, etc.). Different
publishers are known for producing Indy books and
Mainstream comics, and they appear mostly in book formats
(“graphic novels”). Indy books are often sold in comic
books stores, but also have a much higher distribution into
regular bookstores.
While some overlap in readership does exist between
Mainstream and Indy comics, they largely appeal to
different groups of people. Readers of Mainstream comics
often read serializations that appear each month. They often
are very devoted to their favorite comics, and American
comics often target the writing with this consistent
readership in mind, evident through frequent references to
previous storylines. Indy comics have more varied
readership because they are not serialized volumes. Often,
Indy books are produced in single editions, and thus do not
have consistent readership (though readers may follow
particular authors’ works). Readers of Japanese manga are
often more similar to Mainstream American comics—they
have their favorite comics which are released weekly in
large anthologies. While readership of manga is larger on
the whole in Japan than America, there is no reason to
believe that comics in either country are explicitly made
with any expectation that readers will be more or less
proficient in understanding them.
Additionally, while some crossover exists in readership
between American genres, most authors of Mainstream and
Indy books remain independent to their genres. Mainstream
and Indy books are also created with a slightly different
process. Mainstream comics are largely made by an
industry-line style committee (Duncan & Smith, 2009)
consisting of a writer, penciler, inker, colorist, etc. While an
editor coordinates their efforts and oversees the plotline, for
the most part these creators are free to follow their own

242

styles of writing and artwork. In contrast, Indy comics are
more often drawn and written by individual authors.
Japanese manga typically combine these methods. They are
usually attributed to a sole author,
who then employs a team of
uncredited
assistants
who
complete the more menial aspects
of the drawings, like shading or
drawing backgrounds (Schodt,
1983). While these creative
processes may vary between
countries/genres, the finished
products largely reflect the
intuitions of the authors or
creative teams.
In this study, we distinguished
American Mainstream and Indy
books by criteria of graphic style,
genre, and publishers. Mainstream
books ranged in publication date
from 1992 to 2005 with a mean of 2002, while Indy comics
were published between 1991 to 2008, with a mean at 2003.
Japanese books featured more consistent visual styles,
following the stereotypical “standard graphic dialect” of
Japanese comics (Cohn, 2010). However, since genres in
Japan do not align neatly with those in America (Shonen
“boys comics,” Shojo “girls comics,” and Gekiga “serious
comics”), books were chosen that reflected the genre closest
to Mainstream American comics—those focusing primarily
on action/adventure themes (Shonen “boys comics”). Only
English translations of manga were analyzed in the study
due to their availability in our donated corpus, though
manga were attributed to their original Japanese publication
dates, from 1984 to 2005 with a mean of 1999.
Thus, our analysis contrasted either genre or country of
origin. American Mainstream books shared a similar overall
genre (action/adventure) with Japanese manga, though they
came from the same country of origin as American Indy
comics. All of the chosen books were widely read and
popularly distributed throughout comic readership, and from
major publishers—i.e., none of the books were obscure or
minimally distributed. Books analyzed are provided online
at http://www.emaki.net/CTG_FramingAppendix.html.

56.6 pages/book and 5.99 panels/page, while Mainstream
comics averaged 62.6 pages with 5.12 panels/page. Manga
used 65.2 pages/book with 4.75 panels/page.

Figure 2: Relative proportion of panel types across
American Mainstream comics, American Indy comics, and
Japanese Manga.

Results
Panel Type
The analysis of attentional framing of panels found main
effects for Panel Type, F(3,81)=89.71, p<.001, with a Panel
Type by Group interaction, F(6,81)=5.68, p<.001. Main
effects between Groups were not significant, F(2,27)=1.37,
p=.269.
As depicted in Figure 2, Indy and Mainstream comics
used many Macros and Monos, with minimal Micros and
Amorphics. Within Indy comics, overall differences were
found between panel types, F(3, 27)=27.34, p<.001, as well
as between each pair of types (all t>5.81, all p<.001), except
the near equal means for Macros with Monos, and Micros
with Amorphics. Mainstream panels also differed between
all types, F(3,27)=30.05, p<.001. These books featured only
slightly more Macros than Monos, which was not
statistically significant. Micros and Amorphics numbered
far fewer overall, though there were almost twice as many
Micros as Amorphics, t(9)=2.14, p=.06. All other panel
types featured significant contrasts (all t>5.55, all p<.001).
Finally, Manga also showed main effects between panel
types, F(3,27)=64.00, p<.001. Monos far outnumbered other
types, with roughly half as many Macros, and far fewer
Micros and Amorphics. All types differed from each other,
(all t>3.16 or <-7.3, all p<.05), except Micros and
Amorphics.
Across the three populations, differences were found
between each Panel Type (all Fs>2.8, all ps<.01). Indy and
Mainstream comics showed no differences for any of the
panel types (all ts<1.8, all ps>.11). Indy panels differed

Areas of analysis
All books were coded for their attentional Panel Type—the
way in which panels highlight attention in the various types
of attentional categories previously discussed (Macro,
Mono, Micro, Amorphic). Panels that could not be
recognizably coded into these categories were identified as
“Ambiguous.” Two researchers independently coded each
book’s properties, and were consistent in their codings
(Kappa=.785, p<.01). Final analyses used the mean between
coders’ scores for each book.
Populations were fairly similar in the number of
pages/book and panels/page analyzed. Indy comics averaged

243

from Manga for all types (all ts>2.6, all ps<.05) except
Monos, while Mainstream panels differed from Manga on
all types (all ts>2.9, all ps<.01) except with regard to
Micros.

sequential images. American comics may be geared towards
less experienced readers, and thus they need to be constantly
reminded of the elements in a scene with more Macros. On
the other hand, more experienced readers in Japan may be
able to retain or construct the whole scene without being
presented with it.
Thus, under this interpretation, attention is not a factor at
all. We find this explanation to be unfeasible. Manga do
indeed have wider readership across the country of Japan
compared with the readership of comics across America.
However, American comics, particularly Mainstream
comics, are targeted towards a consistent readership. These
readers are often serious and devout fans, and would have as
much if not greater fluency in their visual language than
casual manga readers in Japan. Thus, attributing these
findings to expertise alone seems unlikely.
Though these results on the surface appear to contrast
previous findings on attention, we suggest another
interpretation of these results that is indeed more consistent
with the research by Nisbett and Masuda. Comic panels are
not isolated images like the photos and drawings, but are
instead meant to be read (and are created) in a sequence. A
sequence of images in comics act as a simulation of how an
individual might view a fictitious visual scene in front of
them (a similar argument for film shots is made by Levin &
Simons, 2000). This simulation of attention across
sequential images is different from the treatment of attention
in individual images, like in the study by Nisbett and
Masuda (2003).
Like in attention, readers track only the most important
aspects of a sequence to establish the continuity of the
narrative. Non-relevant information may then go unattended
by the “spotlight of attention” across panels, as happens in
change blindness paradigms (Levin & Simons, 2000). There
are thus two strategies a comic author can use when creating
comic. They can either show a full scene (Macro) and rely
on the reader’s attentional intuitions to discern the most
important parts, or they can use panels to directly highlight
only those salient parts directly (Monos, Micros,
Amorphics), omitting what is unimportant altogether. This
use of panels would heighten the “subjective viewpoint” of
panels simulating attention.
These and previous data suggest that American comics
more consistently use the first option: letting the reader
direct their own attention across panels to find the most
relevant aspects of continuity, while letting less important
elements simply go unattended. This is suggested by the
larger amounts of Macros found in American comics of
both genres. In contrast, Japanese manga do more to
simulate the perception of a reader’s attention, evident in
greater use of Monos, Micros, and Amorphic panels. That
Japanese manga use a strategy that is more subjective of the
way attention may be directed is consistent with McCloud’s
(1993, 1996) claim that manga allow a reader to take more
of a subjective viewpoint on a story. It also is supported by
previous corpus analysis showing that “subjective panels”—
panels that directly show the viewpoint of a character in the

Discussion
This study analyzed how various cultures’ comic panels
frame a fictitious scene as a way to gain insight on how
these cultures may direct attention. We compared
Mainstream and Indy genres of American comics with
“mainstream” Japanese manga. Even more than in Cohn’s
(2011) study, Japanese panels highlighted individual
elements of scenes more than American books. Japanese
manga were found to have far more Monos than any other
type of panel, followed by Macros, and small proportions of
Micros and Amorphics. Both Mainstream and Indy
American comics had near equal proportions of Macros and
Monos, again with small proportions of Micros and
Amorphics.
In the analysis of panels types between cultures, manga
used significantly more Monos, Amorphics, and Micros
than did both types of American comics. American comics
did not vary in their panel types between genres, despite
surface stylistic differences. Thus, though Japanese manga
and Mainstream American comics were similar in terms of
“mainstream” appeal and action/adventure themes, this
similarity did not influence the framing of scenes. These
results suggest that the primary difference between these
populations of comics are that of country of origin: The
framing of entities in American comic panels differ from
Japanese panels, though American comic genres do not
differ substantially from each other.
What can these results offer to our understanding of
cross-cultural attention and cognition? On the whole, the
framing of attention in both genres of American comics
focused more on detailing a whole scene as much as, if not
more than, individual characters, as indicated by the
prevalence of Macros over Monos. In contrast, Japanese
manga directed attention toward details in the scene through
Monos, Micros, and Amorphics, in lieu of actually showing
full scenes in Macros.
These results seem to run counter to the cross-cultural
research on attention. As suggested by the analysis of art
and photographs in Masuda, Gonzalez, Kwan, and Nisbett
(2008), wouldn’t we expect American comic panels to focus
more on the primary objects of a scene (i.e., Monos)
because of a preference for objects over environments?
Shouldn’t Japanese panels focus more on scenes as a whole
(i.e., Macros)? If these results are to be taken directly, they
provide counter-evidence for the claims made by Nisbett
and Masuda with regard to the manifestation of attention in
popular culture.
One interpretation of these results is that cross-cultural
panel framing has nothing to do with attention, but rather
reflects the expertise of each cultures’ readers. Manga are
far more prevalent in Japan than in America, and thus
Japanese may have a greater expertise in general in reading

244

narrative—are more plentiful in Japanese manga than
American comics (Cohn, 2010).
These different strategies of depicting actions by
simulating attention also reflect the way in which attention
may be different between readers of different cultures.
Manga panels highlight individual elements of a scene or
environment because that would be how Japanese readers’
attention would fall on elements of a visual array, and out of
this information would need to integrate these parts into a
coherent whole. In contrast, because American readers will
naturally pick out the focal characters of the scene,
American comics can use more Macros, assuming attention
will be directed to the important elements of interest
automatically. In this way, panels from comics and manga
reflect how a Japanese or American reader might look at a
visual scene if the whole array were in front of them,
thereby echoing the differences in cultural windowing of
attention.
By analyzing comics with a clearly defined categorization
system, we have shown that visual narratives are bound by
cultural conventions that create patterns in the ways that
Japanese and American comic authors window attention
onto visual scenes. We propose that these results are
consistent with the cross-cultural research showing
differences in how Asians and Americans perceive and
attend to their visual environment (Nisbett, 2003; Nisbett &
Masuda, 2003; Nisbett & Miyamoto, 2005), and lend further
support to efforts to study cognitive process through
creative cultural expression.

Duncan, R., & Smith, M. J. (2009). The Power of Comics.
New York: Continuum Books.
Gravett, P. (2004). Manga: Sixty Years of Japanese Comics.
New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Gutchess, A., Welsh, R., Boduroglu, A., & Park, D. (2006).
Cultural differences in neural function associated with
object processing. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral
Neuroscience, 6(2), 102-109.
Levin, D. T., & Simons, D. J. (2000). Perceiving Stability in
a Changing World: Combining Shots and Intergrating
Views in Motion Pictures and the Real World. Media
Psychology, 2(4), 357-380.
Masuda, T., Gonzalez, R., Kwan, L., & Nisbett, R. E.
(2008). Culture and Aesthetic Preference: Comparing the
Attention to Context of East Asians and Americans.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(9), 12601275. doi: 10.1177/0146167208320555
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. (2001). Attending Holistically
Versus Analytically: Comparing the Context Sensitivity
of Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81(5), 922-934.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. (2006). Culture and Change
Blindness. Cognitive Science, 30, 381-399.
McCloud, S. (1993). Understanding Comics: The Invisible
Art. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
McCloud, S. (1996, April 1996). Understanding Manga.
Wizard Magazine, 56, 44-48.
Morling, B., & Lamoreaux, M. (2008). Measuring Culture
Outside the Head: A Meta-Analysis of Individualism—
Collectivism in Cultural Products. Personality and Social
Psychology
Review,
12(3),
199-221.
doi:
10.1177/1088868308318260
Neff, W. A. (1977). The Pictorial and Linguistic Features
of Comic Book Formulas. Doctoral Doctoral Dissertation,
University of Denver, Denver, CO.
Nisbett, R. (2003). The Geography of Thought: How Asians
and Westerners Think Differently... and Why. New York:
Nicholas Brealy Publishing Ltd.
Nisbett, R., & Masuda, T. (2003). Culture and Point of
View. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
100(19), 11163–11170.
Nisbett, R., & Miyamoto, Y. (2005). The influence of
culture: holistic versus analytic perception. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 9(10), 467-473.
Schodt, F. L. (1983). Manga! Manga! The World of
Japanese Comics. New York: Kodansha America Inc.
Toku, M. (2001). Cross-Cultural Analysis of Artistic
Development: Drawing by Japanese and U.S. children.
Visual Arts Research, 27, 46-59.
Toku, M. (2002). Children’s Artistic and Aesthetic
Development: The Influence of Pop-Culture in Children’s
Drawings. Paper presented at the 31st INSEA
Convention, New York, NY.

Acknowledgments
Thanks go to the Tufts Center for Cognitive Studies for
funds supporting this research and to these publishers for
their generous donation of books: Dark Horse Comics,
Drawn & Quarterly, First Second Books, IDW Publishing,
Oni Press, Top Cow, and Viz Media. Early drafts benefited
from feedback from Ray Jackendoff, Igor Grossman, and
Taka Masuda and the Culture and Cognition Lab at the
University of Alberta.

References
Chua, H. F., Boland, J. E., & Nisbett, R. (2005). Cultural
variation in eye movements during scene perception.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
102(35), 12629-12633.
Cohn, N. (2007). A visual lexicon. Public Journal of
Semiotics, 1(1), 53-84.
Cohn, N. (2010). Japanese Visual Language: The structure
of manga. In T. Johnson-Woods (Ed.), Manga: An
Anthology of Global and Cultural Perspectives (pp. 187203). New York: Continuum Books.
Cohn, N. (2011). A different kind of cultural frame: An
analysis of panels in American comics and Japanese
manga. Image [&] Narrative, 12(1), 120-134.

245

