UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gestures Alter Thinking About Time

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3372k7gs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Jamalian, Azadeh
Tversky, Barbara

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gestures Alter Thinking About Time
Azadeh Jamalian (aj2334@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA
Barbara Tversky (btversky@stanford.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA
another, “time has passed”, and “the future is ahead of us”
(e. g., Clark, 1973; Evans, 2003; Lakoff and Johnson, 1999,
Moore, 2006; Nunez, 1999). People’s diagrams of events in
time, such as the meals of a day, are typically ordered in
reading order on a horizontal line (Tversky, Kugelmass, &
Winter, 1991). When relating events in time, English
speakers often move their hands from left to right, event by
event (e.g. Cienki, 1998); they point frontwards for the
future and backwards for the past (e.g. Cooperrider &
Nunez, 2009). Language, diagrams, and gestures are ways
of externalizing thought, and are congruent with thinking
(Tversky, 2011).
If people use actions in space to express their conceptions
of events in time, will seeing different forms of actions in
space change their understanding of time? We address this
question here, by explaining temporal events with identical
language but different gestures.
Speakers everywhere gesture while they speak. Most
gestures are redundant with the speech they accompany
(McNeill, 1992), but gestures sometimes express
information that is not expressed in speech (e. g., McNeil,
1992; Church & Goldin-Meadow, 1986; Goldin-Meadow,
Alibali, & Church, 1993; Perry, Church, & Goldin-Meadow,
1988). Although some have questioned the communicative
significance of gestures (Krauss, 1998; Rauscher, Krauss,
Chen, 1996; Rimè & Shiaratura, 1991), there is good
evidence that speakers often intend their gestures to be
communicative (e. g., Cohen, 1977; Cohen & Harrison,
1973; Alibali, Heat, & Myers, 2001; Emmorey & Casey,
2001), and that gestures, whether redundant or mismatching,
influence addressees’ comprehension (Goldin-Meadow &
Sandhofer, 1999; Thompson & Massaro, 1994).
Can the unique information in gesture alter listeners’
mental models of a highly abstract yet familiar concept? In a
series of studies on reasoning about time, we demonstrate
that gestures affect addressee’s conceptions of time by
keeping speech constant but altering gestures.

Abstract
Can gestures alter thought? Thinking about time is deeply
interlinked with actions in space, and gestures are abstracted
actions. Four experiments showed that gestures alter thinking
about time. Participants heard the same speech accompanied
by different gestures. The viewed gestures biased listeners
toward circular or linear thinking, toward parallel or
sequential thinking, toward moving-ego or moving-time
perspectives. Gestures can abstract and show mental models
more directly and succinctly than speech.
Keywords: Gesture, space, time, metaphor, diagram

Introduction
As they say, life is just one thing after another. But there is
more complexity to thinking about events in time. Historical
and autobiographical events are often regarded as on a
timeline, but events can also happen simultaneously, not a
simple single sequence. Repeating events like seasons, days,
and the cell cycle can be regarded as circular. Moreover,
reasoning about events in time entails taking a perspective
on the timeline. Two common perspectives are moving-ego,
thinking of yourself as moving along a timeline (we’re
approaching summer), or moving-time, thinking of yourself
as stationary on a timeline with events moving past you
(summer is approaching) (e. g., Clark, 1973). These
perspectives are analogous to a route or intrinsic or
egocentric perspective in space; the viewpoint is embedded
in space or in time, with ego as the reference (e.g.,
Levinson, 1996; Tversky, 1996). But just as it is possible to
take an external or survey or absolute perspective on space,
it is possible to take an external or absolute or calendar view
on time, an outside perspective regarding events as ordered
by dates. In the case of survey/absolute spatial perspective,
the reference points are landmarks and the terms of
reference are typically north-south-east-west. For
external/absolute/calendar temporal perspective, the
reference points are dates or events, and the terms of
reference are earlier/later.
Whatever the perspective, how people think about events
in time is highly interlinked to actions in space (Talmy,
2000; Tversky, 2011). The strong association between
action, space, and time is reflected in the language people
use when talking about time, the diagrams they draw when
conveying events in time, and the gestures that accompany
narratives of events in time. People say time “marches on”,
we “move through” time, one event occurs “before”

1: Circular vs. Linear Thinking: Diagram
Prior work (Kessell & Tversky, submitted) has shown that
people are biased towards linear thinking. Participants were
asked to diagram four-step cyclical or sequential processes.
Most participants drew linear diagrams even for cycles.
Expecting
congruency
between
conception
and
visualization, Kessell and Tversky concluded that circular

	  

1

503

thinking is harder or less natural than linear thinking.
Regarding time as a cycle is difficult because it requires
abstraction from a particular instance of an event (i.e. a seed
to a flower) to general classes of events. Thinking of time
cyclically also requires ignoring the forward progression of
time to thinking of time as traveling in a circle with no
beginning, middle, or ending.
Even though participants did not produce a preponderance
of circular representations for cycles, they did comprehend
circular diagrams (Kessell & Tversky, submitted). Could
circular hand gestures prime cyclical thinking?

from the circular-gesture condition, and 2 from the nogesture condition were coded as “other” (see Figure 2).

Method
Participants. 63 (40 female, 23 male) volunteers, mostly
graduate students from Columbia University, participated.
Procedure and Design. All participants consented verbally
to participate in the study. An experimenter said to each
participant: "I will tell you about some events. I'd like you
to think about these events and then construct a simple
schematic diagram to convey them." One-third of
participants were then told twice about one of the three
cycles below:

Circular Diagram
Linear Diagram
Figure 2: Examples of Diagrams
Findings. Of those who saw circular gestures, 66.7% drew
circular diagrams. Of those who saw linear gestures, only
14.3% drew circular diagrams whereas 85.7% drew linear
ones. As expected, of those who saw no gestures, 66.7%
drew linear diagrams. Figure 3 shows the percent of linear,
circular, and “other” types of diagrams for the three gesture
conditions.
The form of gesture participants saw influenced the
diagrams (excluding “other” diagrams) they drew; in a loglinear analysis, the two-way association between gesture
condition and diagram type was significant, χ2(2)=17.668,
p=.000.
Post-hoc analyses showed significant effects of circular
vs. linear gesture, χ2(1)=16.851, p=.000, and circular vs. nogesture, χ2(1)=10.556, p=.001, on diagrams. No significant
differences were found for linear vs. no-gesture conditions,
χ2(1)=0.902, p=.342. The number of circular diagrams was
significantly higher than the number of linear diagrams in
the circular-gesture condition, χ2(1)=4.439, p=.035. As
expected, the number of linear diagrams was significantly
greater than the number of circular diagrams in the lineargesture, χ2(1)=11.872, p=.001, and no-gesture conditions,
χ2(1)= 4.439, p=.035.

Cycles
Seed to flower:
• A seed germinates
• A flower grows
• The flower is pollinated
• A new seed is formed
Events of a day:
• Wake up
• Go to work
• Come home
• Go to sleep
Clothing Cycle:
• Take clothes out
• Wear clothes
• Wash clothes
• Put clothes away
Figure 1: Cyclical Stimuli
Each example was identically worded but accompanied
by linear, circular, or no gestures. For the linear condition,
the experimenter made 4 discrete slicing gestures right to
left for the 4 stages in the spoken text. For the circular
condition, the experimenter made 4 pointing gestures at 12,
9, 6, and 3 o’clock for the 4 stages in the spoken text. The
right-to-left and counter-clockwise directions were from the
experimenter’s point of view so compatible with the
subject’s perspective. For the no-gesture group, the
experimenter kept her hands in pockets.

Results
Coding the diagrams. Participants’ diagrams were coded
blindly as either linear, or circular. In circular (or repeating)
diagrams the last event was connected back to the first, but
not in linear (or ending) diagrams. Two of the diagrams

Figure 3: Proportion of linear, circular, and "other"
diagrams by gesture conditions

	  

2

504

Discussion
Gestures had powerful effects on people’s diagrams of
events in time. People were asked to diagram a cyclical
sequence of four events. Without gestures, a majority of
participants drew linear diagrams. However, with circular
gestures, a majority drew circular diagrams. If the way
people diagram reflects the way they think, and there is
considerable evidence for this (e. g., Tversky, 2011;
Tversky, et al., 2002), then we can conclude that gestures
affect the way people think about temporal events.
However, it could be argued that participants copied the
diagram the experimenter drew in the air. The next study
obviates that objection by asking participants to make
inferences.

Figure 4: Proportion of linear and circular answers for each
gesture condition

2: Circular vs. Linear Thinking: Next Step

3: Perspective: Moving Ego/Time

If seeing circular gestures induces cyclical thinking about
time, then when participants are asked what comes after the
“last” step they should tend to respond with the “first” step.
This tendency should be reduced if linear gestures promote
linear thought.

The first two experiments showed that circular gestures
promoted cyclical conceptions of time. The next experiment
asks whether gestures can bias perspectives on time.
When people are asked “Next Wednesday’s meeting has
been moved forward two days; when is the meeting now
that it has been rescheduled?” half say Friday, and half say
Monday (Boroditsky, 2000; McGlone & Harding, 1998).
Those answering Friday see themselves as moving through
time, taking an ego-moving perspective. Those who answer
Monday see themselves as stationary and time as moving
past them, taking a time-moving perspective (Boroditsky,
2000; McGlone & Harding, 1998; McTaggart, 1908). In a
series of clever experiments, Boroditsky & Ramscar (2002)
showed that although people have strong intuitions about
which answer is correct, their answers change dramatically
depending on how recently they have moved or seen
movement in space. For example, people who have just
landed at an airport are more likely to take an ego-moving
perspective than those waiting to meet passengers. People
sitting still but watching things move are more likely to take
a time-moving perspective. Will seeing actions in space,
notably gesture, have similar effects on temporal
perspective taking?

Method
Participants. 60 volunteers, mostly graduate students from
Columbia University participated in this study.
Procedure and Design. The procedure and design were the
same as the previous experiment except that the no-gesture
condition was eliminated, only the seed cycle was used, and
instead of being asked to produce a diagram, participants
were asked: “What comes after the new seed forms?”

Results
Coding. Participants’ answers to the question “what comes
after?” were coded as linear or circular. Circular answers
included repeating the first or any other stage and saying
words such as repeating and cycle. Any other answers, such
as “that was the last stage,” “nothing,” or “a fruit” were
coded as linear.
Findings. In the circular gesture condition, 90% responded
with circular answers, but in the linear gesture condition,
only 60% responded circularly (Figure 4). In a log-linear
analysis, the two-way association between gesture condition
and answer type was significant, χ2(1)= 7.595, p=.006.
Interestingly, 30% of those who answered circularly in the
linear gesture condition seemed unsure about their answers
as they answered with a question tone.

Method
Participants. 40 volunteers (25 female, 15 male), mostly
graduate students from Columbia University participated in
this study.
Procedure and Design. All participants consented verbally
to participate in the study. While standing side by side, an
experimenter told each participant: "Next Wednesday’s
meeting has been moved forward two days. What day is the
meeting, now that it has been rescheduled?"
Participants were divided into two conditions: (1) forward
sagittal gesture, and (2) backward sagittal gesture. In both
conditions, the experimenter made a slice in the space in
front of her body, with her palm facing her, while saying
“next Wednesday’s meeting”, and then moved her hands
away from her body for the forward-gesture, and towards

Discussion
The previous experiment had shown effects of gesture form
on diagram form. Here, we found effects of gesture on
inferences. When asked “what comes after?” once hearing
the last of four stages of a cycle, participants who saw
circular gestures were far more likely to respond with the
first or subsequent step of the cycle than those who saw
linear gestures. Will gesture affect other kinds of thinking
about time?

	  

3

505

her for backward-gesture condition while saying “has been
moved forward”. Note that participants and experimenter
had identical points of view.

experimenter made a new reference point by placing her
hand in front of her body saying “Next Wednesday’s
meeting,” so the reference is Wednesday rather than the ego.
Then, the experimenter moved her hand along the axis
either to the front of the reference point or to the back of the
reference point with respect to the body. There is another
possible account for the effects of the gestures, and some
participants could have adopted one, some the other.
Participants could have taken an external or calendar
perspective, with the saggital axis as a timeline and
Wednesday as the reference point, with later events away
from the body and the earlier events closer to the body.
Either way, the gestures disambiguated the language and
determined participants’ responses.

Results
The majority of participants who saw the forward gesture
answered that the meeting was moved to Friday whereas the
majority who saw the backward gesture answered that the
meeting was moved to Monday (Figure 5). One participant
answered “not sure” and another, “Based on your gesture
I’d say Friday, but based on your words, Monday”; these
were coded as “other” and not included in the statistical
analysis. In a log-linear analysis, the two-way association
between condition (forward versus backward sagittal
gesture), and answer type (Friday versus Monday) was
significant,
χ2(1)=21.510,
p=.000.

4: Parallel vs. Sequential Thinking
So far our experiments have shown that gestures alter the
way people think of a sequence of events in time. Yet in
life, people often have to keep track of events that happen
simultaneously, a task that can be difficult (e. g., Bauer &
Johnson-Laird, 1993). In one study, students had difficulties
comprehending that the two middle steps of a four-step
procedure for writing a paper were simultaneous. A diagram
showing the simultaneous events side-by-side helped
(Glenberg & Langston, 1992). Like diagrams, and in
contrast to serial language, gestures can organize things in
space and show simultaneity (e. g, Tversky, Heiser, Lee, &
Daniel, 2009). Might gestures help people think about
parallel events in time?

Figure 5: Proportion of participants answering “Friday” and
“Monday” in each gesture conditions

Method
Participants. 60 volunteers, mostly graduate students from
Columbia University participated in this study.
Procedure and Design. After receiving verbal consent for
participation, an experimenter said to each participant: “I
will tell you about a procedure, and then ask you a quick
question about it”. Participants were then told the following
procedure for writing a paper (based on Glenberg &
Langston, 1992): “There are four steps to be taken when
writing a paper. The first step is to write a first draft. The
next two steps should be taken at the same time: One of the
steps is to consider the structure; the other step is to address
the audience. The final step is to proofread the paper.”
Participants were divided into two conditions: (1) parallelgesture, and (2) sequential gesture. For the parallel-gesture
condition, the experimenter made a slice in the air in front
of her face, with her right hand palm facing down, while
saying “the first step is to write a first draft”. Next, she
made two slices with two hands simultaneously below her
first hand gesture, while saying “the next two steps should
be taken at the same time”. Next, she moved her right hand
back and forth from her wrist, in place, with her left hand
still in the air, while saying, “one of the steps is to consider
the structure”. Then, she reversed those hand actions while
saying, “the other step is to address the audience”. Next, she
took away her left hand and made a slice with her right hand
facing down, below its previous spot, while saying, “the

Discussion
When people are told that Wednesday’s meeting was moved
forward two days and asked when the meeting is now, half
spontaneously take an ego-moving perspective, answering
Friday, and half take a time-moving perspective, answering
Monday (e. g., Boroditsky, 2000; McGlone & Harding,
1998; McTaggart, 1908). Actually moving in space biases
respondents toward the ego-moving perspective and
watching movement from a stationary position biases the
time-moving perspective (Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002).
Here, we found that observing representational actions,
namely, gestures, also dramatically affected temporal
perspective-taking. The experimenter first established a
reference point for Wednesday in front of her body. When
she gestured in a frontwards direction away from her body,
a majority of participants responded that the meeting was
moved to Friday, taking an ego-moving perspective, and
when she moved her hand in a backwards direction towards
her body, a majority of participants responded that the
meeting was moved to Monday, taking a time-moving
perspective.
Notably, the gestures were along the sagittal front-to-back
axis of the body. For English speakers, the ego is the
reference point, with future in the front of ego and the past
behind (Cooperrider & Nunez, 2009). Here, the

	  

4

506

final step is proof read the paper.” For the sequentialgesture condition, the experimenter made 4 slices with her
right hand facing down, from top to bottom on a vertical
line in front of her, for the 4 steps in the procedure.
After hearing the description twice, participants were
asked: “Here is the question now: According to the
procedure I just gave you, what should one do immediately
after writing the first draft/ before proof reading the paper?”
Half of the participants in each condition were asked about
steps after writing the first draft, and the other half were
asked about steps before proof reading the paper.

Discussion
We have shown yet again that gesture influences how
people think about time. Previous research (e. g., Bauer &
Johnson-Laird, 1993) had shown that people find it difficult
to conceptualize parallel events. Here we showed that
gestures that indicate the parallel structure of events help
people to reason about simultaneity of events.

General Discussion
One way that people think of events in time is through
space, as dots, representing events, on a line, representing
time. The line can be regarded as straight, a linear sequence
of events, perhaps, as in most narratives, having a
beginning, middle, and end. For events that repeat, like the
parts of the day or the seasons of the year, the line can be
regarded as circular. Simultaneous events can be thought of
as parallel lines. The mental time lines typically have a
spatial orientation and a perspective. When straight, that line
can be regarded as horizontal in reading order, vertical in
top-down order (Boroditsky 2001; Tversky, et al., 1996) or
saggital from front to back (Cooperider & Nunez, 2009).
Thinking and talking about time use target and reference
events and a perspective on time, just like thinking and
talking about space (e. g., Talmy, 2000). People can take an
external perspective on the line, as in looking at a calendar
or a timeline, much like taking an overview of an
environment or looking at a map. Alternatively, they can see
themselves embedded in time just as they can see
themselves embedded in space. The ego can serve as a
reference point, located on the timeline. In the ego-moving
perspective, ego moves along events on the timeline; in the
time-moving perspective, ego is stationary and events move
past ego. Either way, changes in time are conceived of as
actions in space. If changes in time are conceived of as
actions in space, then actions in space might affect
conceptions of time. Indeed, Borodtisky and Ramscar
(2002) showed exactly that, that moving in space or
watching movement in space alters temporal perspective.
Here we found that information in gestures but not in speech
could also alter people’s conceptions of time. Circular
gestures biased thinking about a series of events as a
cyclical rather than linear. Frontwards gestures away from
the body biased taking an ego-moving perspective on time
and gestures toward the body biased taking a time-moving
perspective. Finally, gestures that traced parallel paths
helped people think about simultaneous events.
Why do gestures have such powerful effects on thought?
Many gestures are miniature actions in space that represent
actual actions. For representing time, the gestures traced
temporal paths in space, and indicated specific events along
the paths. In representing paths as lines and events as dots,
gestures are like diagrams (Tversky, 2011; Tversky, et al.,
2009). The set of gestures both abstracts a model of time
and shows it, a more direct way to communicate than purely
symbolic speech.

Results
Coding. Participants’ answers to before/after questions
were coded as sequential, parallel, or other. Answers that
mentioned only one of the two steps (considering the
structure or addressing the audience) were coded as
sequential. Answers that mentioned both steps were coded
as parallel. Any other answer was coded as “other”.
Data analysis. In the parallel-gesture condition, 76.7%
mentioned both steps while only 56.7% in the sequentialgesture condition gave parallel answer. Forty percent of
participants in the sequential-gesture condition but only
10% of subjects in the parallel-gesture condition mentioned
a single step (Figure 6). Four participants in the parallelgesture condition, and one in the sequential-gesture
condition mentioned other steps and were excluded from the
data analysis.
In a log-linear analysis, the two-way association between
gesture type and answer was significant, χ2(1)= 6.276,
p=.012. However, the two-way association between
question type (before vs. after) with answer (parallel vs.
sequential) was not significant, χ2(1)= 1.988, p=.159, nor
was its three-way association with condition (parallel- vs.
sequential-gesture) and answer type, χ2(1)= 0.114, p=.736.
In addition, significantly more participants in the parallelgesture condition gave parallel answers than sequential
answers, χ2(1)= 17.447, p=.000. There was no significant
difference between number of parallel and sequential
answers in the sequential-gesture condition, χ2(1)= 0.866,
p=.35.

Figure 6: Proportion of parallel, sequential, and “other”
answers in parallel- and sequential-gesture conditions

	  

5

507

Krauss, R. M. (1998). Why do we gesture when we speak?
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7, 54–60.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Levinson, S. (1996). Frames of reference and Molyneux's
question: Cross-linguistic evidence. In P. Bloom, M. A.
Peterson, L. Nadel, and M. Garrett, Space and Language
(pp. 109-169). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McGlone, M.S., & Harding, J.L. (1998). Back (or forward?)
to the future: The role of perspective in temporal language
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1211-1223.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McTaggart, J. (1908). The unreality of time. Mind, 17, 457474.
Moore, K.E. (2006). Space-to-time mappings and temporal
concepts. Cognitive Linguistics, 17(2), 199-244.
Nunez, R.E. (1999). Could the future taste purple?
Reclaiming mind, body, and cognition. In R.E. Nunez and
W.J. Freeman (Eds), Reclaiming cognition: the primacy
of action, intention and emotion. Thoverton, UK: Imprint
Academic.
Rauscher, F. H., Krauss, R. M., & Chen, Y. (1996). Gesture,
speech, and lexical access: The role of lexical movements
in speech production. Psychological Science, 7, 226–231.
Rimè, B., & Shiaratura, L. (1991). Gesture and speech. In R.
S. Feldman & B. Rimè (Eds.), Fundamentals of
nonverbal behavior (pp. 239–281). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Perry, M., Church, R. B., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1988).
Transitional knowledge in the acquisition of concepts.
Cognitive Development, 3, 359–400.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive linguistics.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Thompson, L. A., & Massaro, D. W. (1994). Children's
integration of speech and pointing gestures in
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 57, 327–354.
Tversky, B. (1996). Spatial perspective in descriptions. In P.
Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. Garrett (Eds.),
Language and space. (pp. 463-491). Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizing thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science. 3, 499-535.
Tversky, B., Heiser, J., Lee, P. and Daniel, M.P. (2009).
Explanations in gesture, diagram, and word. In K. R.
Coventry, T. Tenbrink, & J. A. Bateman (Editors), Spatial
language and dialogue. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pp. 119-131.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991). Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to NSF HHC 0905417, IIS-0725223, IIS0855995, and REC 0440103 for partial support.

References
Alibali, M. W., Heath, D. C., & Myers, H. J. (2001). Effects
of visibility between speaker and listener on gesture
production: Some gestures are meant to be seen. Journal
of Memory and Language, 44, 169–188.
Bauer, M. I. and Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1993) How diagrams
can improve reasoning. Psychological Science, 4, 372378.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition
(75:1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Boroditsky, L. & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body
and mind in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13,
185-189.
Church, R. B., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1986). The mismatch
between gesture and speech as an index of transitional
knowledge. Cognition, 23, 43–71.
Cienki, A. (1998). Metaphoric gestures and some of their
relations to verbal metaphoric expressions. In Jean-Pierre
Koenig (Ed.), Discourse and cognition: Bridging the gap
(pp 189-204). Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Cohen, A. (1977). The communicative functions of hand
illustrators. Journal of Communication, 27, 54–63.
Cohen, A., & Harrison, R. P. (1973). Intentionality in the
use of hand illustrators in face-to-face communication
situations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
6, 341–349.
Cooperrider, K., & Nunez, R. (2009). Across time, across
the body: Transversal Temporal Gestures. Gesture, 9(2),
181-206.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Time, space, semantics, and the child.
In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language. Pp. 27-63.
New York:
Academic Press.
Emmorey, K., & Casey, S. (2001). Gesture, thought, and
spatial language. Gesture, 1, 35–50.
Evans, V. (2003). The structure of time. Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins.
Glenberg, A. M. & Langston, W. E. (1992). Comprehension
of illustrated text: Pictures help to build mental models.
Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 129-151.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Alibali, M. W., & Church, R. B.
(1993). Transitions in concept acquisition: Using the hand
to read the mind. Psychological Review, 100, 279–297.
Goldin-Meadow, S., & Sandhofer, C. M. (1999). Gesture
conveys substantive information to ordinary listeners.
Developmental Science, 2, 67–74.
Kelly, S. D., & Church, R. B. (1998). A comparison
between children's and adults' ability to detect conceptual
information conveyed through representational gestures.
Child Development, 69, 85–93.
Kessell, A. M. & Tversky, B. (submitted). Linear and
circular thinking.

	  

6

508

