UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Going to Extremes: The influence of unsupervised categories on the mental caricaturization
of faces and asymmetries in perceptual discrimination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/39s86127

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Hendrickson, Andrew
Carvalho, Paulo
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Going to Extremes: The influence of unsupervised categories on the mental
caricaturization of faces and asymmetries in perceptual discrimination
Andrew T. Hendrickson; Paulo F. Carvalho; Robert L. Goldstone
({athendri, pcarvalh, rgoldsto} @indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 East Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

Category labels and CP. An alternative framework suggests
that the presence of category labels, and not perceptual
changes, are responsible for CP effects (Pisoni & Tash,
1974). In this view the category label can be seen as an
additional feature: entities in different categories have
different labels thus having an additional feature unique for
each category. This causes similarity to decrease and
discrimination accuracy to rise. Items in the same category
have the same label and thus either their similarity increases
or remains constant leading to discrimination accuracy that
does not increase.
Hanley and Roberson (2011) point out that the accuracy in
assigning category labels is not constant across distance to
the category boundary. Items farther away from the boundary
are more likely to be categorized correctly than items closer
to the category boundary. This viewpoint is consistent with
many models of category learning that do not incorporate
perceptual learning, including decision boundaries (Ashby &
Maddox, 1990) and many exemplar-based (Nosofsky, 1986)
models of category learning.

Recent re-analysis of traditional Categorical Perception (CP)
effects show that the advantage for between category
judgments may be due to asymmetries of within-category
judgments (Hanley & Roberson, 2011). This has led to the
hypothesis that labels cause CP effects via these asymmetries
due to category label uncertainty near the category boundary.
In Experiment 1 we demonstrate that these “within-category”
asymmetries exist before category training begins. Category
learning does increase the within-category asymmetry on a
category relevant dimension but equally on an irrelevant
dimension. Experiment 2 replicates the asymmetry found in
Experiment 1 without training and shows that it does not
increase with additional exposure in the absence of category
training. We conclude that the within-category asymmetry may
be a result of unsupervised learning of stimulus clusters that
emphasize extreme instances and that category training
increases this caricaturization of stimulus representations.
Keywords: Categorical Perception, Category Labels,
Perceptual Learning, Category Learning, and Language

Introduction
Categorical perception. Our perceptual systems fail
overwhelmingly to be precise replicators of reality in the way
a camera or a microphone is, because these systems have not
evolved to create a veridical representation of reality. Though
constrained by overall neural architecture and the inertia of
representations in primary sensory areas (Petrov et al., 2005),
our perceptual systems consistently learn to create useful, but
potentially distorted, representations of reality (Landy &
Goldstone, 2005).
Often, this perceptual learning produces experiences that
do not reflect the continuous variation of reality. Instead they
warp that variability into discrete groupings such that entities
that fall within a group are less discriminable than physically
equally spaced entities that fall in different groups, a process
known as categorical perception (CP; Harnad, 1987).
While some of the focus in CP research has been on
assessing if particular categories are innate through crosscultural studies (Kay & Reiger, 2003; Roberson & Davidoff,
2000; Sauter et al., 2011), early studies of CP focused on
phonemes (Liberman et al., 1957) which show systematically
different category boundaries based on an individual’s native
language (Logan et al., 1991).
Learned CP has been shown in the visual modality across a
variety of dimensions including hue and saturation
(Goldstone, 1994), line drawings (Livingston et al., 1998),
and morphs between arbitrarily paired faces (Kikutani et al.,
2008; 2010).

Within-category
discrimination
asymmetries.
In
perceptual discrimination testing in which a target object (X)
must be held in memory and compared to itself and a foil
object (A and B, respectively), if A is more likely to be
assigned the same category label as X than B, then the
probability of selecting A as the answer should increase
relative to if A and B are equally likely to be assigned to
categories. Therefore, when the target object is farther away
from the category boundary than the foil and thus more
consistently labeled in the category, accuracy will increase
because the target object is more likely to be selected.
Similarly, when the foil object is farther away, accuracy will
decrease because the foil object will be selected more
frequently (compared in both cases to cases in which no
labeling asymmetry exists).
Hanley and Roberson (2011; see also Roberson et al.,
2007) find this asymmetric within-category advantage for
more perceptually extreme targets across a wide array of
stimuli for which CP effects have been shown, including
color across cultures (Roberson & Davidoff, 2000; Roberson
et al., 2000; Roberson et al., 2005), facial emotions
(Roberson et al., 2007), morphed celebrity faces and
morphed unfamiliar but trained faces (Kikutani et al., 2008;
2010). They failed to find an advantage for more extreme
faces among morphed unfamiliar and either untrained
(Kikutani et al., 2008) or covertly exposed (Kikutani et al.,

1662

2010) conditions. Recently, Sauter et al. (2011) failed to
Experiment 1
replicate the within-category asymmetry across cultures for
In the first experiment we tested these predictions by
morphed facial emotions despite showing CP effects.
measuring perceptual discrimination accuracy along both
relevant and irrelevant dimensions before and after category
CP within categories. Recent evidence has demonstrated
training. The stimuli and category structures were identical to
(Gureckis & Goldstone, 2008; Hendrickson et al., 2010) that
previous studies (Gureckis & Goldstone, 2008; Hendrickson
CP effects emerge not only between categories but also
et al., 2010) that showed CP effects both dimensions. The
within categories. For example, two objects that belong to the
perceptual discrimination task was a two alternative forced
same learned category (receiving the same label) may
choice (2AFC) XAB task similar to those reported by Hanley
nonetheless have increased discriminability if they belong to
and Roberson (2011). The within-cluster asymmetry and the
different clusters within the category when compared to the
standard CP effect were measured along the category
case in which they belong to the same cluster. Withinrelevant and category irrelevant dimensions before and after
category CP effects occur when the distribution of members
category training.
of a category is structured into clusters (sub-groups within
each category) rather than distributed uniformly (e.g. Method
Goldstone, 1994) or normally (e.g. Ashby & Maddox, 1990).
These within-category CP effects are consistent with Participants. 80 Indiana University undergraduates
models of categorization in which the discriminability of participated in this experiment for course credit. 1 participant
items is not only affected by their category label but also by was excluded from analyses for failing to conclude the
the learned clustering of items regardless of their labels experiment within the allotted time (60 min).
(Love et al., 2004; McDonnell & Gureckis, 2011). These
learning processes account for both within and between
category CP effects through representational change: learning
new clusters or prototypes that warp the similarity between
entities either within or between categories (Goldstone &
Hendrickson, 2009).

!"#$%&"'%(*

Within-cluster discrimination asymmetry. Interestingly,
Gureckis and Goldstone (2008; see also Hendrickson et al.,
2010) also found that the magnitude of the CP effects on both
the category relevant and the category irrelevant dimensions
increased as categorization accuracy improved. Importantly,
neither of these CP effects were found before training.
Using this kind of stimuli space, the label ambiguity
account of CP hypothesizes that the within-category
asymmetry should emerge with the CP effect along the
category-relevant dimension and is in fact causing the
categorical perception effect. This would be for
discriminations perpendicular to the category boundary in a
two-dimensional space (see Fig. 1).
What remains unclear is if, within each category, a similar
asymmetry should emerge parallel to the category boundary.
A strict category label account suggests this should not occur
because all stimuli would be equidistant to the category
boundary and thus categorized equally accurately. This strict
viewpoint would need to postulate a second mechanism to
account for within-category CP effects.
Conversely, a category label ambiguity theory of CP that
allows each cluster within a category to have a unique label
would predict that the asymmetry will occur along the
category-irrelevant dimension and that the emergence of the
asymmetry will cause the within-category CP effect. The
main purpose of this work was to investigate the emergence
of within-category asymmetries along both the category
relevant and irrelevant dimensions. A pre-post design was
used to assess the relative timing during training of the
emergence of CP effects and within-category asymmetries.

!"#$%&"'%()

Fig. 1: Stimuli varied along two arbitrary dimensions (1 and 2)
forming a 10-by-10 grid of blended faces. The light grey stimuli
were not used in discrimination or categorization, introducing a
source of within-category structure (two clusters of faces within
each category). The vertical line between columns E and F shows
an example category boundary used during category learning (the
other boundary was a horizontal line between rows 5 and 6).

Materials. A 2-dimensional 10 by 10 matrix of bald male
faces was created using a standard morphing technique
(Steyvers, 1999). Each dimension was created by morphing
between two faces selected from Kayser (1997). The two
selected faces were roughly equally spaced in the multidimensional space based on a pilot similarity judgment task.
The 100 stimuli that constitute the full matrix were created
by equally morphing between all unique pairs of 10 faces in
each of the two dimensions of faces (see Fig. 1).
Procedure. The task consisted of a block of 192
discrimination trials (pre-categorization phase), followed by
8 blocks of 16 categorization trials (categorization phase),

1663

Results
Categorization Performance. A repeated measures
ANOVA with block as a factor revealed a significant effect
on categorization accuracy F(7,546) = 21.75, p < .0001,
categorization accuracy improved throughout training.
A linear regression between distance to the center of the
category space and categorization accuracy was performed
separately for each dimension (category relevant and
irrelevant). There was a significant improvement in accuracy
for stimuli more distant on the category relevant dimension,
F(1,236) = 73.7, p < .0001 but no significant change in
categorization accuracy as a function of distance along the
irrelevant dimension F(1,236) = 1.47, p = .23.
Discrimination Performance. All discrimination trials were
coded in three ways. Half the trials varied along the category
relevant dimension (perpendicular to the category boundary)
and half along the irrelevant dimension. Discrimination trials

were also coded on the relative extremeness of the target and
foil objects: an equal number of trials were coded as “foil
more extreme”, “target more extreme” and “equal.” Finally,
for traditional CP analyses, the “foil more extreme” and
“target more extreme” trials were grouped as Within trials,
“equally” extreme trials were coded as Between trials.
Between and Within trials could be relative to the category
relevant or irrelevant dimension.
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.04

-0.02

Difference in Performance

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Foil

Target

Equal

Foil

Target

More Extreme Stimulus

Pre-categorization Phase

Effect of Categorization

Difference in performance

0.5

Irrelevant

Relevant
Dimension

-0.04

Between
Within

0.00 0.02 0.04

More Extreme Stimulus

0.6

0.7

0.8

Equal

Proportion Correct Responses

Effect of Categorization

0.4

Proportion Correct Responses

Pre-categorization Phase

0.4

and a second block of 192 discrimination trials (postcategorization phase).
Each discrimination trial followed the XAB pattern: a
target stimulus (X) was presented for 500 ms in the center of
the screen followed by a response screen containing a target
and a foil (A and B) stimulus presented horizontally until a
response was made. A 500 ms blank screen was presented
between the two screens and between trials there was a pause
of 1000 ms. Participants were instructed to determine
whether A or B was identical to X. The “target” is the option
identical to X, and the “foil” is the other choice.
Target and foil face stimuli were selected such that they
were identical along one dimension and were separated by 2
face stimuli in the 10 X 10 stimulus space along the other
dimension. This spacing was determined by pilot studies to
avoid ceiling or floor performance. The two central rows and
columns were not used as either targets or foils.
Participants completed 384 discrimination trials broken up
into the two blocks). Each block of 192 trials consisted of 12
unique trials in each row (and each column): the first and
fourth stimuli in the row were compared four times, the
fourth and seventh were compared four times, and the
seventh and the tenth stimuli were compared four times (see
Fig.1). Within each pair each stimulus was the target twice
and with the target occurring equally often on the left and
right position. These comparisons were made for 8 rows
(excluding the middle two) and 8 columns (or rows), both
parallel and perpendicular to the category boundary.
Each categorization trial consisted of a face stimulus
appearing in the center of the screen. The two category labels
appeared below the stimulus indicating which key (“q” or
“p”) should be pressed to indicate that category label. The
assignment of labels to keys was randomized on each trial.
After participants respond, feedback indicating the correct
category label was presented for 1000 ms followed by a
pause of 1000 ms between trials. Each non-grey stimulus
from Fig. 1 was presented twice in random order during
category training.

Between
Within

Irrelevant

Relevant
Dimension

Fig. 2: Experiment 1 Results. Top-left: pre-categorization target-foil
extremeness. Top-right: change in target-foil extremeness after
categorization. Bottom-left: pre-categorization CP effects, split by
dimension. Bottom-right: change in CP effects after categorization,
also split. Error bars represent standard errors.

Pre-categorization phase. The graph in the top-left panel of
Fig. 2 depicts the pre-categorization results, divided by
extremeness condition. A 3 x 2 repeated measures ANOVA
with relative extremeness (Equal vs. Foil vs. Target) and
dimension (Relevant vs. Irrelevant) revealed a main effect of
stimulus extremeness, F(2,156) = 16.15, p < .0001, but no
main effect of dimension, F(1,78) = 2.06, p = .16, or
interaction, F (2,156) < 1. Pairwise comparisons revealed
that discrimination accuracy is higher when the target is the
more extreme stimulus when compared to when the foil is
more extreme, p = .0001, and when they are equally extreme,
p = .001. The last two types of discrimination trials did not
differ, p = 1. All p values were adjusted for multiple
comparisons using a Bonferroni correction.
The results from the pre-categorization task considering
the traditional CP analyses are depicted in the bottom-left
panel of Fig. 2. A 2 x 2 repeated measures ANOVA with CP
type (Within vs. Between) and dimension (Relevant vs.
Irrelevant) as factors revealed a main effect of CP type,
F(1,78) = 4.34, p = .04, with Within more accurate than
Between, but no effect of dimension, F(1,78) = 1.68, p = .20,
or interaction between the two variables, F(1,78) < 1.

1664

Change in discrimination performance after learning. The
pre-categorization analyses of extremeness and CP type were
performed on the change in discrimination performance due
to categorization. The change was computed by subtracting
the pre-categorization discrimination accuracy from the postcategorization. The top-right panel in Fig. 2 depicts the
results for the extremeness effects and the bottom right
depicts the same results in terms of CP type.
A 3 x 2 repeated-measures ANOVA with relative
extremeness and dimension as factors revealed a main effect
of extremeness, F(2,156) = 6.89, p = .001 but no main effect
of dimension, F(1,78) = 1.33, p = .25 or interaction, F(2,156)
< 1. Pairwise comparisons revealed that performance
changed equally for target more extreme and equally
extreme, p = 1. The change in accuracy for the foil more
extreme condition was significantly less than the other types:
target more extreme (p = .03) and equal (p = .005).
To further investigate if accuracy performance improved
with categorization, we performed a series of one-sample ttests for each one of the extremeness conditions. The change
in accuracy did not significantly differ from 0 for the target
more extreme condition, t(78) = 1.11, p = .27 but was
significantly lower for foil more extreme, t(78) = -2.75, p =
.007. The change in accuracy of the equal condition was
marginally greater than 0, t(78) = 1.87, p = .06.
A 2 x 2 repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a main effect
of CP type, F(1,78) = 5.75, p = .02 but no main effect of
dimension, F(1,78) = 1.38, p = .24, or interaction between the
two variables, F(1,78) < 0 (Fig. 2, bottom-right).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 are not consistent with the
hypothesis that category label ambiguity causes CP patterns.
The pre-categorization phase in Experiment 1 indicates that
the asymmetries seen in 2AFC tasks do not depend on the
category or verbal codes assigned. More specifically, the
results show that discrimination accuracy is higher when the
target is more extreme than the foil alternative in the absence
of any previous categorization learning. CP patterns were not
observed before categorization despite the presence of the
within-category asymmetry; in fact the reverse of the CP
effect was marginally significant before categorization.
That the asymmetry exists before categorization suggests
that it is a result of unsupervised learning processes rather
than explicit category labels (Gureckis & Goldstone, 2008;
Love et al., 2004). It remains unclear if the unsupervised
mechanism is cluster labeling or perceptual change. We
revisit this point in the general discussion.
Extremeness along the category relevant dimension
predicted categorization accuracy but extremeness along the
irrelevant dimension did not. This suggests that the
asymmetry along the irrelevant dimension, both before and
after categorization training, was not produced by differences
in category labeling accuracy.
Categorization training did produce the expected CP effect:
Between improved more than Within. This effect was
modulated by an asymmetry among the Within trials, the foil

more extreme trials showed decreased performance and the
target more extreme showed significantly higher change.
This asymmetry is consistent with the category label
ambiguity hypothesis and occurred after category training.
The changes in discrimination performance differ between
the relevant and irrelevant dimensions. This may have been
due to the extensive opportunity for unsupervised learning of
cluster structure during pre-categorization discrimination.

Experiment 2
One hypothesis that must be tested is if the asymmetric
change in discrimination performance found after
categorization training in Experiment 1 can be accounted for
by the increased exposure to the stimuli instead of learning
categories. This hypothesis is tested in Experiment 2, which
is similar to Experiment 1 in that it consists of two critical
blocks of discrimination judgments. However, another block
of discrimination trials was substituted for the categorization
task. Thus, by comparing performance in the first and last
blocks of discrimination trials, which had roughly the same
number of exposures to the stimulus as in Experiment 1, we
can test the effect of experience with the stimulus space in
the absence of categorization experience.

Method
Participants. 76 Indiana University undergraduate students
participated in this experiment for course credit. Two
participants were excluded from analyses because they did
not conclude the experiment in the allotted time (60 min).
Procedure. This experiment followed the same general
procedure of Experiment 1 except for the exclusion of the
categorization phase. Participants completed 3 blocks of
discrimination trials. Each block was identical to those in
Experiment 1.

Results
All discrimination trials were coded similar to Experiment 1
but collapsed across dimension because no category
boundary was learned. Discrimination trials were coded on
the relative extremeness of the target and foil stimuli: an
equal number of trials were coded as “foil more extreme”,
“target more extreme” and “equal.” Finally, to compare to
traditional CP analyses, the “foil more extreme” and “target
more extreme” trials were grouped as Within trials, “equally”
extreme trials were coded as Between trials.
1st discrimination block. The accuracy results for the first
block of discrimination by extremeness condition are shown
in the upper left corner of Fig. 3.
A repeated measures ANOVA revealed a main effect of
stimulus extremeness, F(2, 146) = 9.03, p < .0001. Pairwise
comparisons further revealed that trials in which the target
was more extreme resulted in better discrimination than trials
in which the foil was more extreme, p = .006, and also trials
in which the two stimuli were equally extreme, p = .01.
Finally, there is no difference in accuracy between trials in

1665

which the foil was more extreme and trials in which both
stimuli were equally extreme, p = 1 (Fig. 3, top-left panel).
In the traditional CP analysis (despite no category training
occuring), discrimination accuracy is higher for Within than
Between discrimination trials, t(73) = -2.01, p = .05 (see Fig.
3, bottom-left panel).

Discussion
The results from the first block of discrimination trials
replicate those found in the pre-categorization phase of
Experiment 1. The asymmetry between the target and foil
more extreme trials existed without category training and
when CP patterns were not found.
Without category training, however, comparing the first
and last blocks of discrimination in Experiment 2 did not
show a change in performance consistent with the CP effect
or a change in the difference between equal, target or foil
more extreme trials. Performance for all trial types decreased
in a consistent way across all trial types. This is likely due to
fatigue considering the great number of trials participants
complete without any feedback.
Finally, the categorization in Exp. 1 resulted in
significantly different performance change for equal and
target more extreme trials than what was seen with exposure
alone (Exp. 2). However, this was not the case for foil more
extreme trials. This suggests that category training improves
discrimination for between-category judgments as well as for
within-category judgments in which the target is more
extreme than the foil.

General Discussion
Fig. 3: Experiment 2 results. Top-left: Block 1 target-foil
extremeness. Top-right: change in target-foil extremeness after
prolonged exposure. Bottom-left: Block 1 CP effects. Bottom-right:
change in CP effects after exposure. Error bars represent standard
errors.

Change in discrimination performance. We computed the
difference in accuracy between the last and first blocks to
analyze the possible learning effect through successive
exposure to discrimination trials. The top-right panel in Fig. 3
depicts the results considering the extremeness analysis while
the bottom-right panel shows the results organized in terms
of CP analyses.
A within-subjects ANOVA performed on these data
revealed no main effect of stimulus extremeness, F(2,146) =
1.22, p = .30. Similarly, when analyzing the change in
performance between the last and first blocks of
discrimination trials for Within and Between discriminations
(see bottom right panel of Fig. 3) there are no significant
differences in performance between the two types of
discrimination trials, t(73) = -1.65, p = .1.
Categorization (Exp. 1) vs. Exposure (Exp. 2)
Categorization training (M = 0.011) led to significantly
higher change in discrimination performance relative to
exposure (M = -0.031) for target more extreme, t(151) =
2.62, p = .01, as well as for equal trials, (cat. M = 0.020, exp.
M = -0.015, t(151) = 2.16, p = .03). On the contrary, there
was not a significant difference between the change in
discrimination accuracy for categorization (M = -0.026) and
exposure (M = -0.036) for foil more extreme trials, t(151) =
0.72, p = .47).

The presence of the within-category asymmetry before
categorization and for each of the clusters refutes the
hypothesis that the asymmetry alone can account for CP
patterns or that the asymmetry is a direct result of explicit
category labels. Instead these results are consistent with an
unsupervised learning mechanism that is sensitive to the
distribution of items within categories (Love et al., 2004;
McDonnell & Gureckis, 2011) and a decision process for
discriminations that distorts extreme exemplars to produce
category caricatures in the distribution of items (Goldstone,
1996; Goldstone et al., 2003; Roberson et al., 2007).
The change in discrimination performance after
categorization shows an increase in the asymmetry in
Experiment 1 but not in Experiment 2. The fact that the
asymmetry increases on the category relevant dimension as
well as the irrelevant dimension is a challenge to the category
label ambiguity hypothesis (Hanley & Roberson, 2011). To
account for this behavior, the labeling hypothesis must be
expanded to allow individual clusters within categories,
learned via unsupervised mechanisms, to be assigned unique
labels as in SUSTAIN (Love et al., 2004) or other semisupervised learning models (McDonnell & Gureckis, 2011).
However, the fact that the effect of extremeness in a 2AFC
task is observed before any category learning has taken place
points to a biasing effect of extremeness within a stimulus set
rather than category learning per se. Consequently, the
relative change in performance seen after category learning
might result from category learning processes that produce
warped caricatures by shifting perceptual representations
toward the stimulus extremes (Goldstone, 1996; Goldstone et
al., 2003). This account is consistent with the relative
improvement in between-category (and cluster) judgments as
well as target more extreme judgments after categorization

1666

relative to exposure alone for both the relevant and irrelevant
dimensions.
We believe the strongest message from this work is the
critical importance of measuring the change in perceptual
discrimination performance to understand the learning
mechanisms that underlie CP. Going forward, we plan to
expand this analysis to look at changes in within-category
asymmetries under conditions of verbal interference that may
impair label usage (Hendrickson et al., 2010; Roberson et al.,
2007) and formalize the unsupervised learning predictions in
an extension of the SUSTAIN computational modeling
framework (Love et al. 2004; Gureckis & Goldstone, 2008).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by National Science Foundation REESE
grant 0910218 and Department of Education IES grant R305A1100060. PFC
was supported by Graduate Fellowship SFRH/BD/68554/2010 from the
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT). All data was
collected by Jeremy Falkmann.

References
Ashby FG, Maddox WT. (1990). Integrating information
from separable psychological dimensions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance.
Goldstone, R. (1994). Influence of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and Interrelated
Concepts. Memory & Cognition.
Goldstone, R. L., & Hendrickson, A. T. (2009). Categorical
Perception. Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science.
Goldstone, R. L., Steyvers, M., & Rogosky, B. J. (2003).
Conceptual interrelatedness and caricatures. Memory &
Cognition.
Gureckis, T. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2008). The effect of
internal structure of categories on perception., Proceedings
of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Hanley, J.R. & Roberson, D. (2011) Categorical perception
effects reflect differences in typicality on within-category
trials. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Harnad, S. (Ed.). (1987). Categorical perception: The
groundwork of cognition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Hendrickson, A. T., Kachergis, G., Gureckis, T. M., &
Goldstone, R. L. (2010). The effect of verbal interference
and the internal structure of categories on perceptual
discrimination., Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Kikutani, M., Roberson, D., & Hanley, J. R. (2008). What's
in the name? Categorical perception of unfamiliar faces
can occur through labeling. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review.
Kikutani, M., Roberson, D., & Hanley, J. R. (2010).
Categorical perception for unfamiliar faces: Effect of
covert and overt face learning. Psychological Science.

Kay, P. and Regier, T. (2003) Resolving the question of color
naming universals. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science.
Kayser, A. (1997). Heads. New York: Abbeville Press.
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2005). How we learn about
things we don't already understand. Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence.
Liberman, A. M., Harris, K. S., Hoffman, H. S., & Griffith,
B. C. (1957). The discrimination of speech sounds within
and across phoneme boundaries. Journal of Experimental
Psychology.
Livingston, K., Andrews, J., & Harnad, S. (1998).
Categorical perception effects induced by category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition.
Logan, J., Lively, S., & Pisoni, D. (1991). Training Japanese
listeners to identify English /r/ and /l/: A first report.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A Network Model of Category Learning.
Psychological Review.
McDonnell, J. and Gureckis, T.M. (2011). Adaptive
Clustering Models of Categorization. in Computational
Models of Categorization. edited by Pothos and Willis,
Cambridge University Press, Oxford, UK.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General.
Petrov, A., Dosher, B., & Lu, Z. L. (2005). The dynamics of
perceptual learning: an incremental reweighting model.
Psychological Review.
Pisoni, D. B., & Tash, J. (1974). Reaction times to
comparisons within and across phonetic categories.
Perception & Psychophysics.
Roberson, D., Damjanovic, L., & Pilling, M. (2007).
Categorical perception of facial expressions: Evidence for
a “category adjustment” model. Memory & Cognition.
Roberson, D., & Davidoff, J. (2000). The categorical
perception of colors and facial expressions: The effect of
verbal interference. Memory & Cognition.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I. R. L., & Shapiro, L.
(2005). Colour categories in Himba: Evidence for the
cultural relativity hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology.
Roberson, D., Davies, I. R. L., & Davidoff, J. (2000). Colour
categories are not universal: Replications and new
evidence from a stone-age culture. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General.
Sauter, D. A., LeGuen, O., & Haun, D. B. M. (2011).
Categorical Perception of Emotional Facial Expressions
Does Not Require Lexical Categories. Emotion.
Steyvers, M. (1999). Morphing techniques for generating and
manipulating face images. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers.
Webster, M. A., & Kay, P. (2011) Color categories and color
appearance. Cognition.

1667

