UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Going with TRACE beyond Infant Mispronunciation Studies: Lexical Networks and
Phoneme Competition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6c321444

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Maor, Julien
Plunkett, Kim

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Going with TRACE beyond Infant Mispronunciation Studies:
Lexical Networks and Phoneme Competition
Julien Mayor (julien.mayor@unige.ch)
FPSE, University of Geneva
1211 Genève 4, Switzerland

Kim Plunkett (kim.plunkett@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 3UD, United Kingdom
Abstract

with lexical-phonemic feedback and lateral inhibition at the
phonemic and lexical levels (see Fig. 1).

The TRACE model of speech perception (McClelland & Elman, 1986) is used to simulate graded sensitivity to mispronunciations of familiar words as reported by White and Morgan (2008). Our simulations predict that phoneme or lexical
competition may be absent in the mental lexicons of the 19month-old infants tested experimentally.
Keywords: Word learning; speech perception; language acquisition; inhibition

Introduction
Research on infant spoken word recognition has made dramatic advances over the past two decades. Spurred on by
the refinement of experimental techniques such as the familiarisation head turn preference procedure (Jusczyk & Aslin,
1995), the switch task (Stager & Werker, 1997) and the
mispronunciation task (Swingley & Aslin, 2000), our understanding of what infants and young children know about
the sounds of words, both familiar and newly learnt, has
expanded incrementally. However, our appreciation of the
representations and processes underlying early phono-lexical
knowledge and how these develop is less advanced. Although
these approaches offer important insights as to how infants
and young children develop knowledge about the sounds of
words, they do not provide a precise computational account
of the representations and processes involved. In this paper,
we describe our attempt to apply the TRACE model of word
recognition (McClelland & Elman, 1986) to simulate aspects
of spoken word recognition during infancy and early childhood.
TRACE was originally proposed as a model of adult spoken word recognition. In TRACE, spoken word recognition is
modelled as an incremental process involving the elimination
of competing candidates that are represented in the individual’s mental lexicon. Various accounts have emphasised the
role of cohort competitors (Marlsen-Wilson & Welsh, 1978)
and phonological neighbours (Cutler, 1995; Goldinger, Luce,
& Pisoni, 1989) in this competition. Allopenna, Magnuson,
and Tanenhaus (1998) have argued that the TRACE model of
speech perception provides a satisfactory accommodation for
the role of cohorts and phonological neighbours in the resolution of the competitive process.
In TRACE, acoustic-phonetic features are mapped over
time onto phoneme nodes that map onto lexical nodes,

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of TRACE architecture. Drawing by Ted Strauss.
Allopenna et al. (1998) found that the time course of spoken word recognition indexed by eye movements in human
participants can be modelled by such continuous mapping
models: Adults were instructed to move one of four objects
that were on a screen, while they were simultaneously monitored by an eye-tracker. Along with the referent, three competitors were displayed on screen; a cohort competitor (object
starting with the same onset and vowel), a rhyme competitor
and an unrelated competitor. Using the TRACE model, implementing a forced choice with Luce’s choice rule (Luce,
1959), Allopenna et al. (1998) accurately reproduced the typical pattern of eye-gaze of the participants. For example,
adults were likely to be distracted by both cohort and rhyme
competitors in this task. TRACE also exhibits enhanced activation for these competitors resulting in enhanced levels of
“eye fixations” when using Luce’s choice rule. More recently,
TRACE has been used to model adult’s gradient sensitivity to
within-category voice onset time manipulations in a visual
world task (McMurray, Tanenhaus, & Aslin, 2009) and individual differences in online spoken word recognition, including individuals at risk for specific language impairment
(McMurray, Samelson, Lee, & Bruce Tomblin, 2010). In
both these applications, exploration of TRACE’s parameter

737

space identified factors (phoneme inhibition and lexical decay, respectively) that might account for observed human performance.
We adopt the same approach and try and refine the potential
architecture underlying infant word recognition by simulating
with TRACE the finding that infants display a graded sensitivity to the severity of mispronunciations (White & Morgan,
2008).

the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 1991), where 12 English children were recorded weekly from 20 to 36 months
of age. Word frequencies used in the simulations are raw
word counts on the whole corpora, converted to frequency
per million. When implementing frequencies in the model,
we follow the suggestions advocated by MacKay (1982) and
implemented by Dahan, Magnuson, and Tanenhaus (2001),
i.e., frequency modulates the connection weights associated
with lexical units, using the same value for the scaling parameter (0.13) used in (Dahan et al., 2001). The modulation of frequency effects via phoneme-lexicon connection
strengths is consistent with a learning basis for frequency
(e.g., of the Hebbian type). In addition, Dahan et al. (2001)
found this type of bottom-up connection strength implementation to have qualitative advantages over resting state and
post-perceptual frequency manipulations.
Given the large size of the infant lexicon at 18 months of
age, many of the phonemes needed to represent the different words were not encoded in the original TRACE model
(McClelland & Elman, 1986) nor in its re-implementation
(Strauss et al., 2007). Therefore, we added feature values for
all phonemes used in the infant’s lexicon1 .
Correctly pronounced words and mispronounced words are
presented to the model and activation levels of two competitors (the target and a distracter) are monitored. We adopt the
same linking hypothesis as (Allopenna et al., 1998) in order to
map the activation levels to fixation durations. Activation of a
word is the result of both its direct activation due to phonological overlap with the input and the result of competition with
all other words that are activated with that same input. Only
items that are on display are available as potential responses.
Similarly to (Allopenna et al., 1998), the activation levels
a of the displayed items are then transformed into response
strengths following (Luce, 1959). Given the high salience of
the images, we assume that total looking time is split entirely
between the target and distractor objects, enabling us to convert the response strengths into fixation durations using the
Luce choice rule. The proportion of looking to the target at
katarget (t)
time t is given by: ptarget (t) = katargete(t) kadistractor (t) where k
e
+e
is a free parameter determining the amount of separation between units of different activations (value set to k = 2). All
other parameters used in jTRACE were set to their default
values. Proportion of looking times to the target and distracters are reported as the average over 100 processing cycles
starting with the onset of the pronounced word.
We used the stimuli described in Experiment 1 of (White &
Morgan, 2008), reproduced in Table 1, with the exception of
the word “cookie”, which is not present in the British version
of the CDI that we used to create the new jTRACE dictionaries. Since the distractor is name-unknown in the White
and Morgan (2008) experiment, the activation level associated with the novel object on display is set to zero. It is
noteworthy that, however, due to the application of Luce’s

Graded sensitivity to the severity of
mispronunciations; Implications
Infants show graded sensitivity to mispronunciations of familiar words, as a function of the severity of the mispronunciation. White and Morgan (2008) have shown that 19month-olds show a graded response in their looking behaviour when presented, in an Inter-Modal Preferential Looking (IPL, Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Cauley, & Gordon, 1987)
task, with a correct pronunciation, 1-feature, 2-feature or 3feature mispronunciation of the onset consonant of a target
word: Infants look longer at the target object when supplied
with more accurate renditions of the target object’s name. In
their experiment, the two pictures corresponded to a target
object and a novel object. In contrast to other mispronunciation experiments (Mani & Plunkett, 2007; Swingley & Aslin,
2000), the distracter image is name-unknown and thus does
not represent a potential competing lexical entry as it is a
novel image. White and Morgan (2008) argued that using
a novel object as a distracter is important for demonstrating graded sensitivity as it offers the infant the opportunity
to consider the mispronunciation as a label for the novel distracter. This possibility is not available to the infant when the
distracter is a name-known object. On the basis of their experimental findings, White and Morgan (2008) argue that lexical
processing in toddlers is affected by sub-segmental phonological detail. In this simulation, we examine the adaptations
of the TRACE architecture that are needed to simulate the
(White & Morgan, 2008) results, and explore the ramifications of these adaptations for interpreting their experimental
findings.

Method
We used jTRACE (Strauss, Harris, & Magnuson, 2007), a reimplementation of the TRACE model (McClelland & Elman,
1986). We created typical lexicons for 18 month olds by compiling British CDIs ((Hamilton, Plunkett, & Schafer, 2000),
a British adaptation of the MacArthur-Bates CDI, (Fenson et
al., 1993)) using words that are understood by at least 50% of
the infants at 18 months of age. The lexicon is specified using
data from 179 infants and count 131 words.
Recognition time for spoken words is affected not only
by the number of phonological neighbours (Cutler, 1995),
but also by their frequency (Goldinger et al., 1989). Therefore, we identified individual token frequencies, by extracting word frequencies on all tiers based on the Manchester
corpora (Theakston, Lieven, Pine, & Rowland, 2001) from

1 Thanks to Ōiwi Parker-Jones for help in assigning feature values for phonemes not present in the original TRACE model.

738

rule, both images share some amount of the total looking time
spent during each trial2 .

0.8

Target Fixation

0.7

Table 1: Correctly pronounced and mispronounced labels
presented to infants in Experiment 1 of White & Morgan
(2008). The unfamiliar words used by White and Morgan
(2008) are not listed here because they do not compete for
recognition in TRACE. The table also includes the cohort size
as a function of pronunciation type for the stimuli used in
White & Morgan (2008).

0.3

Mispronunciations
1-feature

2-feature

3-feature

keys
book
bear
foot
car
ball
bird
bottle
shoe
cup
hand

teys
dook
gear
soot
par
gall
gird
gottle
foe
tup
fand

deys
took
tear
zoot
dar
kall
kird
kottle
voe
bup
zand

zeys
sook
sear
goot
zar
sall
sird
sottle
goe
vup
dand

18.7 (12.1)

Mean cohort size (SD)
7.7 (7.2)
11.7 (9.9)

Correct

1−feature

2−feature

3−feature

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

50

100

150

Magnitude of mispronunciation

Figure 2: Top Panel: Simulation of White and Morgan (2008)
with jTRACE’s default parameters. The unbalanced cohort
sizes in each condition interferes with the bottom-up activation flow favoring graded sensitivity to the severity of the
mispronunciations. In particular, looking times in the threefeature mispronunciation condition are longer than in the oneand two-feature mispronunciation conditions. Bottom panel:
Mispronunciation effect (reduction in activation due to the
mispronunciation) as a function of the magnitude of the mispronunciation in jTRACE’s feature space. No correlation is
observed between looking times and the severity of mispronunciations.

4.4 (2.5)

In this approach, mispronunciations cannot act as potential
labels for the distracter image since the distracter image is
name-unknown. The unfamiliar words used by White and
Morgan (2008) do not belong to the lexicon, and therefore
do not compete for recognition in TRACE. Simulations were
run with the 18-month-lexicon to mimic the behavior of 19month olds.

Results
First, we ran simulations with jTRACE’s default parameters
for the same stimuli used by White and Morgan (2008). The
top panel of Figure 2 depicts the proportion of looking time
associated with the target in the correct, 1-feature-, 2-featureand 3-feature-mispronunciations. No graded sensitivity is
observed as a function of the severity of mispronunciation.
Since the metrics used by White and Morgan (2008) to derive the severity of mispronunciation may differ slightly form
jTRACE’s, we also evaluate the impact of the severity of mispronunciations on the level of activation of the target words
within jTRACE’s metrics. The bottom panel of Figure 2 depicts the reduction in activation level as a function of the magnitude of the mispronunciation (Euclidean distance between
the two phonemes in jTRACE’s feature space) for all stimuli.
The absence of any correlation suggests that activation levels of target words are not directly sensitive to the severity of
mispronunciations, in contrast to White and Morgan (2008)
findings.
Closer examination of the stimuli used by White and Morgan (2008) reveals that the number of cohort competitors in
the typical lexicon of an 18-month old differs dramatically
with mispronunciation type. Table 1 presents an analysis
2p
target (t)

0.5

0.4

Reduction in activation (correct − misp)

Correct
pronunciations

0.6

of the cohort size associated with correct pronunciations and
each mispronunciation type. It is apparent that 3-feature mispronunciations have far fewer cohort competitors than any of
the other mispronunciation conditions. An item-analysis of
variance of the number of cohort competitors across types of
pronunciation yielded a main effect of pronunciation condition (F=5.53, df=3, p=0.0028). Two feature mispronunciations have marginally more cohort competitors than 1-feature
mispronunciations (t=1.34, df=10, p=0.21, n.s.), and more
importantly, more than 3-feature mispronunciations (t=2.40,
df=10, p=0.038).
An important characteristic of TRACE is that it implements competition within the different layers of the network.
As a consequence, cohort competitors impact the activation
levels associated with a target word. A low number of cohort
competitors leads to reduced inhibition which, in turn, leads
to higher activation of the target word. For the stimuli used in
(White & Morgan, 2008), we expect the cohort competition
in TRACE to interfere with any mispronunciation effect. In
particular, the low number of cohort competitors in the case
of the 3-feature mispronunciation would lead to an increase
in the activation of the target word, rather than to a decrease

being an exponential function of word activation.

739

in its activation level. Clearly, this outcome would be incommensurate with White & Morgan’s finding of a graded sensitivity to severity in the mispronunciation and explains why
a graded sensitivity to the severity of mispronunciations was
not observed with jTRACE’s default parameters. Therefore,
we conducted a series of simulations so as to evaluate the
impact of word-layer and phoneme-layer inhibition on sensitivity to mispronunciation.
First, we investigate the impact of reducing the level of
lexical inhibition. Both theoretical and experimental considerations motivate this adaptation of TRACE: Lexical inhibition may be reduced in infancy due to the sparseness of the
lexical space (Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1997). Also, several recent experimental findings provide evidence that word
to word interactions do not reach adult levels of competition
before about 21 months of age. For example, Arias-Trejo
and Plunkett (2009) and Styles and Plunkett (2009) used a semantic priming task with infants to demonstrate evidence for
lexico-semantic networks in 21- and 24-month old infants.
However, they failed to find evidence of semantic priming
in 18-month olds. Arias-Trejo and Plunkett (2009) suggest
that entries in the 18-month old lexicon may be best characterised in terms of lexical islands that are not in competition
with each other because they are unconnected. More direct
evidence is provided in a phonological priming task (Mani
& Plunkett, 2011) conducted with 18- and 24-month old infants. Mani and Plunkett (2011) reported cohort effects in
24-month olds (less target looking for words from large cohorts than words from small cohorts) but no cohort effects for
18-month olds. It is likely that these age differences in cohort
effects are driven by differences in the vocabulary sizes of the
infants involved in the study, even though both age groups
were tested on the same set of words. This set of findings, together with the findings from (Arias-Trejo & Plunkett, 2009)
and (Styles & Plunkett, 2009), provide a convergent rationale
for reducing lexical competition in the simulation of White &
Morgan’s 19-month old infants.
The top panel of Figure 3 displays the proportion of target looking in jTRACE associated with the stimuli used by
White and Morgan (2008) for correct, 1-feature, 2-feature
and 3-feature mispronunciations when lexical inhibition is essentially turned off (C = 0.0001)3 . A graded sensitivity to
the severity of mispronunciations emerges, similar to the 19month-olds tested by White and Morgan (2008). However,
correlations between the reduction of activation levels associated with target words and the magnitude of the mispronunciations in TRACE’s feature space did not reach significance
(p = 0.13, see bottom panel of Figure 3). For C ≥ 0.001,
cohort effects counteract the effect of mispronunciation such
that the activity level associated with the 3-feature mispronunciations is higher that the activity level associated with
the 2-feature mispronunciations.

0.8

Target Fixation

0.78

0.76

0.74

0.72

Reduction in activation (correct − misp)

0.7

Correct

1−feature

2−feature

3−feature

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

50

100

150

Magnitude of mispronunciation

Figure 3: Top Panel. Simulation of White and Morgan (2008)
with TRACE with reduced lexicon competition. Cohort effects are reduced and the bottom-up activation flow favoring
graded sensitivity to the severity of the mispronunciations is
not disrupted. Bottom panel. Mispronunciation effect (reduction in activation due to the mispronunciation) as a function
of the magnitude of the mispronunciation in TRACE’s feature space. A weak, non-significant, correlation is observed
between looking times and the severity of mispronunciations.

A second manipulation that may lead to a reduction in
the influence of imbalanced cohort sizes when simulating
White & Morgan’s findings is to reduce phoneme inhibition.
McMurray et al. (2009) suggest that phoneme-level inhibition in TRACE is incompatible with recovery from “lexical garden-paths” initiated by ambiguous phonemes early in
a word. We now consider the impact that the absence of
phoneme-level inhibition may have on simulations of White
& Morgan’s findings. The top panel of Figure 4 depicts the
proportion of looking time at the target when correctly pronounced, and with three levels of mispronunciation severity, when phoneme level inhibition is eliminated in TRACE.
A clear, graded reduction in activation level emerges as the
number of feature changes increases. Furthermore, the bottom panel of Figure 4 indicates that, within TRACE’s feature
metrics, a significant correlation (R = 0.753, p = 1.56 · 10−6 )
is present between the magnitude of the mispronunciation and
its impact on activation levels. Cohort effects are effectively
reduced and the bottom-up flow from the feature level to the
lexical level, via the phoneme level, is not disrupted by cohort
effects.

Discussion

3 For

comparison, the value commonly used to model adult
sensitivities to mispronunciations is C = 0.03 (see for example
(Allopenna et al., 1998)) which means inhibition in the word layer
is 300 times stronger than the value used here.

(White & Morgan, 2008) reported a graded sensitivity in 19month old infants to the severity of the mispronunciation of

740

may result in a more balanced lexicon structure, in turn reducing the impact of cohort imbalance disrupting the graded
sensitivity to mispronunciation severity. However, an analysis of a dense recording at 30 months of age, the Haggerty
corpus (Haggerty, 1929), revealed that /b/-onset words (89
words) are almost twice as numerous as /p/-onset words (48
words). Better descriptions of the lexical composition in infancy would no doubt help refine the distribution of cohort
sizes associated with different onsets. However, they are unlikely to reveal an even profile in cohort sizes.
Taken individually, neither a reduction in lexical-level inhibition, the removal of phoneme-level inhibition, nor a finergrained estimate of vocabulary composition in infancy can
fully account for the graded sensitivity to mispronunciations
described in (White & Morgan, 2008) while also capturing
the findings that both onset consonant and medial-vowel mispronunciations lead to a reduction in target preferences reported by Mani and Plunkett (2007)4 . A proper explanation
of both phenomena will likely incorporate all of these explanations to a certain degree.
In an attempt to adjudicate between these different hypotheses, or to confirm the contribution of multiple contributing factors (reduction in overall inhibition and a slightly
more balanced lexicon), one might ask whether 24-month
olds would also display graded sensitivity to the severity of
mispronunciations. Indeed, an important prediction of the
TRACE simulation of White & Morgan’s (2008) results is
that graded sensitivity to mispronunciation severity will be
affected by cohort and neighbourhood effects if lexical competition is active. We justified switching off lexical competition in the model on the grounds that empirical studies
have reported lexical island effects and lack of cohort effects
with 18-month old infants (Arias-Trejo & Plunkett, 2009;
Mani & Plunkett, 2011). However, these studies also report
that lexical competition effects are apparent by 24-months of
age. If the lexical-level inhibition hypothesis holds, we would
predict, therefore, that when a task like White & Morgan’s
(2008) study is conducted with 24-month-old infants, then
the impact of severity of mispronunciation is likely to diminish when using the same stimuli.
It is noteworthy that the acceleration of rapid word learning, often dubbed the “vocabulary spurt” (Bloom, 1973), between 18 and 21 months of age coincides with the potential emergence of lexical competition. Of course, TRACE
only implements lexical competition at a phonological level.
Lexico-semantic competition, which is outside the purview
of TRACE, may follow a different developmental trajectory
and lead to different patterns of competition.
Finally, it should be noted that many simplifying assumptions were adopted in the simulations reported in this research. The dictionaries used in the simulations were created by assessing typical vocabularies as assessed by the Oxford CDI (Hamilton et al., 2000). However, individual differences in lexicon sizes and composition would lead to a

0.8

Target Fixation

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

Reduction in activation (correct − misp)

0.2

Correct

1−feature

2−feature

3−feature

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

50

100

150

Magnitude of mispronunciation

Figure 4: Top Panel: Simulation of White and Morgan’s
(2008) findings in jTRACE with no phoneme inhibition. Cohort effects are reduced and the bottom-up activation flow
favouring graded sensitivity to the severity of the mispronunciations is well established. Bottom panel: Mispronunciation
effect (reduction in activation due to the mispronunciation)
as a function of the magnitude of the mispronunciation in
TRACE’s feature space. A strong, significant, correlation is
observed between target preference and the severity of mispronunciations.

a target word and argued that this finding demonstrated finegrained sensitivity at the sub-segmental level. The gradual
decrease in looking time at the target object as the number
of modified features increased was observed despite the fact
that the number of cohort competitors for mispronunciations,
as evaluated by an analysis of CDI reports, was smaller for
the 3-feature mispronunciations than for the 2-feature mispronunciations. Competition between word activation levels
in TRACE has an opposite effect on target word activation
to mispronunciation severity for the stimuli used by White
and Morgan (2008), leading to an apparent incompatibility
between White & Morgan’s findings and the predictions of
jTRACE . The fact that White and Morgan (2008) report that
target looking decreased with mispronunciation severity suggests that either inhibition between competing words in the
lexicon is not present (or extremely reduced) at 19 months of
age (consistent with Mani and Plunkett (2011); Arias-Trejo
and Plunkett (2009) or that phoneme-level inhibition should
be removed (consistent with McMurray et al., 2009).
An alternative possibility is that the apparent asymmetry between cohort sizes used in (White & Morgan, 2008)
is illusory. It is recognised that parental reports provide
under-estimates of actual vocabulary sizes (Mayor & Plunkett, 2011). A proper estimate of vocabulary composition

4A

741

full analysis in reported in (Mayor & Plunkett, Submitted).

distribution of phonological sensitivities and looking patterns
rather than a single uniform result in TRACE for a given age
group. Moreover, the nonlinear impact of lexical competition
in TRACE implies that a mean looking pattern based on a
mean lexicon would not match the mean of looking patterns
associated with different lexicon sizes. Fitting TRACE to
individual lexicons rather than a standardised lexicon would
provide yet another series of novel experimental predictions
against which to evaluate the model.

Jusczyk, P., & Aslin, R. N. (1995). Infant’s detection of
sound patterns of words in fluent speech. Cognitive
Psychology, 29, 1–23.
Luce, R. (1959). Individual choice behavior. Wiley New
York.
MacKay, D. (1982). The problems of flexibility, fluency, and
speed-accuracy trade-off in skilled behavior. Psychological Review, 89(5), 483–506.
MacWhinney, B. (1991). The CHILDES project : Tools for
analyzing talk. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mani, N., & Plunkett, K. (2007). Phonological specificity of
vowels and consonants in early lexical representations.
Journal of Memory and Language, 57(2), 252–272.
Mani, N., & Plunkett, K. (2011). Phonological priming and
cohort effects in toddlers. Cognition.
Marlsen-Wilson, W., & Welsh, A. (1978). Processing interactions and lexical access dunng words recognition in
contmuous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 29–63.
Mayor, J., & Plunkett, K. (2011). A statistical estimate of
infant and toddler vocabulary size from cdi analysis.
Developmental Science, 14(4), 769–785.
Mayor, J., & Plunkett, K. (Submitted). Infant Word Recognition: Insights from TRACE Simulations.
McClelland, J. L., & Elman, J. L. (1986). The TRACE model
of speech perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 1–86.
McMurray, B., Samelson, V., Lee, S., & Bruce Tomblin, J.
(2010). Individual differences in online spoken word
recognition: Implications for sli. Cognitive psychology,
60(1), 1–39.
McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M., & Aslin, R. (2009). Withincategory vot affects recovery from. Journal of memory
and language, 60(1), 65–91.
Stager, C. L., & Werker, J. F. (1997). Infants listen for more
phonetic detail in speech perception than word learning
tasks. Nature, 388, 381–382.
Strauss, T., Harris, H., & Magnuson, J. (2007). jTRACE: A
reimplementation and extension of the TRACE model
of speech perception and spoken word recognition. Behavior Research Methods, 39(1), 19.
Styles, S., & Plunkett, K. (2009). How do infants build a
semantic system? Language and Cognition, 1, 1–24.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R. N. (2000). Spoken word recognition and lexical representation in very young children.
Cognition, 76, 147–166.
Theakston, A., Lieven, E., Pine, J., & Rowland, C. (2001).
The role of performance limitations in the acquisition of verb-argument structure: an alternative account.
Journal of Child Language, 28(01), 127–152.
White, K., & Morgan, J. (2008). Sub-segmental detail in
early lexical representations. Journal of Memory and
Language, 59, 114–132.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation grant 131700 awarded to Julien Mayor and by the Economic and Social Research Council Grant RES-062-23-0194
awarded to Kim Plunkett.

References
Allopenna, P., Magnuson, J., & Tanenhaus, M. (1998). Tracking the Time Course of Spoken Word Recognition Using Eye Movements: Evidence for Continuous Mapping Models. Journal of Memory and Language, 38(4),
419–439.
Arias-Trejo, N., & Plunkett, K. (2009). Lexical-semantic
priming effects in infancy. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B, 364, 3633–3647.
Bloom, L. (1973). One word at a time: The use of single
word utterances. The Hague: Mouton.
Cutler, E. (1995). Spoken-word recognition. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J., & Tanenhaus, M. (2001). Time
course of frequency effects in spoken-word recognition: Evidence from eye movements. Cognitive Psychology, 42(4), 317–367.
Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, S., Thal, D., Bates, E., Hartung,
J., et al. (1993). Macarthur communicative development inventories: User’s guide and technical manual.
San Diego: Singular Press.
Gaskell, M., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (1997). Integrating form
and meaning: A distributed model of speech perception. Language and cognitive Processes, 12(5-6), 613–
656.
Goldinger, S., Luce, P., & Pisoni, D. (1989). Priming lexical
neighbors of spoken words: Effects of competition and
inhibition. Journal of Memory and Language, 28(5),
501–518.
Golinkoff, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Cauley, K., & Gordon, L.
(1987). The eyes have it: lexical and syntactic comprehension in a new paradigm. Journal of Child Language, 14, 23-46.
Haggerty, L. (1929). What a two-and-one-half-year-old child
said in one day. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 38,
75-100.
Hamilton, A., Plunkett, K., & Schafer, G. (2000). Infant
vocabulary development assessed with a British communicative development inventory. Journal of Child
Language, 27, 689–705.

742

