UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Honoring Different Ontological Boundaries: The Role of Language in Category Formation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qv8g7t7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Tran, Duc
Yoshida, Hanako

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Honoring Different Ontological Boundaries: The Role of Language in Category
Formation
Duc N. Tran (dntran2@uh.edu)
Department of Psychology, 126 Heyne Bldg.
Houston, TX 77204 USA

Hanako Yoshida (yoshida@uh.edu)
Department of Psychology, 126 Heyne Bldg.
Houston, TX 77204 USA
Abstract
The present study examines the different ways in which
language structure marks individuation and cue early attention
in a novel noun generalization task. Results in the present
study extends the Boundary Shift Hypothesis, suggesting that
the linguistic boundary between individuals and
nonindividuals influences the perceptual boundaries and the
correlational patterns formed overtime between ontological
kinds. The results provide a new perspective on the
facilitative role of linguistic markers in category formations,
rather than strictly in boundary formations. This demonstrates
the potential degree of cognitive processing among different
language learners and lends support towards a mechanistic
explanation of the role of language in categorical formations.
Keywords: category learning, categorical structure, ontology,
ontological boundaries, linguistic structure, individuation

Introduction
Language is a symbol system that maps the world’s
categories. It allows people to efficiently shape their world
through abstract representations. Words have long been
viewed as a vital unit that allows one to shape abstract
information to promote and refine clusters of information
for representational use. Such examinations allow one to
group information into arbitrary categories that assist in
later retrieval (with less effort and less cost). Categories are
essential in all general learning and have become a key
device in allowing children (Katz, 1963) and adults
(Goldstone, Lippa, & Shiffrin, 2001) to effectively make
sense of their surrounding world. Previous research
concerning ontological boundaries provided evidence that
suggests linguistic cues available in one’s environment
enhances the way world categories are distinctively
perceived. The present mechanistic proposal hypothesizes
that if a language supports both boundaries, then the cluster
of correlations between perceptual and linguistic cues
available in such language should readily aid in honoring all
ontological categories. The present research addresses this
question by examining how the Vietnamese language may
honor different ontological boundaries and, more
importantly, category formation.

Categorical Structure and Ontological Distinctions
There are three different types of ontological categories in
the world: Animate, Inanimate (Discrete), and Substances.

Distinctions between these categories depend on the
magnitude of individuation. In the Individuation Continuum
described by Lucy (1992), individuation occurs when an
entity is conceptualized as bounded and discrete. In this
continuum, animates lie at one end (more individualized)
and substances at the other end (less individualized) of a
continuous spectrum, with inanimates comprising the
middle (i.e., animates———inanimates———substances).
The likelihood that a particular entity is conceptualized as
an individual varies systematically across the continuum
from animates to substances (Lucy, 1992).
Learning associations for categorization that ties labels
and meanings together facilitates relational judgments to be
transferred to novel stimuli (Lupyan, Rakison &
McClelland, 2007). For instance, when different labels were
provided among the same exemplars, discrete differences
are highlighted between the stimuli that affect one’s
judgment to separate items into different categories
(Lupyan, Rakison & McClelland, 2007). A traditional
approach to this issue has asked whether language is simply
a symbol system that maps to all the relevant categories
found in the world. Another view is that language creates
and shapes human cognition (Whorf, 1956). People can
interpret the world quite differently if they come from
different language backgrounds and such differences have
significant effects on the level of cognitive processing
among these language learners (Cook, 1977; Bent, 2006).
Research on the Japanese and English language, for
instance, posits the importance of linguistic cues as a vital
factor that couples available perceptual cues in the
environment to facilitate perceptual regularities in the world
(Imai & Gentner, 1997; Yoshida & Smith, 2005).
Individuation in English In English, individuation is
frequently demonstrated by the count/mass distinction.
Count nouns are nouns that can take the plural form (e.g.
cups, cats), usually denoted with an –s after the noun. Thus,
count nouns are conceptualized as discrete entities that are
bounded and individualized. Mass nouns, however, are not
pluralized (e.g., milk, water), but instead take continuous
quantifiers (e.g., some, much). Thus, mass nouns are
conceptualized as continuous entities that are unbounded
and massed. For example, “My cats (count noun) drank
some (continuous quantifier) milk (mass noun) from the

2457

bowl” would be more grammatically correct than “My many
cat drank milks from the bowl.” Although nouns may take
both count and mass forms (e.g., “Would you like some
muffins?”), English generally treats animates and objects as
individuals, while substances are treated as masses. The
likelihood of treating an object as an individual, therefore,
drops markedly between objects and substances in English
(Soja, Carey & Spelke, 1991; Soja, 1992; Imai & Gentner,
1997; Yoshida & Smith, 2003). See Figure 1 for an
illustration. Further, solidity proves to be an important
factor that highlights the contrastive nature between
substances among other objects (Colunga & Smith, 2000).
The key point here is that the English language privileges
substances as continuous masses.

Figure 1: Three mutually dependent layers: linguistic,
conceptual, and perceptual organization of the Boundary
Shift Hypothesis. Linguistic individuation marks descriptive
linguistic functions (e.g., lexical semantics/animacy,
classifiers) available in each language—that is, -iru and –
aru Japanese distinctions for animates; mass/count English
distinctions for substances. Conceptual distinctions indicates
the ontological categories—animates, inanimates/objects,
and substances. Perceptual cues indicate the typical features
associated with each ontological category provided in the
real world. Different ontological distinctions for each
language (Japanese and English; Yoshida & Smith, 2003)
and the predicted boundaries for Vietnamese are illustrated.
Individuation in Japanese Japanese lexical and syntactic
devices relevant to individuation are different from those in
English (Yoshida, 2001). Japanese nouns that refer to
multiple entities are not necessarily pluralized (e.g., the
same expression can mean the same thing—“there was a
dog” and “there were many dogs”). A particular plural
suffix -tachi is never used with inanimate nouns (and is
optional with animate nouns). There are unique quantifiers
for animates, but those used for objects and substances form
an overlapping set. The Japanese language also have
separate ‘exists/is located’ verbs for animates and
inanimates (-iru and -aru respectively). Thus, the likelihood
of treating an object as an individual drops markedly
between animates and objects in Japanese. See Figure 1.
The key point here is that the Japanese language privileges
animates as individuals (Yoshida & Smith, 2003).
In both cases, this can be considered as the consequence
of different correlational patterns among the types of
linguistic cues available in each language. Recent studies
have taken such measure by providing a mechanistic
approach in exploring the role of language in category

formations through the Boundary Shift Hypothesis (e.g.,
Yoshida & Smith, 2003, 2005; Hidaka & Saiki, 2004).

The Boundary Shift Hypothesis
A mechanistic approach towards the formation of
categorical organizations could, perhaps, be explained by
the Boundary Shift Hypothesis (Yoshida & Smith, 2003).
As introduced by Yoshida & Smith (2003), “ontological
partitions” individuates the boundaries through specification
of categorical concepts among the three distinct
psychological forms (i.e., different kinds of existence) that
serve as a foundation for human category learning (i.e.,
animals/animates, object/inanimates, and substance). Each
category has its own set of perceived characteristics and
children are able to categorize novel objects based upon its
perceptual traits (Landau, Smith & Jones, 1988). Based on
previous studies, it has been suggested that when children
are presented with an object with eyes and/or limbs and a
novel name, they are likely to select different objects that
have the same shape and texture, thereby strengthening a
category based on animate features (Yoshida & Smith,
2003). However, children are likely to form categories
based on the same shape when objects are solid, angular,
and made-up of multiple parts (Yoshida & Smith, 2003).
The Boundary Shift Hypothesis explains ontological
partitions by advocating the view that the language one
learns influences or shifts the boundaries of the ontological
space of objects and substances (Yoshida & Smith, 2003).
Namely, this view suggests that categorization may be due
to the correlational structure presented in the world
(Samuelson & Smith, 1999). The cluster of correlations
between perceptual and linguistic cues relevant to
individuation enhances the perceptual characteristics of
individualized entities and support formation of ontological
categories (Yoshida & Smith, 2003). See Figure 2 and 3 for
an illustration. Correlations among these perceptual cues
and category structure, then, are systematically generalized
by each language and differ accordingly among different
language systems (i.e., consequences of different
correlational patterns).

2458

Figure 2: Illustration of associations between perceptual
cues and category structure available in the world (Yoshida
& Smith, 2003).

In this sense, language is viewed as a functional aspect that
encompasses clusters of associations (i.e., weight of the
correlations) that modifies the way we conceptualize
categories. As demonstrated by Imai & Gentner (1993) and
Yoshida & Smith (2003), psychological forms are
conceptualized differently in English and Japanese. Thus,
ontological categories are the products of learned
correlations among the perceptual and linguistic cues.

Figure 3: Associations among perceptual cues, category
structure and linguistic cues available to learners of
Vietnamese.
As a simple mapping system, language would honor the
existing category structure and not influence category
development. Thus, category development would be similar
between children speaking different languages. The big
question is, if language structure plays a vital role in shifting
the boundaries between different ontological categories,
would a language that have clear distinctions in representing
different ontological structures demonstrate clear
ontological partition (thus supporting the Boundary Shift
Hypothesis)? All such theories predict that boundaries are
formed from clusters of correlations; however, categorical
knowledge is vast and may require more sophisticated ideas
in explaining multiple categories. The purpose of the present
study examines whether this type of boundary shifting (i.e.,
creating one boundary) is necessary for all children, or if
children can reflect the reality of the three distinct
categories. That is, the study explores the different ways in
which language structure marks individuation by examining
the Vietnamese language, which has implications in
category formation through utilization of explicit classifiers
to represent different ontological categories. If language
does indeed influence category structure, we would expect
to find a difference between the category formations of
young children speaking different languages.

Vietnamese Classifiers
Why Vietnamese? Vietnamese is a rich language that
encompasses multitudes of explicit classifiers for speakers
to conceptualize, classify, and describe spatial
characteristics (shape, size, position) of objects in the
surrounding world (Ly, 1999). Vietnamese classifiers are
groups of nouns that have grammatical/syntax (Nguyen,

1963, 1975), semantic (Ly, 1999), and some implications in
cognitive foundations (Lakoff, 1986; Friedrich, 1970). In
the Vietnamese language, there are more than 40 different
types of classifiers.
Vietnamese classifiers have two main functions: (1)
singling out objects from different classes and, (2) help
partition the world categories into various types (Ly, 1999).
For example, in the sentence “con mèo” or “a cat”
(CL+cat), the cat here is perceived as an individual animate
object because of the classifier, whereas “cái ghế” or “a
chair” (CL+chair) will be used to denote an individual
inanimate object. In the Vietnamese language, the classifier
“cái” is used most often for inanimate objects, while the
classifier “con” indicates general animacy. Furthermore,
classifiers describe explicitly the spatial characteristics of
objects through the notion of salience and meaning. For
instance, in English, the spherical feature is included in the
meaning of the noun “ball” only implicitly. In Vietnamese,
the same feature receives explicit expression by means of
the classifier “quả/trái” (fruit/round-like), such as “quả/trái
banh” or “a ball” (CL+ball).
Moreover, there are two types of classifiers: (1)
Numerical (or non-descriptive) and (2) Descriptive. In
numerical classifiers, an example would be “cái ghế” or “a
chair” (CL+chair), which demonstrates that the classifier
“cái” is indicating one chair. “Con”, however, may be used
to describe inanimate and/or substances that are volitional in
nature, such as “con song” or “a river” (CL + river); “con
dao” or “a knife” (CL + knife). When paired up with
numerals, both classifiers may indicate count nouns.
Without the use of “cái”/”con” preceding the noun, mass
nouns would be implicated.
Additionally, there are certain distinctions for mass/count
nouns in the Vietnamese language. For count nouns,
singular forms are determined whether there is
definite/limited size (e.g., “một cái bánh” or “a (one) piece
of cake” numeral+CL+noun) or indefinite in size through
the deletion of numerals (e.g., “cái bánh” or “piece of
cake”; CL+noun). In a similar vein, plural count nouns are
also dependent on definite/limited in size (e.g., “những cái
bánh” or “some cake”; limited plural+CL+noun) and
indefinite/maximal in size (e.g., “các cái bánh” or
“every/all cake”; unlimited plural+CL+noun)—both of
which can be viewed in parallel to the –s suffix that is added
at the end of nouns in the English language. For mass or
non-count nouns, however, it is not dependent on the size.
Cao (1999) notes that mass nouns in Vietnamese are neutral
to definiteness or non-definiteness. Where, in contrast, the
zero article is used with a non-count noun (e.g., “bánh” or
“cake” (zero or no CL+noun).
Given the richness of the descriptive language structure in
Vietnamese, where would the Vietnamese language stand in
regards to the Boundary Shift Hypothesis? That is, the
linguistic boundary between individuals and nonindividuals
perceptual boundaries between ontological kinds. Further,
how do children come to understand the type of items or
objects that are organized in different ways? Where does the

2459

knowledge of different kinds of things emerge (i.e.,
animates, inanimates/objects, substances)? Japanese and
English demonstrate homogenous differences in honoring
two different ontological boundaries, is one or the other
maximized or are both ontological distinctions present in the
Vietnamese language? The present study hypothesizes that
Vietnamese children should behave similarly to Japanese
and English children—that is, the richness of the
Vietnamese language should allow children to build distinct
categorical formations for all ontological boundaries. See
Figure 1. To test children’s knowledge of ontological
categories, an adaptation of the Novel Noun Generalization
(NNG) task was used (Soja, 1992). NNG tasks have been
used to provide insight into children’s systematic
expectations about how nouns map to distinct categories.

Method
Participants
Thirty monolingual Vietnamese participants with ages
ranging from 23.85 to 33.22 months (M=29.59, SD=2.91)
from Vietnam participated in the present study. Of the 30
participants, 20 completed the entire task and were therefore
included in the analysis (attrition rate= 33.33%; 7 due to
fussiness, 3 due to fatigue). Participants were recruited at a
local preschool in Đồng Nai, Việt Nam. Prior to
participation, all children were screened to ensure that
Vietnamese was the only language they were regularly
exposed to.

Procedure
Children sat at a comfortable distance from the computer
screen in a quiet room at the preschool. A native
Vietnamese experimenter sat next to the child and
administered the task. A 5-minute break was implemented
after the 27th trial (of 54 total trials) to reduce fatigue.
Responses were recorded in-session by the experimenter.

Task
The task was administered as a flash demonstration on a
15’’ HP laptop. There were a total of 54 trials consisting of
18 exemplars—6 animates, 6 inanimates, 6 substances—
with 3 presentations each exemplar. Trials were presented in
6 blocks (i.e., 9 trials per block).
Familiarization trials. Children were presented with flash
demonstrations of novel entities that were animate,
inanimate, and substance. The objects were mixed and
orders were randomized. All flash demonstrations began
with the appearance of a novel object, followed by an
animation of a hand acting upon the object.

Figure 4: Animate. Testing choices matched on
Color+Texture (CO+TX), Shape+Color (SH+CO), and
Shape+Texture (SH+TX) from left-to-right respectively.

Control. Nine monolingual Japanese participants with ages
ranging from 23.71 to 40.39 months (M=31.72, SD=5.78)
from the USA (recently immigrated; temporary residents)
participated in the present study for comparison results. Of
the 9 participants, 8 participants completed the entire task (1
due to fussiness). Participants were recruited at a local
Japanese daycare in Houston, TX. Primary caretakers were
monolingual Japanese. Prior to participation, all children
were screened on English and Japanese to ensure that
Japanese was the only language they were regularly exposed
to.

Figure 5: Inanimate. Testing choices matched on SH, TX,
and CO from left-to-right respectively.

Measurement Tools
A basic demographic questionnaire on language exposure
and a parent checklist on productive vocabulary were used
to ensure and control for homogeneity among the
participants. To assess the children’s vocabulary, parents
were asked to complete an adapted Vietnamese version of
the MacArthur–Bates Communicative Development
Inventories (MCDI; Fenson, Dale, Reznick, Bates, Hartung,
Pethick, & Reilly, 1993). The Vietnamese version of the
MCDI was developed by translating the American English
(Fenson et al., 1993) and the Japanese MCDI (Ogura &
Watamaki, 1997; see also Ogura, Yamashita, Murase, &
Dale, 1993). Adult native speakers of Vietnamese translated
and modified the documents. For the control group, the
Japanese MCDI was used. The MCDI was used to control
for vocabulary development among the participants.

Figure 6: Substance. Testing choices matched on CO,
SH, and TX from left-to-right respectively.
For animates, the novel entity had animate characteristics
such as blinking eyes and volitional mannerisms (i.e.,
moved out of the screen from the incoming hand). For
inanimates, novel objects were depicted without animate

2460

cues (i.e., angular, curvature, solid blocks) and
demonstrated static mannerisms (i.e., incoming hand moved
the object out of the screen). For substances, the nonsolidity feature was illustrated by manipulations from the
hand (i.e., incoming hand changed the shape of the
substance). See Figure 4-6 for an example of the animate,
inanimate, and substance stimuli used. During each flash
demonstration, the experimenter would introduce a new
novel label attached to each entity (e.g., “Này là Phoom. Em
thấy không? Này là Phoom đó!”/“This is a Foom (novel
label). See? This is a Foom (novel label)!”). Instructions
were given in a neutral manner (i.e., no classifiers were
given) to avoid biasing the child’s response.
Testing trials. After each demonstration, children where
shown three testing choices and were asked to identify
which of the new testing choices presented is called by the
same label (e.g., “Em chỉ cho chị, nào là Phoom?”/“Can
you point to the Foom (novel label)?”). Again, questions
were given in a neutral manner to avoid biasing the child’s
response. For animates, testing choices were matched on
Shape-Texture (SH+TX), Shape-Color (SH+CO), and
Color-Texture (CO+TX). For inanimates and substances,
testing choices were matched on Shape (SH), Texture (TX),
and Color (CO). See Figure 4-6 for an example of the
testing choices. According to Jones & Smith (2002), adult
judgment indicates that the expected answer choice for
animates should be organized by similarities based on
SH+TX, SH for inanimates, and TX for substances.

That is, Vietnamese participants significantly chose feature
matched on SH+TX for animates, SH for inanimates, and
TX for substances. Proportion of expected choices were
performed against chance (p=.33) using multiple t-tests. All
expected choices were significantly above chance as
illustrated by the star and dotted line (See Figure 7-9).
Specifically, in the animate trials, Vietnamese
participants chose feature matched on SH+TX (expected)
53.89% of the time, t(19)=4.597, p<.001, versus 28.61% for
SH+CO match, t(19)=-.913, p=.373, and 17.5% for CO+TX
match, t(19)=-5.220, p<.001. See Figure 7.
For the inanimate trials, Vietnamese participants chose
feature matched on SH (expected) 56.38% of the time,
t(19)=4.514, p<.001, versus 20% for TX match, t(19)=3.739, p<.001, and 23.61% for CO match, t(19)=-2.021,
p=.058. See Figure 8.

Figure 8: Proportion of expected choice for Inanimates
matched on SH, TX, and CO.

Results
Replicating previous results (Imai & Gentner, 1997;
Yoshida & Smith, 2001, 2003), Japanese monolingual
participants (control group) significantly chose feature
matched on SH+TX (t(7)=2.986, p<.05) for animates, SH
(t(7)=1.225, p<.05) for inanimates, and SH (t(7)=3.666,
p<.05) for substances.
As predicted for the Vietnamese participants, results
demonstrate that they honored all ontological distinctions—
animates, inanimates, and substances—suggesting the role
of language in category structure.

Finally, in the substance trials, Vietnamese participants
chose feature matched on TX (expected) 48.89% of the
time, t(19)=3.620, p<.01, versus 26.67% for SH match,
t(19)=-1.468, p=.158, and 25% for CO match, t(19)=-2.010,
p=0.59. See Figure 9.

Figure 9: Proportion of expected choice for Substances
matched on SH, TX, and CO.

General Discussion
Figure 7: Proportion of expected choice for Animates
matched on SH+TX, SH+CO, and CO+TX.

Results from the present study supports previous research
(i.e., Boundary Shift Hypothesis) suggesting that the way in
which children form categories depends largely on the
language they are learning and the correlational patterns

2461

they develop given the perceptual cues and regularities
available in their environment. In particular, individuation
among the perceptual boundaries between ontological kinds
in the Vietnamese language is highly influenced by the
availability and use of explicit classifiers within the
language. Specifically, classifiers that highlight animates
(i.e., con), inanimates (i.e., cái), and substance (i.e.,
numerical+CL inclusions for count nouns and deletion of
classifiers for mass nouns) among the variety of classifiers
help Vietnamese children to identify the discrete differences
among different entities. Overtime, such regularities are
produced to create clusters of correlations that allow
children to form discrete ontological boundaries. This
suggests that categorization is highly dependent on the
structure of the language being learned, perceptual cues and
regularities available in the environment, and the
correlational pattern over time. The current results indicate
that this phenomena is robust across tasks, regardless of task
variations (Soja, Carey & Spelke, 1991; Soja; 1992; Imai &
Gentner, 1997; Yoshida & Smith, 2003), among a variety of
languages that foster distinct ontological boundaries.
Therefore, we expect that English monolingual children
should behave similarly from previous literature (Soja,
Carey & Spelke, 1991; Yoshida & Smith, 2003). In sum,
how children form categories may depend largely on the
language they are learning and, in particular, on the way that
language individuates kinds.
Acknowledgments
Support for this research was provided in part by the National
Institutes of Health grant (R01 HD058620), the Foundation for
Child Development, and the University of Houston’s Enhance and
Advance Research (GEAR) program. We would like to extend our
appreciation to the parents, teachers, and children who participated
in the study. Special thanks are also due to Lauren Baker who
created and designed the stimuli used in the present study.

References
Bent, T., Bradlow, A.R., & Wright, B.A. (2006). The
influence of linguistic experience on the cognitive
processing of pitch in speech and nonspeech sounds.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 32(1), 97–103.
Cao, X.H. (1999). Tieng Viet: May van de ngu am, ngu
phap, ngu nghia. Hanoi: Nha xuat ban Giao duc.
Colunga, E. & Smith, L. (2000) Committing to an
Ontology: A connectionist Account. Talk presented at the
22nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Cook, V.J. (1977). Cognitive processes in second language
learning. International Review Applied Linguistics, XV/1,
73-90. Reprinted in D. Nehls (ed.), Studies in Language
Acquisition. Julius Groos, 1980.
Goldstone, R.L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R.M. (2001).
Altering object representations through category learning.
Cognition, 78, 27–43.
Hidaka, S. & Saiki, J. (2004). A mechanism of ontological
boundary shifting. Talk at the 26th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.

Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J.S., Bates, E., Hartung, J.,
Pethick, S., & Reilly, J. (1993). MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventories. San Diego,
CA: Singular.
Friedrich, R. (1970). Shape in grammar. Language, 46,
379–407.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study of
early word meaning: universal ontology and linguistic
influence. Cognition, 62, 169–200.
Katz, P. A. (1963). Effects of labels on children's perception
and discrimination learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 66, 423–428.
Lakoff, G. (1986). Classifiers as a reflection of mind. In
Noun Classes and Categorization, ed. C. Craig.
Amsterdam.
Landau, B., Smith, L.B. & Jones, S.S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning, Cognitive
Development, 3, 299–321.
Lucy, J.A. (1992). Language diversity and thought: A
reformulation of the linguistic relativity hypothesis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D. H., & McClelland, J. L. (2007).
Language is not just for talking: Labels facilitate learning
of novel categories. Psychological Science, 18(12), 1077–
1083.
Ly, T. T. (1999). Representation of space in Vietnamese
classifiers. Mon-Khmer Studies, 29, 71–80.
Nguyen, T.C. (1963). K coprosu o klassifikatorax vo
Cietnamskom jazyke. Filologii stran Vostoka. Leningrad.
Nguyen, T.C. (1975). Tu loai danh tu trong tieng Viet hien
dai. Ha Noi.
Samuelson, L., and Smith, L. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category structure and syntax
correspond? Cognition, 73, 1–33.
Soja, N.N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E.S. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meaning: object terms and substance terms. Cognition,
38, 179–211.
Soja, N. (1992). Inferences about the meanings of nouns:
the relationship between perception and syntax. Cognitive
Development, 7, 29–46.
Whorf, B.L. (1956). "The Relation of Habitual Thought and
Behavior to Language." In J.B. Carroll (ed.) Language,
Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee
Whorf (pp. 134–159). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L.B. (2001). Early noun lexicons in
English and Japanese. Cognition, 82, 63–74.
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L.B. (2003). Shifting ontological
boundaries: How Japanese- and English- speaking
children generalize names for animals and artifacts.
Developmental Science, 6, 1–34.
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L.B. (2003). Correlation, concepts
and cross-linguistic differences. Developmental Science,
6(1), 30–34.
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L.B. (2005). Linguistic cues enhance
the learning of perceptual cues. Psychological Science,
16(2), 90–95.

2462

