UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Function Assignment and Word Order are Determined: Evidence from Structural
Priming Effects in Japanese Sentence Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3701650p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Deng, Ying
ono, Hajime
Sakai, Hiromu

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Function Assignment and Word Order are Determined:
Evidence from Structural Priming Effects in Japanese Sentence Production
Ying Deng (dengying0105@gmail.com)
Elisabeth University of Music
4-15 Nobori-cho, Naka-ku, Hiroshima-Shi, 730-0016 Japan

Hajime Ono (onohajime@kindai.ac.jp)
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Kinki University
3-4-1 Kowakae, Higashiosaka-Shi, Osaka, 577-8502 Japan

Hiromu Sakai (Hsakai@hiroshima-u.ac.jp)
Graduate school of Education, Hiroshima University
1-1-1 Kagamiyama, Higashihiroshima-Shi, Hiroshima, 739-8524 Japan
Abstract
Using a structural priming paradigm, the details of sentence
production model have been investigated substantially,
specifically the processes in grammatical encoding level.
Many studies provide evidence that the function assignment
stage and the constituent assembly stage are processed
separately in grammatical encoding. However, it is less
known whether these two stages interact with each other
during the processes, and if so, how the processes are
executed. In this study, we report three structural priming
experiments in Japanese, in which function assignment and
word order were manipulated independently and
simultaneously in order to examine the processes at two
stages directly. Our results revealed that priming effects
patterns were different depending on whether the effects
occur at function assignment stage or at constituent assembly
stage. Based on the current findings, implications for the
recent models of sentence production are discussed, from the
perspective of the grammatical function assignment and word
order determination.
Keywords: Structural
Active/Passive sentence

Priming; Sentence

Production;

Introduction
People can express thoughts by conveying them through
language. Speakers can often express their meaning in
several ways by using different linguistic expressions. For
example, a transitive event in which a dog is chasing a cat
can be expressed by an active sentence (the dog is chasing
the cat) as well as by a passive sentence (the cat is being
chased by the dog). How do speakers put words together,
and choose a syntactic structure? Many decisions must be
made during the production process. How these decisions
are made and how these decisions generate a linguistic
expression, especially how the grammatical function roles
and word order are determined during the processing are the
central issues of sentence production.
Current models of sentence production widely assume
that language production has three levels: message encoding
level, grammatical encoding level, and a phonological and
phonetic encoding level (e.g., Bock and Levelt, 1994,
Ferreira and Slevc, 2007). Grammatical function assignment

and word order are assumed to be determined during the
grammatical encoding level, in which speakers encode the
preverbal message into a grammatically well-formed
linguistic message. The grammatical encoding level is
comprised of two separate encoding stages: the function
assignment stage in which thematic roles such as agent and
patient are assigned to grammatical functions and the
constituent assembly stage in which word order is processed.
For example, the choice of active/passive alternations is
assumed to take place in the function assignment stage, in
which the agent role is mapped to the subject and the patient
role to the non-subject in the active voice, and the opposite
mapping takes place in the passive voice. However word
order is assumed to be left unspecified at this point. In the
subsequent stage, the constituent assembly stage, word order
is processed, such as in the case of the canonical/scrambled
word order alternations in Japanese.
In contrast several studies have provided empirical
evidence that suggests function assignment and word order
are computed simultaneously (Bernolet, Hartsuiker, &
Pickering, 2007; Branigan, Pickering, & Tanaka, 2008).
Most production models assume that these two stages in the
grammatical encoding level are computed separately, (e.g.,
Hartsuiker & Westenberg, 2000; Vigliocco & Nicol, 1998).
Therefore, there is still controversy about whether
grammatical functions and word order are encoded
separately in different stages. Furthermore, less is known
about how these two stages are computed during the
production processes, that is whether or not these two stages
interact with each other and if so, how the processes are
executed.
A structural priming paradigm has often been used to
investigate the details of the production model. Structural
priming is known as the speaker’s tendency to reuse
syntactic structures that they have recently produced or
comprehended (Bock, 1986). Using a picture description
task, Bock (1986) found that after repeating a prime
sentence paticipants were more likely to describe a
subsequent target picture with the structure that they had
just repeated in the prime sentence. For example, more

1488

passive sentences were produced after passive primes than
after active primes. Since previous studies have shown that
structural priming is sensitive to syntactic/structure factors
between the prime and target pairs (e.g., Bock, 1989, Bock
& Loebell, 1990), the structural priming paradigm has been
used to investigate the details of the processes in the
grammatical encoding level specifically. However empirical
evidence supporting the two separate stages model and the
one stage model both come from research using the
structural priming paradigm (e.g., the separate stages model:
Hartsuiker & Westenberg, 2000; Shin & Christianson, 2009;
the one stage model: Bernolet, Hartsuiker & Pickering,
2007; Tanka, 2007).
In this study, we investigated whether the function
assignment stage and the constituent assembly stage are
independent of each other in the grammatical encoding level.
Moreover we aimed to investigate the details of how the
function assignment stage and the constituent assembly
stage are computed during the production processes, that is
whether the processes of grammatical function assignment
and word order determination interact with each other and if
so, how the processes are executed.
In order to answer these questions we used Japanese and
conducted three structural priming experiments. The
relatively free word order of Japanese allowed us to
manipulate function assignment and word order
independently. In Japanese, besides mapping a thematic role
to the subject (active/passive sentence), one can choose to
place the subject at the first position before the non-subject
in the sentence, namely, canonical word order (SOV word
order), or after the non-subject, in scrambled word order
(OSV word order). This word-order variation in Japanese
allows us to manipulate the grammatical functions
independent of overlap in the word order between prime and
target pairs and enable us to investigate the function
assignment stage and the constituent assembly stage
separately.
If the two stages are computed simultaneously, we would
expect to see structural priming effects only when both
function assignment and word order match between the
prime and the target pairs. If the function assignment stage
and the constituent assembly stage are independent of each
other, we would expect to see structural priming effects
when only one function assignment or word order is shared
between the prime and the target pairs (i.e., OSV-passive
and SOV-passive pairs; OSV-passive and OSV -active
pairs). Moreover, if the processes of two stages interact with
each other, we would expect to find structural priming
effects between the prime and target pairs interacted with
grammatical function assignment and word order
determination process.
In Experiment 1, we examined whether the pure structural
priming effects of active and passive sentences in Japanese
can be observed when conceptual factors were controlled. In
Experiment 2, we looked at whether priming effects can be
found when function assignment is matched between primetarget pairs, even without sharing the word order, like OSV-

passives and SOV-passives pairs. In Experiment 3, we
manipulated function assignment and word order
independently and simultaneously in order to look at
whether the priming effects can be observed across the two
stages.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we examined structural priming effects of
active and passive sentences in Japanese. If the locus of the
voice priming effects occurs at the function assignment
stage, i.e. the assignment of the subject to agent role in
active sentences or patient role in passive sentences, we
expect to observe priming effects.

Method
Participants Twenty students, all native speakers of
Japanese at Hiroshima University participated in the
experiment (13 females and 7 males, the mean age was 22.1
years). Participants were paid 500 yen for their participation.
Throughout the experiment, a female native speaker of
Japanese acted as the confederate.
Materials The prime was either an active or a passive
sentence: (1) active prime and (2) passive prime. A target
picture (Figure 1) was presented immediately after the
prime. Two sets of 80 items were created: a confederate set
and a participant set. The confederate set consisted of 80
sentences (20 prime and 60 filler sentences), and the
participant set consisted of 80 simple black and white line
drawings (20 target and 60 filler pictures). In addition, we
prepared two sets of 36 simple black and white line
drawings for a picture recognition task.
(1) sapootaa-ga sakkaa sensyu-o
ooensi-teiru.
fans-NOM
soccer player-ACC cheer
“The fans are cheering the soccer player.”
(2) sakkaa sensyu-ga
sapootaa-ni
ooen-sare-teiru.
soccer player-NOM
fans-OBL
cheer-PASSIVE
“The soccer player is being cheered by the fans.”

Figure 1: Example of a target picture. A girl chasing a boy.
To ensure that the observed effects are purely structural in
nature, conceptual factors such as event type, animacy of
NPs, and viewpoint shifts were carefully controlled in the
prime/target pairs. That is, our experimental items only
involved human entities for both agent and patient,
minimizing the bias of conceptual accessibility. The event
type between primes and targets was paired among positive,
negative or neutral types, in order to eliminate the
possibility that the event similarity facilitates the use of
same viewpoint between the prime/target pairs.

1489

Procedure We adopted a confederate-participant dialoguestyle setting (Branigan, Pickering & Cleland, 2000).
Participants were told that the study was investigating how
people communicate to each other. Participants were asked
to describe pictures in turn with the confederate. The
experiment always began with the confederate’s description.
The confederate pretended to describe the picture even
though the prime sentence was visually presented on screen.
Next, participants were asked to repeat the prime sentence
loudly, while memorizing and creating a mental image of
the picture. Then, participants described the target picture
on the screen and the confederate repeated the description
and pretended to memorize it. The experiment consisted of
three blocks, and after each block, participants and the
confederate were asked to complete a picture recognition
task in which a set of pictures was presented. Participants
and the confederate were asked to decide whether these
pictures matched the description given by the partner during
the block.

Results and Discussion
Priming effects were observed even after conceptual factors
being strictly controlled (Figure 2). The results showed that,
more passive sentences were produced after passive primes
(11.5%) than active primes (1.5%), indicating a clear
priming effect (F1 (1,19)=10.94, p<.001; F2 (1,19)=17.36,
p<.001).

/+0(+12'3+-#45#,'--.*+#-+12+1(+-#

&!"#

However, there is an alternative explanation to the
priming effects in Experiment 1. The passive primes and the
produced passive sentences shared the same patient-agent
thematic role order, but the active primes and the produced
passive sentences do not. Since previous studies have
demonstrated that the thematic role order did affect the
priming effects (e.g., Chang, Bock, & Goldberg, 2003), it is
possible that the locus of the priming effect occurs outside
the function assignment stage. In experiment 2 we addressed
these concerns.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we looked at whether priming effects can
be found when function assignment is matched between
prime-target pairs, even without sharing the word order, like
OSV-passives and SOV-passives pairs. If function
assignment and word order are computed simultaneously,
the effects observed in Experiment 1 are expected to
disappear in Experiment 2. In contrast, if function
assignment is responsible for the priming effects, and it can
be processed separately from word order, then we expected
to observe the priming effects again.

Method
Participants Twenty students, all native speakers of
Japanese, at Hiroshima University participated in the
experiment (11 females and 9 males, the mean age was 22.8
years). Participants were paid 500 yen for their participation.
Throughout the experiment, a female native speaker of
Japanese acted as the confederate.
Materials The materials were similar to those in
Experiment 1, except we changed the word order of the
subject and non-subject (oblique object) in the passive
prime as in (3). This time the agent-patient order in active
primes and passive primes was controlled.

%$"#

%!"#

(3) sapootaa-ni sakkaa sensyu-ga
ooen-sare-teiru.
fans-OBL
soccer player-NOM
cheer-PASSIVE
“The soccer player is being cheered by the fans.”

$"#

Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment1.
!"#

'()*+#

,'--.*+#

/0.6+#27,+#

Figure 2: Percentages of passives in each condition.
After participants heard passive primes (i.e., assign the
sentence subject to patient role) from the confederate, they
tended to use passive sentences more often than after they
heard active primes (i.e., assign the sentence subject to
agent role). Because the conceptual factors between prime
and target pairs have been carefully controlled in
Experiment 1, the priming effects are most likely due to the
processes in the function assignment stage.

Results and Discussion
The voice priming effects observed in Experiment 1 was
replicated (Figure 3). Participants produced more passive
sentences after passive primes (6%) than active primes (2%).
The main effect of prime type was marginally significant in
the participant analysis and significant in the analysis on
items (F1 (1,19)=3.43, p=.08; F2 (1,19) =4.63, p<.05).
Participants showed a tendency to reuse a passive sentence
after passive primes, even though function assignment only
was shared between the passive primes and the produced
passive targets, and the thematic order was also unmatched,
priming effects were found again. Thus the results from

1490

/+0(+12'3+-#45#,'--.*+#-+12+1(+-#

&!"#

%$"#

%!"#

$"#

!"#

'()*+#

/0.6+#27,+#

,'--.*+#

assignment stage (assign an agent role to subject or nonsubject NPs).
Results from the Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 strongly
support that the function assignment stage and the
constituent assembly stage are independent of each other in
the grammatical encoding level, and the grammatical
function roles and word order are determined separately
during the processes.
However, since we did not manipulate the conditions in
active voice systematically, whether the word order priming
effects across voice between OSV-passive and OSV-active
pairs in Experiment 2 reflected purely word order priming
effects is unknown. Moreover whether function assignment
and word order determination processes interacted with each
other and if so how the processes are computed is left
unknown. We examine these questions in Experiment 3.

Figure 3: Percentages of passives in each condition.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3 we manipulated function assignment and
word order independently and simultaneously in order to
examine the interaction between two stages directly.

*+,-+./01+2#34#(')#2+./+.-+2#

&!"#

%$"#

Method
Participants Thirty-three students, all native speakers of
Japanese at Hiroshima University participated in the
experiment (25 females and 8 males, the mean age was 21.5
years). Participants were paid 500 yen for their participation.
Throughout the experiment, a female and a male native
speakers of Japanese acted as the confederate.

%!"#

$"#

!"#

'()#

(')#

*,56+#/78+#

Figure 4: Percentages of OSVs in each condition.
Experiment 2 suggest that the voice priming effects in
Experiment 2 are due to the processes in the function
assignment stage.
In addition to the voice priming effects, we discovered
another interesting finding. Participants produced more
scrambled sentences (scrambled active sentences: OSVactive) after passive primes (OSV word order, 14.5%) than
after active primes (SOV word order, 6.5%) (Figure 4).
Analyses revealed a main effect of word order priming
effect was marginally significant in the participant analysis
and significant in the analysis on items (SOV-active) (F1
(1,19)=3.94, p=.06; F2 (1,19)=11.50, p<.005), meaning that
more OSV-active were produced after the scrambled passive
primes (OSV-passive) than canonical active primes.
The word order priming effects that were found between
OSV-passive and OSV-active suggest that the word order
determination processes occurred in the constituent
assembly stage (place the subject before or after the nonsubject) and could be primed separately from the function

Materials The prime was either an active or a passive
voice sentence with canonical (SOV) or scramble (OSV)
word order. (1) SOV-active prime, (2) SOV-passive prime
OSV-active prime, and (3) OSV-passive prime were similar
to those in Experiment 1 and 2. In addition, we created a (4)
OSV-active prime condition. Two sets of 120 items were
created: a confederate set and a participant set. The
confederate set consisted of 120 sentences (32 prime and 88
filler sentences), and the participant set consisted of 120
simple black and white line drawings (32 target and 88 filler
pictures). In addition, we prepared two sets of 60 simple
black and white line drawings for a picture recognition task.
(4) sakkaa sensyu-o
sapootaa-ga
soccer player-ACC
fans-NOM
“The fans are cheering the soccer player.”

ooensi-teiru.
cheer

Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1
and 2.

Results and Discussion
Again, the voice priming effects and the word order priming
effects were observed.
Figure 5 shows the proportion of SOV-passive sentences
in each conditions. The interaction of voice and word order

1491

/+0(+12'3+-#45#6789/'--.*+#-+12+1(+-

&!"#

%$"#

('141.(':#

%!"#

-(0';<:+#
$"#

!"#
'()*+#

,'--.*+#

!"#$%&'()%

Figure 5: Percentages of SOV-passives in each condition.

General Discussion

&!"#

/+0(+12'3+-#45#6789:()*+#-+12+1(+-

In contrast, the results showed that in OSV-active
responses only the main effect of word order was significant
(F1(1,32)=7.01, p<.05; F2(1,31)=5.28, p<.05). More OSVactives were produced after OSV primes than after SOV
primes (Figure 6). This result suggests that after an active
voice is selected at function assignment stage, the word
order is determined at the constituent assembly stage, and
affect by both OSV-active and OSV-passive primes. Again
the results showed that word order determination occurs
indecently from the function assignment stage.
Taken together, the findings from the voice priming
suggest that various factors affect and complicate the
processes at function assignment stage (assign an agent role
to subject or non-subject NPs). However, the foundlings
from the word order priming suggest that the processes at
constituent assembly stage are rather straightforward only
be influenced by word order determination.

%$"#

('141.(';#

%!"#

-(0'<=;+#
$"#

!"#
'()*+#

,'--.*+#

!"#$%&'()%

Figure 6: Percentages of OSV-actives in each condition.
was significant in the participant analysis and marginally
significant in the analysis on items (F1 (1,32)=7.43, p<.05;
F2 (1,31)=3.31, p=.08).
Contrasts across SOV word order conditions revealed that
more SOV-passive sentences were produced after SOVpassive primes (6%) than after SOV-active primes (1.6%)
(F1(1,32)=9.06, p<.01; F2(1,31)=7.30, p<.05). This pattern
of result is identical to those in Experiment 1, which
reflected a voice priming effect.
The tendency of difference was also found in active prime
conditions – more SOV-passive sentences were produced
after OSV-active (4%) than after SOV-active (1.6%)
(F1(1,32)=4.73, p<.05; F2(1,31)=2.17, p=.15). The voice
priming effects between OSV-active prime and SOVpassive target suggests that the similarity between these
sentence types, although both function assignment and word
order were different between the prime/target pairs.
Although the conceptual factors were strictly controlled in
Experiment 3, this founding suggests the locus of this
priming effects might occur outside the grammatical
encoding level.

Three experiments investigated the production processes of
the two stages in the grammatical encoding level. In
particular, we examined whether the function assignment
stage and the constituent assembly stage are processed
separately or simultaneously and how the processes are
computed.
Using a structural priming paradigm in Experiment 1, we
demonstrated that the priming effects of passive voice occur
in the function assignment stage, which has a major
influence on the choice of active or passive voice, even
when the active voice is highly favored. The results from
Experiment 2 further confirmed that the priming effects are
raised due to the processes in the function assignment stage.
Moreover the word order priming effects were found across
active and passive voice, which suggested that word order
was determined independently of the function assignment
stage, in the constituent assembly stage. The results from
Experiment 3 further confirmed that the function assignment
stage and the constituent assembly stage are computed
separately during the production processes. Moreover the
pattern of the voice priming effects and the word order
priming effects are different according to the stages.
The results from Experiment 3 show the similarity
between the OSV-actives and SVO-passives, in this case
both function assignment and word order were different
between the prime/target pairs. This is consistent with
previous studies (e.g., Prat-Sala & Branigan, 2000). PratSala and Branigan (2000) demonstrated that Spanish
speakers tend to produce dislocated active sentences (OVS
word order) instead of using passive sentences when the
patient is more salient than the agent (a language setting
which facilitates the production of passives). The authors
interpreted that the results suggest that conceptual factors
may be associated with variations in word order directly,
and the way in which the factors influence is constrained by
the syntactic options available within that language.

1492

Prat-Sala and Branigan (2000) suggested the similarity
between the dislocated actives and passives when producing
an event in which the patient is more salient than the agent
(e.g., a sentence emphasis on the patient). In Japanese, both
passive sentence and OSV-active are assumed to put
emphasis on the patient (Shibatani, 1985, 1990). An
explanation of the priming effects found in Experiment 3
between OSV-actives and SVO-passives, might occur
outside the grammatical encoding level, that it is due to the
similarity between the OSV-active and SOV-passive, which
both put emphasis on the patient. For example, after
participants heard SOV-passive primes from the confederate,
both passive voice and OSV word order were more
available than usual at the grammatical encoding level.
Although the event type between prime and target pairs
were controlled, processing a passive prime might explain
the emphasis on the patient roles. If the emphasis of the
patient role is persistent between the prime and target pairs,
because the active voice was highly favored as conceptual
factors were controlled in our study, participants might have
chosen an OSV-active over an OSV-passive or SOV-passive,
in order to make the patient more salient than the agent.
This explanation is consistent with the findings in Bernolet,
Hartsuiker, and Pickering (2009), and can be explained by
the current model of sentence production which assumes
that perspective meaning, a sub-component in the preverbal
message level, can affect constituent assembly stage directly.
Further studies are needed to examine whether the priming
effects between SOV-passive and OSV-active in our study
were due to word priming effects or the persistence of
emphasis in the patient role. Further studies are needed to
examine whether the persistence of emphasis in the patient
role can influence the priming effects in the grammatical
encoding level.
In conclusion, our findings provide support for a twostage production model with two separate stages within the
grammatical encoding level, namely the function
assignment stage and the constituent assembly stage.
Moreover, our findings suggest that various factors affect
and complicate the processes at the function assignment
stage; however, the processes at the constituent assembly
stage are rather straightforward by the syntactic options
available in that language.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research #20320060 (PI: Hiromu Sakai, Hiroshima
University) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science. I would like to thank Mikihiro Tanaka, Jeff Pannell,
Kyoko Sakamoto, Hiroe Maeda, Kanako Ono and Takuya
Kubo for helpful discussions and helping with data
collection.

for the role of word-order repetition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 33(5), 931-949.
Bernolet, S., Hartsuiker, R.J., and Pickering, M.J. (2009)
Persistence of emphasis in language production: A crosslinguistic approach. Cognition, 112, 300-317.
Bock, J. K. (1986) Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Bock, K. (1989) Closed-class immanence in sentence
production. Cognition, 31, 163-186.
Bock, J.K., & Levelt, W.J.M. (1994). Language production:
Grammatical encoding. In M. Gernsbacher (Ed.),
Handbook of psycholinguistics. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Bock, J.K., and Loebell, H. (1990) Framing sentences,
Cognition, 35, 1-39.
Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J., and Cleland, A.A. (2000)
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B1325.
Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J., & Tanaka, M. (2008).
Contributions of animacy to grammatical function
assignment and word order during production. Lingua,
118, 172-189.
Chang, F., Bock, K., & Goldberg, A.E. (2003). Can
thematic roles leave traces of their places? Cognition, 90,
29-49.
Ferreira, V.S., & Slevc, L.R. (2007). Grammatical encoding.
In G. Gaskell (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of
psycholinguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hartsuiker R.J., & Westenberg, C. (2000). Persistence of
word order in written and spoken sentence production.
Cognition, 75, B27-B39.
Shin, J.-A., and Christianson, K. (2009) Syntactic
processing in Korean-English bilingual production:
evidence from cross-linguistic structural priming.
Cognition, 112, 175-180.
Shibatani, M. (1985). Passives and related constructions: A
prototype analysis. Language, 64, 821-848.
Shibatani, M. (1990). The languages of Japan. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Tanaka, M. (2007) The representation of conceptual and
syntactic information during sentence production.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of
Edinburgh.
Vigliocco, G., and Nicol, J. (1998) Separating hierarchical
relations and word order in language production: is
proximity concord syntactic or linear? Cognition, 68,
B13-B29.

References
Bernolet, S., Hartsuiker, R.J., and Pickering, M.J. (2007)
Shared syntactic representations in bilinguals: evidence

1493

