UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Learning: A Demonstration and a Novel SRT Paradigm

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1fx6q9td

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Yeates, Fayme
Jones, Fergal
Wills, Andy
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Learning: A Demonstration and a Novel SRT Paradigm
Fayme Yeates1 (fy212@exeter.ac.uk)
F.W. Jones2
1

A.J. Wills1

M.R.F. Aitken3

I.P.L. McLaren1

School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.
2
School of Psychology, Canterbury Christ Church University
3
School of Psychology, University of Cambridge.
Abstract

Evidence for human learning without awareness of what is learned
has been sought in serial reaction time (SRT) tasks in which,
unknown to participants, the locations of stimuli follow a particular
rule or sequence (Willingham, Nissen & Bullemer, 1989). A
number of criticisms have been levelled at such tasks, including a
lack of adequate control for sequential effects and a discrepancy in
sensitivity between measures of implicit and explicit knowledge
about the task (Jones & McLaren, 2009; Shanks & St. John, 1994).
In this study we provide a novel, two-choice SRT paradigm
whereby the locations of the response stimuli are sometimes
predicted by a separate set of stimuli on screen. A color-filled
square appears before each stimulus requiring a response, with
participants informed this is simply a fixation point to prepare for
the next trial. Two out of eight colors are predictive on 80% of
trials, and performance on these consistent trials was faster than on
the other six colors that were equally likely to result in either of the
two possible responses. All these trial types were faster and more
accurate than the remaining inconsistent 20% of trials for the
predictive colors, which also produce more errors than control
colors. A prediction task and interview followed the task, on which
participants performed at near (slightly below) chance levels. We
suggest that this task is a useful tool for studying associative
learning in humans, as it provides reliable effects that appear to
demonstrate implicit learning with relatively brief training.
Keywords: Associative learning; implicit learning; SRT task

Introduction
In 1994 Shanks and St. John published their seminal
review of implicit learning in Behavioral and Brain
Sciences. Their conclusion was that implicit learning in
humans had not yet been conclusively demonstrated. One
paradigm that seemed to hold some promise in this regard
was the SRT task pioneered by Willingham, Nissen and
Bullemer (1989). In this task participants had to simply
respond to one of four possible stimulus locations by
pressing a spatially compatible key. Unknown to them, the
sequence in which the stimulus locations were presented
was not random but instead repeated a particular ordering.
Willingham et al found that participants trained on such a
sequence learned to respond faster than controls, yet were
unable to say much about the sequence or, importantly, to
predict the next stimulus location given a number of
preceding trials. Shanks and St. John analysed this result,
and others like it, and concluded that whilst the prediction
task was potentially a sufficiently sensitive method of
assaying participants' knowledge of the sequence, the
evidence suggested that the non-significant findings on the

prediction task had more to do with a lack of power than a
lack of knowledge. Subsequent reviews of more recent
evidence (e.g. Lovibond and Shanks, 2002; Shanks and
Lovibond, 2002; Mitchell, De Houwer and Lovibond, 2009)
have seen no reason to change this conclusion.
In this paper we attempt to provide the evidence needed to
prove that learning can take place without awareness of
what is being learned. We do this using a variant of the SRT
task employed by Jones and McLaren (2009) developed by
Aitken (1996) which, instead of using the preceding trials to
determine the later ones, uses a separate stimulus to predict
which of the location stimuli will be presented next. A
colored square presented between two stimulus locations is
the predictor stimulus, and which of the two stimulus
locations changes from an open to a filled circle is what
determines the response required. If the left circle fills, then
a left key press is needed and if the right-hand circle fills
then a right key press is appropriate. The colored square is
presented just before a response is required (while both
circles are unfilled) so that it can predict which response
will shortly be needed. Rather than run a separate control
group, we follow Cleeremans (1993) in using a withinsubject control. Thus some colors are never predictive (they
have a random relationship with the stimulus location)
whereas others are correlated with the response needed on
the next trial.
The detailed design of this paradigm was dictated by our
assumption of a dual-process mechanism for human
learning. Following McLaren, Green and Mackintosh
(1994), we conceptualized learning as being driven by two
quite different sets of processes, one Cognitive in nature,
employing conscious, controlled, rule-based symbolic
processes, the other Associative in nature, automatic in
operation and based on simple algorithms that capture the
correlations between events. The challenge, then, was to
arrive at a paradigm that would readily allow learning on an
associative basis but would be much less amenable to rulebased cognition. The Aitken SRT paradigm allows for a
parameterization that meets these requirements. We used 8
colors in total, but made only 2 of them predictive (one left,
one right). Thus, 6 out of the 8 bore no relationship to the
next stimulus location to occur. Following the technique
used by Posner and Snyder (1975), the 2 predictive colors
were themselves only 80% reliable. Hence, if one of them
typically predicted a left response would be the next needed,
20% of the time it was followed by a stimulus location that

1185

required a right response. Our rationale for doing this was
that it would make conscious detection of the contingencies
in play much harder. Due to 6 of the 8 colors being nonpredictive, the overall prediction rate possible in this
experiment is a mere 57.5% if complete knowledge of the
contingencies is assumed, and no stimulus is an entirely
reliable predictor of anything. In these circumstances, we
expected it to be very difficult to notice which colors had
some predictive value. Any attempt to "work out" what was
going on in this fast paced task, with many different colors
involved, would overtax working memory and severely
impair performance on the main, SRT task, which should
lead to this type of strategy being quickly rejected.
We also used the fact that there were 6 non-contingent
colors to configure a design in which half the blocks were
control blocks, and the other half experimental. The latter
included the 2 contingent colors and 2 of the noncontingent, whereas the control blocks had the other 4 noncontingent colors in them. Control and Experimental blocks
were alternated. This meant that for much of the time our
participants were not experiencing any contingency between
the colored square and the stimulus location / response
required. It also allowed us to define two, somewhat
different, within subject controls for our experimental
manipulation. The first are the control colors in the
experimental blocks: these have the advantage of sampling
our participants’ behavior under similar circumstances to
those in force for the contingent, experimental colors. The
second are the colors in the control blocks: these have the
advantage of sampling behavior over an entire block
without any distortions caused by the contingent colors. The
control blocks were given exactly the same sequence of
right and left responses as the corresponding experimental
blocks. Thus, any sequential effects, caused by a particular
run of right and left responses, will be controlled for by
these blocks. As we shall see, this proved to be a useful
aspect of our design.
Despite our efforts to prevent conscious rule-based
learning, the parameters chosen for this design should
nevertheless support strong associative learning. The colors
occur just before the stimulus location is presented and the
response required, and feedback is available shortly
afterward. Thus, given that there is a reliable contingency
between a clearly perceived stimulus and stimulus location /
response, it should be easily learned. We ensured that the
colors were presented boldly at fixation and gave our
participants good reason to be looking there at the start of
each trial. If this type of learning is automatic, and stimulus
specific, then there should be little difficulty in learning the
association between the two predictive colors and their
correlated stimulus locations / responses.

Method
Participants
The study was conducted with 32 participants, randomly
divided into two groups (n=16 in each) who performed the
task with slightly different parameters (different distances

between the stimuli on screen). The participants were all
first year psychology students at the University of Exeter,
aged from 18 to 22 years old, who were rewarded with a
course credit in return for their participation.
Materials
An Apple iMac computer was used to run the experiment,
with participants seated roughly 50cm from the screen. The
display during blocks contained two white, outline circles
and a white, outline square on a black background. The
circles were 1.9cm in diameter, and the square was 1.9cm in
width. The square was positioned directly in the centre of
the screen for both groups. One group saw the circles
positioned 2.2cm to the right and left of the centre of the
screen, consistent with the distance separating the twochoice SRT task stimuli in Jones & McLaren (2009). The
other group saw the same size white circle outlines placed
7.5cm from the right and left of the centre of the screen,
following the stimulus locations specified in Aitken (1996).
The predictor stimulus was a colored filled square 1.9cm
in width that filled in the white square outline. A choice of
eight possible colors: red, green, blue, yellow, pink, orange,
brown and teal were used. The response signal was a white
filled circle 1.9cm in diameter that replaced either the right
or left outline circle during the trials. The participants were
instructed to press the spatially compatible “x” key on a
QWERTY keyboard if the target stimulus appeared on the
left, and the “>” key if the stimulus appeared on the right.
Design
The experiment consisted of a two-choice SRT task
conducted over one session that lasted approximately an
hour. The task consisted of 20 alternating blocks, half of
which were control blocks and half experimental, each with
120 trials. The ordering of the blocks was counterbalanced
across participants. On both experimental and control blocks
participants received a random ordering of equal amounts of
right and left response stimuli. In the experimental blocks
participants saw four colors (red, green, blue, yellow) as the
filled square predictor stimulus. One of these colors
preceded a right circle fill with an 80% contingency, and
another color appeared before the left circle filling 80% of
the time. The other two colors in the experimental block
occurred with equal probability before a right or left circle
fill. The colors were randomized for each participant and the
experimenter was blind to which colors were predictive, and
which response they predicted. During control blocks, all
four colors (pink, orange, brown, teal) were equally likely to
occur before a right or left response signal. Each color that
could appear in a block appeared on an equal number of
trials in that block, and all trials were constructed so that a
color would not repeat itself on the next trial.
Procedure
Participants were instructed to fixate on the colored square
and then to simply respond as quickly and accurately as
possible to the white circle fills. They were told to use the

1186

colored square to bring their focus back to the centre of the
screen and therefore improve their overall performance on
the task by avoiding bias to one side or the other. They were
informed that the colors changed to attract their attention
back to the centre of the screen: no mention was made of
any contingencies or the role of the colored square as a
predictive or instructive stimulus.
On each trial the square would fill with the stimulus color
and remain on screen until the computer detected a
response. A variable interval in the range of 250-500ms
would then occur before the white circle response signal
appeared on screen. Reaction time was measured from this
stimulus’ appearance on screen until a key press was
detected. A 250ms response-stimulus interval (RSI) then
followed before the appearance of the next colored square
stimulus during which the screen was blank except for the
square and circle outlines. On each trial the stimuli
remained on the screen until the participant had responded
or was timed-out for not having pressed a key within 4.25s.
If participants pressed an incorrect key or were timed-out
then the trial terminated and the computer issued a short
‘beep’ sound. Following each block, participants rested
during a 30 second break in which they were shown their
average reaction time (in milliseconds) and their accuracy
(as a percentage) for the block of stimuli just completed.
They were also informed whether these scores were better
or worse than those from the previous block. At the end of
the 20th block, participants were instructed to fetch the
experimenter.
A short verbal interview asking general questions about
the task was given, and participants were then assessed to
determine the extent of their knowledge about the
contingencies during the experiment. They were first asked
to describe any relationship that they had noticed between
the colors and the circle fills. Then a prediction task was
conducted that closely followed the procedures employed in
the main task they had just experienced. Thus, participants
were instructed to attend to a colored square at fixation in
the middle of two outline circles, but now had to make a
prediction about which circle they thought would fill by
pressing the appropriate key. They were told that the circles
would not fill, and that no response would be considered an
error, apart from pressing keys other than the two response
keys, and that there was no time limit on making their
choice. The prediction task was presented as two short
blocks of 16 trials per block, with each color from both
control and experimental blocks occurring twice in each
block in a randomized order.

Results
Results were computed for both errors and RTs, with four
Stimulus Types compared across Blocks and at the different
Distances between the two response signals. Those colors
that had an 80% contingency with a right or left circle fill
(the Experimental colors) are split into both their Consistent
and Inconsistent presentations. For example, if a red square
preceded a right circle fill on 80% of the trials, those

responses would be Consistent, whilst when a red square
was followed by a left circle fill on the other 20% of trials
this would be Inconsistent with the trained contingency. The
two other colors in the experimental block form one control
set (denoted Control – Experimental Block) for withinsubject comparison, as do the four control colors from the
control blocks (Control – Control Block). Trials following
an error were excluded from both RT and error analyses.
The RT and error data are shown in Figures 1 and 2,
respectively.

Figure 1. Average RT in msecs for different Stimulus
Types.

Figure 2. Proportion of errors for different Stimulus Types.
ANOVAs were conducted on both RT and proportion of
errors, with Block, Distance and Stimulus Type as the
independent variables. Blocks were collapsed into fours for
the analyses, so each Block comprised two Experimental
blocks and two Control blocks. The Distance of the stimulus
did not have a main effect on the RTs, F(1,30) = .27, p =
.61, nor on the errors, F(1,30) = .56, p = .46. Distance did
not interact with any other variable, and therefore the
location of the response stimuli was not a significant factor
in determining learning of the color contingencies.

1187

Figure 1 shows the average RT and proportion of errors
for the four Stimulus Types, the main effect of Stimulus
Type was significant for both the RTs, F(3,90) = 17.45, p <
.001, and errors, F(3,90) = 3.72, p = .014. Both RTs and
errors follow the same ordinal pattern, which was examined
in more detail with a set of planned contrasts. Faster
responses and fewer errors were made on Experimental
Consistent trials. The difference between Experimental
Consistent and Inconsistent trials is significant for both RTs,
F(1,30) = 33.15, p < .001, and errors, F(1,30) = 5.463, p =
.026, with Inconsistent stimuli responded to more slowly
and with lower accuracy. Experimental Consistent stimuli
are also responded to faster than both Control stimuli from
Experimental, F(1,30) = 34.46, p < .001 and Control blocks,
F(1,30) = 6.173, p = .019, this trend is also apparent in the
errors, but it is significant only in the RTs.
Experimental Inconsistent trials are slower than Control
stimuli from Experimental blocks in RTs, F(1,30) = 4.85, p
= .035, and show a trend toward more errors, F(1,30) =
3.34, p = .078. Experimental Inconsistent trials are also
slower and less accurate than Control stimuli from the
Control blocks, significantly so in RTs, F(1,30) = 14.51, p =
.001, and again demonstrating a trend in the errors, F(1,30)
= 4.05, p = .053. It seems therefore that learning of the
contingencies occurred, with performance averaged across
the experiment showing faster and more accurate responses
to those trials that were predicted 80% of the time by the
preceding color. This is further highlighted by the
decrement in performance for those trials inconsistent with
the learnt relationship, causing participants to make more
errors and respond slower to these stimuli than both the
Consistent stimuli and the Control stimuli.
The Control stimuli are interesting, in that they
significantly differ from one another in the RTs, F(1,30) =
9.16, p = .005, although not in the errors, F(1,30) = .62, p =
.44. Control stimuli from the Experimental blocks are
responded to more slowly than Control stimuli from the
Control block. We suspect that this is due to the presence of
the Consistent and Inconsistent stimuli in the Experimental
Block. It is not that more errors are being made (overall) in
the Experimental blocks, instead, it may be that the conflict
that occurs on inconsistent trials engages mechanisms that
produce more cautious responding, though we note that this
cannot simply be a speed-accuracy trade-off as the error rate
is, if anything, lower for the Control block stimuli than for
Control stimuli from the Experimental Blocks.
Block has a significant main effect in RTs, F(4,120) =
9.26, p < .001, and errors, F(4,120) = 19.02, p < .001. With
practice, participants got faster at the task but exhibited
something of a speed-accuracy trade-off, making more
errors progressively throughout the experiment. Block did
not interact with Stimulus Type in the RT analysis, thus
Experimental Consistent stimuli in Experimental Blocks
were responded to faster than Control stimuli in Control
Blocks, which were in turn responded to faster than Control
stimuli in Experimental Blocks, and all are faster than
Experimental Inconsistent stimuli. The relative positions of

Inconsistent and Consistent stimuli are reversed in Block 1
in the errors, however, and the interaction between Block
and Stimulus Type for errors is significant, F(12,360) =
2.68, p = .002. Thus, in this case, the Consistent /
Inconsistent difference emerges over blocks.
The structured questionnaire and prediction task were
completed by half of the participants, eight at each Distance
value. The other participants were simply asked to pick
which colors were predictive: they were invited to select
two colors from the eight possible candidates. 14 of the 16
felt able to make the attempt, and out of the 28 responses
that were generated 6 were correct (7 would be expected by
chance).
The results of the structured questionnaire for the other 16
participants who completed the prediction task show that of
the 32 responses, 8 were correct. If we take it that there are
two predictive colors, and do not require the participant to
remember which predicted left and which predicted right,
then if we ask the participants to pick two colors out of the
eight, the expected number of colors selected correctly is
0.5. With 16 participants taking part the total number of
colors correctly selected is expected to be 8 by chance, and
it is exactly 8, approximately evenly distributed across the
different responses (right or left) and Distances.
Turning now to the prediction task itself, each participant
experienced 32 trials in total. 8 of which involved the two
predictive colors. Taking into account the requirement to
give the appropriate response for the color, we can expect 4
correct responses by chance to these 8 presentations.
Inspection of Figure 3 shows that the distribution of correct
responses across participants is approximately binomial at
each Distance, and is centered at a mean of 4 or less.

Figure 3. The number of correct responses participants gave
for Consistent – Predictive colors. Data presented from 8
participants who performed the task with 2.2cm Distance
(open bars) and 8 participants who performed the task with
7.5cm (solid bars) between response stimuli.
The actual means are 3.5 and 4 for Distances of 2.2 cm
and 7.5 cm respectively, neither of which differ significantly
from chance, and neither of which exceed mean chance

1188

expectation. Our conclusion, based on these data, is that our
participants do not know which colors are predictive, and do
not know what they predict. This is in accord with their selfreports at the end of the experiment: they claimed to be
unaware of any contingency between the color of the central
square and the response that followed.

General Discussion
Our basic claim is that our participants’ behavior was
affected by the contingencies between color and stimulus
location / response in the absence of any conscious
knowledge on their part about these contingencies. That
their behavior was affected is beyond doubt; the effect is
statistically highly significant and, by the standards of these
things, rather easy to obtain after relatively little training.
We believe that these characteristics make this paradigm a
good candidate for studying associative learning in humans.
In particular, the highly reliable difference between
Consistent and Inconsistent responses to the contingent
colors is noteworthy, and our results suggest that this
difference is made up of a disadvantage for Inconsistent
trials and an advantage for Consistent trials.
Our use of two different types of within-subject control
enables us to be confident that the advantage for Consistent
trials and the disadvantage for Inconsistent trials are real.
They also allow us to speculate about the effect of having
these types of trial in a block. In some ways the most
appropriate controls are those colors used as controls in the
Experimental blocks. They are subject to the same local
conditions, in terms of motivation, mood etc., and so
provide an appropriate baseline for comparison with
Consistent and Inconsistent responses to the contingent
stimuli. We included the separate control blocks because we
suspected that simply having some predictable trials in a
block might alter our participants behavior, and also to
provide a control for sequential effects. This last was
accomplished by using exactly the same sequence of left
and right responses in paired Control and Experimental
blocks, the only difference between the two was in what
colors were used in the block, and how they were paired
with responses. Thus, in a Control block our participants
would have exactly the same sequence of responses to
make, but no useful information from the colored squares
that were presented to help (or hinder) them. The fact that
our contingent stimuli also differ from these controls on
Consistent and Inconsistent trials gives us considerable
confidence that there is no hidden artifact responsible for
our results.
The difference between the Experimental control stimuli
and the Control block control stimuli is also revealing. We
hypothesize that this difference, with Experimental block
controls performing worse than Control block controls, is
due to the conflict experienced on Inconsistent trials leading
to a greater cautiousness on some trials (perhaps best
described as some kind of post-stimulus presentation
checking process) that does not shift performance in terms
of any speed – accuracy trade-off. By this we mean that the

slower RTs do not lead to higher accuracy, but instead
reflect an additional “cost” that is incurred in task
performance. It is difficult to speculate any further on what
the exact nature of this cost might be, but one possibility is
that perceptual information specifying which stimulus
location had occurred might continue to be gathered postdecision on some proportion of trials as part of the checking
process. If this mostly occurred on trials where the decision
was the correct one (which given the low absolute error
rates of our participants is quite likely), then it would have
relatively little impact on the error rate but a significant
impact on RTs. This analysis can only apply if the chance of
engaging the checking process is unrelated to the probability
of making an error, and low enough to result in a low
frequency of occurrence on trials that result in an error. In
these circumstances our RT measure would be much more
sensitive to such a process than the error estimate (because
the latter would be based on so few data points), so a result
in the RTs alone would be quite possible. All speculation
aside, this result is, as far as we are aware, a novel one, and
opens up a new line of enquiry that may well be related to
recent work by Verbruggen et al (in press).
Now we turn to some consideration of the arguments that
may be raised to suggest that our prediction test results do
not prove that our participants had no conscious knowledge
of the contingencies. The most obvious is that the prediction
test results apply to only half the participants. This objection
is of no concern, as the effects we report, i.e. the advantage
for Consistent vs. Inconsistent, the advantage for Consistent
trials relative to both types of Control trial and the
disadvantage for Inconsistent trials are all significant if only
the 16 participants who were given the prediction test are
included. We’ve included all our data because this gives the
best estimate of the pattern of performance on the main task,
and because it gives the best estimate of the ability of
participants to pick the contingent colors during the
structured interview. Another objection that might be raised
is that the prediction task itself is flawed, in that it a) takes
place after the main task by which time participants have
forgotten which are the contingent colors and b) is not
sufficiently like the main task to help them recall this
information. Our response is that our participants appear to
have learned to respond faster to Consistent trials relatively
early in the experiment, certainly by the time they reached
the 6th block, and appear to have had no trouble
remembering this information (if that was how they were
doing it) from block to block from then on. And our
prediction task used the same room, same computer, same
display, same stimuli presented in a very similar fashion, it
was simply the response requirements and consequent
presentation rate (and feedback) that were different to the
main task. If our participants consciously knew which were
the contingent stimuli, this should have acted as a salient
reminder of that information.
Perhaps more troublesome for our analysis is the
objection that, whilst our prediction test does attempt to
assess the correct information (Shanks & St. John, 1994), it

1189

does not do so sensitively enough. We only gave two blocks
of 16 trials each, compared to the 20 blocks of 120 trials
each for the main task. Is this really a fair test of our
participants’ knowledge about the color-response
contingencies? To which question our answer has to be
“yes”. The point here is that, in order to be effective in
determining RT to respond to the stimulus location,
participants’ knowledge must be of the categorical variety if
the idea of “conscious knowledge” is to mean anything
different to “there’s been some change in behavior”. They
must know that this color predicts this location / response,
even allowing for a caveat to the effect that this prediction
will not always be valid. In other words, they must know,
when faced with the appropriate stimulus input, that some
colors are predictive and that others do not seem to be. Only
then can conscious knowledge produce the desired pattern
of results. If this were the case, then our 8 trials for the
contingent colors should be more than adequate to detect
this type of categorical knowledge. If they get all 8 correct,
then this is significantly better than chance on an individual
basis. Even allowing for only some of the participants being
aware of the contingencies, the means over all 16
participants who took the test should produce overwhelming
evidence of such knowledge if only as many as 4 were
aware of the contingencies. But we do not even have means
that are greater than chance to report for our prediction test,
let alone means approaching significance.
Another possibility is that the effect observed in the RTs
might be due to our participants being aware of the
contingencies on very few trials during the experiment (and
then they forget), and that we have simply not given enough
trials in the prediction task to capture any of these trials.
This is implausible. Firstly, once the contingencies are
explicitly coded – then this should in itself increase the
probability of noticing them again until it becomes a
frequent occurrence. Secondly, even a rate as low as say 1
trial in every 8 of the predictive colors (i.e. 2.5 on average a
block in training) would produce a mean on our prediction
test of 4.5 that is significantly different to that observed
(Z=2.27, p<.05). And the effect on these individual trial RTs
would have to be large (approx 40msec). There is no
evidence for such a bimodal distribution in our data.
It would seem, then, that we have good evidence for
implicit performance on our task. It is still possible that we
may have not demonstrated implicit learning, if we adopt a
position that results from a stringent application of the
Shanks and St. John criteria (our thanks to Tony Dickinson
for pointing this out). Imagine that during training on some
trials our participants became aware of the contingencies,
but then forgot this prior to being asked. They would have
learned the contingencies, but not implicitly. This learning
might then give rise to performance that reflected the
learning, but still without conscious knowledge of the
contingencies so that they passed our prediction test. This
type of implicit performance, based on a form of implicit
memory, would explain our results. In the limit, it is almost
impossible to discount this type of critique, but we think

that it lacks plausibility when applied to our paradigm.
There is not much to learn, just that two colors predict
responses, and if participants were to become repeatedly
aware of this (so that learning could occur), it’s hard to see
why they would forget this so easily.
Our conclusion, then, is that we have demonstrated
learning in human participants without conscious awareness
of what has been learned. This robust effect has been
accomplished in a single, one-hour session with relatively
few participants. These considerations suggest that this
paradigm is ideally suited to the study of implicit processes,
and we hope to report the results of further investigations
with this paradigm in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by an ESRC grant to IPL
McLaren and FW Jones.
REFERENCES
Aitken, M.R.F. (1996). Peak shift in pigeon and human
categorisation. Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of
Cambridge.
Cleeremans, A. (1993). Mechanisms of Implicit Learning:
Connectionist Models of Sequence Processing. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Jones, F.W., & McLaren, I.P.L. (2009). Human sequence
learning under incidental and intentional conditions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
35(4), 538-553.
Lovibond P.F., & Shanks, D.R. (2002). The role of awareness
in Pavlovian conditioning: Empirical evidence and theoretical
implications. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 28(1), 3-26.
McLaren, I.P.L., Green, R.E.A., & Mackintosh, N.J. (1994).
Animal learning and the implicit/explicit distinction. In N.C.
Ellis (Ed.) Implicit and explicit learning of languages (pp.
313-332). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Mitchell, C.J., De Houwer, J., & Lovibond, P.F. (2009). The
propositional nature of human associative learning.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32, 183-246.
Posner, M.I. & Synder, C.R.R. (1975). Attention and Cognitive
Control. In Robert L. Solso (ed.), Information Processing and
Cognition: The Loyola Symposium. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Shanks, D.R. & St. John, M.F. (1994) Characteristics of
dissociable human learning systems. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 17, 367-447.
Shanks, D.R. & Lovibond, P.F. (2002) Autonomic and
eyeblink conditioning are closely related to contingency
awareness: Reply to Wiens and Öhman (2002) and Manns et
al. (2002). Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 28, 38-42.
Verbruggen, F., Adams, R., & Chambers, C.D. (in press).
Proactive motor control reduces monetary gambling.
Psychological Science.
Willingham D.B., Nissen M.J. and Bullemer P. (2009). On the
development of procedural knowledge. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition,
15, 1047-1060.

1190

