UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Learning of L2 word stress rules

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1cb2s11k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Chan, Ricky
Leung, Janny

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Learning of L2 Word Stress Rules
Ricky Chan (rickychan0809@gmail.com)
School of English, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Janny Leung (hiuchi@hku.hk)
School of English, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
Abstract

memorised chunks. Knowlton and Squire (1994, 1996) have
proposed that both abstract information about grammar
patterns and concrete information about the learning
materials may be involved in implicit learning and they both
contribute to performance in grammaticality judgment tasks.
Whether abstract rules or chunks are learnt is of great
relevance to the learning of prosody in that it would shed
lights on how knowledge of prosodic signals is represented.
Relevant studies have been met with methodological
challenges. Critics have challenged the validity of assessing
awareness by verbal reports. The inability to verbalise
knowledge might reflect low confidence on the part of the
participants, lack of appropriate vocabulary to describe their
knowledge or the intrinsic complexities of the regularity, and
the knowledge assessed by verbal reports might not be
responsible for performance on the measure of learning
(Dienes & Berry, 1997; Shanks & St. John, 1994). Dienes et
al. (1995) have sought to improve awareness measurement by
asking participants to rate their confidence in judgment; a
lack of correlation between judgment performance and
confidence rating suggests that knowledge is unconscious
(zero-correlation criterion). Tunney and Shanks (2003) found
that binary confidence ratings are more sensitive to low
levels of awareness than continuous ratings and were
therefore adopted in our experiment.
More recently, Destrebecqz & Cleeremans (2001) have
developed an objective awareness measure called the
“method of opposition”, modelled on the process dissociation
procedure, a methodology framework first proposed by
Jacoby (1991) to differentiate between the influences of
implicit and explicit knowledge on performance. The method
of opposition was applied to the SRT task (e.g. Curran, 2001;
Haider, Eichler, & Lange, 2010). After completing the SRT
task, participants were told there was a hidden sequence
governing the presentation of visual stimuli and they were
asked to complete free-generation tasks under both inclusion
and exclusion instructions. Participants were asked to press
response keys in an order that followed the sequence
(inclusion condition) and that did not resemble the sequence
(exclusion condition). According to the Global Workspace
theory (Baars, 2003), when knowledge becomes conscious,
the possibility for voluntary control of performance is opened
up. A difference between inclusion and the exclusion
performance indicates top-down processing and thus explicit
knowledge. On the contrary, people with no explicit
knowledge would tend to perform equally well in both
inclusion and exclusion tasks (inclusion = exclusion) as they
do not have control over how the implicitly learnt knowledge

This paper reports two experiments on the implicit learning of
second language word stress rules and presents a
methodological innovation. In both experiments L1
Cantonese L2 English participants practised pronouncing
two-syllable Spanish words. Learning of a hidden stress
regularity was measured by a judgment task. We assessed
participants’ awareness of the stress rule by verbal reports,
confidence rating and a novel methodology: inclusionexclusion production tasks adapted from Destrebecqz and
Cleeremans (2001). Experiment 1 demonstrated the implicit
learning of association between the ending phoneme and
word stress and experiment 2 the implicit learning of a more
abstract rule of stress placement. We conclude that L2 word
stress rules may be learnt implicitly.
Keywords: implicit learning, word stress, Spanish, binary
confidence ratings, process dissociation procedure

Introduction
Previous studies of implicit learning have demonstrated that
small-scale artificial grammar (Reber, 1967) and sequence of
visual stimuli presentation in Serial Reaction Time (SRT)
task may be learnt without awareness. In the domain of
language, while early first language acquisition is essentially
implicit, it remains cloudy whether implicit learning is
relevant to second language acquisition (SLA) at all. The
theoretical and pedagogical significance of implicit learning
in SLA has stimulated recent research interests (e.g. Leung &
Williams, 2011; Robinson, 1996, 2005; Saffran, 2001;
Saffran et al., 2008; Rebuschat & Williams, 2011).
In the realm of L2 phonology, it has been shown that
phonotactics (Dell, Reed, Adams, & Meyer, 2000; Onishi,
Chambers, & Fisher, 2002; Warker & Dell, 2006), segmental
features (Goldrick, 2004) and metrical stress rules (Gerken,
2004; Gerken & Bollt, 2008) may be learnt implicitly. Yet, to
our knowledge, it is not known whether word stress
regularities can be learnt without awareness, despite their
importance in the parsing of speech stream. In the context of
SLA, previous studies on the learning of lexical stress
revealed that learners from a non-stress language background
may have a different stress system than native speakers do,
leading to a non-native “accent” of stress. For example,
Mandarin speakers associated high flat tone with stress and
Cantonese learners pronounce English stress and unstressed
syllables as though they were high and low tones in their
mother tongue (Chao, 1980). In light of the difficulty of
learning stress, L2 stress pedagogy begs for further research.
A crucial theoretical issue in implicit learning research is
whether the knowledge acquired is abstract rules or

192

influences behaviour (Curran, 2001). The experiment below
demonstrates how the method of opposition could be
employed as an awareness measure in other implicit learning
tasks.

Experiment 1

Figure 1: A sample trial used in learning (left) and testing
phase (right) in experiment 1

Method
Materials The learning target was a simplified Spanish stress
rule: words that end in “o” have their stress on the
penultimate syllable (e.g. busco and burro) and words that
end in “ar” on the last syllable (e,g, gustar and tumbar).
Two-syllable real Spanish words were employed as stimuli
and they were generated, using a Spanish male diphone
database11, by the MBROLI speech synthesizer (Dutoit,
Pagel, Pierret, Bataille, & Vrecken, 1996). The specific
values were based on those used by Enríquez, Casado and
Santos (1989): 100Hz and 60 ms for unstressed vowels and
116 Hz and 120ms for stressed vowels. Albeit the artificiality
of the synthesizer, it was still preferred to voice recordings
because a Spanish native speaker is likely to be biased
against incorrectly stressed words, which raises a possibility
that participants rely on the speaker’s fluency rather than
knowledge of stress placement in the judgement task.
Procedure 37 university students (14 males and 16 females,
Mage = 21.8 years old) were recruited as the experimental
group and 15 university students aged 20 to 26 (7 males and
and 8 females, Mage 21.4) as the control group. All of them
were native Cantonese speakers with English as an L2. None
of them reported any knowledge of Spanish or Portuguese.
They were told that the experiment aimed to study how
people learn words. The experiment took around 25 minutes
to complete.
Training phase: The training phase consists of 64 randomised
trials, each containing a Spanish word and its English
translation (See Fig 1, left). A set of 16 Spanish words, half
of which end with -ar and the other half -o, was repeated four
times. Participants repeated aloud after the recording. This
provided participants with exposure to the target stress rules
without explicitly directing their attention to them.
Testing Phase (pronunciation judgement): The testing phase
consists of 40 trials, each of which includes an English verb
and two sound icons (See Fig 1, right). Participants pressed
the corresponding keys to listen to two audio presentations
and choose the one that “sounds better” to them. As Scott and
Dienes (2008) have shown that familiarity is the essential
source of knowledge in artificial grammar learning,
preference judgment is used rather than accuracy judgment
(e.g., “choose the correct one”) because the former may
encourage the use of intuition and discourage rule search
during the testing phase (Rebuschat & Williams, 2011).

1

All the 16 critical items (8 -ar ending and 8 –o ending) were
novel to the participants. Those sound pairs differed only in
stress placement. Other previously seen items were randomly
shuffled with the critical items so as to reduce the likelihood
of participants consciously deducing the difference between
the sound pairs.
To test whether, for –ar ending words, participants’
judgements were based on the –ar ending, -r ending or the
vowel “a” at the end, 8 –a ending words were added in the
testing phase. Like the –o ending words, words that end in
“a” have their stress on the penultimate syllable and those
sound pairs differed only in stress placement.
Inclusion-exclusion Tasks. Adapted from Destrebecqz and
Cleeremans (2001), the tasks required participants to read
aloud 8 two-syllable words in each of the two conditions: 1)
“as similarly to Spanish pronunciation as possible”
(inclusion) and 2) “as differently from Spanish pronunciation
as possible” (exclusion). A small dot was given in each word
(see Fig 2) to indicate syllabification which serves to remind
the participants that all words consist of two syllables. Their
voices were recorded.

Figure 2: A sample trial in the inclusion-exclusion tasks
Verbal reports. Participants were probed for whether they
had any knowledge about the pronunciation patterns and
stress rules of Spanish words. They were also told there were
underlying stress patterns and if they could not report
knowledge of the regularities, they would be asked to provide
as many guesses as possible.
All the items used are presented in table 1 below.

http://tcts.fpms.ac.be/synthesis/mbrola.html

193

Four participants reported some knowledge that overlaps
with our target rules (i.e. “r” is stressed; intonation falls when
a words ends in –o; stress is related to the “ar” ending; stress
is related to word length). They were classified as aware. In
fact many participants did not notice any stress patterns and
were surprised when they were asked to guess.
Inclusion-exclusion tasks: Participants’ audio recordings for
the tasks were analysed using Praat to locate their stress
placement based on the fundamental frequencies (F0) of the
two syllables, as it was found that Chinese speakers rely on
F0 as the most important cue in stress judgement (Wang,
2008). The difference between inclusion and exclusion scores
was calculated. The five aware participants scored higher
under the inclusion instruction than the exclusion instruction
(from +2 to +3), showing congruence with their awareness
level revealed in verbal reports. 15 out of the 32 remaining
participants scored equally for both tasks and they were
classified as our truly unaware participants. The other 17
participants who showed some difference in their scores for
both tasks (from -3 to +3) were re-classified as aware and
were not included in our analysis of unaware data.
Pronunciation Judgment Task: The 15 unaware participants
achieved an average of 58.8% accuracy (M = 9.4; SD = 1.20;
SEM = .32) on the 16 critical items and their performance
was significantly above chance, t(14) = 4.37, p << .01, d =
1.65. Their performances on both –ar ending and –o ending
words are both significantly above chance, M =59.1%, SD =
1.12, SEM = .30, t(14) = 2.44, p = .014, d = .92 and M
=58.3%, SD = 1.07, SEM = .29, t(14) = 2.32, p = .018, d = .
88 respectively. There is evidence of implicit learning of L2
ending-phoneme-to-stress rules by young Cantonesespeaking adults with only short and limited exposure.
However, their accuracy on –ar ending words was not
significantly higher than that of –o ending words, t(28) =
0.16, p = 0.44.
Control: The control group completed only the pronunciation
judgement task. Their accuracy on critical items was not
significantly different from chance, M = 47.1%, SD = 1.09,
SEM = .29, t(14) = 1.61, p = .065.
While previous studies suggest that novel L2 stress
perception may pose challenges to learners from a non-stress
language background, participants’ proficiency in English
and their prior general knowledge of word stress might have
been helpful in this experiment. Moreover, it was found that
participants in general performed significantly better for –ar
ending words than –o ending words. This may be explained
by their prior linguistic knowledge. A previous study (Bailey,
Plunkett, & Scarpe, 1999) showed that native English
speakers, when learning a novel stress pattern, had a
significant bias for non-word-final stress. In our study, when
participants were asked if they had any feelings about
pronunciation patterns of Spanish words, 12 participants
mentioned “the intonation of the words tended to go up”, “the
last syllable seemed to be louder and higher in pitch” and
“stress tends to lie on the final syllable”, despite the fact that
words with a word-final stress and a non-word-final stress
appeared equally frequently in the experiment. These

Table 1: Items used in training, testing, and inclusionexclusion tasks in experiment 1

Results and Discussion
Overall performance Participants’ performance on the
pronunciation judgment task served as the measure of
learning. The experimental group attained an average of 59.6
% accuracy (SD = 1.41; SEM = .23) on the 16 critical items.
Further analysis using t-test showed that their performance
was significantly above chance, t(36) = 6.57, p << .001, d =
1.55. They achieved above-chance-level performances on
both –ar ending and –o ending words, M = 64.2%, SD = 1.42,
SEM = .24, t(36) = 4.81, p << .001, d = 1.13 and M =55.1%,
SD = 1.13, SEM = .19, t(36) = 2.16, p = .019, d = .51
respectively. Their performance on –ar ending words was
significantly better than that of –o ending words, t(69) = 2.41,
p < 0.01, d = .57, suggesting more learning of –ar ending
words than –o ending words in relation to stress placement.
Awareness measures Verbal reports and inclusion-exclusion
tasks were used to determine whether the acquired
knowledge was conscious or not.
Verbal reports: 32 out of 37 participants remained unaware of
the underlying stress rules based on verbal reports. One
participant was able to verbalize the whole target stress rules.

194

statements are an indication that stress patterns that are
distinct from English (word-final stress in this case) might
have appeared more salient to our participants given their
prior linguistic experience. In addition, heavy syllables tend
to stressed in English. This may explain why there appeared
to be more learning of –ar ending words (which has a heavy
syllable at the end) than that of –o ending words.
It is worth mentioning that there is a medium negative
correlation between participants’ accuracy on –ar ending
words and that of –a ending words, r(35) = -0.51, p = .001
for all participants and r(13) = -0.72, p = .002 for unaware
participants. On the other hand, a medium positive
correlation was found between their accuracy on –o ending
words and that of -a ending words for both the whole
experimental group, r(35) = 0.49, p = .002, and the unaware
participants, r(13) = 0.64, p = .001. These suggest that
participants might have made their judgements based on the
last phoneme (i.e. the –r ending instead of the vowel a) in the
last syllable. While it is still unclear whether participants
learnt an abstract rule or a set of probabilities, their higher
sensitivity to the difference between open and closed
syllables provided initial evidence of rule learning. This issue
was addressed in a follow-up experiment, whose design was
similar to experiment 1.

vowel and the other half consonant, were repeated three times
to form 108 trials.
Testing Phase (pronunciation judgement):
Participants
clicked to listen to two possible Spanish pronunciations (See
Figure 2, right) and chose the one that “sounds better” to
them.

Figure 2: A sample trial used in learning (left) and testing
phase (right) in experiment 2
Confidence rating: A binary confidence rating was included
to further improve awareness assessment. After making a
judgement, participants were asked to indicate whether they
made a guess or were certain about their choice.
Critical data came from 18 novel words, half of which ends
in /a/, /e/ or /o/ and the other half /ɾ/, /l/ and /z/. To determine
whether participants had learnt an abstract rule or memorised
chunks, 12 “extension items”, half of which ends in /i/ or /u/
(vowel ending) and the other half /d/, / x/ (consonant ending)
were included. Those sound pairs differed only in placement
of stress.
Inclusion-exclusion tasks: Same as experiment 1, except that
there were 18 items for each condition.
Verbal reports: Same as experiment 1.

Experiment 2
Method
Materials The learning target was more complicated stress
regularities: words that end in a consonant (closed syllable)
have their stress on the final syllable (e.g. felol and cerroz)
and words that end in a vowel on the last syllable (e,g, pato
and bona). Two-syllable nonwords with four or five
phonemes (vowel-ending words and consonant-ending words
respectively) were generated by the same speech synthesizer
based on Spanish pronunciation. The words were
combination of phonemes illustrated below:
1. First phoneme: /b/, /b/, /d/, /d/, /f/, /g/, /h/, /k/, /k/, /ɾ/
(ll), /m/, /n/, /p/, /s/, /s/, /t/, /t/ or /v/.
2: Second phoneme: /a/, /e/ or /o/.
3. Third phoneme: /b/, /b/, /d/, /d/, /g/, /k/, /k/, /l/, /m/, /n/, /n/,
/p/, /ɾ/, /r/ (trilled), /s/, /t/, /t/ or /v/.
4. Fourth phoneme: /a/, /e/ or /o/
5. Fifth phoneme (consonant-ending words only): /ɾ/, /l/, /θ/
(z).
Procedure 44 participants were recruited. The experimental
group consisted of 22 young adults (9 male and 13 female,
Mage = 21.0 years old). The other 22 young adults (12 male
and 10 female, Mage = 22.3 years old) were the control
group. They were all native Cantonese speakers with English
as an L2 with no knowledge of Spanish or Portuguese. The
experiment took around 30 minutes to complete.
Training phase: Participants were presented with a Spanish
word (See Fig 2, left). They repeated aloud after the
recording. 36 Spanish-based words, half of which end in a

Table 2: Items used in training, testing, and inclusionexclusion tasks in experiment 2

195

Results and Discussion
Verbal reports: Among the 22 participants, one participant
was able to report our target rules. Two other participants
mentioned “rising intonation for -z ending words” and “stress
is affected by length of the word”, which overlap with our
target rules. These three participants were classified as aware.
Still, many participants reported they paid no attention to any
stress patterns and were surprised when they were asked to
guess.
Confidence rating: The Chan difference score (Chan, 1992;
Dienes et al, 1995) was computed for each participant to
determine whether learning was implicit by the zero
correlation criterion. It is the difference between the
proportion of ‘certain’ responses which were correct (hit) and
those which were incorrect (false alarm). Participants with a
positive score were classified as aware and those score 0 or
below were classified as unaware.
Inclusion-exclusion tasks: Participants who scored the same
in inclusion and exclusion tasks were classified as unaware;
otherwise they were classified as aware.
Pronunciation Judgment Task: Only 8 out of 22 participants
were classified as unaware based on the above criteria. Their
average accuracy in the judgement task was 68.1% (M =
12.25; SD = 1.67; SEM = .59) on the 18 critical items, which
was significantly above chance, t(7) = 5.51, p < .001, d =
1.95. They achieved better-than-chance accuracy for both
vowel and consonant ending words, t(7) = 2.12, p = .03, d =
0.75 and t(7) = 3.86, p = .003, d = 1.37 respectively, but
accuracies on vowel and consonant ending words are not
significantly different, t(14) =.30, p = .39. These serve as
evidence of learning the target regularities.
An analysis of their accuracy on extension items showed that
their accuracy was significantly higher than chance, t(7) =
4.73, p = 0.001, d = 1.67. They achieved better-than-chance
accuracy for both vowel and consonant ending words, t(7) =
5.00, p < .0001, d = 1.77 and t(7) = 2.39, p = .023, d = 0.85
respectively, with no significant difference on accuracies for
vowel and consonant ending words, t(14) = 1.25, p = .15.
Such findings revealed that the resultant knowledge was
abstract rules rather than memorized chunks. Participants
were sensitive to the difference between the ending phoneme
(vowel or consonant) and syllable type (open and closed
syllables) in relation to stress placement and were able to
apply their abstract knowledge to novel items.
Control: The control group completed only the testing phase.
Their accuracy on critical items was not significantly higher
than chance, M = 52.0%, SD = 1.24, SEM = .27 t(21) = .74,
p = 2.33.

in the experiments. We conclude that young adults are able to
acquire L2 word stress implicitly.
The present study bears theoretical, methodological and
pedagogical significance. On the theoretical level, it extends
previous findings on the implicit learning of language: not
only may syllable regularity (at the segmental level) and
metrical stress rules be learnt implicitly (as shown in
previous studies), but sensitivity to lexical stress rules (at the
supra-segmental level) may also develop without awareness.
This raises the possibility of implicit learning of other kinds
of prosodic rules such as tonal rules. Importantly, the rules
and stimuli in the experiment were all based on a natural
language and so there is little question of transferability of
findings to the context of language acquisition.
Our study is also methodologically interesting as it is the first
implicit learning study which integrates verbal reports,
subjective measures of confidence and process dissociation
procedure to establish strict criteria for awareness
measurement. It is also, to our knowledge, one of the first
successful attempts to apply the process dissociation
procedure outside of SRT tasks. Based on our data, the verbal
reports were useful in identifying three aware participants
who were able to verbalize partial knowledge of the target
rules. However, other participants whose awareness was not
reflected in the verbal reports nevertheless performed
differently in the inclusion-exclusion tasks, which appeared
to be more sensitive in identifying participants with low
confidence or low awareness about the rules. The findings
demonstrated the usefulness of inclusion-exclusion tasks as
an objective measure of participants’ awareness, and their
potentially higher sensitivity than verbal reports.
From the perspective of L2 pedagogy, the present study
provides an insight into how L2 stress patterns may be taught
and learnt. The possibility of learning L2 stress patterns
implicitly offers an alternative to the widely-adopted explicit
approach to teaching word stress. It would be theoretically
and practically interesting to determine the relative
effectiveness of explicit and implicit teaching and learning of
word stress and explore their potential synergetic effects in
different settings.
Other further research directions include exploring 1) the
implicit learning of other supra-segmental phonological rules
such as tonal rules; 2) whether the ability to implicitly learn
L2 phonological rules is sensitive to individual differences;
and 3) whether age has a significant impact on the implicit
learning of L2 phonological patterns.

References
Baars, B. J. (2003). How brain reveals mind: Neuoimaging
supports the central role of conscious experience. Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 10(9-10), 100-114.
Bailey, T., Plunkett, K., & Scarpe, E. (1999). A crosslinguistic study in learning prosodic rhythms: Rules,
constraints, and similarity. Language and Speech, 42(1), 138.

Conclusion
The two experiments above suggest that, under incidental
learning conditions, young adults were able to learn L2 word
stress rules, which are supra-segmental phonological patterns,
with only short and limited exposure. The knowledge
obtained was implicit, abstract, and may be applied to novel
items. Their lack of awareness was verified by verbal reports,
binary confidence ratings and process dissociation procedure

196

Chan (1992). Implicit cognitive process: Theoretical issues
and applications in computer systems design. Unpublished
DPhil thesis, University of Oxford.
Chao, Y.R. (1980). Chinese tone and English stress. In
Waugh, L. R. & VanSchooneveld, C. H. (eds.) The
Melody of Language, Baltimore, MD: University Park
Press, 41-44
Curran, T. (2001). Implicit learning revealed by the method
of opposition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 503-504.
Dell, G. S., Reed, K. D., Adams, D. R., & Meyer, A. S.
(2000). Speech errors, phonotactic constraints, and implicit
learning: A study of the role of experience in language
production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning
Memory, and Cognition, 26(6), 1355-1367.
Destrebecqz, A., & Cleeremans, A. (2001). Can sequence
learning be implicit? New evidence with the process
dissociation procedure. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
8(2), 343-350.
Dienes, Z., Altmann, G.T.M., Kwan, L. & Goode, A. (1995).
Unconscious knowledge of articifial grammars is applied
strategically. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 1322-1338.
Dienes, Z., & Berry, D. C. (1997). Implicit learning: Below
the subjective threshold. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 4, 3-23.
Dutoit, T., Pagel, N., Pierret, N., Bataille, O., & Vrecken, V.
d. (1996). The MBROLA project: Towards a set of highquality speech synthesizers free of use for non-commercial
purposes. Proceedings of ICSLP'96, Philadelphia, 3(13931396).
Enríquez, E. V., Casado, C., & Santos, A. (1989). La
percepción del acento en español. Lingüística Española
Actual, 11, 241-269.
Gerken, L. A. (2004). Nine-month-olds extract structural
principles required for natural language. Cognition, 93,
B89-B96.
Gerken, L. A., & Bollt, A. (2008). Three examples allow at
least some linguistic generalizations: Implications for
generalization mechanisms and constraints. Language
Learning and Development, 4, 228-248.
Goldrick, M. (2004). Phonological featurs and phonotactic
constraints in speech production. Journal of Memory &
Language, 51, 586-603.
Haider, H., Eichler, A., & Lange, T. (2010). An old problem:
How can we distinguish between conscious and
unconscious knowledge acquired in an implicit learning
task? Consciousness and Cognition.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework:
Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory & Language, 30, 513-541.
Juffs, A. (1990). Tone, syllable structure and interlanguage
phonology: Chinese learners’ stress errors. International
Review of Applied Linguistics, 28(2), 99-118.
Knowlton, B. J., Squire, L. R. (1994). The information
acquired during artificial grammar learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 20, 79-91.

Knowlton, B. J., Squire, L. R. (1996). Artificial grammar
learning depends on implicit acquisition of both abstract
and
exemplar-specific
information.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 22, 169-181.
Leung, J., & Williams, J. N. (2011). The Implicit Learning of
Mappings between Forms and Contextually-Derived
Meanings. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 33.
Onishi, K., Chambers, K., & Fisher, C. (2002). Learning
phonotactic constraints from brief auditory experience.
Cognition, 83, B13-B23.
N.Warner (eds.). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 203-240.Reber,
A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 6, 855863.
Rebuschat, P., & William, J. N. (2011). Implicit and explicit
knowledge in second language acquisition. Applied
Psycholinguistics,
Available
on
CJO
2011
doi:10.1017/S0142716411000580
Robinson, P. (1996). Learning simple and complex second
language rules under implicit, incidental, rule-search, and
instructed conditions. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 18, 27-67.
Robinson, P. (2005). Cognitive abilities, chunk-strength, and
frequency effects in implicit artificial grammar and
incidental L2 learning: Replications of Reber, Walkenfeld,
& Hernstadt (1991) and Knowlton & Squire (1996) and
their relevance for SLA. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 27, 235-268.
Saffran, J. R. (2001). The use of predictive dependencies in
language learning. Journal of Memory and Language,
44(493-515).
Saffran, J. R., Hauser, M., Seibel, R., Kapfhamer, J., Tsao, F.,
& Cushman, F. (2008). Grammatical pattern learning by
human infants and cotton-top tamarin monkeys. Cognition,
107, 479-500.
Scott, R., & Dienes, Z. (2008). The conscious, the
unconscious, and familiarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory, and Cognition, 34, 12641288.
Shanks, D. R., & St. John, M. F. (1994). Characteristics of
dissociable human learning system. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 17, 367-447.
Tunney, R. J. & Shanks, D. R. (2003). Does opposition logic
provide evidence for conscious and unconscious processes
in artificial grammar learning? Consciousness and
Cognition, 12, 201-218.
Wang, Q. (2008). L2 stress perception: The reliance on
different acoustic cues. Speech Prosody 2008. Campinas,
Brazil, 135-138
Warker, J. A., & Dell, G. S. (2006). Speech errors reflect
newly learned phonotactic constraints. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 32, 387-398.

197

