UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Improving Representational Competence in Chemistry with Model-Based Feedback

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/79v664t7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Padalkar, Shamin
Hegarty, Mary

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Improving Representational Competence in Chemistry with Model-Based Feedback
Shamin Padalkar (shamin.padalkar@psych.ucsb.edu)
Mary Hegarty (mary.hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Abstract

Diagrams Used in this Study

Representational competence is an important component of
learning Organic Chemistry. However, students are seen to be
incompetent in translating from one kind of molecular
diagram to another. An instructional method informed by
spatial cognition research was designed and administered
individually. The instruction involved having students check
their solutions by attempting to match concrete models to
their solution. The instruction helped students in the
experimental group to identify their mistakes, understand the
usefulness of concrete models and lead to large improvements
in performance for the experimental group.
Keywords: concrete
visualization.

models;

chemistry

Dash-Wedge Diagram (Sometimes referred to, as
perspective formula): In a Dash-Wedge diagram (Figure
1a), the molecule is oriented with the backbone carbons 1 at
the two 4-way intersections of lines on the left and right of
the diagram. Dashed lines represent bonds to atoms that are
going into the page (below the plane of the paper). Wedge
lines represent atoms that are coming out of the page (above
the plane of the paper). Solid lines represent bonds to atoms
that are in the plane of the paper.

CH3

education;

HCH3

HH33CC

Introduction
The literature in science education and chemistry education
in particular, shows that interconnected cognitive skills,
such as visualization, construction of mental models, model
based reasoning, and representational competence are
essential for acquiring mastery in the discipline (Kozma &
Russell, 2005; Coll, 2006; Justi and Gilbert 2006; Treagust
& Chittleborough, 2001). Kozma & Russell (2005) define
‘representational competence’ in the context of chemistry as
‘a set of skills and practices that allow a person to
reflectively use a variety of representations or
visualizations, singly and together, to think about,
communicate, and act on chemical phenomena in terms of
underlying, aperceptual physical entities and processes’.
Representational competence is particularly important in
organic chemistry. Organic chemists use several different
representations of molecules, including different kinds of
diagrams, models, and equations, for different purposes. For
example, three kinds of diagrams are commonly used in
organic chemistry and are introduced in the introductory
college course on this topic. Mastering these diagrams is
challenging, because they use different conventions to
represent the three-dimensional (3-D) arrangement of atoms
in the molecules in the two-dimensions of the printed page.
They are also drawn from different orthogonal perspectives.
This paper describes a study in which we examined
students’ ability to translate between these models, and
tested an educational intervention that was designed to
improve their representational competence using 3-D
molecular models.
Examples of the three types of diagrams are given in Fig.
1 and their conventions and a brief description of each is
given below.

H

H

OH

H

CH
H 3

HOH
3C

CH
CH3

H3C

H

3

CH3

a. Dash-Wedge diagram

b. Newman projection

CH3
HO

H

H

H
CH3

c. Fischer projection
d. Ball-stick model
Figure 2: 2-Butanol molecule presented in three types
of diagrams
and concrete
models
used in
Figure
1: 2-Butanol
molecule
presented
in this
threestudy
types
of diagrams and concrete models used in this study
Newman Projections: In a Newman projection (Figure 1b),
the molecule is oriented with one backbone carbon in front
of the other. The front carbon is located at the intersection
of the 3 lines (noon, 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock around the
circle). The substituents (atoms or groups of atoms) at the
ends of these three lines are attached to the front carbon.
The rear carbon is behind the circle. The substituents at the
ends of the shorter lines connected to the circle (2 o’clock, 6
o’clock, and 10 o’clock around the circle) are attached to the
rear carbon.
1

Carbon backbone: longest series of covalently bonded
carbon atoms in an organic compound.

2162

Fischer Projections: In the Fischer projection (Figure 1c),
the atoms at the right and left of the horizontal lines are
coming out of the page (above the plane of the paper) and
the atoms at the top and bottom of the vertical line are going
into the page (below the plane of the paper). The two
backbone carbons are located where the horizontal lines
cross the vertical line. These carbons are in the plane of the
paper.
The arrangement of atoms is of great importance in
Chemistry, because even if the chemical formula is same,
different arrangements of atoms result in different chemical
properties. Dash-Wedge, Newman and Fischer diagrams
serve different functions and hence chemists are often
required to translate from one diagram to another. Ability to
perform this representation translation task is also a measure
of students’ understanding of the 3-D structure of a
molecule, as well as the conventions of a diagram, and
prepares them for further problem solving. Therefore
representation translation problems are included in typical
assessments in organic chemistry classes.
Since it is difficult to visualize the 3-D structure of
molecules from these diagrams, concrete, 3-D models (see
Figure 1d) are sometimes used as pedagogic tool. A model
represents the 3-D structure of the molecule directly, and
therefore does not depend on remembering conventions for
how the three dimensions are represented in a 2-D diagram.
Furthermore, in translating between diagrams of molecules
from different orientations, a student can rotate a physical
model and observe the results, rather than having to perform
difficult internal spatial transformations (mental rotation or
perspective taking). This corresponds to what Kirsh (1997)
referred to as a complementary action, that is, an action
performed in the world that relieves the individual of the
need to perform an internal computation. However
chemistry instructors differ in their use of models. Some
chemistry teachers use models while teaching and
encourage their students to use them, but others rarely use
models.
In recent studies (Stull, Hegarty, Dixon, & Stieff,
submitted), undergraduate students were asked to translate
between different kinds of diagrammatic representations of
organic molecules and concrete models were made available
to them. In different conditions across three experiments,
students were encouraged to use the models and the
correspondence between the models and diagrams was
explicitly pointed out to the students. Students performed
poorly on the representation translation task. When models
were made available to them, many of the students did not
use the models. However, those students who used the
models performed significantly better on the diagram
translation task. In conclusion, if models are used, they are
extremely helpful in the translation task, but many students
face a barrier to using them. Thus, just providing models is
not enough; research is required to develop an appropriate
instructional method for scaffolding the use of models.

Exploratory study
In order to explore what strategies students use to solve the
translation problems and how they interact with models, we
first conducted a pilot study. Six undergraduate students
were interviewed and asked to think aloud while solving six
diagram translation problems. The students were familiar
with the diagrams and their conventions. Most of the
students used algorithms (rules) and/or internal visualization
to solve the translation problems, rather than using models.
Interestingly despite making many errors, these students
were confident that they were performing the task correctly,
which decreased their motivation for exploring the
possibility of using models and improvement. That is,
students had an illusion of understanding (cf. Rozenblit &
Keil, 2002; Dunning, et. al., 2003). Specifically, they did
not have clear understanding of the difference between
stereoisomers and conformations2. Molecules that are
stereoisomers have the same bond structure (in terms of
which atoms are bonded with which other atoms) but
different structures in terms of the relative locations of the
substituents (atoms and groups of atoms) in 3-D space. An
informal task in which they were asked to match the
concrete model to their solution made students realize their
mistake and to use the models effectively. From this study it
was clear that (1) the participants need to know that they are
making errors and what kind of errors they are making, and
(2) they need to be guided to pay attention to the 3-D
structure of the molecules as shown in the concrete models.

Experimental Intervention Study
A short instruction, which required the participants use
the model to check their solution, was designed and tested
in an experiment. This instruction served two purposes:
First it provided feedback to the participants. Second, it
forced them to structurally align the model, therefore
making them pay attention to the 3-D structure of the
molecules, and revealed how the model could be used to
help translate between the diagrams. We compared the
accuracy of solutions of a group given this instruction
(experimental group) to that of control group who
performed the same representation translation tasks, but
without the intervention. In addition to the accuracy of their
solutions and demographic facts, we measured their spatial
ability and general intelligence. Performance of the diagram
translation task has been found to be correlated with spatial
ability (Stull et al., submitted) but previous studies did not
assess its relation to general intelligence. In addition, given
that students are overconfident with their responses and
many students do not spontaneously use models, we asked
2

Stereoisomers have the same bond structure, but the
different geometrical positioning of atoms and functional
groups in space (e.g. switching the groups around one or
more chiral (asymmetric) Carbon atom, which results into
different chemical properties. However, rotation around C-C
sigma bond results in a different conformation of the same
molecules and it has the same chemical properties.

2163

them to judge their levels of confidence and the usefulness
of models before and after the interventions. We also
videotaped the students while they performed the task and
coded whether or not they used the models on each trial.

Experimental Task
Students solved 18 problems (6 pre-test, 6 post-test and 6
transfer) in which they were provided one kind of diagram
of a molecule (e.g., a dash-wedge diagram) and were asked
to draw another kind of diagram (e.g. a Newman diagram)
for the same molecule. The worksheet (8.5” x 11”) included
an instruction on the top and a diagram below it. Solution
space on the work-sheet for the pre-test was divided into
two equal parts by a horizontal line and participants were
asked to draw their solution above the line. Post-test
worksheets were not divided and participants were allowed
to draw their solution wherever they wished.

Aptitudes as a test of general reasoning ability (40 items, no
time limit).
Participants were videotaped with their consent. The
video camera was situated 2 feet above the table, usually on
the left side of the participant. The experimenter sat to the
left side of the participant, gave relevant instructions,
provided relevant models and occasionally monitored the
video camera. Participants saw only one model at a time,
that is, the model of the molecule in the problem they were
solving; the others were kept behind a screen. The assembly
is shown in Figure 2.

Research Design
The experiment followed a pre-test post-test design with
control and experimental groups. Both experimental and
control groups were first given basic instructions, which
included the nature of the task, examples of three kinds of
diagrams (see Figure 1) and their conventions (as described
earlier). Participants were told that the instruction sheet
would be kept, face down on the table and they could refer
to it as necessary. They were also given a concrete (Ball &
Stick) model3 and reminded of the color codes for the
different atoms in the models. The model was positioned in
a clay stand. The experimenter demonstrated that the
concrete model could be taken out of the stand and that it
could be rotated in space and around the main carboncarbon bond.
The pre-test consisted of six problems involving 4-Carbon
molecules. It was followed by a short questionnaire on
participants’ level of confidence in their solutions and the
usefulness of the concrete models. Then the experimental
group went through a training intervention (described
below) and the control group participants were given a 5minute break. The post-test included a second set of six
problems with 4-carbon molecules (enantiomers, or, mirror
images) of the molecules in the pre-test problems and six 5carbon problems. We refer to the set of 5-carbon problems
as transfer problems, although they were very near transfer.
The post-test was followed by a questionnaire which
included questions about demographics and the same
statements about confidence and usefulness of models as in
the pre-test questionnaire. Finally, all participants completed
the Vanderberg and Kuse (1978) Mental Rotation Test as a
test of spatial ability (20 items administered in two 3 minute
blocks) and Abstract Reasoning Test from the Differential

3

We used a ‘Fundamental Organic Chemistry Set’
manufactured by HGS Hinomoto Plastic Co., LTD (see Fig.
1d).

Figure 2: Assembly for the study

Intervention

The intervention involved directions for participants to
use models to check their own solutions and to draw correct
solutions, if any of their solutions were found to be
incorrect.
In the beginning of the intervention, participants were told
“We are going to check the solutions”. They were provided
the concrete model for each problem and each problem was
checked in three steps. Participants were provided help at
each step if necessary. As a first step and were asked to
match (i.e., structurally align) the model with the given
diagram (cf., Gentner, 1983). This gave participants an
opportunity to confirm that the given model indeed
represented the given diagram and also gave practice in
seeing the correspondence between model and diagram. In
the second step of the intervention, participants were asked
to align the model with their solution to the problem (which
was drawn above the horizontal line). If the participant had
drawn a correct solution, once s/he matched aligned the
model with the solution, s/he was asked to move to the next
problem. If the solution was incorrect, it would not be
possible to structurally align the model with the solution. In
this case, s/he realized that the model could not be matched
and the solution was incorrect. The third step involved
drawing a new corrected solution (below the horizontal
line).
If the participant again drew an incorrect solution, Steps 2
and 3 were repeated. This was necessary for only 16
participants (on a total of 25 trials, i.e. an average of 1.56
trials per participant). If the participant drew an incorrect
solution on the third attempt, he/she was told his/her
mistake and was asked to go to the next problem. There was
only one participant who could not draw the correct solution
even after 3 cycles, and that was only on one trial.

2164

Participants

Coding of Model Use

The experimental group consisted of 30 participants (15
females) and the control group consisted on 24 participants
(12 females), all undergraduate students at a research
university. These students had completed at least one course
in Organic Chemistry, in which they had been introduced to
the three types of diagrams of organic molecules. The two
groups did not differ in age (average = 20.3 years), spatial
ability (average MRT scores = 35.67), general intelligence
(average abstract reasoning test scores = 28.94), GPA
(average = 3.15) or number of years in college (average =
3). The participants received course credit or $20 for their
participation.

Participants’ use of the models was coded using the videos.
Each trial was coded for whether or not participants moved
the model in any way during each trial. Whenever
participants moved the model it was coded as a use of the
model. Pointing at the model (which happened extremely
rarely) was not counted as using the model.

Coding of Diagrams
The data were coded in 2 ways:
Number of correct solutions: A score of ‘0’ or ‘1’ was
assigned to each problem. A drawing had to be completely
correct to receive a score of 1. The sum of correct solutions
served as the total accuracy scores for the pre-test, post-test,
and transfer problems.
Level of accuracy: Depending upon the type of error a
level of 0 to 2.5 was assigned to each problem. In this
scoring scheme, level 0 was assigned if a participant drew
the wrong type of diagram or drew a diagram with missing
or additional substituents. Level 1 was assigned when the
diagram drawn was made up of the correct substituents, but
these were incorrectly connected to the central carbon
atoms. If the substituents were attached to the correct carbon
atoms, but their 3-D spatial arrangement was incorrect, level
2 or 2.5 was assigned depending upon whether the mistake
was made on both sides of the molecule (level 2) or only on
one side (level 2.5). A fully correct diagram was assigned a
level of 3. In addition to scoring the level of understanding
for each problem, a student was assigned to a level of
understanding (ranging from 0 to 3) if two_thirds of their
solutions (4 of 6) were at or above this level of
understanding for the pre-test, post-test, and transfer
problems.
Data for 20 participants were coded independently by two
researchers to establish the inter-rater reliability. Cohen’s
Kappa for the scores of pre-test, post-test and transfer
problems together was 0.977.

Results
Analysis of Correct Solutions: Performance of the control
and experimental groups on the pre-test, post-test and
transfer problems is shown in Figure 3. The control group
and experimental group had relatively poor performance on
the pre-test, consistent with previous studies (Stull et al.,
submitted) and did not significantly differ on the pre-test, t
(52) = 1.844, p = .07. The experimental group performed
significantly better after the intervention than before, t (29)
= 9.344, p < .001, and scored significantly better than the
control group on the post-test, t (52) = 4.06, p < .001. The
average score for this group on the transfer problems is
almost the same as for the post-test for the experimental
group, t (29) = .162, p = .87, indicating that what was
learned from the intervention transferred to solving slightly
more difficult problems.

Figure 3: Average scores
The control group improved significantly from the pretest to the post-test, t (23) = 2.18, p < .05, and from the posttest to the transfer problems, t (23) = 2.41, p < .05, thus
making the difference between scores of the pre-test and
transfer problems significant, t (23) = 3.72, p = .001.
Despite this, the experimental group outperformed the
control group on the transfer problems, t (52) = 3.08, p< .01.

Figure 4: Percentage of participants at each level in the experimental and the control group

2165

Thus, the intervention was successful and lead to very
accurate performance (approximately 5 out of 6 problems
solved correctly) on the post-test and transfer problems;
although the control group spontaneously improved, they
solved less than half of the post-test and transfer problems
correctly.
Analysis of Levels of Accuracy: In the pre-test, the
majority of students’ drawings were at level 2.5 indicating
that they understand the connectivity between the molecular
substituents, but not their relative locations in 3-D space. In
the post-test and transfer problems, the majority of students
in the experimental group were at level 3, i.e., fully correct
solutions. For the control group, the number of students
performing at level 3 gradually increased (Figure 4). At the
final (transfer) phase of the experiment 83% of participants
in the experimental group and 58% of those in the control
group were performing at Level 3.
Correlations: As Table 1 shows, for the control group,
scores on the pre-test, post-test and transfer correlated with
each other. However this was not true for the experimental
group. Participants in the experimental group performed
well in post-test and transfer problems, regardless of their
performance in the pre-test, which shows that the
intervention was successful, irrespective of students’ initial
ability to do this task. As expected, scores on the pre-test
and post-test correlated with scores on the mental rotation
test (MRT) but this test was not significantly correlated with
the transfer problems. The abstract reasoning test was
correlated with performance only for the control group.
Partial correlations of MRT with drawing performance,
controlling for abstract reasoning, were significant for the
pre-test (0.34* pooling all participants). However, the
correlations of MRT with the post-test and transfer
problems were not significant. Thus, spatial ability is an
important predictor of performance in the pre- and post-test
but as the participants become familiar with the task, spatial
ability becomes less important.
Table 1: Correlations (‘*’ indicates a significant correlation)
Scores

Pre-test

Post-test

Transfer

Post-test

Ctrl
Expt

0.832*
0.095

1

Transfer

Ctrl
Expt

0.778*
0.079

0.902*
0.705*

1

MRT

Ctrl
Expt

0.480*
0.528*

0.410*
0.361*

0.275
0.134

Abstract
reasoning

Ctrl
Expt

0.519*
0.238

0.441*
0.311

0.410*
0.130

Students’ perceptions about models and confidence
level: Students were given six statements (shown in Figure
5) to judge on scale of 1 to 5 after both the pre and post-test.

The arrows indicate the shift in their judgments from pretest to post-test, with the experimental group shown in blue
and the control group shown in red. Although overconfident
in the pre-test, after the intervention, participants in the
experimental group were significantly more and
appropriately confident. They found models to be more
helpful, and they recorded that they used the models more
after the intervention.
I am confident about my solutions.
Strongly agree

2

3

4

Strongly disagree

The transformation problems were challenging.
Strongly agree

2

3

4

Strongly disagree

The molecular models were helpful.
Strongly agree

2

3

4

Strongly disagree

I did not need to use the models.
Strongly agree

2

3

4

Strongly disagree

The models helped me visualize the projections.
Strongly agree

2

3

4

Strongly disagree

I found it necessary to pickup the models during the task.
Strongly agree

2

3

4

Strongly disagree

Figure 5: Shift in students' attitudes (‘*’ indicates a
significant difference)

Participants’ use of the models: Participants in the
experimental group moved the model on only 35% of trials
during the pre-test but this percentage increased to 86% for
the post-test and the transfer problems (Figure 6). On the
other hand, participants in the control group moved the
model on 62% trials in the pre-test and this percentage
increased to 68% for the post-test. Thus the intervention was
successful in inducing the experimental group to use the
models. The tendency for the control group to use the model
more in the pre-test appears to be due to sampling error,
however it might also explain why these participants
spontaneously improved on the problems, even without an
intervention.

Figure 6: Percentages of trials on which participants
moved the models (‘*’ indicates a significant difference)

2166

Discussion
In summary, the intervention was successful. The accuracy
of the experimental group increased from 27% to 83%.
Although the control group underperformed the intervention
group on the post-test, their accuracy steadily increased
from 42% to 55% and their scores for the transfer problems
were significantly higher than the pre-test scores. Spatial
ability was an important predictor of performance on the pre
and post-test, but it did not predict performance on the
transfer problems, which suggests that spatial ability
becomes less important with practice on the task.
Participants in the experimental group also showed an
increase in confidence level, reported that they found
models more useful, and reported that they used the models
more often after the intervention. The latter result was
validated by objective measures of their use of the models.
Analysis of students’ levels of understanding (Figure 4)
shows that the majority of participants were at level 2.5 in
the pre-test which means that they switched the positions of
two of the chemical groups around one of the central carbon
atoms in the model. This mistake reflects a lack of
understanding of the 3-D spatial relations between the
chemical groups. There are two possible reasons for this
error. First, participants may not realize the importance of
the relative 3-D locations and hence draw a different
molecule (an isomer of the correct molecule). Second they
might understand the importance of the 3-D structure, but
not be able to perform the required spatial transformation.
The current experiment does not rule out either of these
explanations, but it shows that once participants attempted
to structurally align the models with the diagrams, they
discovered their error and this in turn lead to increased use
of the models and better performance in the post-tests.
If students do not understand the importance of the 3-D
spatial relations, then giving them constructive feedback,
that they drew an isomer, rather than the correct molecule,
should be sufficient to improve performance. If they
understand the importance of the 3-D relations, but are
unable to perform the required spatial transformations,
showing them how models map onto the diagrams should
help them perform the correct spatial transformations. To
identify which of these two reasons played an important role
in students’ inability to perform the diagram translation
task, we are currently conducting a second experiment
which compares a ‘feedback’ condition and ‘model match’
condition.
In any case, the current paper documents an intervention
that was certainly useful. It took a short time (an average of
17 minutes to check the 6 pre-test problems) and could be
accommodated in a laboratory or tutorial session in the
context of an organic chemistry class. Further studies will
be necessary to examine whether this type of intervention
can lead to lasting gains in student performance, and
whether the intervention leads to an understanding of the
structure of molecules that can improve performance in a
situation where students do not have access to models.
Although experts often use more abstract rule-based

strategies to translate between diagrams (Stieff, 2007)
understanding the 3-D structure of molecules is central to
organic chemistry knowledge, and models appear to be an
important stepping stone to reaching higher levels of
understanding. Also, since models, in contrast to diagrams,
are powerful representations having the unique quality of
three-dimensionality, they have been an important tool in
cutting edge research and hence students should be familiar
with strengths and weaknesses of models through their own
experience. The general approach of the intervention can be
adopted and tested in the instructions of other disciplines
such as geology, astronomy, architecture etc. in which threedimensional structure and dynamic properties of the system
are very important.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by National Science Foundation
Grant DRL 1008650. We are thankful to Andrew Stull,
Trevor Barrett, David Sanosa, Emily Steiner, Bonnie Dixon,
Mike Stieff for their contributions to the research.

References
Coll, R. (2006) The role of models, mental models and
analogies in chemistry teaching. In P. Aubusson, A. G.
Harrison, S. Ritchie (Eds.) Metaphor and analogy in
science education. Springer.
Dunning, D., Johnson, K., Ehrlinger, J., & Kruger, J.
(2003). Why people fail to recognize their own
incompetence. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 12(3): 83-87. doi:10.1111/1467-8721.01235.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Justi, R. and Gilbert, J. (2006) The role of analog models in
the understanding of the nature of models in Chemistry. .
In P. Aubusson, A. G. Harrison, S. Ritchie (Eds.)
Metaphor and analogy in science education. Springer.
Kirsh, D. (1997). Interactivity and multimedia interfaces.
Instructional Science, 25, 79–96.
Kozma, R. & Russell, J. (2005) Multimedia learning of
chemistry. In R. Mayer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of
Multimedia Learning, 409-428. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Rozenblit, L. & Keil, F. (2002). The misunderstood limits of
folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth. Cognitive
Science, 26, 521-562.
Stieff, M. (2007). Mental rotation and diagrammatic
reasoning in science. Learning and Instruction, 17, 219234.
Stull, A. T. Hegarty, M., Dixon, B., Stieff, M. (submitted)
Representational Translation with Concrete Models.
Treagust, D. F., Chittleborough, G. (2001), Chemistry: A
matter of understanding representations, in J. Brophy
(Ed.) Subject-specific instructional methods and activities
(Advances in Research on Teaching, Volume 8), Emerald
Group Publishing Limited.

2167

