UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inductive reasoning in the courtroom: Judging guilt based on uncertain evidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8g5322z4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Martin, Ann
Hayes, Brett

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inductive reasoning in the courtroom: Judging guilt based on uncertain evidence
Ann M. Martin (Ann.Martin@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

Brett K. Hayes (B.Hayes@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

Abstract
Most legal systems require jurors to consider all the evidence
presented at trial. Hence when there is uncertainty over
aspects of evidence this should be factored into juror
judgments. Two experiments examined how mock jurors used
uncertain information in their ratings of defendant guilt and
final verdicts. Participants read scenarios where an eyewitness
expressed uncertainty about the identity of a critical piece of
evidence (e.g. the object a defendant was holding could have
been a knife or a mobile phone). The respective probability of
these alternatives was varied, as was their association with the
alleged crime. When the probability of the alternatives was
varied between subjects (Experiment 1) there was only weak
evidence that jurors considered both alternatives. When
probability was varied within-subjects (Experiment 2), jurors
did consider both alternatives in their guilt judgments. The
implications for theories of reasoning with uncertain
information and forensic practice are discussed.
Keywords: Inductive reasoning; Probabilistic reasoning;
Category-based induction, Forensic judgment

Introduction
The process of deciding on the guilt or innocence of a
defendant in a criminal trial could be seen as form of
complex inductive inference (Lagnado, 2011). Induction
involves drawing probabilistic inferences from given
information. When the category membership of an object is
known with certainty (e.g., a man at a robbery crime scene
was carrying a knife) the process of inductive inference is
relatively straightforward (e.g., the knife was likely being
used as a weapon in the robbery).
However, the evidence presented in criminal cases is
typically complex and fraught with uncertainty (e.g., an
eyewitness may not be certain about the identity of the
object that the defendant was holding). In such cases
induction involves the consideration of multiple possible
object categories that may have different implications for
judgments about the defendant’s guilt. For example, if a
defendant was thought to be carrying a knife then a juror
may judge the defendant as likely to be guilty of committing
a crime. But if there is some chance that the object in the
defendant’s hand was something less incriminating (e.g., a
metallic-colored mobile phone) then this may reduce belief
in the defendant’s guilt.
So just how do jurors respond to such uncertain
alternatives when making inferences about guilt or

innocence? The legal answer to this question is
straightforward and prescriptive. Most criminal jurisdictions
specify that jurors should consider all evidence presented at
trial when determining defendant culpability (e.g., Attorney
General’s Department of New South Wales, 2007).
Laboratory studies of inductive reasoning with uncertain
categories however, suggest a more complex answer (see
Hayes, Heit & Swendsen, 2010 for a review).
Bayesian approaches to inductive reasoning, such as
Anderson’s (1991) Rational model, generally agree with the
legal ideal, suggesting that reasoners incorporate
information about all category alternatives when making
inferences (hereafter referred to as multiple-category
reasoning). To illustrate, let us assume that an eyewitness
believes that the probability that the object the defendant
was holding was a knife is 0.7 (which we will refer to as the
primary category), with a 0.3 probability that the object was
instead a metallic mobile phone (the secondary category).
Further assume that these alternatives are associated with
different conditional probabilities of guilt. If the person was
holding a knife then the probability of them being guilty is
high (e.g., p(guilt| knife) = 0.9), but if they were holding a
mobile phone the probability of guilt will be much lower
(e.g., p(guilt| phone) = 0.2). Applying Bayes’ theorem, the
Rational model combines the probabilities from the primary
and secondary categories to give an estimate of the
probability that the defendant was guilty, given they were
seen with a metallic object in their hand (p(guilt| metallic
object) = (0.7*0.9) + (0.3*0.2) = 0.69). Note that this
probability estimate is considerably lower than would be the
case if the uncertainty over object identity was ignored. If
the juror assumed that the object in the defendant’s hand
was a knife then the guilt estimate would be 0.9.
Unfortunately (from a legal point of view), empirical
studies have so far found little evidence of multiplecategory reasoning. Malt, Ross and Murphy (1995) for
example, presented vignettes in which the category
membership of a target character was uncertain, and asked
participants to make various inferences about the targets.
For each scenario two possible category identities were
suggested, a more likely primary category and a less likely
but plausible secondary category. The primary category was
held constant across conditions (e.g., the vignette always
made it clear that the target character was most likely a
realtor). The secondary category however was varied; in one
condition the target was most likely a cable repairman, in

1966

another it was most likely a burglar. These alternatives have
different implications for inferences such as “how likely is it
that the man will pay attention to the sturdiness of the doors
on the house?” Such behavior seems more likely if the
target was a burglar than if they were a realtor or cable
repairman. If people do consider multiple categories in
induction, then their inferences should differ across the
conditions with different secondary categories. Malt et al.
(1995) however, found that participants tended to ignore the
secondary category when making inductive inferences.
Predictions were predominantly based on consideration of
the primary category alone (also see Ross & Murphy, 1996).
Such “single-category reasoning” seems pervasive in nonforensic domains, having been demonstrated with a wide
variety of artificial and natural categories (see Murphy &
Ross, 2007, 2010 for reviews). Murphy and Ross (2007)
suggest that single-category reasoning can be viewed as a
cognitive heuristic that reduces the complexity of deriving
inductive predictions from multiple uncertain alternatives.
The pervasive nature of single-category reasoning in
previous studies leads to a negative prognosis for forensic
reasoning, suggesting that jurors are also likely to use the
single-category heuristic. Such a prediction is consistent
with reports of juror “satisficing” where the juror focuses on
aspects of trial evidence that are consistent with a single
coherent story, ignoring contradictory evidence (Kuhn,
Weinstock, & Flaton, 1994; Pennington & Hastie, 1992).
On the other hand, multiple-category reasoning may be
more common in forensic situations because of their
particular motivational demands. Motivational factors play
an important role in determining the depth and complexity
of reasoning (Gilovich & Griffin, 2010; Kunda, 1990).
Forensic judgments like guilt or innocence are widely
recognised as having profound consequences for a
defendant and for the wider community (Bornstein &
Greene, 2011). Hence jurors may be more likely to consider
uncertain alternatives when making highly consequential
judgments. Some support for this prediction comes from
Hayes and Newell (2009) who found that multiple-category
reasoning was more likely when neglect of the secondary
category could lead to a highly negative outcome (e.g. when
the primary category was a common but easily treatable
disease and the secondary category was a rare but
potentially terminal disease).
The main aim of the current studies therefore was to
examine whether mock jurors would show multiplecategory reasoning in cases where there was uncertainty
about the identity of forensically relevant evidence in a
criminal trial.

Experiment 1
Experiments 1 and 2 were patterned after those of Malt et
al. (1995) and Ross and Murphy (1996), using a design
where probability estimates of guilt were compared across
conditions in which the primary category was held constant
and the secondary category varied (see Table 1).
Participants in all conditions were shown written vignettes

which described criminal cases where there was uncertainty
about the identity of a critical piece of evidence. An
eyewitness testified that they observed the defendant
carrying an object, which they believed to be a particular
item (the primary category). However, they acknowledged
that there was a lower probability the object may have been
something else (the secondary category). In two Primary
Related conditions (Comparison 1 in Table 1), the primary
category consistently implicated the defendant in the crime
(e.g., in a robbery the primary category was “knife”).
However, the less likely secondary category varied such that
it indicated that the defendant was guilty in one condition
only (e.g., a stolen watch in one condition and a mobile
phone in the other).
After reading the vignettes participants judged which
object they thought the defendant was actually carrying
(object categorization) and made inferences about the
defendant’s guilt. Whether participants used single- or
multiple-category reasoning to arrive at these inferences
could be determined by comparing guilt estimates in the
conditions where the secondary categories were varied (see
Comparisons 1 & 2 in Table 1).
Table 1: Summary of the experimental design (with
examples of critical object alternatives from the Robbery
vignette)
Secondary Category
Related (e.g.,
Unrelated (e.g.,
stolen watch)
mobile phone)
Primary = knife Primary = knife
Comparison 1
Secondary =
Primary Category Secondary =
stolen watch
mobile phone
Related
(e.g., knife)
Comparison 2
Primary Category
Unrelated
(e.g., keys)

Primary = keys
Secondary =
stolen watch

Primary = keys
Secondary =
mobile phone

A subsidiary aim of Experiment 1 was to re-examine the
Ross and Murphy (1996) finding that multiple-category
reasoning is more likely when the secondary category is
closely linked to the prediction being made and the primary
category is not. In a variant on the realtor/cable guy/burglar
task, Ross and Murphy (1996) asked participants to make
predictions that were more strongly associated with the
secondary category of burglar but not with the primary
category of realtor (e.g., the prediction “how likely is it that
the man will try to find out if the householder keeps her
windows locked?”). Participants were more likely to
consider both categories when making such predictions.
Hence in the current study, we also ran a Primary
unrelated condition where the primary category was not
strongly associated with culpability and the association of
the secondary category with culpability was varied. In the
Primary unrelated, Secondary related condition the

1967

secondary category was associated with guilt (e.g., a stolen
watch), whereas in the Primary unrelated, Secondary
unrelated condition, neither category was associated with
the crime. Consideration of the secondary category should
lead to higher guilt estimates in the Primary unrelated,
Secondary related condition that in the Primary unrelated,
Secondary unrelated group.

Method
Participants
Ninety-eight
undergraduate
students
participated for course credit. The majority were female (n =
72), and the mean age was 19.95 years (SD = 1.84). All
were Australian citizens aged 18 years or older, in
accordance with Australian juror selection criteria.
Design and Materials The experiment followed a 2 × 2
factorial design with the first factor being whether the
primary category related to the crime and the second factor
being whether the secondary category related to the crime
(see Table 1). In Experiment 1 both factors were
manipulated between subjects, with approximately equal
numbers allocated to each experimental condition.
These factors were operationalized using written vignettes
presented as brief criminal trial summaries. Each vignette
was approximately 290 words in length and described a case
in which an eyewitness reported seeing the defendant at the
crime scene carrying an object whose identity was critical
for evaluating defendant guilt (see Appendix for an
example). Two category possibilities were provided for this
object: a primary category, which was described as the most
likely identity of the critical object (with an explicit
likelihood of 70%), and a secondary category, which was
described as having “a small chance” of being the identity
of the object. Two vignettes with this structure were
developed. One described a criminal trial for assault and
robbery, and the other described a trial for arson.
Our assumptions about the relatedness of the various
critical objects with the crime were confirmed in a pilot
study. Fifty nine participants who did not take part in the
main experiments read versions of the vignettes in which the
eyewitness provided only one category for the critical
object. Participants were then asked to rate the likelihood
that the defendant was guilty on a 100-point scale (1= not at
all likely, 100 = very likely). Defendants seen carrying
“related objects” (knife, stolen watch) were rated as more
likely to be guilty (M = 62.85) than those carrying
“unrelated objects” (mobile phone, keys), (M = 35.37), F(1,
55) = 27.24, p <.001.
Procedure Participants were told that they were to play the
role of a juror in determining the guilt of a defendant in a
criminal trial. Each vignette was then presented on a
computer screen with the eyewitness evidence about the
critical object alternatives written in bold type. After reading
the vignette participants clicked an on-screen button which
started a series of questions (with the vignette no longer
visible). The first was a categorization question that asked

participants to rate the percentage likelihood that the item
the defendant was carrying was (a) the primary category, (b)
the secondary category, or (c) some other item, with the
restriction that the three estimates must sum to 100 percent
(see Murphy & Ross, 2010 for a similar procedure). This
was followed by a filler question asking participants to
recall the general location of the crime as described in the
vignette. The final two questions required participants to
infer defendant culpability based on the trial evidence.
Participants first estimated the likelihood that the defendant
was guilty on a 100-point scale (1=not at all likely,
100=very likely). They then rendered a binary verdict
(‘guilty’ or ‘not guilty’) by clicking on one of two forced
choice buttons.
Previous research (e.g., Harris & Hahn, 2009) indicates
that mock jurors often give less weight to evidence that they
perceive to be inconsistent. In our experimental vignettes
all eyewitnesses expressed some inconsistency about the
identity of the critical object. However, it is possible that the
effects of this inconsistency on juror confidence in
eyewitness evidence may have differed across experimental
conditions (e.g., jurors may give more weight to evidence
when both objects are positively related to the crime, than
when one is related and the other is not). To check on this
possibility all participants were also asked to rate their
confidence in the reliability of the eyewitness on a sevenpoint scale (1= ‘very low confidence’, 7= ‘very high
confidence’).
Within each condition participants completed both
robbery and arson vignettes with order of vignette
administration counterbalanced.

Results and Discussion
Preliminary Analyses. The experimental predictions are
based on the assumption that participants believe that the
critical object was more likely to belong to the primary than
the secondary category. The object categorization data
identified 12 participants who did not rate the primary
category as more likely. Consequently they were excluded
from further analyses.
Preliminary analyses confirmed that the percentage
likelihood ratings for membership of the critical object in
the primary (M = 69%) and secondary categories (M = 26%)
were close to those stated or implied in the vignettes.
Notably participants in all conditions rated the likelihood of
secondary category membership as well above zero (group
means ranged from 21% to 30%). Hence participants in all
conditions grasped the uncertainty about the category
membership of the critical object.
Preliminary analyses confirmed that there were no
significant differences between the robbery and arson
vignettes in overall guilt estimates or ratings of reliability of
eyewitness evidence. Consequently, in both experiments
analyses of guilt judgments were collapsed across vignettes.
A two-way analysis of variance revealed a significant
main effect of secondary category association on ratings of
eyewitness reliability, F(1,82) = 6.36, p = .01. Witnesses in

1968

the secondary related conditions were rated as more reliable
(M = 4.1) than those in the secondary unrelated conditions
(M = 3.52). Hence, eyewitness reliability ratings were
included as a covariate in analyses of guilt judgments.

1998). Such levels of variability are likely to have reduced
the sensitivity of our tests of multiple-category reasoning.
Experiment 2 addressed this issue by manipulating the
status of the secondary category within subjects.

Guilt Likelihood Ratings and Guilt Verdicts. Both
variates were analyzed in 2(Primary category status) ×
2(Secondary category status) analyses of covariance with
eyewitness reliability entered as a covariate. Figure 1 shows
the adjusted guilt likelihood ratings for each condition. Not
surprisingly the defendant was rated as more likely to be
guilty when the primary category for the critical object was
closely linked to the crime than when it was unrelated,
F(1,81) = 32.97, p < .001. The more critical question was
whether the status of the secondary category affected guilt
estimates. There was no main effect of secondary category
status on guilt likelihood ratings, F(1,81) = 0.02, p = .89,
but there was a significant interaction between the status of
the primary and secondary categories, F(1,81) = 5.05, p =
.027. However, when Tukey’s HSD tests were applied, there
was no significant effect of secondary category association
in the critical comparison between the two Primary Related
conditions (q = 2.45, p>.05) nor between the two Primary
Unrelated conditions (q = -2.16, p > .05).

Experiment 2

Estimates of Defendant Guilt
(%)

90
80

Secondary Related

70

Secondary Unrelated

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Primary Related

Primary Unrelated

Figure 1. Mean likelihood ratings of defendant guilt (with
standard error bars).
The proportion of guilty verdicts was higher when the
primary category was related to the crime (M = 0.6) than
when it was unrelated (M = 0.21), F(1,81) = 28.80, p < .001.
However, there was no main effect or interaction involving
the status of the secondary category (p’s >.15). In other
words there was no evidence that participants considered the
secondary category when deciding on guilt verdicts.
In sum, this study found minimal evidence for multiplecategory reasoning in a forensic context. Note however, that
there was considerable variance in guilt judgments within
conditions. For binary judgments for example, the mean
standard error across experimental conditions was 0.073 (in
a scale ranging from 0.0-1.0). This high level of variability
is consistent with previous findings that individual jurors
presented with the same evidence often give very different
absolute estimates of guilt (e.g., Solana, García, & Tamayo,

Experiment 2 aimed to provide a more sensitive test of
whether mock jurors use multiple-category reasoning when
faced with uncertain alternatives. The design was similar to
the first study except that all participants completed two
versions of each trial vignette; one where the secondary
category was related to the crime, and one where it was
unrelated. Multiple-category reasoning would be indicated if
different judgments about guilt are given in these
conditions.

Method
Participants Forty-two undergraduate students participated
for course credit. The majority were female (n = 29) and the
mean age was 20.69 years (SD = 4.98).
Design and Procedure The design of Experiment 2
followed the description given in Table 1. Unlike the
previous study however, the status of the secondary
category (related or unrelated to the crime) was manipulated
within subjects. All participants completed two versions of
each of the robbery and arson vignettes; one with a crimerelated secondary category, and one with an unrelated
secondary category. The order of presentation of these
alternate versions was counterbalanced across participants.
To reduce sequencing effects alternate versions of the same
vignette were never presented consecutively. Before
completing the study participants were warned that they
would sometimes be reading summaries with similar details
and were instructed to “do your best to evaluate the trial
summaries independently”.
As in the previous study the status of the primary category
was manipulated between subjects. Equal numbers were
randomly allocated to conditions in which the primary
categories were related to the crime or were unrelated. In all
other respects the procedure was identical to Experiment 1.

Results
Preliminary Analyses Eleven participants failed to assign
the highest categorization rating to the primary category in
at least one scenario, and were excluded from further
analyses. Preliminary analyses again found that for the
remaining participants, ratings of the likelihood that the
critical object belonged to the primary and secondary
categories closely matched the probabilities stated or
implied in the vignettes. Notably, there was no evidence of
sequencing effects on guilt judgments for the secondary
related and secondary unrelated versions of each vignette.
The guilt estimates for these alternate versions were
unaffected by which version was presented first (F<2.0). As
in the previous study however, eyewitness reliability was
rated higher in secondary related than the secondary

1969

unrelated conditions, F(1,29) = 4.23, p <.05. Consequently,
eyewitness reliability scores were again included as
covariates in guilt analyses.
Guilt Likelihood Ratings and Guilt Verdicts Both
variates were collapsed across scenarios and the binary
verdicts were coded as per Experiment 1. Both data sets
were entered into separate 2 (primary category status) × 2
(secondary category status) multivariate analyses of
variance, with repeated measures on the second factor and
eyewitness reliability scores entered as covariates. Figure 2
shows adjusted mean guilt likelihood ratings. Once again
there was a significant main effect of primary category
status, F(1,28) = 27.22, p <.001, with higher guilt estimates
when the primary category was incriminating than when it
was not. More importantly, in this case there was also a
robust effect of secondary category status, F(1,28) = 36.46,
p < .001, but no primary x secondary category interaction,
(F < 1). When the secondary category was unrelated to the
crime, ratings of guilt likelihood were lower than when that
category incriminated the defendant. This shows that
participants were factoring both primary and secondary
categories into their guilt estimates.
Estimates of Defendant Guilt
(%)

90
Secondary Related
Secondary Unrelated

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Primary Related

Primary Unrelated

Figure 2. Mean likelihood ratings of defendant guilt (with
standard error bars).
A similar pattern was observed for binary guilt verdicts.
The proportion of guilty verdicts was higher when the
primary category was related to the crime (M = 0.63) than
when it was unrelated (M = 0.13), F(1,28) = 22.83, p <.001.
Critically there was also a robust effect of secondary
category status, F(1,28) = 8.33, p = .01. The proportion of
guilty verdicts was significantly lower when the secondary
category was unrelated to the crime (M = 0.30) than when it
was crime related (M = 0.46). There was no primary x
secondary category interaction, (F <1.0).
These data indicate that mock jurors were considering
both category alternatives when inferring guilt.

General Discussion
The goal of these experiments was to examine whether
mock jurors consider more than one alterative scenario
when inferring defendant guilt on the basis of uncertain
evidence. In our trial vignettes there was always some

uncertainty about the category membership of a critical
piece of evidence, with a more likely (primary) and a less
likely (secondary) category alternative. Mock jurors in both
studies acknowledged this uncertainty, recognizing that the
object could have belonged to the secondary category.
In Experiment 1 we found minimal evidence that jurors
factored these uncertain alternatives into their guilt
judgments but analyses of the critical comparisons did not
find these differences to be reliable. Notably though when
within-condition variance was reduced by manipulating
secondary category status within-subjects (Experiment 2),
robust evidence of multiple-category reasoning was found.
When there was a possibility that the defendant was holding
an innocuous rather than an incriminating object,
participants reduced their ratings of guilt likelihood and
were less like to return a verdict of guilty.
This is an important result because most previous work
(e.g., Malt et al., 1995; Murphy & Ross, 2007, 2010; Ross
& Murphy, 1996) has failed to find evidence that people
consider more than one category when making predictions
about objects whose category membership is uncertain.
Ross and Murphy (1996) reported some evidence of
multiple-category reasoning but only when the secondary
category was more highly associated with the prediction
than the primary category (equivalent to our primary
unrelated condition). In Experiment 2 however, we found
multiple-category reasoning in both primary related and
primary unrelated conditions. This result is particularly
interesting because it shows that consideration of the
secondary category can lead to either decreases in the
probability of a given prediction (in the Primary related
conditions) or increases in prediction probability (in the
Primary unrelated conditions).
One concern is that our strongest evidence of multiplecategory reasoning was found when participants completed
both the secondary related and secondary unrelated versions
of the vignettes. Under these conditions participants could
conceivably compare the structure of the two scenarios and
this may have increased their sensitivity to the role of the
secondary category in determining guilt. In other words, the
strong evidence of multiple-category reasoning may have
been an artifact of the repeated measures design. To
examine this possibility we looked at participant guilt
judgments the first time the vignettes were presented and
then the second time the vignettes were presented as two
separate sets of data. This order-artifact account predicts
that we should only see evidence of multiple-category
reasoning the second time that a participant sees the
vignettes as it is the exposure to the first version that directs
attention to the secondary category. Contrary to this account
however, the effect of the secondary category on guilt
ratings was robust on the first presentation on both the guilt
likelihood ratings, F(1,26) = 7.70, p < 0.05, and the
proportion of guilty verdicts, F(1,26) = 16.02, p < 0.01. In
other words, the first time participants read the vignettes

1970

they factored category uncertainty into their guilt ratings. 1.
So just why did we succeed in finding robust evidence in
multiple-category reasoning in Experiment 2 when a
majority of previous studies have failed to do so? Further
research will be required to give a complete answer to this
question. As noted earlier however, the highly consequential
nature of forensic decisions may lead participants to be
more reflective in their consideration of uncertain
alternatives. An analogous finding is that expert clinicians
have been shown to consider multiple uncertain categories
but only when making clinically relevant predictions (Hayes
& Chen, 2008). When required to make predictions about
nonclinical materials they ignored category uncertainty.
Overall these studies provide qualified support for the
conclusion that jurors can use multiple-category reasoning
when making inferences about guilt. Clearly much further
work is needed to be able to generalize these results to more
realistic trial contexts where, for example, the explicit
probabilities of different alternative scenarios are unlikely to
be given. Nevertheless our findings suggest that, at least in
some contexts, jurors can satisfy the legal imperative to
consider multiple uncertain aspects of evidence.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Australian Research Council
Grant DP0770292 to the second author. We would like to
thank Melissa Lim for her assistance with programming.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98, 409-429.
Attorney General’s Department of NSW. (2007). A guide
for jurors. Sydney, NSW: Court Services, Attorney
General’s Department of NSW.
Bornstein, B. H., & Greene, E. (2011). Jury decision
making: Implications for and from Psychology. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 63-67.
Gilovich, T. D., & Griffin, D. W. (2010). Judgment and
decision making. In T. Susan & D. T. Gilbert (Eds.),
Handbook of social psychology, Vol 1 (5th ed.) (pp. 542588). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Lagnado, D. A. (2011). Thinking about evidence.
Proceedings of the British Academy, 171, 183–223.
Harris, A. J. & Hahn, U. (2009). Bayesian rationality in
evaluating multiple testimonies: Incorporating the role of
coherence. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 1366-1373.
Hayes, B. K. & Chen, T-H. J. (2008). Clinical expertise and
reasoning with uncertain psychodiagnoses. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 15, 1002-1007

Hayes, B. K., Heit, E., & Swendsen, H. (2010). Inductive
reasoning. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive
Science, 1, 278–292.
Hayes, B. K. & Newell, B. R. (2009). Induction with
uncertain categories: When do people consider the
category alternatives? Memory & Cognition, 37, 730-743.
Kuhn, D., Weinstock, M., & Flaton, R. (1994). How well do
jurors reason? Competence dimensions of individual
variation in a juror reasoning task. Psychological Science,
5, 289-296
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480-498.
Malt, B. C., Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1995).
Predicting features for members of natural categories
when categorization is uncertain. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 646661.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (2007). Use of single or
multiple categories in category-based induction. In A.
Feeney & E. Heit (Eds.), Inductive reasoning:
Experimental, developmental, and computational
approaches (pp. 205-225). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Murphy. G. L., & Ross, B. H. (2010). Uncertainty in
category-based induction: When do people integrate
across categories? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36, 263-276.
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1992). Explaining the
evidence: Tests of the story model for juror decision
making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 189-206.
Ross, B. H. & Murphy, G. L. (1996). Category-based
predictions: Influence of uncertainty and feature
associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 736-753.
Solana, E. F., García, J., & Tamayo, I. (1998). Some
individual differences in perception of the evidence and
the verdict choice. Psychology, Crime and Law, 4, 361373.

Appendix
Excerpt from the Robbery Vignette used in
Experiments 1-2 showing the primary categories
(in bold) and secondary categories (in italics).

1
It should be noted that although this first presentation is similar
in design to Experiment 1, different results were obtained. There
is no clear explanation for this discrepancy. One possibility is that
this was due to the new instructions used in Experiment 2, which
strongly encouraged participants to attend the details of the
vignettes.

Ms. Kelly advised that the defendant Mr Bell was carrying a
metallic looking object in his hands. She believed that the object
was most likely a KNIFE/ KEYS. When asked to estimate her
certainty Ms. Kelly advised that she was “reasonably certain, at
least 70%”. She advised that there was “a small chance” that the
object was the STOLEN WATCH/ a MOBILE PHONE. In
summary, Ms. Kelly testified that there was a small chance that the
defendant was carrying the STOLEN WATCH/ a MOBILE
PHONE but she believed the defendant was most likely carrying a
KNIFE/ KEYS. Note that Ms. Kelly was sure that the defendant
was only carrying one object.

1971

