UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactions between abstract actions and apparent distance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5247v6bv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sears, Kathryn
Lesky, Jessica
Landy, David

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactions between abstract actions and apparent distance
Kathryn Sears (kathryn.sears@richmond.edu)
David Landy (dlandy@richmond.edu),
Jessica Lesky (jessica.lesky@richmond.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond
Richmond, VA 23173
Abstract
Perceptions influence the way we act in our environment
based upon judgments assessing required efforts to perform
an action and the availability and demand for immediate
action on an object (Proffitt, 2006B). Social and physical
anxiety has been shown to distort perceptions of depth and
perceptions of object size (Stefanucci et al., 2008; CañalBruland et al., 2010). Relatively little work, however, has
explored the potential role of depth perception in abstract
reasoning tasks (Landy & Linkenauger, 2010). In Experiment
1, the relationship between depth perception and the order of
actions taken to simplify arithmetic expressions was
investigated by manipulating apparent distances of arithmetic
operations of high and low syntactic precedence. When the
high precedence operations appeared to be closer to the
participant, expressions were solved more quickly than when
low precedence expressions appeared to be closer.
Experiment 2 explored the whether the affordance of abstract
actions conversely impacted perceived distance by asking
participants to make distance judgments to multiplication and
addition operations. Experiment 2 found no impact of anxiety
about mathematics on perceived distance. However, effects
resulting from condition assignment were found to influence
perceived distances, as well as solving strategy. We interpret
results in terms of attention, which we speculate plays a key
role moderating both ordering behavior and perceived
distance.
Keywords: Perception; Anxiety; Attention

Introduction
The basic purpose of perception is to guide sensible action.
Specifically, perception functions as a tool that informs and
guides actions (Proffitt, 2006A). Perception involves
consideration of the necessary efforts required to perform an
action, which in turn may bias judgments of object size and
proximity. For instance, perceived distance of an object is
more than simple metric distance. Participants carrying a
heavy backpack estimate the slant of hills to be steeper than
those not wearing backpacks (Proffitt, 2006B). Likewise,
simply intending to act on an object could make it seem
closer Witt & Proffitt (2005). Witt & Proffitt (2005) found
that athletes playing well reported a softball ball as being
bigger than its actual size and therefore closer. Their ability
to hit the ball was correlated with their batting average,
demonstrating the relationship between perceptions of
object size and performance when acting on that object.
Perceptual phenomena like these indicate that perception
relates the body and goals to the opportunities and costs of
acting in the physical environment.

Although the connection between concrete physical action
capabilities and depth perception is well documented, much
less work has explored the relationship between perceived
depth and non-concrete behaviors. There is evidence that
anxiety also influences perception (Proffitt, 2006A). For
instance, participants with a fear of heights judge hills to be
steeper than do those who are less afraid (Stefanucci et al,
2008). According to Teachman et al (2008), fear of heights
is associated with perceptual biases in judging heights,
implying that an individual’s emotional state influences
what is seen, perhaps because it affects perceived costs,
such as the cost of falling down a steep hill.
Anxiety not only distorts perception in the sense that
distances appear farther and angles steeper, but also by
altering the appearance of an object’s size. Cañal-Bruland,
Pijpers, & Oudejans (2010) studied the relationship between
anxiety and depth perception, while also taking into
consideration perceptions of object size. Participants were
asked to throw darts at a target from a position on a rock
wall. Cañal-Bruland, et al. found that the low anxiety group
performed better and saw the target as bigger. However,
these findings are limited to perceptions related to actions in
the physical world.
Even less is known about cases in which the action itself
is abstract or non-physical. In the case of abstract
calculation, since all actions are in principle equally easy to
perform, the logic of perceived energetic cost per se does
not predict any relationship between depth and intentions to
act. However, mathematical rules specify that certain
operations are to be performed before other others.
Particularly relevant for the studies reported here are the
order of precedence rules, which require that multiplications
be executed before additions., As a result, some operations
demand action before others, making, it possible to vary the
relative availability of actions. Furthermore, since the
actions do not depend on reach distance, any action lies
within the action boundary (Fajen, 2005). Landy &
Linkenauger (2010) found a relationship between the
availability of computational actions in compound
arithmetic expressions and judgments of depth. The study
explored judged depth of terms, and indeed found that
participants in a forced-choice task preferred to align depth
and precedence; furthermore, in a face-vase illusion in
which sub-expressions of mathematical equations were
superimposed onto a face-vase illusion, when the times sign
was over the vases, participants reported seeing the faces
less often than when the times sign was over the faces.
These perceptual effects can be explained by the

2300

affordances of immediate action associated with the times
sign as a result of taking precedence when using order of
operations in solving arithmetic expressions. The current
work builds on Landy & Linkenauger (2010) by considering
whether perceived (rather than judged) distance interacts
with the availability of concrete action
Visual attention also plays a significant influence on actionspecific perception and performance. In their study, CañalBruland, Zhu, van der Kamp, & Masters (2011) explored
this relationship through a golf-putting task that
manipulated the target-directed visual path. They found that
participants receiving full visual access to the target and
who putted more successfully estimated the target circle to
be bigger than their less successful counterparts. Thus, the
results of this study have shown that visual attention
influences perceptions object size, but only for objects of an
intended action. The relationship between anxiety and depth
perception is abstract when attentional influence is taken
into consideration. The current study aims to further explore
attention as a moderating variable in the relationship
between math anxiety and depth perception.
Math anxiety is defined by a strong tendency to avoid
math, which leads to lower competency levels in math
compared to those without math anxiety (Ashcraft, 2002).
Hoffman (2010) posits that anxiety is a common
impediment to learning in college students. Anxiety has
shown to impede working memory processes involved with
problem-solving efficiency, especially for women.
Implications from prior research suggest that more needs to
be done in order to understand the perceptual difficulties
associated with math anxiety, especially if research can
identify attention as a target for future interventions.
The purposes of the current studies were as follows: first,
to establish whether the effect on judgments of apparent
distance in pictures reported by Landy & Linkenauger
(2010) generalized to perception in physical situations and
second, to evaluate the influence of anxiety in distorting
perceptions of depth in abstract situations.

Figure 1: The stimuli used in Experiment 1. In this
congruent problem, the times sign (which is high
precedence) appears to be closer to the subject.

Experiment 1
Participants & Procedure
Thirty members of the University of Richmond community
were given partial course credit in exchange for
participation.
Participants sat in front of a computer. Participants were
shown 128 simple arithmetic problems, and were instructed
to state the solution to the problems out loud. Before
beginning, participants were reminded of the order of
operations through direct instruction and an example, and
were explicitly instructed to ignore any irrelevant images or
visual structure. Responses were recorded by microphone
and analyzed using CheckVocal (Protopapas, 2007).
All trials involved single digit operands, and were of one
of two forms: a+b×c or a×b+c. Correct solution values
ranged from 13 to 76.
The first 8 trials were practice trials. In these trials,
problems were presented against a white background. In the
remaining 120 trials, problems were presented against a
background image intended to affect the apparent depth of
the operators and operands. In this image (see Figure 1),
stimulus problems appeared to be placed on a set of pillars,
which varied in whether the left operator appeared closer
(left-closer condition), or the right (the right-closer
condition).
We hypothesized that problems would be solved more
easily when the high-precedence operation appeared to be
closer to the participant (called congruent problems).
Following comparable results in the manipulation of
spacing cues (Landy & Goldstone, 2010) we expected the
alignment of precedence and distance cues to selectively
influence order of operation reversals and operation errors
(e.g., performing a multiplication instead of an addition),
and to affect correct-trial response time.

Results
Because trial RTs were substantially non-normal the median
response time for each condition was calculated for each
subject, and subjected to a standard ANOVA. Pillar and
operation structure functioned as independent variables (see
Table 1). Neither main effect was significant (pillars:
F(1,28)=0.04, p~0.85, operations: F(1, 28)=1.2, p~0.3); the
interaction was significant and in the predicted direction
(F(1,28)=10.4, p<0.01).
Mean accuracy was 0.90 (Min=0.79, max=1.0).
Participants made very few order of operations errors and
operation errors: together, these made up just 2.9% of
responses. There was no difference between problems that
aligned pillars and operation structure and problems that
misaligned them. The error rate was 0.1 (SE=0.01) on
incongruent problems, and 0.06 on congruent problems
(SE=0.01) on congruent problems. A logistic regression
over operation order and pillar structure revealed neither a
main effect (operations: z=0.4, pillars: z=0.16, all p’s > 0.5),
nor an interaction between the two (z=0.5, p~0.6). Results

2301

Participants

Table 2: Mean response time for accurate trials in
Experiment 1 (Errors are standard errors).
Leftmost
Closer Pillar
operation
Left
Right
Plus
Times

2619
(127)
2465
(129)

The 32 participants of this study were from the Richmond
community between the ages of 18 and 30. They were
recruited through flyers posted around the University of
Richmond campus, as well as, through weekly online
campus announcements.

2516
(111)
2554
(131)

Apparatus and Materials
Experimental Room. The room was set-up with two
identical tables (137 cm x 76 cm) joined at a corner,
forming an L-shape. The participant’s chair was positioned
at the corner of these tables facing the wall. Both tables
were positioned approximately 23 cm from the wall. The
front legs of the chair were positioned 12 inches from the
front outer-legs of the table.

were nearly identical when just order and operation errors
were considered: The mean rate of operation errors and
order errors was 0.03 (SE=0.007) and 0.028 (SE=0.007) for
congruent and incongruent problems, respectively; there
was no difference between these by a logistic regression
over pillar structure and operation (pillar z = -1.1, operation
order = -0.1, interaction z = -0.5, all p’s > 0.61).

Discussion
Apparent distance did, as predicted, influence the execution
of basic arithmetic problems. Despite the equal availability
and readability of all terms in these problems (i.e., all
problems were presented on identical local backgrounds, at
identical sizes), problems in which high precedence
problems were apparently nearer to the participant were
solved more quickly than those in which the reverse was
true. This suggests that reasoners use cues about physical
structure when making abstract decisions such as operation
ordering. Experiment 1 indicates a bidirectional relationship
between apparent distance and arithmetic ordering.
In other similar work (e.g., Landy & Goldstone, 2010),
we have typically observed both accuracy and response time
effects. One difference between those and these was that the
rate of errors in this study was very low overall (just 10%),
and the rate of errors expected to be related to operation
order was even lower (just 2.9% overall). The population of
students in the current study was generally efficient at basic
arithmetic. This fact, together with the direct reminder to
follow the order of operations, may have shielded
participants from making many direct strategic errors when
solving the expressions.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 explored the relationship between perceived
distance, action affordance, and experienced anxiety in an
abstract domain--arithmetic. Participants judged the distance
to specific symbols inside an arithmetic expression, which
either did or did not afford immediate action. We
hypothesized, first, that participants who knew the order of
operations would judge times signs as closer than plus signs,
since in unparenthesized expressions with multiple
operations multiplications afford more immediate action
than additions do. We explored whether demonstrations that
anxiety distorts perceptions of action affordances would
generalize to abstract actions and situations.

Boards and Measuring Key. Expressions were displayed
on boards made of a white foam poster board, cut into
rectangles (45.7 cm x 30.5 cm) and supported by 30.5 cm
easel backs. The boards angled slightly, so that the top was
slightly further from the participant than the bottom.
A total of eight boards were made, one for each arithmetic
expression. The boards were placed at distances both within
and out of reach to the participant. Measured from the back
of the chair, expressions were placed at four distances:
80cm, 40cm, 110cm, and 50cm.
Questionnaires. Participants completed the Abbreviated
Math Anxiety Scale (Hopko et al., 2003) and WRAT-3
assessment (Roberston, 2010), as well as a questionnaire
assessing each participant’s particular math background and
interests.

Procedure
Participants sat in a chair facing the corner of the two tables.
To familiarize the participant with the procedure, a warm up
trial consisting single row of five dots was presented on the
right-hand table at a distance of 80cm. Participants were
informed that following the warm-up, the board would
display arithmetic expressions instead of dots. Because we
were interested in the potential long-term influence of
operation ordering practice on distance perception,
participants were not instructed in a particular solving
method. In particular, participants were not reminded of the
order of operations, but were simply asked to solve the
problems as they usually would, and to do their best.
Participants were instructed to estimate the distance from
their sternum to the center dot. Participants indicated their
estimate by extending the tape measure along the left-hand
table, with the blank side of a tape measure up. This method
allowed the participant to have full control over the
estimation process, while blinding them to the actual
measurement. When providing their estimate, participants
were not permitted to use the tape measure on the table
displaying the board, nor were they allowed to reach out and
touch the board.

2302

During actual experimentation, the procedure followed in
the same manner as the warm-up, substituting arithmetic
expressions for the row of dots. Participants viewed four
expression pairs displayed on boards set at one of four
distances (80cm, 40cm, 110cm, 50cm) from the edge of the
table closest to the participant. We repeated the procedure
for each participant and with variance in the complexity of
the math problems: four multiplication and four addition,
with two easy and two complicated in each. Problems were
paired, so that for each problem a participant solved while
focusing on a multiplication sign, they later solved a
problem identical except for the substitution of additions for
multiplications. For example, if given the problem 5+4x3+7,
we asked them to focus on the multiplication sign when
giving their estimate. Immediately following their estimate,
they proceeded to solve the expression aloud, step-by-step.
The order of distances was fixed, but the problem
presentations were counterbalanced in a Latin Square
design, leading to a total of eight conditions (see Table 1).
Table 2: Stimuli for Experiment 2 (Condition 1)
Expression

Distance
(cm)
80
40

Difficulty

3 x 5+ 2 x 7
1/3 x 4 + 2/3 x 1/2

Center
Operation
Add
Add

5x8+2x3
1/4 x 1/6 + 5 x 2/3

Add
Add

110
50

Easy
Difficult

3+5x2+7
1/3 + 4 x 2/3 + 1/2

Mult
Mult

80
40

Easy
Difficult

5+8x2+3
1/4 + 1/6 x 5 + 2/3

Mult
Mult

110
50

Easy
Difficult

Easy
Difficult

Each expression pair was set at the same distance. Thus, if
5+4x3+7 was set at 50 cm, then 5x4+3x7 was also set at 50
cm. Between trials the participant was given a packet of
mazes and instructed to complete as much of it as they could
while the experimenter set up the next trial.
Following the distance perception session, the math
anxiety level and abilities of each participant was assessed
with a basic mathematics proficiency test, WRAT-3. Each
participant was given 10 minutes to complete as much of the
packet at they could, without returning to the problems they
skipped. After the WRAT-3, participants completed the
Abbreviated Math Anxiety scale.

Results
Distance estimates (see Table 3) were subjected to an
ANOVA using operation structure and problem difficulty,
within-participants factors, and math anxiety and

precedence behavior as between-participant factors.
Participant precedence behavior was coded by the
experimenter as either the correct use of order of operations
or the incorrect use. Participants who did not use the order
of operations correctly tended to use other strategies, such
as adding from left to right, or computing sums before
products. It was typically difficult to discern what strategy a
participant had used, and some participants tended to shift
strategies over the course of a trial. To be clear: differences
in operations based on precedence strategy are expected
only among subjects who apply correct order of operations.
There was no significant main effect of math anxiety on
distance estimates (F(1,30)=.02, p~0.9) or in the interaction
between math anxiety and problem difficulty on distance
estimation (F(1, 30) = 1.10, p > .05), There was, however, a
significant interaction between the operation in focus and
precedence behavior (F(1, 30)=5.0, p<0.05), such that
operations which were treated as high precedence yielded
lower distance estimates. A follow-up analysis considering
just participants who correctly used order of operations
revealed a significant main effect of focal operation (F(1,
17) = 4.87, p < .05). There was no significant interaction for
who did not obey standard precedence rules; numerically,
this group tended to estimate the plus signs as closer than
the times signs (F(1, 12)=3.1, p~0.11).
Post-hoc analyses revealed a possible confound of the
counterbalance condition, in that the condition in which the
participant was randomly assigned seemed to influence
whether or not they estimated the plus or times signs to be
closer and the strategy used to solve the expressions.
Specifically, those who received the conditions presenting
the times sign as the operation in focus first tended to use
order of operations when solving the expressions (87.5%
correct precedence behavior), whereas those receiving the
plus sign as the operation in focus tended not to (31%
correct precedence). The effect of first operation on
precedence behavior was significant by Fisher’s exact test
(p<0.01); however, since this effect was not predicted ahead
of time, it should be interpreted cautiously. To ensure that
the main analyses were not affected by an overall linear
trend in distance judgments across trials, the data were
reanalyzed using problem order as a covariate; results were
in all ways similar to those reported above.

Table 3: Mean (standard error) distance underestimated
distance to central operations in Experiment 2.
Central
Precedence Behavior
operation
Correct
Reversed or
Left/Right
Plus
14.2
17.2
(1.7)
(1.4)
Times
16.8
15.6
(1.9)
(1.4)

2303

Discussion
Although our hypothesis that math anxiety would lead to
overestimation of distances was not supported, our findings
support the prediction that those who knew the order of
operations would perceive the times sign to be closer.
However, it is quite possible that null findings could be a
result of such a small sample size. Taken together with the
results from Experiment 1, high precedence operations
afford immediate action and therefore, may appear to be
closer. The effect of the experimental conditions suggest
that attention may serve as a moderating variable between
depth perception, anxiety, and the perceived efforts to enact
an action.

General Discussion
Two experiments verified and extended the basic findings of
Landy & Linkenauger (2009), demonstrating a bidirectional
relationship between perceived distance and effective
arithmetic syntax. While prior results indicated a
metaphorical relationship between distance and precedence,
Experiment 2 here demonstrated that participants who
correctly apply the order of operations also estimate the
actual physical distance to high precedence sign as smaller
than that to a low precedence sign. Furthermore, these are
the first results to demonstrate that (simulated) physical
distance affects the application of abstract formal
operations.
Both of these phenomena are familiar in interactions with
physical objects. Intentions and object affordances both
impact perceived distance (Proffitt, 2006B). We know of no
research directly exploring the impact of apparent distance
on action selection, but it seems quite likely that actions
with physical objects are selected in part on the basis of
perceived proximity. In the current experiments, however,
the relevant action is itself abstract, and the ease of adding
and multiplying does not depend in any obvious way on
physical proximity. The interpretation of interactions
between apparent distance and abstract actions is thus less
clear than with concrete objects. A dramatic reading might
hold that explicit distance perception tracks the perceived
difficulty of engaging in behavior—that is, that explicit
perceptions of distance are fundamentally less concrete and
more abstract than has previously been supposed. The fact
that we did not find any sign of a relationship between math
anxiety, problem difficulty, and perceived distance speaks
against such a dramatic conclusion.
A more plausible interpretation is that abstract
procedures, such as calculation are executed via systems
normally devoted to perception and action (Landy &
Goldstone, 2007, 2009; Goldstone, Landy, and Son, 2010;
Landy, Allen, and Anderson, 2011). On this “Rigging Up
Perceptual Systems” account, learning to engage in formal
operations, such as operation ordering often involves
adapting a pre-existing perceptual-motor system that already
performs computations roughly appropriate to the to-belearned content. Previously identified systems include the
use of perceptual grouping and attention to perform

operation ordering (Landy & Goldstone, 2007, 2010;
Goldstone et al 2010); it may be that some individuals
implement operation ordering via distance perception
mechanisms, learning to treat sub-expressions which should
be ignored as farther away, and so leveraging powerful
machinery that produces distance judgments to automatize
routine computation.
It also seems possible that differences in perceived
distance may simply be a result of focused attention: that is,
it is possible that simply attending to an object increases its
apparent proximity. Though we know of no direct
demonstration of this possibility, attention is thought to
affect other aspects of perception, such as contrast (Treue,
2004), apparent speed of motion (Turatto et al, 2007), and
apparent size (Anton-erxleben & Treue, 2007; but see
Schneider, 2008). Attentional focus may also influence
perceived distance. This explanation provides a natural
account for the influence of precedence judged distance and
figure and ground perception in the face-vase illusion
previously demonstrated by Landy & Linkenauger (2009).
Furthermore, attention is thought to be necessary for actionspecific effects on perceived distance (Cañal-Bruland et al.,
2011) Finally, though it should be interpreted with caution,
the unpredicted relationship between initial focal operation
and both distance and precedence behavior is also
compatible with an attention-based interpretation. It may be
that asking people to attend to a particular sign influenced
both ordering behavior and perceived depth.

Conclusions
In our experiments, we did not find any effect of perceived
difficulty on estimated distance, either when problem
difficulty varied, nor based on personal skill or arithmetic
self-efficacy. Of course, null results such as these must be
interpreted with caution; nevertheless, there is little
indication here of a very tight analogy between estimations
of abstract difficulty and perceptions of physical distance.
On the other hand, we found substantial bidirectional
influences between order of operations and perceived depth,
suggesting that the relationship between action ordering and
depth is not restricted to concrete behaviors, but is also
involved in abstract actions as well.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded by Department of
Education, Institute of Education Sciences grant
R305A110060, as well as an undergraduate research grant
from the University of Richmond. Beth Crawford provided
helpful comments on the design of Experiment 2, and Sally
Linkenauger on the design of Experiment 1.

References
Anton-Erxleben, K., Henrich, C., & Treue, S. (2007).
Attention changes perceived size of moving visual
patterns. Journal of Vision, 7(11):5, 1-9.

2304

Cañal-Bruland, R., Pijpers, J., & Oudejans, R. (2010). The
influence of anxiety on action-specific perception.
Anxiety, Stress, & Coping, 23(3), 353-361.
Cañal-Bruland, R., Zhu, F., van der Kamp, J., & Masters, R.
(2011). Target-directed visual attention is a prerequisite
for action-specific perception. Acta Psychologica, 136,
285-289.
Fajen, B. R. (2005). The scaling of information to action
in visually guided braking. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 31,
1107-23.
Goldstone, R.L., Landy, D., & Son, J. Y. (2010). The
Education of Perception. Topics in Cognitive Science,
2(2), 265-284.
Hoffman, B. (2010). “ I think I can, but I’m afraid to try”:
The role of self-efficacy beliefs and mathematical
anxiety in mathematics problem-solving efficiency.
Learning and Individual Differences, 20(3), 276-283.
Hopko, D.R., Mahadevan, R., Bare, R.L., & Hunt, M.K.
(2003). Abbreviated math anxiety scale (AMAS):
construction, validity, and reliability. Assessment, 10(2).
178-182.
Landy, D., Allen, C., & Anderson, M. L. (2011).
Conceptual discontinuity through recycling old
processes in new domains. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 34(3), 136-137.
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2007). How abstract is
symbolic thought? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33(4), 720-733.
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2010). Proximity and
precedence in arithmetic. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 63(10), 1953-1968.
Landy, D., & Linkenauger, S.A. (2010). Arithmetic
Notation…now in 3D! Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX,
USA.
Proffitt, D. R. (2006A). Distance Perception. Psychological
Science, 15(3), 131-135.
Proffitt, D.R. (2006B). Embodied perception and the
economy of action. Persepectives on Psychological
Science, 1(2), 110-122.
Protopapas, A. (2007) CheckVocal: A program to facilitate
checking the accuracy and response time of vocal
responses from DMDX. Behavior Research Methods,
39(4), 859-862.
Roberston, G.J. (2010). Wide-range achievement test.
Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology, 1-2.
Schnall, S., Harber, K., Stefanucci, J., & Proffitt, D. (2008).
Social support and the perception of geographical slant.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44(5), 12461255.
Schneider, K. A. (2008). Attention biases decisions but does
not alter appearance. Journal of Vision, 8, 1-10.
Stefanucci, J. K., & Proffitt, D. R. (2009). The roles of
altitude and fear in the perception of heights. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 35, 424-438.

Stefanucci, J. K., Proffitt, D. R., Clore, G., & Parekh, N.
(2008). Skating down a steeper slope: Fear influences
the perception of geographical slant. Perception, 37,
321–323.
Teachman, B.A., Stefanucci, J.K., Clerkin, E.M., Cody,
M.W., & Proffitt, D.R. (2008). A new mode of fear
expression: Perceptual bias in height fear. Emotion, 8(2),
296- 301.
Treue, S. (2004). Perceptual enhancement of contrast by
attention. Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(10), 435-7.
Turatto, M., Vescovi, M., & Valsecchi, M. (2007).
Attention makes moving objects be perceived to move
faster. Vision research, 47(2), 166-78.
Witt, J.K., & Proffitt, D.R. (2005). See the ball, hit the ball:
Apparent ball size is correlated with batting average.
Psychological Science, 16(12), 937-938.

2305

