UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Intelligibility is Necessary for Scientific Explanation, but Accuracy May Not Be

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/32m3q2sp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Braverman, Mike
Clevenger, John
Harmon, Ian
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Intelligibility is Necessary for Scientific Explanation, but Accuracy May Not Be
Mike Braverman (braverm2@illinois.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

John Clevenger (jcleven2@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 810 S. Wright Street
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Ian Harmon (iharmon2@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 810 S. Wright Street
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Andrew Higgins (higgins9@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 810 S. Wright Street
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Zachary S. Horne (horne2@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 810 S. Wright Street
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Joseph Spino (spino2@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 810 S. Wright Street
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Jonathan Waskan (waskan@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 810 S. Wright Street
Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Abstract
Many philosophers of science believe that empirical
psychology can contribute little to the philosophical
investigation of explanations. They take this to be shown by
the fact that certain explanations fail to elicit any relevant
psychological events (e.g., familiarity, insight, intelligibility,
etc.). We report results from a study suggesting that, at least
among those with extensive science training, a capacity to
render an event intelligible is considered a requirement for
explanation. We also investigate for whom explanations must
be capable of rendering events intelligible and whether or not
accuracy is also viewed as a requirement.
Keywords:
intelligibility.

science;

explanation;

psychologism;

Introduction
The nature of explanation has been a major topic of
investigation in the philosophy of science for at least sixty
years. While much is still disputed, a consensus has
emerged that scientific explanations are not constituted by
psychological events. Philosophers of science first made
arguments to this effect in the middle of the 20th century in
response to the charge that explanations play no useful role
in science because they are constituted by subjectively
variable psychological states (viz., familiarity and empathy).

Hospers (1946), Miller (1947), and Hempel (1965), for
instance, argued that many legitimate explanations appeal to
principles (e.g., Newton’s law of gravitation) that were
utterly unfamiliar when they were first introduced. Hempel
(1942) also noted that historical explanations sometimes
refer to individuals (e.g., paranoiacs) with whom most are
incapable of empathizing. On such grounds Hempel
famously rejects psychologistic theories of explanation in
favor of a more “objective” account (1965, 426).
More recently, philosophers of science have viewed
psychologistic theories as equating explanations with other
feelings, such as insight, satisfaction, or "aha" feelings
(Craver 2007; Salmon 1984; Trout 2007). Like Miller and
Hempel, they rebut such psychologistic proposals by
pointing to cases of explanation where the relevant feelings
are absent. One common strategy is to point to a putative
explanation, whether it be a passage of text describing a
process of speciation (Trout 2007) or a computer simulation
of the human nervous system (Craver 2007), whose
complexity so outstrips the limits of human memory and
attention that humans find it incomprehensible. Humans
thus fail to derive from these putative explanations any
feelings of insight, satisfaction, etc. It is frequently
concluded on the basis of such examples that explanations
are non-psychological - we term this the objectivity

1368

hypothesis - and hence that psychological research will
contribute little to our understanding of explanations.1
We believe that this anti-psychologistic attitude is
wrongheaded for a few reasons. One is that the very process
of justifying theories of explanation on the basis of how
well they track philosophers’ classifications (i.e., as
explanations or non-explanations) of various representations
are laden with psychological presuppositions. Philosophers
appear to assume that they have, through their exposure to
science and scientists, come to possess tacit knowledge of
the norms regarding the proper use of ‘explanation.’
Whether or not philosophical judgments mirror scientific
ones is, however, an empirical matter that is best resolved
through psychological investigation. We suspect, moreover,
that scientists do regard a certain kind of conscious
psychological event as necessary for explanation. The type
of event we have in mind is not an affect-laden feeling, but
rather the more intellectual process of understanding how or
why, at least possibly, an event came about. This state is
sometimes known as finding a happening intelligible or
making sense of it (cf. Machamer & Woody 1994). Familiar
objections have been raised against this proposal as well –
namely, that there are (e.g., hyper-complex) explanations
that never render anything intelligible to anyone. Our
specific hypothesis, however, is that scientists will not
consider a representation an explanation unless it has the
capacity to render intelligible, which we term intelligability. It would thus not undercut our position if there were
explanations that never actually render the event intelligible
to anyone. Consider, by comparison, that a liquid may be a
solvent of salt even if at a given time if it happens not to be
dissolving any salt at all or even if it never does so (viz.,
because the opportunity never arises). It must merely have
the capacity to do so, even if it is not exercised. Likewise,
we suspect that scientists require not that a representation
actually renders a happening intelligible to someone, but
merely that it has the capacity to do so.
Notice that even if a liquid that has the capacity to
dissolve salt never exercises that capacity, it would still tell
us a lot about what makes that liquid a solvent of salt if we
had information about the process by which it would
dissolve salt were the opportunity to arise. This is best
accomplished by studying cases in which solvents of salt
actually do exercise their capacity to dissolve salt. Matters
are somewhat more complicated with regard to
explanations, but we believe that even if a certain
representation that has the capacity to make things
intelligible to people never actually exercises that capacity,
it may well tell us a lot about what makes that representation
an explanation if we had information about the process by
which it would make sense of things were the opportunity to

1

Trout, admittedly, seems in places to be opposed to the idea
that explanations are constituted by conscious psychological states
in that he allows that explanations sometimes involve implicit
learning.

arise. This would be best accomplished by studying cases in
which explanations actually do exercise their intellig-ability.
Notice also that if the reason why a liquid has failed to
dissolve any salt is that there is something about the nature
of the liquid that precludes it from ever dissolving any salt,
the liquid then lacks even the capacity to dissolve salt and is
thus no solvent of it. Likewise, if there is something about a
representation that precludes it from ever rendering an event
intelligible – for instance, it is too complex to ever be
comprehended by anyone at all or it refers to things like
extra dimensions that are utterly incomprehensible to
anyone – then it lacks even the capacity to render
intelligible and scientists will thus not regard it as an
explanation. We suspect that laypeople also view intelligability as a requirement and will classify such cases in a
similar way.
If a representation must have the capacity to render
intelligible in order for it to be considered an explanation, a
further question naturally arises: Intelligible to whom?
Scientists generally interact with at least some colleagues
who exceed their own intelligence, so they are almost
certainly cognizant of the fact that some representations are
too complex to make events intelligible to everyone. Thus,
they likely do not require that a representation must have the
capacity to render things intelligible to just anyone in order
to be considered an explanation. However, since scientists
presumably do not interact with beings that possess utterly
different perceptual and cognitive abilities, they might think
that a representation must have the capacity to make things
intelligible to beings basically like themselves in order to be
considered an explanation. Then again, they may turn out to
be even more liberal, merely requiring that a representation
makes sense of things for sentient beings of some sort, even
ones with completely alien thought processes. There are
numerous possibilities here, with regard to both scientists
and laypeople, that are worth investigating.
Another widely accepted view among philosophers of
science is that a high degree of accuracy is essential in order
for a representation to be an explanation (Craver 2007; C.G.
Hempel 1965; Humphreys 1989; Salmon 1998; Trout,
2007). We call this the accuracy hypothesis. We think a
representation must merely specify a possible way, even if it
is not the actual way, in which an event occurred for the
representation to be considered an explanation. We call this
the plausibility hypothesis. An implication of the accuracy
hypothesis is that scientists will be less likely to judge that a
representation is an explanation if they are told that it is
merely possibly accurate (which is to say that it might be
inaccurate) or that it once seemed possibly accurate but was
later falsified. Cases of the latter sort mirror many cases
from this history of science where a theory seemed to make
sense of things (e.g., the Ptolemaic theory of planetary
retrograde motion) but was ultimately proven false. If
scientists and laypeople do regard such cases as
explanations, telling them that a representation is merely
possibly accurate or conceivably accurate but factually

1369

inaccurate should not undermine their tendency to regard a
representation as an explanation.
We tested whether people treated either intellig-ability or
accuracy as a necessary condition for something to be an
explanation. We tested this with regard to two groups of
participants: those with and without extensive science
training.

Methods
Participants
The participants in this study were 297 workers recruited
using Amazon Mechanical Turk with varying levels of
science training.

Materials
We used stories about the origins of either life, color
experiences, or gamma ray bursts, and manipulated the
characteristics of these stories. Vignettes were grouped into
following three sets:
Set 1: A potential explanation (viz., a passage of text) is
described that has various theoretical virtues and that also
supplies some level of understanding. Specifically, the
representation either supplies understanding of how the
target happening actually occurred (A), of a possible way in
which it occurred (PA), or of a possible way in which it
occurred that is eventually shown to be false (PAF).
Set 2: A potential explanation is described which is said
to be incapable of rendering a happening intelligible to
humans because of our cognitive limitations - that is, either
the representation defies the limits of normal human
working memory and attention or it refers to highly exotic,
hyper-dimensional properties. The possibility is then
introduced that the representation would render the
happening intelligible to beings with cognitive capacities
that are, roughly speaking, quantitatively better (i.e.,
involving augmented memory and attention span) or
qualitatively different (i.e., involving the ability to think in
extra dimensions). Cases of the former sort involve hypercomplex passages of text (AM). Cases of the latter sort
(HD) refer to passages of text that describe hyperdimensional properties.
Set 3: This set closely mirrors Set 2 except that the
complexity and exotic nature of the putative explanation is
such that it precludes the representation from rendering the
target intelligible to anyone at all. This set includes passages
of text (IQuant) or computer simulations (Sim) that are
hyper-complex, and passages of text that refer to exotic
properties (IQual).
There were three storylines and nine vignette types,
yielding twenty-seven possible vignettes. Each participant
read and responded to three vignettes. One vignette came
from each set, and each followed a different storyline.

eligible, workers had to be in the U.S. and have at least a
75% approval rate. Eligible workers were redirected to
SurveyMonkey, where they completed the study.
Afterwards, workers were directed back to MTurk, where
they were compensated with $.50.

Procedure
Participants were presented with a vignette (story) on a
computer screen. Each vignette referred either to a
typewritten description of a physical process or to a
computer simulation thereof. For example, some
participants saw the following vignette2:
Dr. Nikro is a little-known, very-gifted scientist
investigating the manner in which color
experiences arise in the brain. He spends years
tinkering with the complex equations of
neurochemistry and subatomic physics and
considering the different possible locations in
which color experiences might originate. He
eventually chances upon a remarkable series of
calculations, which he posts to his rarely visited
public webpage. They indicate that conditions like
those found in the pyramidal cells of the cortex
would, over the course of hundreds of
milliseconds, reliably undergo a series of changes
resulting in the creation of color experiences. The
calculations fit quite nicely with the most widely
accepted theories and observations from a variety
of related fields. Yet they merely refer to ordinary
things like membranes and neural firings, of which
anyone could easily conceive. As a result, Dr.
Nikro comes to understand the actual manner in
which color experiences are generated in the brain,
as would any specialist from his field who were to
study the details of the material he posted.
After reading the vignette, participants were asked to rate
the extent to which they agree (-3 strongly disagree, 0
neutral, +3 strongly agree) that the representation described
in the vignette constitutes an explanation. There was some
concern that participants might confuse this question with
the question of whether or not the representation constitutes
a good or a satisfying explanation. Participants were thus
informed at the outset that, insofar as they do agree that the
representation in constitutes an explanation, they should
also specify the extent to which they agree that the
representation constitutes a good and a satisfying
explanation (cf. Lombrozo and Carey 2004).
Mishra & Brewer (2003) found that participants paid
closer attention to the contents of their study materials (i.e.,
real-world explanations) if they were forewarned that they
would be asked a series of simple comprehension questions.
We likewise informed participants in advance that they
would be asked a series of simple questions. Some of these

Collection
Participants were recruited through the Amazon
Mechanical Turk (MTurk) work-distribution website. To be

2

A demonstration version of the study can be found at
www.surveymonkey.com/s/PPG6DW6.

1370

concerned aspects of the vignettes (e.g., accuracy or intelligability) that were particularly salient to the experiment.
This sequence of instructions, vignettes, and questions
repeated two more times, each time with vignettes from a
different set and on a different topic (i.e., life, color
experiences, or gamma-ray bursts). Participants completed a
distractor task in between each vignette. At the end of the
study, participants were asked some follow-up questions,
including questions about their level of science training.
Six separate studies were constructed to balance the order
in which participants saw the various storylines, with one
study for each permutation (i.e., Life-Color ExperiencesGamma Rays, Life-Gamma Rays-Color Experiences, etc.).

Table 2: Mean Responses and Standard Deviations for
Low-Science Participants
A
PA PAF AM HD IQuant IQual SIM
Avg. 1.29 1.31 -.137 .350 -.241 -.714 -.859 -.610
SD 1.66 1.42 1.78 1.67 1.64 1.87 1.87 1.65

Results
Of the 297 completed studies, data from 38 of those
studies were excluded because the participants involved had
already completed the study at least once. After this
exclusion there were 259 completed studies or 777 sets of
responses to particular vignettes. If a participant failed to
answer at least two of three comprehension questions
correctly for a particular vignette, responses to that vignette
were excluded. Using this criterion, 61 individuals had
responses to one vignette eliminated, 9 individuals had
responses to two vignettes eliminated, and 5 individuals had
responses to all three vignettes eliminated. After eliminating
these problematic responses, responses to 683 vignettes
were recorded and analyzed.
We divided our sample into high-science (5 or more
college-level science courses) and low-science (less than 5
college-level science courses) groups to investigate the ways
in which laypeople and scientists conceive of explanations.
After the division, the high-science group contained the
following number of responses to the ‘constitutes an
explanation’ question for each of the following conditions:
26 accurate (A), 32 possibly accurate (PA), 22 possibly
accurate but false (PAF), 28 augmented memory (AM), 28
hyper-dimensional thinking (HD), 22 unintelligiblequantitative (IQuant), 30 unintelligible-qualitative (IQual),
and 27 unintelligible-quantitative simulation (SIM).
The low-science group contained the following number of
responses to the ‘constitutes an explanation’ question for
each of the following conditions: 37 accurate (A), 58
possibly accurate (PA), 51 possibly accurate but false
(PAF), 57 augmented memory (AM), 62 hyper-dimensional
thinking (HD), 21 unintelligible-quantitative (IQuant), 71
unintelligible-qualitative (IQual), and 59 unintelligiblequantitative simulation (SIM).
The mean responses and standard deviations to the
explanation rating task are located in Tables 1 and 2.
Table 1: Mean Responses and Standard Deviations for
High-Science Participants
A
PA PAF AM HD IQuant IQual SIM
Avg. .769 .968 .090 .285 -.357 -.727 -1.1 -.370
SD 1.77 1.80 2.02 1.95 1.66 1.72 1.78 1.94

After the division of the sample, mean ratings were
measured for differences using 18 two-tailed independent
samples t-tests. To guard against increased chance of Type 1
errors, we performed a Bonferroni correction to adjust α
(significant results were p < .0027).
In the low-science group, descriptions – be they written
text or simulations – that were unintelligible to anyone,
resulted in lower ratings than descriptions that were
intelligible to the scientists in the vignettes (A and IQuant
(t(56) = 4.22, p < .0027), A and IQual (t(106) = 5.87, p <
.0027) and A and SIM (t(94) = 5.48, p <.0027)). Lowscience participants also gave lower ratings when only
cognitively advanced beings – whether they be humans with
augmented memory or beings capable of perceiving extra
dimensions – found the descriptions intelligible (PA and
AM (t(113) = 3.30, p < .0027), PA and HD (t(118) = 5.49, p
< .0027)). Significance obtained when comparing lowscience participants’ ratings of descriptions described as
false to descriptions described as accurate or possibly
accurate (A and PAF (t(86) = 3.82, p < .0027, PA and PAF
(t(107) = 4.68, p < .0027)). Whether a description was
accurate or possibly accurate, however, made no difference
to low-science participants’ judgments (t(93) = 41, p = .96).
For the high-science group, descriptions incapable of
rendering the event intelligible to anyone resulted in lower
ratings than those that made the event intelligible to the
scientists in the vignettes (A and IQual (t(54) = 3.911, p < .
0027)). However, these differences did not hold across all
Set 3 vignettes (A and IQuant (t(46) = 2.95, p = .004), A
and Sim (t(51) = 2.25, p = .028)). For high-science
participants, ratings were not significantly different for
descriptions described as false, or only possibly accurate, as
compared to those described as accurate (A and PAF (t(46)
= 1.24, p = .222), A and PA (t(56) = .422, p = .675), PA and
PAF (t(52) = 1.67, p = .10)). Likewise, these participants’
ratings were not significantly affected when a description
was described as intelligible only to beings with
quantitatively or qualitatively different cognitive capacities
(PA and AM (t(58) = 1.40, p = .16), PA and HD(t(58) =
2.94, p = .004)).

Discussion of Results
This study sought to answer the following questions:
1. Does intellig-ability matter? If the objectivity
hypothesis captures how laypeople and practicing scientists
conceive of explanations, then altering whether a
representation is described as capable of rendering a
happening intelligible should not affect the judgments of
either low-science or high-science participants. If the

1371

intellig-ability hypothesis is correct, participants should be
less likely to regard a representation as an explanation when
told that it is, whether due to sheer complexity or to exotic
constructs, incapable of rendering a happening intelligible to
anyone. Low-science participants were less likely to judge a
representation to be an explanation when told that the
representation lacks intellig-ability. The judgments of lowscience participants thus indicate that laypeople conceive of
explanations in a way consistent with the intellig-ability
hypothesis and inconsistent with the objectivity hypothesis.
High-science participants were less likely to regard a
passage of text as an explanation when told that the
representation, because of qualitative barriers (IQual), lacks
intellig-ability. They were, however, not significantly less
likely to regard a passage of text (IQual) or a simulation
(SIM) as an explanation when told that the representation,
because of quantitative barriers, lacks intellig-ability. One
possibility is that quantitative barriers to intelligibility seem
far less daunting than qualitative ones. Indeed, those with
extensive science training should be well aware that myriad
techniques have been developed for analyzing and
visualizing information regarding the behaviors of complex
systems with the precise point of rendering those systems
intelligible to humans. This may have had enough of an
impact on judgments to weaken the intellig-ability effect.
Regardless, the differences in high-science ratings between
(PA), on the one hand, and (IQuant) and (SIM) on the other
were large enough to warrant further investigation.
The difference between (A) and (IQual) is, by itself,
clearly inconsistent with the objectivity hypothesis.
Admittedly, we cannot be sure that the judgments of our
high-science participants mirror those of professional
scientists, so further study of practicing scientists is also
needed to better support our proposal that intellig-ability is a
requirement for explanation. However, taken as a whole,
this set of results strongly suggests that manipulating
intellig-ability alters explanation judgments, and we take
this to be inconsistent with the objectivity hypothesis.
2. Intellig-ability to Whom? The results above indicate
that people treat intellig-ability as in some way necessary
for explanation, but what is not clear is for whom a
representation must be intellig-able (i.e., able to make sense
of things). To address this question, participants were asked
to consider cases in which potential explanations are
unintellig-able to humans because of cognitive limitations.
In the (AM) case, the representation exceeds the limits of
normal human working memory and attention. In another
case (HD), the representation refers to exotic properties such
as hyper-dimensionality (see Set 2 in Materials). The
possibility is then introduced that the representation may be
intellig-able to beings with, roughly speaking, quantitatively
augmented memory and attention or qualitatively different
cognitive capacities. We take such beings to lie along a
similarity continuum such that creatures who merely have
augmented memory and attention are more similar to
present-day humans than creatures with qualitatively
different cognitive capacities.

As it turns out, relative to judgments regarding (PA)
vignettes, low-science participants are less inclined to
regard a description as an explanation in the (AM) and (HD)
conditions. Relative to that same baseline (PA), there was
no indication that high-science participants are less inclined
to regard a description as an explanation in the (AM)
condition. Nor were high-science participants significantly
less likely to regard a description as an explanation in the
(HD) condition than in the (PA) condition. Although the
difference in judgments is not significant (p = .004), it is
suggestive enough to warrant further investigation.
There are a number of ways of interpreting these findings.
Starting with low-science individuals, one possibility is that
they believe representations must be intellig-able to presentday humans. This condition was satisfied in the (PA)
vignettes but not in the Set 2 (i.e., (AM) or (HD)) vignettes.
Another possibility is that these individuals’ expectations
are somewhat more flexible, requiring merely that
representations be intellig-able to beings fairly similar to
present-day humans. It may just be that they consider the
differences between present-day humans and the beings
described in the Set 2 vignettes to be too stark to meet this
condition. It is also possible that the reason why they were
less inclined to regard the representations in the Set 2
vignettes as explanations had nothing to do with intelligability. It may have been, rather, that the representations did
not actually render the target happening intelligible to
anyone. On this view, it is still an open question as to what
sorts of beings a representation must actually make sense of
things.
Within the high-science group, there were not significant
differences between ratings of (PA) and any of the Set 2
vignettes (though, as mentioned, the comparison to (HD) (p
= .004) is suggestive). Thus, it appears that high-science
individuals may be quite flexible about to whom a
representation must be intellig-able in order for it to count
as an explanation. They do not expect that representations
must be intellig-able to present-day humans, but it is unclear
whether there is some upper bound on their expectations.
They may think a representation that is intellig-able to any
kind of sentient being at all counts as an explanation, or they
might require that it be intellig-able to beings relevantly
similar to present-day humans. In the latter case, highscience individuals may have such a liberal understanding
about what counts as relevantly similar that the beings
described in the Set 2 vignettes still meet this condition.
Clearly, further studies are also warranted here in order to
determine for whom, precisely, a representation must be
capable of making sense of things in order to be considered
an explanation and whether or not low-science individuals
require that this capacity be exercised.
3. Does accuracy matter? The accuracy hypothesis
suggests that high-science participants should be more likely
to judge something an explanation when it is accurate than
when its accuracy is in question or when it is false. This
pattern of results did not obtain. There was no difference in
judgments about descriptions depicted as accurate (A) and

1372

those depicted as possibly accurate (PA). As mentioned
above, the possibly accurate but false (PAF) vignettes
mirror many historical examples in which a representation
of a way that things could have occurred is eventually
discredited. We hypothesized that there would be no
difference between judgments regarding the (A) and (PAF)
vignettes. Results for high-science participants were
consistent with this prediction in that there was no
significant difference in their judgments about the two types
of vignettes. However, we did find that low-science
participants were significantly less likely to judge that the
descriptions in the (PAF) vignettes are explanations
compared with the descriptions in the (A) vignettes. The
fact that the (A) versus (PAF) manipulation produced an
effect in the low-science group alleviates some of our
concerns about the relevance of the null result found in the
high-science group. We thus once again take our findings to
supply tentative evidence that the accuracy hypothesis does
not reflect the views of practicing scientists, though we
acknowledge that additional research on the matter is
desirable.

Anti-Psychologism Revisited
We were motivated to undertake this project in large part
because we reject the anti-psychologistic stance regarding
the study of explanation that still pervades much of the
philosophy of science. Philosophers often take this stance to
be justified by appeal to cases which they regard as
explanations but which seem not to elicit any relevant
psychological
events
(e.g.,
familiarity,
insight,
intelligibility, etc.). Our data suggest, however, that
scientists and laypeople have different intuitions from
philosophers regarding some of these cases. Insofar as there
is something about a representation, whether sheer
complexity or exotic constructs, that positively precludes it
from rendering a certain happening intelligible, high-science
and low-science participants are significantly less inclined
to regard it as an explanation. Thus, the anti-psychologisitic
position appears to rest upon intuitions that are, without
discernible justification, idiosyncratic; psychological
investigations are the proper methodology for determining
how scientists conceive of explanations. In addition, given
that the capacity to produce a certain kind of mental state
(i.e., finding intelligible) seems to be the crucial factor,
empirical investigation into the actual exercise of this
capacity will surely be a part of any complete portrait of
why certain representations are regarded as explanations and
others are not. Indeed, insofar as scientists and laypeople
have, with their concepts of explanation, correctly
demarcated the boundaries of a real natural or sociocultural
kind, then psychological research into what it means to find
a happening intelligible will probably contribute much to
our understanding of what explanations are, in and of
themselves. Thus, for philosophers of science wishing to
know what explanations are and what role they play in our
lay and scholarly lives, it would seem inadvisable to turn
their backs on empirical psychology and retreat to

evaluating theories based upon how well they track their
own classifications of supposedly clear-cut cases of
explanation and non-explanation.

References
Craver, C. F. (2007). Explaining the brain. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Hempel, C. G. (1942). The function of general laws in
history. The Journal of Philosophy, 39(2), 35-48.
Hempel, C. G. (1965). Aspects of scientific explanation and
other essays in the philosophy of science. New
York: The Free Press.
Hospers, J. (1946). On explanation. The Journal of
Philosophy, 43(13), 337-356.
Humphreys, P. (1989). Scientific explanation: The causes,
some of the causes, and nothing but the causes'.
Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science, 13,
283-306.
Lombrozo, T., & Carey, S. 2004. Functional explanation
and the function of explanation. Cognition, 99,
167-204.
Machamer, P., & Woody, A. (1994). A model of
intelligibility in science: Using Galileo's balance as
a model for understanding the motion of bodies.
Science & Education, 3(3), 215-244.
Mishra, P., & Brewer, W. F. (2003). Theories as a form of
mental representation and their role in the recall of
text information. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 28, 277-303.
Miller, D. L. (1947). Explanation versus description. The
Philosophical Review, 56(3), 306-312.
Salmon, W. (1984). Scientific explanation and the causal
structure of the world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Salmon, W. (1998). Causality and explanation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Trout, J. (2007). The psychology of scientific explanation.
Philosophy Compass, 2(3), 564-591.

1373

