UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language acquisition in Down Syndrome from embodied perspective: How body constrains
language acquisition?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5jr3715s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Hristova, Penka
Toushek, Hristina
Petkov, Georgi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language acquisition in Down Syndrome from embodied perspective: How body
constrains language acquisition?
P. Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg),H.Toushek (chrissidt@yahoo.com),G. Petkov (gpetkov@cogs.nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria
Abstract
Parents of children with Down syndrome (DS) were asked to
fill a questionnaire about how much their children understand
and how well they use words. It was found that word
acquisition is affected not only by word frequency, but also
by whether a word is related to eventual misbalance of the
body. The results are in favor of the hypothesis that the
constraints of the human body may cause systematic
variations of language acquisition as long as keeping the body
balance is a typically difficult motor task for DS children.
Additionally, we also found an asymmetry of the acquisition
of the verbs and the nouns, depending on their frequency and
relatedness to eventual misbalance of the body.

Introduction
Usually learning of a native language takes several years.
During their first years of life children learn thousands of
linguistic symbols and constructions used by people around
them. How does this extensive learning happen? Glenberg,
A.M., Havas, D., Becker, R., & Rinck, M. (2005)
conclusively argue backed up with the Searl’s Chinese room
and the Harnad’s symbolic marry-go-around argument, that
language must be grounded outside the linguistic system.
Language gets meaning from what is already meaningful for
children, i.e. perceptions, actions and emotions. Many
cognitive psychologists, however, would agree that the
initial states of language acquisition are grounded in
perception and action, since at least, the first symbols can be
considered as gaining meaning from these modalities. The
problem mainly concerns the mature language processing
where the role of bodily states for language use is still
debatable (Glenberg et al, 2005). Recently, however, a study
on body-specificity hypothesis has shown that right-handers
activate the left-premotor cortex during lexical decision on
manual-action verbs, while left-handers activate the right
premotor cortex (Willems, Hagoort, Casasanto, 2010).
Hence, it seems reasonable to assume that different bodies
lead to different representation of environmental categories
and therefore, to predict that body differences are connected
to specific differences in language usage.
The goal of this study is to provide preliminary evidence
that specific body constraints correspond to specific patterns
of language acquisition. The possibility that the human
mind and body were evolutionary shaped by language in a
way that allows language production and comprehension is
largely recognized nowadays (for a review, Pinker, S.,
2000), but the opposite direction is still fairly
underestimated. In other words, there has been no attempt,
at least to our knowledge, to investigate systematic
variations in language acquisition due to particular body
constraints.

We start from the consistent evidence for specific
difficulties in the Down Syndrome population (Lauteslager,
2004; Winders, 1997) for problems with maintaining
balance and posture (i.e., insufficient stability, lack of trunk
rotation and delayed reaction speed) that according to
Lauteslager (2004) leads to a peculiar compensatory
symmetrical manner of moving, mainly characterized by
lack of variability. Every move that threatens the balance
seems to be problematic for children with Down Syndrome
(DS). Thus almost every stage of the typical motor
development is a hardship for a DS child, who usually is
able to maintain head control, sitting, standing, climbing,
walking, jumping etc. considerably late in his/her
development. But importantly, the way DS child acquires
the motor skills important for independent locomotion is
different from the typically development trajectory and is
characterized by preference toward symmetrical movements
with a lot of external support. The main reason considered
to be responsible for the specific motor development of DS
children is the low muscle tone (i.e. hipotonia) that affects
individiuals from this population in different degree but is
present from birth and persist throughout life.
To summarize, the low muscle tone constraints motor
development of DS children, causing problems with
maintaining balance and posture, which in turn leads to
development of specific symmetrical movements,
movements with a lot of external support and static motor
behaviour (Lauteslager, 2004). Thus we hypothesize that
word for actions and objects that threaten body posture and
balance will be represented differently from DS population
compared to normally developing one.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to predict how these specific
body constraints would change language acquisition. It is
possible that children with DS will acquire the meaning of
words that are problematic for their motor planing and
behaiviour much later than other words which do not tread
body posture and balance. In other words, because it is
difficult for them to walk, run, climb, swing etc. they will
avoid such behaviors and the respective situations that
require these actions. If this hypothetical scenario really
takes place, then the direct sequence should be a substantial
underrepresentation of such nouns and verbs that in some
respect threaten their balance and body posture.
But we may expect just the opposite result as well, namely
that children with DS will know better the words, associated
with maintenance of posture and balance than the other
words. If children with DS are raised in a stimulating
environment, which encouraged them to walk, to bring the
ball, to jump, to ride etc. they will finally master these
actions. Moreover, during this process of pure motor

1703

development child’s attention necessarily should be focused
on the accomplishment of movements that are difficult for
them. Hence everything that happens at this moment of keen
attention can be potentially encoded better, including the
labels for the body movement, hopefully provided from
people around them. Since, it was reported that they have
substantial deficits in sustained attention (i.e. attention
toward a given stimulus that allow its efficient processing)
(Brown, Johnson, Paterson, Rick Gilmore, Longhi and
Karmiloff-Smith, 2003), the attention toward a difficult
action seems to provide a prolonged period of focused
attention that may facilitate encoding at least of the label of
the action and the associated with this action objects.
To sum up, we expect a substantial difference in both
understanding and production of words, associated with
body posture and balance in DS children. At this point, we
don’t have any strong theoretical reasons to narrow down
our expectations. But, since we plan to study understanding
and production of word in home-raised children with DS
(i.e. hopefully, these children were stimulated to interact
actively with the surrounding physical and social
environment) we assume that the mere association of a
given word with posture and balance maintaining will
facilitate its knowledge.

Language acquisition in children with Down
Syndrome
Overall, children with DS acquire language at slower rates
than typically developing children on the same
chronological age. They produce shorter sentences and tend
to omit function words (i.e., articles, prepositions, pronouns,
etc.) (Chapman, 1995). Language comprehension in DS is
usually superior to language production, but still
significantly behind their level of cognitive development
(Miller, 1992), mental age (Vicari, Caselli, Gagliardi,
Tonucci, & Volterra, 2002) or vocabulary size (Singer et al,
as cited in Tomasello, 2006). Overall the linguistic abilities
of children with DS are surprisingly behind the ones
expected on the bases of their cognitive abilities.
But actually the picture is much more complicated. A few
studies point to the possibility that language acquisition in
DS has its own profile, which turned to be different from the
one of typically developing children. When asked to repeat
words and sentences children with DS omit a significantly
higher number of articles, verbs, and prepositions than
typically developing children and children with specific
language impairment, matched on mental age (Caselli,
Trasciani, & Vicari, 2008). The authors explain these
differences with the specific repetition task administered to
children that certainly relies on different cognitive abilities,
including verbal short-term memory, executive control etc.,
that are usually reported to be poorer in DS than in mental
age-matched children with typical development. However,
general cognitive impairments can hardly explain why
exactly verbs, articles and prepositions are preferentially
omitted by children with DS rather than nouns and
modifiers.

On other hand, another line of research points to the fact
that verb acquisition poses specific difficulties to DS
children, since verb understanding strongly relies on
syntactic development (Tomasello, 2006), which is reported
to be dramatically delayed in this specific population
(Fowler, 1990 as cited in Tomasello, M, 2006). Naigles,
Fowler, & Helm (1995) point out that verbs incorporate
both semantic and syntactic knowledge and thus mastering
of verb meaning should depend on both of these
components: “specific lexical and syntactic information
concerning each individual verb must be accrued in order to
establish stable verb representations”.
Overall, based on the Caselli et al (2008) and Naigles et al.
(1995) findings we may expect that children with DS will
underrepresent verbs compared with nouns. With respect to
our hypothesis, also seems much easier to imagine how
verbs are learned through out specific actions than nouns,
for example. Hence, the expected effect of embodiment on
language acquisition, if any, should be predominantly
expected in the domain of verb learning.
Then, our question is what will happen with word learning
in general and verb learning in particular, if some actions
are more difficult for an individual than others.

Investigation
We asked parents of children with Down syndrome and
parents of typically developing children, matched on age
(control group) to judge on a 7-point scale how well their
children understand and how well they use the respective
words. We designed a list of 172 Bulgarian words,
controlled for objective frequency, length, type (noun or
verb), and balanced with respect to embodiment, i.e. the
degree of association between a given word and
maintenance of body posture and balance (see section
Stimuli below).
Whereas, expectedly, the results for the control group
reached a ceiling effect for all words, the data of DS group
seems to follow an interesting trend.

Method
Design
The design of the study was 2(diagnoses of trisomy 21:
yes/not) x 2(objective frequency: high/low) x 2(length of the
word: long/short) x 2 (type of the word: noun or verb) x
2(embodiment: high/low) factorial design. The dependent
measures were the ratings, given from the parents of the
children, to the understanding and to the production of the
respective words.
An
additional
independent
factor
–
concreteness/abstractness was measured for control
considerations (see the next section - Stimuli).
Stimuli
We achieved the objective frequency of 355 Bulgarian
words from a corpus of 70 stories, included in the training

1704

program for public kindergartens in Bulgaria. The length of
the words varied uniformly between 3 and 11 letters.
On the next step, we asked two native speakers to judge
each of the word on a 7-point scale according to the
instruction: “Please, rate on a 7-point scale how much each
of the following concepts or actions disturbs body posture
or balance”. For example, both experts gave high ratings to
verbs like rush toward, jump, and scramble. Both experts
gave high ratings to nouns like fight, stroke, and ball. On the
other pole, low ratings were given for verbs like rill,
mistake, love; and nouns like sky, gold, sign… The highest
disagreements between the expert’s ratings were 3 (on a 7point scale).
Finally, we chose 172 words from the whole list (100
verbs and 72 nouns) and formed 86 pairs of words with
polar ratings according to their embodiment (relatedness to
dis-balance of the body) and fixed objective frequency and
length. More precisely, we ensured that for each verb
(respectively noun) with a specific length, frequency, and
low embodiment, there is another verb (respectively noun)
in the list with same length and frequency but with high
embodiment. The length of the words was distributed
among 3 and 11 letters with a dominance of 4-8 letter
words.
If the value of the words according to frequency and
embodiment dimension are discretized onto “high frequent”,
“low frequent”, and, respectively “high embodied” and “low
embodied”, the overall distribution of the stimuli would be
the one shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Distribution of the stimuli – verbs on the top panel; nouns
on the bottom panel.

embodiment

low

high

total

low

31

16

47

high

35

18

53

total

66

34

100

embodiment

First of all, we received a clear ceiling effect for the children
from the control group. The mean rating for understanding
was 6.662, st. dev. 0.623 for all words; the mean rating for
usage was 0.659, st. dev. 0.708.
The respective mean ratings for the DS children, however,
were:
For understanding: mean rating 3.887, st. dev. 1.883; for
usage: mean rating 1.772, st. dev. 1.002

frequency

NOUNS

low

high

total

low

21

19

40

high

17

15

32

total

38

34

72

Eight parents of children with DS (seven mothers and one
father) were asked to evaluate each of the words according
to two criteria:
First, how much they think that their child understand the
respective word.
Second, how appropriate their children use the respective
word.
The ratings were given on a 7-point scale. The order of the
words was random for every participant. The parents
worked at home. At the beginning of the questionnaire, they
should fill the age of the child as well as additional health
problems, if any. All parents were duly confident that the
data are confidential and will be used for statistical purposes
only.
The same procedure was used for a control group of the
parents of ten children without DS.
The age the children with DS were between 4 years and 4
years and 7 months. Half of the children (4) were girls and
the other half (4) – boys. Two of the children had corrected
to normal vision, 2 had heart problems (one of them was
diagnosed also with West Syndrome). All children with DS
were with full trisomy 21and not mosaic. All parents of DS
children in our study were recruited from Bulgarian Down
Syndrome Association and were with university education.
The group of the typically developing children was
matched in age and sex to the DS children in our study.
None of them did not have heart or vision problems. All
parents again were with university degree of education.
Results

frequency

VERBS

Procedure and participants

For an additional control, we asked 14 adults (10 women
and 4 men) on mean age of 22.5, to rate the words according
to their concreteness/abstractness. This was an additional
ad-hock variable, used to control for: First, whether our
measurement of embodiment wasn’t actually a measurement
of concreteness. Second, whether concreteness is the better
predictor of understanding and usage of words then the
other factors. Thus, for each of the 172 words we had also
an average rating of its concreteness/abstractness on a 7point scale (1- very concrete…7- very abstract).

The rest of analyses were on the results from the DS
children only and reflect the pattern of language
understanding and production observed and reported from
their parents. The data for all DS children were averaged by
item (172 independent words) and we analyzed the impact
of embodiment, frequency, length and type of the words two
dependent variables – mean rating of understanding and
mean rating of production.
For control (see below, at the end of the section Results),
we aggregated the data by subject as well and repeated the
analyses assuming within-subject design (each subject was
an independent case).
Results for understanding, depending on objective
frequency, length of the words, type of the words

1705

(verbs/nouns) and embodiment (how much each concept or
action disturbs body posture or balance)
The Univariate ANOVA analysis on understanding
detected main effect of the frequency (F (1, 164) = 12.031, p
= 0.001) and of the embodiment (F (1, 164) = 8.730, p =
0.004). There was not significant main effect of the type of
the word (verb or noun): (F (1, 164) = 1.465, p = 0.228). In
other words, parents in our sample estimated words with
high objective frequency as the words that their children
understand better than the words with lower objective
frequency. Interestingly, words with high embodiment were
also rated as significantly more knowable for children with
DS than words, associated with less posture disturbances
and balance difficulties.
There were not significant interactions among pairs of the
variables but it was a significant triple interaction among
frequency, embodiment, and type of the word (F (1, 164) =
4.708, p = 0.031). Figure 1 illustrates this interaction:

Figure1: The influence of the frequency and embodiment on the
understanding of the words by the children with Down syndrome was
different for the verbs (upper panel) and nouns (bottom panel)

Thus, the pattern of understanding of the words was found
to be completely different. Whereas both high frequency
and high embodiment support understanding (not much
surprisingly), it happen that embodiment doesn’t support
understanding of low frequently nouns.

The length of the words influenced understanding of the
verbs (F (1, 98) = 9.246, p = 0.003, obtained by a linear
regression analysis): according to parents of DS children
their children understand shorter verbs better than longer
ones. However, the length doesn’t influence significantly
understanding of the nouns: (F (1, 70) = 0.125, p = 0.725).
One may argue that this is due to the fact that children learn
first the nouns, thus the influence of the length became
slower. However, we didn’t found a significant difference
between the overall level of understanding of the verbs and
the nouns. It should be mentioned, however, that it was a
significant correlation between length and frequency (r = 0,279, p < 0.001).
The
final
control
measurement
–
concreteness/abstractness of the words, correlated with
embodiment (r = - 0.244, p = 0.001) and didn’t correlated
with the other independent variables.
Whereas it was a main effect of abstractness on
understanding (F (1, 164) = 6.739, p = 0.010), there were no
any interactions (neither paired, neither triple) with the other
factors (i.e., embodiment, frequency, length and type of the
word). Thus, our interpretation is that embodiment is
different measurement from concreteness and that the
interesting interaction on Figure 1 is due to the relatedness
of the words to a possible disturbance on the balance of the
body, instead of concreteness/abstractness.
Results for production, depending on objective frequency,
length of the words, type of the words (verbs/nouns) and
embodiment (how much each concept or action disturbs
body posture or balance)
Although the ratings for the other dependent measure–
correct usage of the words – were much lower, the results
followed similar pattern according to all analyses:
It was main effect of the frequency (F (1, 164) = 11.885, p
= 0.001) and of the embodiment (F (1, 164) = 4.582, p =
0.034). In contrast with the results for the understanding, it
was a significant main effect of type of the word too: (F (1,
164) = 11.216, p = 0.001). The nouns received higher
ratings.
There were not any pair interactions. The triple
interaction between frequency, type of word, and
embodiment was with a marginal significance only: (F (1,
164) = 3.046, p = 0.0083).
Length of the word influenced usage of the verbs (F (1,
98) = 14.126, p = 0.000) and doesn’t influence the usage of
the nouns (F (1, 70) = 0.055, p = 0.815).
It was main effect of abstractness (F (1, 164) = 4.137, p =
0.044) without any paired or triple interactions. For
comparison with the marginal significance of the interaction
between frequency, type, and embodiment, the results for
the respective interaction between frequency, type, and
abstractness was F (1, 164) = 0.194, p = 0.660.
Repetition of analyses: analyses on the date averaged by
subject

1706

The impact of embodiment, frequency, length and type of
the word was measured with a Repeated Measures Analysis
on data averaged by subject (i.e., eight DS children). The
main effects of these factors were again estimated as
significant. We obtained main effects of frequency (F(1, 7)
= 66.714, p = 0.000), of embodiment (F(1, 7) = 46.505, p =
0.000), and also of type of the word (F(1, 7) = 9.239, p =
0.019).
The triple interaction was also significant: F (1, 7) =
31.166, p = 0.001. The only difference was that Repeated
Measures Analysis estimated as significant the interaction
between frequency and embodiment: F (1, 7) = 12.071, p =
0.010.

Discussion
According to their parents children with DS understand
and use better words that involve difficult for them actions,
namely the ones associated with greater posture disability
and asymmetry. It seems that, while performing the difficult
for them body movements, children learn better the words
for these movements and the words for the objects that are
typically connected to this movements. Having in mind that
keeping the balance of their body is a typically difficult
motor task for these children, the result is in favor of the
hypothesis that the body constraints may cause systematic
variations of language acquisition.
Interestingly, although both frequency and embodiment
influence word understanding and production of DS
children, the pattern for verbs and for nouns differs. The
embodiment doesn’t influence low frequent nouns. This was
not due to a floor effect, as can be seen on Figure 1 and
cannot be explained just by a complete misunderstanding of
those words. This asymmetry raises new questions and
requires further investigations.
The main effect of embodiment, however, points to an
important trend in language acquisition in children with DS:
the words that are related to eventual misbalance of the
body were estimated as better understood and used from DS
children.
The important question, however, is why this happens. We
speculated at the beginning of this paper that children with
DS may be recognize the situations that disturb their body
posture or balance as more difficult and hence, requiring
their attention. Then, their outperformance on words that are
associated with such situations can be considered as a
matter of attention, which is dedicated to the maintenance of
body posture and balance. The extra attention dedicated to
the movements that require maintaining of posture and
balance may as a side effect improve the knowledge for the
associated concepts. Attention, indeed, seems to be a
problematic cognitive ability for DS population. Brown et
al.(2003) conclusively argued that toddlers with DS has
significant problems with maintaining attention to objects in
the environment compared to a group of chronologically
matched toddlers with Williams syndrome, a group of
chronologically matched typically developing children and a

group of mentally matched typically developing children.
Possibly, the extra attention and effort toward the difficult
actions may overcome the reported sustained attention
deficits of DS children. Instead of training the sustained
attention of children with DS we may compensate it with
educational techniques that back on their posture and
balance difficulties.
It could be, however, that DS children recognize actions that
disturb their body posture and balance as threatening ones,
since at least at the beginning of their motor development
these actions usually end up with incidents, associated with
physical pain. Possibly, in order to avoid successfully this
actions, children with DS learned better everything,
associated with situations that treat their body posture and
balance.
Of course, both explanations could be rephrased in a way
that appreciates the role of the parents in raising their
children. It is quite possible, indeed probable that parents,
rather than children recognize, which are the threatening and
the difficult situations for their DS toddlers and pay more
attention in teaching them how to master such situations.
Again, the prediction will be that children finally will learn
better the words associated with such situations than with
others.
Unfortunately, our study could not disentangle between
those possible explanations, but we find the compensatory
account the most interesting one. If extra intentional
resources can be allocated to particular movements and as a
side effect this extra attention can improve conceptual
knowledge, we may design techniques for both native and
foreign language learning appropriate for the DS
peculiarities.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported financially by the European
Office for Aerospace Research and Development under
grant FA8655-10-1-3061 (Adaptive Problem Solving by
Analogy).

Reference
Brown, Johnson, Paterson , Rick Gilmore, Longhi and
Annette Karmiloff-Smith (2003) Spatial representation
and attention in toddlers with Williams syndrome and
Down syndrome, Neuropsychologia 4, 1037–1046
Caselli, Monaco and Manuela Trasciani, and Vicari, (2008)
Language in Italian Children With Down Syndrome and
With Specific Language Impairment, Vol. 22, No. 1, 27–
35
Chapman RS. Language development in children and
adolescents with Down syndrome, In: Fletcher P,
MacWinney B, editors. The Handbook of Child Language.
Oxford: Blackwell, 1995.
Glenberg, A.M., Havas, D., Becker, R., & Rinck, M. (2005).
Grounding Language in Bodily States: The Case for
Emotion. R. Zwaan and D. Pecher (Eds.) The grounding

1707

of cognition: The role of perception and action in memory,
language, and thinking. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Lauteslager, P. (2004). Children with Down’s syndrome;
motor development and intervention. Amersfoort: 's
Heeren Loo Zorggroep.
Miller JF. Development of speech and language in children
with Down syndrome. In: Lott IT, Mc Loy EE, editors.
Down Syndrome, 1992: p. 39–50.
Naigles, L. G. Fowler, A.E. , Helm, A. (1995). Syntactic
bootstrapping from start to finish with special reference to
Downsyndrome. In : Tomasello, M. & Merriman, W. E.
(Eds.) Beyond names for things: Young children's
acquisition of lverbs. pp. 299-330. Hillsdale, NJ,
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Pinker, S. (2000) "Language Acquisition," in L. R.
Gleitman, M. Liberman and D. N. Osherson eds., An
invitation
to
Cognitive
Science
(http://users.ecs.soton.ac.uk/~harnad/Papers/Py104/pinke
r.langacq.html). MIT Press, Cambridge.
Tomasello, M. (2006). Acquiring linguistic constructions. In
D. Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of Child
Psychology. New York: Wiley.
Vicari, M.C. Caselli, C. Gagliardi, F. Tonucci, V. Volterra,
(2002) Language acquisition in special populations: a
comparison between Down and Williams syndromes,
Neuropsychologia, vol 40 , p. 2461–2470
Willems, R. M., Hagoort, P., & Casasanto, D. (2010). Bodyspecific representations of action verbs: Neural evidence
from right- and left-handers. Psychological Science, 21,
67-74.
Winders, P. (1997) Gross Motor Skills in Children with
Down Syndrome: A Guide for Parents and Professionals,
Woodbine House.

1708

