UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning from speaker word choice by assuming adjectives are informative

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3b19d8nw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Horowtiz, Alexandra
Frank, Michael

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning from speaker word choice by assuming adjectives are informative
Alexandra Horowitz

Michael C. Frank

ahorowit@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

The goal in our studies was thus to investigate whether children can learn from how speakers choose to express themselves. We focused on adjective use as a case study because adjectives are optional and may signify cues to contrast and noteworthy features. As an extension of the principle of contrast—that a contrast in form signifies a contrast in
meaning (E. Clark, 1987)—children should interpret that referential expressions modified with adjectives convey different
types of information than expressions with bare nouns. This
makes adjective interpretation a useful domain for examining
how children form implicit inferences from a speaker’s word
choices. We began by looking at color and size terms because
they are some of the earliest-learned and most commonlyused adjectives.
Adults perceive adjective use as marking contrast, but there
are differences between their comprehension and production.
Grice’s maxim of quantity—that speakers should be only as
informative as is necessary—predicts that modifiers should
be used selectively to disambiguate target referents from contrast sets (Grice, 1975). Indeed, in comprehension, visual
search findings reveal that adults process color and size information as it comes online and are faster to locate a modified referent (e.g. “big comb”) when a contrasting competitor
item is present (e.g. a small comb) than when a distractor
item is present (e.g. a spoon) (Sedivy, Tanenhaus, Chambers,
& Carlson, 1999). This indicates that prenominally modified expressions may evoke a contrast set with the referent;
adults are sensitive to implied contrast information embedded
in adjective use and process prenominal modifiers incrementally to locate and disambiguate a speaker’s intended referent.
However, adults are not always Gricean in their production;
although they rarely produce scalar modifiers without a size
contrast set present, they frequently over-modify with color
terms (Grodner & Sedivy, 2005; Sedivy, 2003). In all, adults
are sensitive to the implications of adjective use, but they are
not always maximally informative.
Children seem to be developing similar skills in their
preschool-age years. By kindergarten, children can recognize
the informativeness of adjective use in both comprehension
and production; children are more likely to use an adjective
to uniquely identify a big cup from a small cup than when
only a single cup is present (Nadig & Sedivy, 2002), suggesting that they are able to consider what level of description is
most useful to the perspective of an interlocutor. Preschoolers
can also learn to produce unambiguous references for more
complex scenes with feedback (Deutsch & Pechmann, 1982).
In processing speech, 3-year-olds make use of adjective information as soon as it becomes available; they correctly look to

Pragmatic abilities are not only a component of efficient communication; they can also be an important learning mechanism
for young children. We discuss four experiments and a corpus
analysis to investigate whether children and adults can infer
information about a speaker’s knowledge based on the choice
of an adjective. In Experiments 1 – 3, we found that adults
are sensitive to adjective use as an indicator of intended contrast dimension (e.g. that people say “red” if an object could
have been blue, but “tall” if it could have been short). In Experiment 4, we found developmental differences between older
and younger 4-year-olds: older children were above chance at
selecting the referential dimension of interest, while younger
children exhibited some contrast inference but a strong color
bias. This suggests that by preschool, children are beginning to
make inferences from a speaker’s word choices, but that there
are differences between adjective types. We conducted an exploratory corpus analysis to investigate possible causes for this
developmental difference.
Keywords: Pragmatics; adjectives; language development.

Introduction
A key feature of human language is its ability to convey information efficiently in context. For adults, the ability to
make pragmatic inferences—extrapolations about meaning in
context—can dramatically facilitate the exchange of information between conversational partners. For example, from “I
can’t find my left shoe,” we can make the inference that the
speaker probably knows where her right shoe is, or else she
would have mentioned that both of her shoes were lost. For
children, sensitivity to word choice information is instrumental in early word learning; pragmatic inference helps guide
both language acquisition and comprehension. In general,
recognizing that speakers have chosen to say something in
a particular way because of some communicative goal is an
integral part of understanding language (H. Clark, 1996).
In addition to aiding in the acquisition and comprehension
of language, inferences about the pragmatic implications of
speakers’ wording decisions might also be an important learning mechanism for children. Following our shoe example further: Children who learn to infer implied information embedded in word choices can incorporate implicit knowledge (we
are talking about one specific shoe) and move on to acquire
additional information (“where was it last seen?”) rather
than spending time repeating and confirming implied details
(“only one shoe is lost?”). Using speakers’ word choices to
make broader inferences allows children to learn from both
what is stated and what are implied alternatives. The earlier and faster children can recognize implicit contrasts from
word choice, the greater their opportunities to make use of
this information.

473

the bigger of two cars upon hearing “big”, even before they
hear the word “car” (Fernald, Thorpe, & Marchman, 2010).
In sum, preschoolers actively process adjective information
in production and comprehension as cues for uniquely identifying referents. But can children apply this knowledge to
make inferences about what implicit information is conveyed
by a speaker’s choice of adjective use? To our knowledge, this
is the first investigation of children’s abilities to use referential expressions to make inferences about the broader context.
In this paper, we outline four experiments and a corpus
analysis investigating pragmatic inferences from information
contained in speaker word choice. In Experiment 1, we
used a novel task to examine whether adults use adjective
information to infer referential contrast, and found that they
performed equally strongly with color and size terms. We
slightly modified the language in Experiment 2 to make implied contrast less salient, and found that performance only
decreased slightly. In Experiment 3, we examined performance with other context-dependent and context-independent
features, and found no differences across modifier types. In
Experiment 4, we extended our task to 4-year-olds, and found
a developmental change between children younger and older
than 4-and-a-half: while older 4s performed above chance,
younger 4s showed a strong color bias. We conducted an exploratory corpus analysis to examine possible causes for this
developmental difference.

Figure 1: Participants saw a set of three aliens: a training exemplar (e.g. tall red) followed by a test set containing one
alien that differed only by color (e.g. tall blue), and one that
differed only by size (e.g. short red). Participants were told
that a character uttered an expression modified by an adjective (color or size), and asked to predict which test exemplar
represented what that kind of alien usually looked like.

Experiment 1
Our goal was to examine what information listeners can infer
about why a speaker chose to form an utterance in a particular
way. Before studying behavior in children, we wanted to confirm our intuitions that adults interpret adjective information
contrastively when more than one possible visual contrast is
available. In Experiment 1, we used a novel task in which
adjective choice was the only informative cue to referential
contrast (Figure 1). If adults are able make inferences about
a speaker’s intended contrast set from adjective information,
then they will be more likely to infer contrast along the referenced dimension rather than another visible but unstated dimension. This is precisely what we found.

Procedures Participants were introduced to a character
named Allen the Alien. Allen presented the training exemplar, and said something about it, e.g. “This is a special kind
of glorp. This is a red glorp.” For a third of participants
the reference was about color, and for another third the reference was about size. Participants then saw the test set and
were asked, “What do you think glorps usually look like?”,
and prompted to select one of the two images. We measured
whether adults used the adjective information to infer a contrast along the referenced dimension. For the remaining third
of participants, we measured responses to a bare noun baseline in order to detect any response biases unrelated to adjective information.

Methods

Results and Discussion
The baseline control revealed that when adults had no access to adjective information, they were exactly at chance
for the image they selected. Of the 24 baseline participants,
they selected the size contrast half of the time (n=12) and the
color contrast equally as often (n=12). Additionally, participants were equally likely to select an image on either the left
(n=12) or right (n=12) side regardless of counterbalancing
(n=6 for each combination of contrast type and side presentation). These results indicate that adults showed no selection
bias with our stimuli when only visual cues were available.
For the experimental trials, responses were coded as correct if participants selected the alien that differed along the
referenced dimension (i.e. chose the alien that differed by size

Participants Seventy-two adult participants were recruited
from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk). They were informed that the task was designed for children. All reported
that they were native speakers of English.
Stimuli Participants viewed an online storybook with cartoon images of aliens, with one test trial. The test featured a
set of three aliens: a training exemplar, and a test set consisting of an alien identical to the training exemplar except for
size and an alien identical to the training exemplar except for
color (Figure 1). We used the height dimension to reflect size
because piloting revealed that scaling total size was construed
as reflecting age rather than size.

474

Methods

in size trials, and color in color trials). Participants selected
the contrasting dimension more often than chance (p < .01
in an exact binomial test for both conditions) and performance did not differ across the two conditions (χ2 (1) = 0.10,
p = .75, Figure 2).
Adjective information was used informatively to denote
contrast along a specified dimension; adults interpreted color
or size reference as conveying a noteworthy or contrastive
feature that distinguished different aliens. Although adults
often have access to prosody and emphatic stress on prenominal adjectives as additional cues to contrastive focus in speech
(Ito & Speer, 2008), they were sensitive to the implications of
adjective use even in our written task. The overall high level
of performance suggests that adults are attuned to the subtle
informativeness of word choice information. Though the only
difference across all conditions was the use of a size term vs.
a color term to describe the training exemplar, adults were
able to detect and apply this information when making generalizations about the broader populations. They effectively
interpreted the single difference in word choice across trials
as signaling either a color or size contrast.

Participants Ninety-six MTurk workers were recruited.
Stimuli and procedure Stimuli were similar to Experiment
1, but color was held constant and other contrasts were added.
Participants either saw aliens that differed by height and texture (spiky vs. smooth), or by height and width (fat vs. thin).
We again used language to highlight contrast salience, e.g.
“This is a special kind of glorp. This is a [spiky] glorp.” A
height, texture, or width adjective was used.

Results and Discussion
Responses were coded as correct if participants selected the
alien that differed along the referenced dimension. Adult participants performed significantly above chance in exact binomial tests (p < .05) for all conditions, and with no differences
between conditions (χ2 (2) = 0.55, p = .76, Figure 2). This
result suggests that adults are able to infer relevant contrast
information from adjective use across a variety of contextdependent and -independent dimensions. Our findings thus
show that adults are sensitive to pragmatic inference from adjective use across a variety of adjective types. Our next experiment tests children’s sensitivity.

Experiment 2

Experiment 4

In Experiment 1, we tried to make cues to contrast highly
salient by drawing attention to the unique referent (i.e., “this
is a special kind of alien”). In Experiment 2, we ran the
same procedure but used a more neutral introduction (“this
is a glorp”) in order to determine whether adults would still
use adjective information to infer a contrast dimension. Performance decreased only slightly from Experiment 1.

To assess children’s ability to use adjective choice to infer
contrast, we used a similar paradigm. We focused on color
and size contrasts with 4 – 5 year-old children because this
has been found to be an age of pragmatic development in
other studies (Barner, Brooks, & Bale, 2011). If young children infer the potential informativeness of adjective use to
convey cues to contrast, then they should be more likely to
select the image that differs along the referenced dimension
(i.e. color or size). If they are not sensitive to this information, then they should select an image at random or according
to a baseline bias for one dimension or the other.

Methods
Participants Forty-eight MTurk workers were recruited.
Stimuli and procedure Stimuli were identical to Experiment 1. The only change to the procedure was a modification
of the referential expression. Instead of Allen saying, “This
is a special kind of glorp. This is a red glorp,” we changed
the wording to, “This is a glorp. This is a red glorp.”

Methods
Participants We recruited 46 four-year-old children from
the Bing Nursery School at Stanford University. Pilot testing
suggested response differences by older and younger 4-yearolds, so we recruited two age groups: twenty-four children
age 4.0 – 4.5 (mean age 4 years 2 months) and 22 children
age 4.5 – 5.0 (mean age 4 years 10 months).

Results and Discussion
Again, adult participants performed significantly above
chance (p < .05 in an exact binomial test for both conditions) with no difference between conditions (χ2 (1) = 0.11,
p = .74, Figure 2). Adults used adjective information to infer
a referential contrast dimension even when more overt cues
to contrast were removed.

Stimuli We used a similar task design to the previous experiments, but printed a physical book that the experimenter
read with children. Each child received two training and six
test trials. Each test trial used a unique set of three aliens: a
training exemplar alien and two test exemplar aliens that differed from the training alien each by only color or only size.

Experiment 3
In our next experiment, we tested whether inferences about
contrast from adjective use would generalize to other properties that are less ubiquitous than color and size. We re-ran the
procedure keeping color constant, but used the dimensions of
texture (which, like color, remains constant across contexts)
and width (which, like size, is relative to context).

Procedures The experimenter read the book to each child
individually in a quiet room at the Bing Nursery School. Children were introduced to Allen the Alien, and then completed
two training trials with familiar items to get them used to the
study design (e.g., “This is a special kind of milk. This is

475

JGG

!"#"$3!"-2$+,2
&'()3!"-2$+,2

5)/26$)3!"-2$+,2
:';293!"-2$+,2

3

HG

3

?G

3

G

4G

E)$F)-23&)#)F2);

IG

3

!"#"$%&'()

*+,)#'-)

./0)$'1)-234

5)/26$)%7)'892

./0)$'1)-23J

:';29%7)'892

./0)$'1)-23K

<"6-8)$=>?@AB

C#;)$3=D?@AB

./0)$'1)-23?

Figure 2: Mean percent correct performance across all conditions of Experiments 1-4. The dashed line represents chance
(50%). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

chocolate milk. What does milk usually look like?”). Training trials featured adjectives other than color and size and
only one relevant contrast choice (e.g. plain milk vs. orange
juice). If children did not select the correct training image,
they were prompted until the correct image was chosen.
Training was followed by six test trials. For each test trial,
the child was shown a picture of a single exemplar alien and
told something about it, e.g. “This is a special kind of glorp.
This is a tall glorp.” Children were then shown two pictures,
one of an alien that differed from the exemplar by size, and
one that differed by color. They were asked, “What do you
think glorps usually look like?” Children received six test
trials: two trials using size adjectives (e.g. “this is a tall
glorp”), two trials using color adjectives (e.g., “this is a red
glorp”), and two trials with no adjective to serve as a baseline (e.g., “this is a glorp”). Adjectives were focused with
contrastive stress. The experimenter averted her gaze while
children pointed to their response. The sessions were videorecorded. Trial types and test pictures were counterbalanced
across children, and alien sets were presented in one of two
orders. The task took about 10 minutes to complete.

interaction between age and contrast (color or size) such that
older children performed above chance for both color and size
trials, and younger children responded above chance for size
trials but were only at chance for color trials (β = −3.25,
p < .01). Overall, this analysis suggested weak responding
by the younger 4s with successes by the older 4s.
To ensure that performance differences were not due to unfamiliarity with the color and size terms, we ran a posttest
with a subset of children for each age group (n=13 younger,
n=12 older). Younger children produced the correct size term
over 80% and color terms 95% of the time. Older children’s
production was 94% for size and 99% for color. These data
suggest that younger children’s lower performance on color
trials was not a result of not knowing their color words.
Baseline responses also indicated a significant developmental change. While younger 4s chose color-matching targets 71% of the time on the baseline trials, older 4s chose
color-matching targets 38% of the time. In fact, nearly half
(n=10) of the younger children selected a color match for all
trials in the study, while only one of the older children did.
To examine this effect, we replotted our data by proportion of
trials on which the color-matching target was chosen (Figure
3). A correct pattern of responding for a color trial would be
choosing the size match (hence success on a color trial would
be below 50% in Figure 3), while a correct response on a size
trial would be choosing the color match (above 50%). Replotted in this manner, we can see that younger 4s are modifying
their responses only slightly for color trials and not at all for
size trials, while older 4s modify their responding slightly for
color trials and considerably for size trials.
We captured this pattern with a second logit mixed model,
this time predicting choice of color-matching target as a function of trial type (including baseline), age group, and their interaction. In this analysis, we saw that younger children had

Results and Discussion
Preschool-aged children did show sensitivity to the implications of adjective use. Overall, preschoolers could pick
out adjective information as marking an implied contrast dimension. Nevertheless, we saw an interesting developmental
trend in the data (Figure 2).
We analyzed our results using a logit mixed model, predicting correct responses as an interaction between age (older
vs. younger) and contrast type with random effects of participant and alien type. There was a significant effect of age,
such that older children performed better than younger children (β = −2.06, p < .001). There was also a significant

476

B==

2$1$%
3)C+

"

;8
98

>=

"

@=

"

?=

;+%<+"(

"

!8

:8

"

"

=

8

/(,0(12"3454,"36470(-

A=

<88

=+-(571(
3454,
>7?(

!"#"!$%

!"#$%&'()*+,-.+

!$%"#"%

/).)01+,2$"(%'.(

3(%+..,$",4567

2$%89.,4"'1:.+.

&'(")*(+,-.

Figure 3: Mean percent color choices for all trials in the three
trial types by the children in Experiment 4. Error bars show
95% confidence intervals.

Figure 4: Percent of color and size corpus samples that were
categorized by informative use, being in the context of a visible contrast, and exhibiting stress on the adjective.

a significant bias for color (β = 1.32, p = .004), and a trend
towards differential responding in color trials (β = −.83,
p = .09). There was a significant coefficient on older children’s bias, indicating more size responding (β = −2.02,
p = .002), as well as a significant interaction for size trials, indicating success in overcoming this baseline effect (β = 1.76,
p = .04), but only for size trials. Thus, both groups showed
some bias in their responding, but older 4s were better able to
overcome that bias—at least for size—and make inferences
about why a particular adjective was produced.
To summarize: Even within the narrow age range of our
sample, there was a developmental difference between performance on color and size adjective trials. Although children at
both ages were sometimes able to make contrast inferences,
the ability to make these inferences clearly depended on the
category of the adjective being used. Our next study looks
to children’s input to investigate one potential source for this
developmental change.

size use. We used the last two or three samples for five children to most closely match the ages we used in Experiment
4 (age range 3;5.16 – 4;0.02, mean 3;8.06). A second coder
blind to the hypotheses coded a random 40% of the samples.
Inter-rater agreement was substantial (Cohen’s κ = 0.70).
Procedures For each file, all uses of color and size adjectives throughout the written transcript were analyzed along
with the video context. For each adjective use, we marked
the category (color or size), adjective (e.g. red), position
(prenominal, postnominal, or adjective used as noun), stress
(whether or not the adjective was marked with emphatic
stress), whether a visual contrast was present (e.g. whether
a big and small item were both physically available during a
reference to size), and whether the term was used in a contrastive or informative context (e.g. did the adjective convey
a clear possible learning opportunity for the child).

Results and Discussion

Corpus Analysis

We analyzed 330 speech instances of adjective use: 228 for
size and 102 for color. The majority of the utterances used the
adjective in the prenominal position (66% for color and 77%
for size), but while 20% of size uses appeared in the postnominal, we only found 2 instances for color. The remaining third
of color examples were used for naming or without a noun.
Emphatic stress was placed on color terms more often than
size terms (83% for color, 48% for size). Color terms were
also used more often with a visual contrast present than were
size terms (59% color samples and 27% size samples). Results are plotted in Figure 4. It may be that adult speakers are
selecting informative opportunities to use color labels with
children at this age. Children may have a firmer grasp on size
terms and infer contrast without a visible contrast set present.

There are a number of possible reasons for developmental
differences in color and size responding. One factor raised
by Sandhofer and Smith (2001) was that distinctions in the
ways color and size terms are used may promote production
for color terms and comprehension for size terms. We conducted a corpus study to investigate how color and size terms
are presented in natural speech to children, and whether there
are differences in the types of contexts and contrasts in which
these terms are typically used.
Materials Fourteen full speech files from the Providence
corpus of CHILDES (Demuth, Culbertson, & Alter, 2006)
were analyzed for adult-to-child speech containing color and

477

ity allows children both to learn more from each utterance
and to increase learning opportunities. Although pragmatic
inferences are not always easy for children, our results suggest that these inferences may become an important source of
background knowledge about the world.

For each of the samples, we examined whether or not the
adjective was used in an informative context. Contexts were
coded as informative if there was verbal reference to contrast,
visual contrast, or marked salience to evoke an implied contrast with the prototype. Adjective use was considered uninformative when it did not provide qualifiable information to
the child. In our samples, we found that 25% of size term
use was uninformative, but this was almost never the case for
color, suggesting that color and size terms are produced in
different types of contexts. Color terms were nearly always
used in instances that provided some type of information to
the child (97%), whereas size was used informatively in 70%
of instances. In addition, color was used to reference a visible
contrast that was present in the immediate scene—as opposed
to a reference to an unseen or implicit contrast item—44% of
the time but only 16% for size.
It may be the case that children expect color terms to highlight the salience of a particular item in a visible contrast set
instead of selecting an implied contrast set. In addition, perhaps the greater information contained in color utterances for
children at this age may lead children to be biased to pair
items on the basis of color, as in baseline performance in Experiment 4. Although more work is needed to understand
the links between corpus distribution and behavior, the differences in use we observed might lead children to interpret
color and size information in different ways.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the staff and families at the Bing Nursery School.

References
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children’s pragmatic
inference. Cognition, 118(1), 84–93.
Clark, E. (1987). The principle of contrast: A constraint on
language acquisition. Mechanisms of language acquisition,
1, 33.
Clark, H. (1996). Using language (Vol. 4). Cambridge University Press Cambridge.
Demuth, K., Culbertson, J., & Alter, J. (2006). Wordminimality, epenthesis and coda licensing in the early acquisition of english. Language and Speech, 49(2), 137–
173.
Deutsch, W., & Pechmann, T. (1982). Social interaction and
the development of definite descriptions. Cognition, 11(2),
159–184.
Fernald, A., Thorpe, K., & Marchman, V. (2010). Blue car,
red car: Developing efficiency in online interpretation of
adjective-noun phrases. Cognitive psychology, 60(3), 190–
217.
Frank, M., Goodman, N., Lai, P., & Tenenbaum, J. (2009).
Informative communication in word production and word
learning. In Proceedings of the 31st annual conference of
the cognitive science society (pp. 206–211).
Grice, H. (1975). Logic and conversation. 1975, 41–58.
Grodner, D., & Sedivy, J. C. (2005). The effect of speakerspecific information on pragmatic inferences. The processing and acquisition of reference. MIT Press: Cambridge,
MA.
Ito, K., & Speer, S. (2008). Anticipatory effects of intonation:
Eye movements during instructed visual search. Journal of
Memory and Language, 58(2), 541–573.
Nadig, A., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Evidence of perspectivetaking constraints in children’s on-line reference resolution. Psychological Science, 13(4), 329.
Sandhofer, C., & Smith, L. (2001). Why children learn color
and size words so differently: Evidence from adults’ learning of artificial terms. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130(4), 600.
Sedivy, J. C. (2003). Pragmatic versus form-based accounts
of referential contrast: Evidence for effects of informativity
expectations. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 32(1),
3–23.
Sedivy, J. C., Tanenhaus, M., Chambers, C. G., & Carlson,
G. N. (1999). Achieving incremental semantic interpretation through contextual representation. Cognition, 71(2),
109–147.

General Discussion
Can adults and children learn from speakers’ choice of a particular adjective? Our results suggest that adults are able to
infer the general structure of a category based on the words
chosen to describe a specific, anomalous example. Children
also showed sensitivity to word choice, though we saw developmental differences between ages four and five. Children
older than four-and-a-half sometimes succeeded in making
inferences based on word choice, while younger children primarily exhibited a color bias. Our corpus analysis suggests
that the language adults use with children around this age
may mark color as implying a salient, immediate dimension,
whereas size was used for a wider variety of functions.
The ability to make inferences from speakers’ word
choices may not only reflect more adult-like comprehension,
but may also be an important learning mechanism for children. The earlier and faster children can go beyond what
is stated at face value, the more opportunities they have to
gain further knowledge through pragmatic cues. This kind of
inference is consistent with work suggesting that pragmatic
mechanisms can be used in a variety of different kinds of inferences: for inferring speaker meaning, learning words, and
in this case, inferring facts about the world (Frank, Goodman,
Lai, & Tenenbaum, 2009).
Children who are able to recognize that word choices can
convey broader information will have greater opportunities
for learning about the world because they can recognize both
what is explicitly stated and implicitly implied. This abil-

478

