UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Lexical Access Across Languages: A Multinomial Model of Auditory Distraction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vq722q3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Beaman, Philip

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Lexical Access Across Languages: A Multinomial Model of Auditory Distraction.
C. Philip Beaman (c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk)
School of Psychology & Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL, UK

and nature, of the processing to which the auditory
distracters are subjected. Similarities and differences
between results obtained with category free-recall and with
identical distracters applied during immediate serial recall
also indicate the generality, and specificity, respectively, of
both the auditory distraction effect and memory models
which aim to account for this effect.

Abstract
Recall in many types of verbal memory task is reliably
disrupted by the presence of auditory distracters, with verbal
distracters frequently proving the most disruptive (Beaman,
2005). A multinomial processing tree model (Schweickert,
1993) is applied to the effects on free recall of background
speech from a known or an unknown language. The model
reproduces the free recall curve and the impact on memory of
verbal distracters for which a lexical entry exists (i.e., verbal
items from a known language). The effects of semantic
relatedness of distracters within a language is found to depend
upon a redintegrative factor thought to reflect the contribution
of the speech-production system. The differential impacts of
known and unknown languages cannot be accounted for in
this way, but the same effects of distraction are observed
amongst bilinguals, regardless of distracter-language.

The Schweickert (1993) model.
The model tested in this study is Schweickert’s (1993)
multinomial model of immediate recall. This model has
previously been applied to short-term memory for serial
order, in which items must be recalled in the order in which
they appeared and are scored as incorrect if an item appears
in the wrong position in the serial recall protocol. This
model was able to successfully account for the interaction in
serial recall data between the frequency of words within the
English language (the word frequency effect) and the point
at which they were presented in a to-be-recalled list (Hulme,
Roodenrys, Schweickert, Brown, Martin & Stuart, 1997).
The same model also accounted for a distracter-word
frequency effect, that is an effect on immediate serial recall
of whether an auditory distracter – presented concurrently
with the visual presentation of the to-be-recalled list – was
of high or low frequency, with low frequency words causing
the most distraction (Buchner & Erdfelder, 2005). As such,
the model is a useful one for examining the effects of lexical
properties of the auditory distracters, and how these might
interact with lexical processing of the to-be-recalled items.
The multinomial model is conceptually straightforward,
the structure of the model is given in Figure 1. An item is
either directly recalled in an intact form, with probability i,
or else the representation of the item exists only in a
degraded form and it must be redintegrated, or
reconstructed, which is only possible with probability r.

Keywords: Auditory distraction; bilingualism; memory;
MPT models.

Introduction
Auditory distraction is a simple and inevitable fact of
everyday experience, stemming from the role of audition as
the “sentinel of the sense” (Handel, 1989; Jones, Hughes &
Macken, 2010). A considerable body of experimental data
has been amassed, particularly with regard to immediate
serial memory (e.g., Jones et al, 2010), indicating that – as a
predictor of disruption experienced to the primary task – the
lexical content of verbal auditory distracters is less
important than the acoustic properties of the signal. For
example, to reliably disturb immediate serial recall it is
necessary for an auditory stream to consist of multiple,
varying items – a single repeated item is much less
disruptive (Jones & Macken, 1993). Nevertheless, given the
verbal nature of most primary tasks shown to be vulnerable
to interference from auditory distracters, it would be
surprising if no effect of the lexical properties of the
distracters was ever observed.
One task which reliably shows more disruption from
meaningful verbal distracters that are semantically related to
the material being studied than from semantically unrelated
material is categorical free recall. In this task, participants
are asked to recall, in any order that occurs to them, a series
of items all drawn from the same semantic category (e.g., a
fruit, a vegetable, or a four-footed animal) which are
presented to them visually, one item at a time. Recall in this
task is disrupted by the presence of auditory-verbal
distracters but is disrupted more when these distracters are
drawn from the same category as the to-be-recalled material.
Participants are always asked to ignore anything they may
hear, and are never tested on the content of the auditory
stream. Results obtained within this task show the extent,

Correct Recall

i
Correct Recall
r
(1-i)

(1-r)

Incorrect Recall

Figure 1. Diagrammatic representation of Schweickert’s
(1993) multinomial processing tree model.

96

The form of the model thus allows for two means by
which items can be correctly recalled – they may already
exist in an “intact” form and be readily available, or they
may require reconstruction. If both of these processes fail,
the item cannot be recalled. The model has thus far been
applied only to immediate serial recall – that is recall
commonly considered to be from “short-term memory” but
the existence of two distinct processes, each underlying
recall in a different way, calls to mind earlier models
previously applied to free recall (e.g., Atkinson & Shiffrin,
1968) which also assumed dual components to recall, so it is
of interest to examine whether Schweickert’s model for
serial recall can also be applied to free recall, and in
particular the free recall of items from within a single
category, which will require the model to generate the wellknown serial position function typical of free recall, with
primacy and extensive recency (Murdock, 1962), rather than
the serial recall curves, with extensive primacy and limited
recency, generated by Buchner and Erdfelder (2005) and
Hulme et al. (1997).

observed data. Buchner and Erdfelder (2005) conclude in
favor of an account in which, “low-frequency distracter
words require more processing resources that could
otherwise have been used for keeping the memory
representations of the target words active and intact” (p. 89).
The study by Buchner and Erdfelder (2005) is curious in
that there is no necessary a priori reason why low-frequency
distracters should attract more attention, or require more
processing resources, than high frequency distracters - as
these authors are careful to note. Previous studies, however,
all used immediate serial recall rather than – as studied here
– categorical free recall which draws upon semantic
memory and appears to be more sensitive to the lexical
properties of the auditory distracters than serial recall
(Marsh, Hughes & Jones, 2008). In particular, auditory
distraction may also occur within a semantic-memory
fluency task
in which speech production processes
presumably play a large part (Jones, Marsh & Hughes,
2012). On this basis, and using the logic employed by
Hulme et al. (1997), if it is possible to apply the
Schweickert (1993) model to categorical free recall then the
lexical effects of the auditory distracters should be most
evident on the r parameter, reflecting interference with
speech production systems, rather than the i parameter
which might be interpreted – as, for example, by Buchner
and Erdfelder (2005) – as a more general effect, possibly
the result of an attentional mechanism drawing off
processing resources.

Lexicality and recall.
As with all multinomial models, the goodness-of-fit
between the model and the data is assessed by finding the
values for the free parameters (i and r, in this instance)
which produce expected data closest to those observed in
behavioral testing. A goodness-of-fit test then determines
whether the expected values differ significantly from the
observed data (Bachelder & Reifer, 1999). In Hulme et al’s
(1997) study, i was held constant across simulations of
different experimental conditions but allowed to vary
across serial position to produce the serial position curve
indicative of serial recall. That is, for a 7-item to-be-recalled
list, different parameter values would exist for i1, i2, …i7, but
these would be identical regardless of experimental
condition. r was held constant within an experimental
condition but allowed to vary across conditions. Hulme et
al. (1997) argued that variation of r across experimental
condition reflected the effect of word frequency upon the
redintegration process, with representations of higherfrequency words supporting the redintegration more
effectively than representations of low-frequency words (so
r high-frequency> r low-frequency). It was assumed that verbal shortterm memory is essentially a by-product of processes
involved in speech perception and speech production
(Hulme, Maughan & Brown, 1991), with redintegration an
integral part of speech production, representing the “cleanup” of noisy representations (e.g., within an underlying
connectionist network). Similarly, Buchner and Erdfelder
(2005) concluded that the word-frequency of the distracters
must impact upon the probability of retrieving an intact
representation (i) because a model varying r, but with
equivalent values of i across experimental conditions
differed significantly from the data, whereas the expected
data from a model with equivalent r but varying i across the
experimental conditions, such that i high-frequency distracter > i lowfrequency dsitractor were statistically indistinguishable from the

Modeling Recall and Disruption Within and
Across Languages
To test these possibilities and simultaneously test the
generality of the Schweickert (1993) model, the model was
applied to a set of data obtained from English
monolinguals and Welsh-English bilinguals. Bilinguals
were used to test the possibility that distraction effects
associated with the meaning of speech cannot be inhibited,
and by extension the idea that the meaning of speech
cannot be ignored. The free recall task was presented in
one language (English) with speech distracters in either
English or Welsh. The distracting speech (in either
English or Welsh) consisted of words related to the same
subject, or to a different subject. The typical finding is that
both unrelated and semantically related speech (distracter
words from the same category as the to-be-recalled items)
give a distraction effect, but that there is a greater
distraction effect for related speech (Neely & LeCompte,
1999). The effect, even for unrelated speech, is lexical
rather than acoustic, because non-words and sinewave
speech tokens do not disrupt recall (Marsh et al., 2008).
Where does the disruption originate? If the effect of
related speech is conceptual in nature, originating from the
organization of the speech planning and production
system, then one might expect bilinguals to show
equivalent disruptive effects of the meaning of the words
regardless of their language of origin (English or Welsh).
Conceptual effects of the irrelevant speech arising from

97

the disruption of speech organization in this way should be
reflected in reductions of the r parameter of the model.
Alternatively, if the effect is a non-specific
lexical/attentional effect akin to that reported by Buchner
and Erdfelder (2005) then the bilinguals might be expected
to perform more like monolinguals when the irrelevant
speech accesses a lexicon (Welsh) other than the one they
are employing for the focal task (English). Any residual
difference between the two groups, or between the
disruption caused by related and unrelated speech should
be accountable in terms of the i parameter, with
lexical/attentional effects reducing the values of this
parameter for those conditions that show the most
disruption.
For the experiment, twenty-eight English monolinguals
and twenty-eight Welsh-English bilinguals each viewed 28
trials of 12 target words, in English, visually-presented for
free recall. Stimuli were chosen from semantic categories of
the Van Overschelde, Rawson, and Dunlosky (2004)
category norms. Items from positions 13-24 in the categorynorm lists were used to form target lists and items from
positions 1-12 were used as distracters. On half the trials,
the auditory distracters were taken from the same category
as the targets (e.g., both sets of stimuli were types of
animals, and no “shape” exemplars were presented). On the
remaining trials, the distracter items were taken from one
category of the pair (e.g., fruit) and targets from the other
category (e.g., carpenter’s tools). Additionally, half of the
distracters were presented in English, and half in Welsh,
yielding four separate conditions each experienced by both
English monolinguals and Welsh-English bilinguals:
English unrelated distracters (EU), English related
distracters (ER), Welsh unrelated distracters (WU) and
Welsh related distracters (WR). Space precludes a full
analysis of the behavioral results, but a bar chart of the
overall impact of distracters on both groups is given in
Figure 2.

implementing the serial position function, but there was a
single value for r regardless of serial position. multiTree
software (Moshagen, 2010) was used to implement the
models. In what follows, only models which fit the data are
presented graphically.
Examining first the unrelated speech condition for
bilingual participants, that is distracters – presented in either
English or Welsh – semantically unrelated to the English
language targets, the results could be modeled by assuming
that neither i nor r varied across conditions with no
significant difference between observed and expected
results, G2 = 15.67, df = 11, p = .15. This confirms the
viability of the Schweickert model for categorical free recall
and shows that – for Welsh-English bilingual participants –
semantically unrelated distracters have an equivalent effect
upon free recall of English words regardless of the language
of the distracter.

Figure 3. Frequency of correct recalls across serial
position by Welsh-English bilinguals for unrelated
distracters in English and Welsh. Expected values according
to the MPT model are given by the solid line.
For the English monolinguals, a similarly constrained
model differs significantly from the data, G2 = 33.95, df =
11, p < .001. Thus, for English monolinguals, there is a
difference between unrelated English and unrelated Welsh
words as distracters. Relaxing the constraints upon the
model by allowing r to vary across conditions does not
improve the fit of the model, G2 = 30.6, df = 10, p < .001.
Thus, whatever effect the presence of unrelated verbal
distracters in a known language (which have a lexical status)
has over the effect of distracters in an unknown language
(for which no lexical entry exists), cannot be accounted for
within the Schweickert model by a redintegration process.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to test the effects of
similarly freeing the constraints upon the i parameter, as
investigated by Buchner and Erdfelder (2005), because
varying i across conditions as well as serial positions
imposes too few constraints on the model (Bachelder &
Reifer, 1999).

Figure 2. Total frequency of correct recalls across all
conditions, summed across serial positions.

Unrelated distracters across languages.
As with Hulme et al. (1997) and Buchner and Erdfelder
(2005) i was allowed to vary across serial position, thereby

98

factor. This is consistent with reports by Buchner and
Erdfelder (2005) that the frequency of occurrence of words
presented as distracters impacted upon the i parameter and
not the r parameter, which they interpret as an attentional
effect. However, there are a priori reasons to suppose that
the difference between semantically-related and unrelated
distracters could be captured by just such a single,
redintegrative factor.
Hulme et al. (1991, 1997) argued that – in immediate
serial recall – the effects of word frequency, captured by the
r parameter in the Schweickert model, reflect the operation
of a speech production system yoked into supporting recall.
In an investigation of the effects of distraction upon a verbal
fluency task of the kind frequently used to explore the
speech production system, Jones et al. (2012) found an
effect of semantically-related speech. Thus, it seems
reasonable to suggest,

Related distracters across languages.
Applying the model to bilingual English and Welsh
speakers exposed to irrelevant distracter speech in either
English or Welsh that was semantically related to the
English language to-be-remembered stimuli, a model in
which i varied across serial position but i and r were
identical regardless of the language of the distracter
provided a good fit to the data, G2 = 8.67, df = 11, p = .65.
Thus, the distraction effects for bilinguals can be modeled
using the same parameter values regardless of the language
in which the distracters were presented.

1)

2)
Figure 4. Plot of frequency of correct recalls by WelshEnglish bilinguals for semantically related distracters in
English and Welsh. Expected values according to the MPT
model are given by the solid line.

In free recall as in serial recall, speech production
systems may play a role – perhaps by supporting
covert articulatory rehearsal. This may particularly
apply to categorical free recall, free recall of items
from specific, reasonably circumscribed semantic
categories.
If so, the effects of specifically semantically-related
distracters might be traceable to this system via their
impact upon the r parameter in the model.

Applying the model to the data, this time for the effects of
related and unrelated English speech upon free recall by
monolinguals, a model that does not differ significantly
from the data is obtained by varying only the parameter r
between the unrelated and related speech conditions, G2 =
15.51, df = 10, p = .11. The fit of the model is given in
Figure 5. To ensure that this fit was not possible simply
because there was no difference in the data between the
effects of related and unrelated speech, parameter r was
constrained to be equivalent in both conditions. The
resulting model differed significantly from both the
previous model, ∆G2 = 11.84, df = 1, p < .001and the data,
G2 = 27.35, df = 11, p = .004.

Unsurprisingly, a similar attempt to model the impact of
semantically-related auditory distracters in both English and
Welsh on monolingual English speakers was unsuccessful,
with the best-fitting model differing substantially from the
data, G2 = 60.27, df = 11, p < .001. Allowing r to vary
between Welsh and English distracter conditions was also
insufficient to substantially improve the fit of the model, G2
= 26.62, df = 10, p = .003. Thus, in terms of the Schweickert
(1993) model, the extra impact, upon a visual-verbal free
recall task, of an auditory distracter being in a known
language must be upon factors other than redintegration.
This is true regardless of whether the auditory distracter is
unrelated, or semantically related, to the to-be-remembered
targets.

Comparing unrelated and related distracters
within languages.
In addition to looking at the effects of bilingualism upon
auditory distraction when the distracters are presented in
different languages, it is also of interest to compare the
effects of distracters within a single language. Using the
model to investigate the effects of shifting the language of
distracters has revealed that the language of the distracter is
irrelevant provided it is a known language (Figures 2-4) and
that the difference between known and unknown language
distracters cannot be captured by a single redintegrative

Figure 5. Correct recalls by English monolinguals for
semantically related and unrelated distracters in English.

99

Expected values according to the MPT model are given by
the dashed lines and observed values by the solid lines.

Additionally constraining the r values for semanticallyrelated speech distracters to be equivalent across languages,
and likewise constraining r for unrelated distracters to be
equivalent across languages, produced a model that did not
differ significantly from the baseline model, ∆G2 = .007, df
= 2, p = .996, nor from the data, G2 = 20.67, df = 22, p =
.54. However, it was not possible to fit a model in which the
r values were equated within languages, regardless of the
semantic relationship between distracters (i.e., rEU = rER and
rWU = rWR), and were allowed to vary across languages (i.e.,
rE ≠ rW) – such a model differed significantly from both the
baseline model, ∆G2 = 57.16, df = 2, p < .001, and from the
data, G2 = 77..83, df = 22, p < .001.

Finally, the model was applied to the performance of
Welsh-English bilinguals in the presence of English and
Welsh distracters that could be either semantically-related,
or unrelated to the target lists. Constraining the values of i to
be equivalent regardless of whether the distracters were
semantically related or not, but allowing the values of r to
vary, resulted – as in the case of the English monolinguals –
in a model that did not differ significantly from the data
observed, G2 = 20.67, df = 20, p = .42. This was defined as
the baseline model, and the output of this model is shown,
for Welsh and English, in Figures 6a and 6b.

Discussion
The modeling results reported here show that it is possible
to extend the Schweickert (1993) model of immediate serial
recall to also apply to free recall, consistent with research
(such as that of Tan and Ward, 2000), emphasizing
similarities between immediate serial and free recall. More
importantly, the model also shows that – for bilinguals – the
effects of distracters presented in either of their languages
are equivalent, even if the primary task on which the impact
is observed (free recall in this case) is conducted wholly
within one of those languages. Important issues are still to
be worked-out with regard to bilingualism, e.g., secondlanguage (L2) proficiency and the age at which L2 was
learned, but it is notable that no simple means was found to
model, in a similar manner, the effects of English and Welsh
distracters on the performance of
English-speaking
monolinguals. Clearly therefore, for monolinguals, the
effects of English and Welsh speech upon categorical free
recall performance differed, even when the English
distracter speech was semantically-unrelated to the target
words. In this, the categorical free-recall task differs from
other, notably serial recall, tasks in which foreign speech
(including Welsh) has been played to participants, with
equivalent effects to speech in their native language (e.g.,
Jones, Miles & Page, 1990). Whatever the basis for this
difference, it cannot be located within a redintegrative stage
affected by distracters from known versus unknown
languages as manipulation of this parameter did not improve
the fit of the model. This is broadly consistent with Buchner
and Erdfelder’s (2005) finding that varying the wordfrequency of distracters within a known language was also
more accurately modeled by varying the i rather than the r
parameter within the Schweickert (1993) model.
Unfortunately, known limitations of the modeling
methodology employed (principally, the requirement for the
model to be identifiable; Bachelder & Reifer, 1999), prevent
further exploration of this issue given the experimental
design available (for more discussion of this issue, see
Buchner & Erdfelder, 2005).
A more interesting, and more positive, finding arising
from the current study is that the semantic effects of
distraction within a known language can be accounted for in
terms of a redintegration stage. Comparison of semantically-

Figure 6a. Frequency of correct recalls across serial
position by Welsh-English bilinguals for semantically
related (R) and unrelated (U) distracters in Welsh (W).
Expected values according to the MPT model are given by
the dashed lines, and observed values by the solid lines.

Figure 6b. Correct recalls by Welsh-English bilinguals for
semantically related (R) and unrelated (U) distracters in
English (E). Expected values according to the MPT model
are given by the dashed lines

100

related with unrelated English distracter words amongst
English monolinguals and Welsh-English bilinguals, and a
similar comparison of semantically-related with unrelated
Welsh distracter words in the bilingual group, all produce
this same result (see Figures 5, 6a and 6b).
This finding is consistent with the data from Jones et al.
(2012) showing a semantic distraction effect upon verbal
fluency tasks generally considered to tap recall from
semantic memory prior to speech-formulation and
production, and is consistent with the hypothesis that
redintegration reflects a “clean-up” stage in recalling items
within the speech production system (Hulme et al., 1991,
1997). “clean-up” may seem to imply simply the filling in
of blanks, or correcting of misinformation, within a single
already-recalled item by reference to longer-term memory
or lexical storage (Levelt, 1999). However, it may fulfill a
more important function, namely one of identifying – by
means of “cleaning-up” an incomplete or noisy
representation – which one of several possible items is the
correct one to recall in a particular instance (Nairne, 2003,
personal communication). This is likely to be particularly
important when, as in the current situation, recall is always
from a list in which all of the target items are drawn from
the same semantic category and therefore share many
semantic and conceptual features. Under such conditions,
identifying the correct item from several possible candidates
is likely to be particularly important.
In this instance, it seems reasonable to suggest that the
presence of semantically-related distracters compromises
the redintegrative process at the level of retrieval of the
word-concept, resulting in greater distraction than is seen
with semantically-unrelated distracters. This suggestion is
further supported by the fact that bilinguals show a semantic
distraction effect from a language other than the one in
which they are nominally working (that is, the Englishlanguage memory task). This implies that although the
effects of speech on categorical free recall may be lexical
(Marsh et al., 2008) the specific effects of semantic
distraction across languages are conceptual, not lexical, in
nature.

Beaman, C. P. (2005). Auditory distraction from lowintensity noise: A review of the consequences for learning
and workplace environments. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 19, 1041-1064.
Buchner, A. & Erdfelder, E. (2005). Word frequency of
irrelevant speech distractors affects serial recall. Memory
& Cognition, 33, 86-97.
Handel, S. (1989). Listening: An introduction to the
perception of auditory events. Cambridge, Ma.: MIT
Press.
Hulme, C., Maughan, S., & Brown, G. D. A. (1991).
Memory for familiar and unfamiliar words: Evidence for
a long-term memory contribution to short-term memory
span. Journal of Memory & Language, 30, 685-701.
Hulme, C., Roodenrys, S., Schweickert, R., Brown, G. D.
A., Martin, S., & Stuart, G. (1997). Word-frequency
effects on short-term memory tasks: Evidence for a
redintegration process in immediate serial recall. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 23, 1217-1232.
Jones, D. M., Hughes, R. W., & Macken, W. J. (2010).
Auditory distraction and serial memory: The avoidable
and the ineluctable. Noise & Health, 12, 201-209.
Jones, D. M., & Macken, W. J. (1993). Irrelevant tones
produce an irrelevant speech effect: Implications for
phonological coding in working memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 19, 369-381.
Jones, D. M., Marsh, J. E., & Hughes, R. W. (2012).
Retrieval from memory: Vulnerable or inviolable?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
& Cognition. In press.
Jones, D. M., Miles, C., & Page, C. (1990). Disruption of
proof-reading by irrelevant speech: Effects of attention,
arousal or memory? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 4, 89108.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1999). Models of word production. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 223-232.
Marsh, J. E., Hughes, R. W., & Jones, D. M. (2008).
Auditory distraction in semantic memory: A processbased approach. Journal of Memory & Language, 58,
682-700.
Moshagen, M. (2010). multiTree: A computer program for
the analysis of multinomial processing tree models.
Behavior Research Methods, 42, 42-54.
Murdock, B. B. (1962). The serial position effect of free
recall, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64, 482-488.
Neely, C. B., & LeCompte, D. C. (1999). The importance of
semantic similarity to the irrelevant speech effect.
Memory & Cognition, 27, 37–44
Schweickert, R. (1993). A multinomial processing tree
model for degradation and redintegration in immediate
recall. Memory & Cognition, 21, 168-175.
Van Overschelde, J. P., Rawson, K. A., & Dunlosky, J.
(2004). Category norms: An updated and expanded
version of the Battig and Montague (1969) norms.
Journal of Memory & Language, 50, 289-335.

Acknowledgments
The multinomial modeling research reported here was
supported by ESRC grant RES-062-23-1752 to Dylan M.
Jones and C. Philip Beaman. Thanks to John Marsh for
providing the experimental data and to Robert Hughes for
the Welsh language stimuli.

References
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory:
A proposed system and its control processes. In Spence,
K. W., & Spence, J. T. The psychology of learning and
motivation (Volume 2). New York: Academic Press. pp.
89–195
Bachelder, W. H., & Reifer, D. M. (1999). Theoretical and
empirical review of multinomial processing tree
modeling. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 57-86.

101

