UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Listening to Thematic Music Prior to a Generation Task Causes Thematic Elements to Be
Included in a Story Generation Task.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/06x189h9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sifonis, Cynthia
Fuss, William

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Listening to Thematic Music Prior to a Generation Task Causes Thematic Elements
to Be Included in a Story Generation Task.
Cynthia M. Sifonis (sifonis@oakland.edu)
Department of Psychology
Rochester, MI 48309-4401 USA

Wiliam C. Fuss (wcfuss@oakland.edu)
Department of Psychology
Rochester, MI 48309-4401 USA
Abstract
The current study examines whether thematic music (e.g.,
battle music) can activate related concepts in memory (e.g.,
weapons, death) and whether the activated concepts are more
likely to be included in a story generation task. Participants
listened to one of two 90-sec excerpts of thematic music
(Baby theme or War theme) either before or after engaging in
a story generation task. Their stories were examined to
determine the degree to which the thematic elements of the
music were included in the stories. Across two experiments,
there was evidence that listening to war or baby themed music
before engaging in a generation task increased the likelihood
that elements associated with that theme would be
incorporated into the story. Evidence also existed that the
music theme interacted with the story theme to influence the
degree that thematic elements would be incorporated into the
story.
Keywords: concepts; categories; knowledge representation;
music; creativity; generation.

Introduction
We use music to celebrate events, entertain, motivate and
inspire us. Hearing a song can bring back memories of a
college romance. The musical score of a movie warns us
when something unpleasant is about to happen. Given the
pervasiveness of music in our lives, surprisingly little
research has been directed at determining whether music is
represented in semantic memory and how the musical
associations stored in semantic memory affect performance
on a variety of tasks
People’s musical knowledge develops throughout their
lives via exposure to such things as lullabies, music
education, background music in television and film, and
musical entertainment. Because people live in a musically
rich environment, they become attune to the complexities of
musical structure at an early age. Even three-year-old
children demonstrate an understanding of the relationship
between music in a major key being associated with a happy
mood and music in a minor key being associated with a sad
mood (Kastner & Crowder, 1990). This type of knowledge
affects five to six-year-old children’s interpretation of a
story such that “happy” music playing in the background
causes the children to form positive interpretations of a
neutral story whereas “sad” music playing in the

background causes them to form negative interpretations
(Ziv & Goshen, 2006).
Exposure to certain types of music becomes associated
with particular events throughout a lifetime of musical
experiences (e.g., weddings, circuses). It stands to reasons
that the link between music and event becomes strong
enough that knowledge of the music will join object and
event information in the concepts and schemas with which it
is associated (e.g., “wedding music,” “circus music”).
Empirically demonstrating the existence of these
associations is just beginning though.
Daltrozzo and Schön (2009) argued that music conveys
concepts in the same way that images and words convey
concepts. They supported this claim by demonstrating a
larger N400 component of the event-related brain potentials
to 1-second musical excerpt targets following a conceptually
unrelated compared to a conceptually related linguistic
context. Though this is fairly direct evidence of conceptual
processing of musical information, it is left to other
researchers to explain how such a short excerpt of music
carries enough information to activate conceptual
information in memory. Stronger (albeit indirect) evidence
for the conceptual representation and processing of musical
information is provided by North, Hargreaves, &
McKendrick (1997) who demonstrated that ethnic
background music can affect consumer decisions. When
French music was playing in a wine shop, consumers were
more likely to buy French wine than German wine. When
German music was playing, the opposite was true, Boltz
(2001) also demonstrated the effect of music on actions by
demonstrating that musical soundtracks could activate a
schematic framework thus affecting the interpretation of an
ambiguous movie scene. Boltz (2001) had participants
watch an ambiguous scene paired with either “positive” or
“negative” music. She found that when a scene was paired
with positive music it activated a positive schema resulting
in positive interpretations of the events occurring in the
scene (e.g., the man following the woman is a long lost
lover) and subsequent memory for positive objects (e.g.,
flower bouquet) and events in the scene. When a scene was
paired with negative music it activated a negative schema
resulting in negative interpretations of the events occurring
in the scene (e.g., the man following the woman is her
brother and plans to kill her) and subsequent memory for

2333

negative objects (e.g., human skull) and events in the scene.
An interesting component of the paradigm Boltz (2001)
used to demonstrate music acting as a schematic influence
on the cognitive processing of film events is that she had
participants extrapolate the film’s ending as a means of
examining the effect of schema activation by looking for
elements of those schemas in the extrapolations. In
demonstrating the influence of the schemas activated by the
music via the events and objects described in participant’s
extrapolations of the film’s ending, Boltz (2001) also
demonstrated that music can activate conceptual knowledge
which then affects performance in a generation task.
Those studying creative cognition, frequently use
generation tasks to examine the influences of concepts and
categories on performance. In doing so, they gain
knowledge about the contents and organization of
conceptual knowledge and how this knowledge is applied
when generating new ideas. For example, Marsh, Binks and
Hicks (1999) demonstrated that participants shown
examples sharing the conceptual feature of hostility (e.g.,
weapons, fangs) were more likely than those not
experiencing the examples, to generate novel exemplars
with hostile features. They also demonstrated that simply
activating the concept of hostility was sufficient to influence
performance on a generation task. Participants who
unscrambled hostile sentences were more likely to generate
novel exemplars with hostile features compared to
participants who had unscrambled conceptually neutral
sentences.
If people represent thematic music in memory and that
representation is linked to the objects and activities with
which it is associated, it should be possible to activate that
representation and its associated concepts by having people
listen to the music. For example, if the concept of “war” is
associated with a certain type of music, then having people
listen to “war music” should activate the war concept and
the elements associated with war such as “marching” and
“weapons.” Once those concepts are activated, they should
affect performance in a subsequent generation task by
increasing the likelihood that conceptual elements will be
incorporated into the novel product.

Experiment 1
As discussed, music experienced during goal-directed
activity (shopping, watching a movie) has the ability to
affect purchasing decisions as well as story interpretation
and generation in what appears to be a conceptually
congruent fashion. What is less clear is whether our
representation of thematic music is rich enough that
listening to such music in the absence of other stimuli is
sufficient to activate more complex concepts such “fighting
in a war” and “tucking a baby into bed” much less
instantiate those concepts in a generation task. The current
experiment seeks to demonstrate the ability of music to
activate complex concepts in memory and affect the content
incorporated into stories generated in a story generation
task.

Participants will listen to one of two types of thematic
music (“tucking a baby into bed” (baby) theme, “going off
to war” (war) theme) either before or after a story
generation task. The stories generated by participants will be
examined for the presence of elements associated with
either one of the two music themes.
We hypothesize that participants who listen to the war
themed music prior to engaging in the generation task will
include more war themed concepts than baby themed
concepts in their stories than people who listened to the war
themed music after engaging in the generation task.
Participants who listen to the baby themed music prior to
engaging in the generation task will include more baby
themed concepts than war themed concepts in their stories
than people who listened to the war themed music after
engaging in the generation task.

Methods
Pilot Testing
Participants, Stimuli and Procedure. Thirty-one Oakland
University students participated in exchange for
experimental credit in the song-rating task.
Participants wearing headphones were seated at a
computer and interacted with a Flash program that provided
instructions, randomized song presentation and collected
participants’ responses to the songs. The 14 songs presented
to participants during pilot testing satisfied the criteria of 1)
being strongly thematic and containing at least 90 seconds
of music devoid of 2) environmental sounds (e.g., barking
dog, crying baby) or 3) lyrics.
On each trial, participants listened to a 90 sec. song clip,
then listed the “first three things the song made them think
of” and rated the familiarity, pleasantness, and liking of the
song on a 7 point Likert scale (7 = most familiar, pleasant,
liked) (See Table 1).
Responses to each song were content analyzed to identify
the three most salient concepts (listed by > 30% of sample)
that each song brought to mind (MusicConcepts).
The two songs chosen for use (DeLaTerra and Carousel)
were selected because they 1) both elicited consistent
thematic responses from participants (“war” and “baby”
respectively), 2) the themes were extremely different from
each other and 3) the songs were equally unfamiliar.
It was thought that the activation of a concept by listening
to the music might spread to associated concepts and affect
performance on the generation task. Consequently, a
different group of 18 students enrolled in a Cognitive
Psychology course engaged in a feature listing task, listing
features for the three Carousel and three DeLaTerra
MusicConcepts. Nine conceptually related features
(MusicAssociates) were listed by at least 33% of the
students in response to the Carousel MusicConcepts and
seven features were listed by at least 33% of the students in
response to the DeLaTerra MusicConcepts.

2334

Stimuli and Procedure
Participants were seated at a computer with headphones on
and interacted with a Flash program in the browser that
provided instructions, presented stimuli and recorded
participants’ responses. All participants spent four minutes
engaged in a nine-item Remote Associates Task (included to
disguise the study’s purpose), listened to 90 seconds of
music, and spent 15 minutes writing a story with the theme
“My Adventure on an Alien Planet.” Conditions different
only in terms of which of the two songs participants
experienced and whether the songs were presented
immediately before or immediately after the story
generation task.

Coding
Raters blind to condition coded the stories generated by the
participants for the presence of the MusicConcepts and
MusicAssociates associated with the two songs. This
resulted in four dependent variables: the proportion of Baby
MusicConcepts, the proportion of Baby MusicAssociates,
the proportion of War MusicConcepts, and the proportion of
War MusicAssociates included in the story written by the

participant.

Results
Four 2 X 2 ANOVAs were conducted examining the effects
of music theme (Baby, War) and position (Before, After) on
the proportion of MusicConcepts and MusicAssociates
included in the stories.
The analyses revealed no main effects or interactions on
the tendency for participants to include the Baby
MusicConcepts or MusicAssociates in their stories, p > .05.
The same was also true for the tendency to include War
MusicConcepts in their stories. However, there was a
significant main effect of position on the proportion of War
MusicAssociates incorporated into the story, F(1, 137) =
4.34, p < .05, eta2 = .032. This main effect was moderated
by a non-reliable interaction, F(1, 137) = 3.15, p < .10, eta2
= .023. Participants exposed to the War theme music before
the story generation task included a greater proportion of
War MusicAssociates into their stories (M = .04, SE = .01)
than those who were exposed to War music after the
generation task (M = .00, SE = .01) or those who were
exposed to the Baby music either before (M = .02, SE = .01)
or after (M = .02, SE = .01) the generation task.

Table 1: Characteristics of 90-second Song Samples and Evoked Concepts (Concepts)
Theme
Music
Music Primes
Familiarity
Song
Artist
M
SD
Church
Dante’s Prayer
Loreena
Church, Sadness,
3.4
1.77
McKinnett
Peace
Evil
Toccatta and
Bach
Church, Organ,
4.91
1.85
Fugue in D Minor
Horror
Carmina Burana
Orff
Choir, Movies,
6.00
1.60
Introduction
Marching Band
Indian
Ahini-Lalita
Ravi
Middle East, India,
3.51
2.09
Shankar
Desert
Arabia
Lawrence of
Henry
Movies, Broadway
4.18
1.95
Arabia
Mancini
Marco Polo
Loreena
Desert, India, Egypt 3.80
1.73
McKinnett
Latin
Latin Quarter
Big Lazy
Spanish, Salsa,
3.60
2.04
Tango
Asian
Asian-ThaiChinese
China, Asia,
3.60
2.16
Classic Chinese
Folk Music
Oriental
Folk Music
Circus
Cirque De La
Vernian
Circus, Carnival,
2.88
1.92
Mort
Process
Scary
Death of a Doll
Creature
Video game
2.69
2.34
Maker
Feature
War
De La Terre a La
Vernian
Marching,
3.06
2.10
Lune
Process
Marching band,
War
Your Betrayal
Bullet for
Rock, Rock
3.67
2.04
My
Concerts
Valentine
Hostile
Agitated Screams
Dir en
Anger, Rock,
2.69
2.08
of Maggots
Grey
Screamo
Baby
Se Lest
Sigur Ros
Baby, Sleep, Music 2.32
1.97
Box
Carousel on a
Lullatone
Sleeping, Baby,
3.09
2.15
2335
Slide Projector
Lullaby

Pleasantness
M
SD
4.75
2.01

Liking
M
SD
4.34 1.81

3.91

1.72

3.89

1.86

4.53

1.56

4.26

1.89

4.29

1.53

3.89

1.60

5.15

1.48

4.53

1.50

4.91

1.63

4.57

1/60

4.97

1.46

4.37

1.54

5.03

1.54

4.40

1.42

2.97

1.57

2.74

1.66

3.57

1.82

3.4

2.02

3.5

1.24

3.0

1.37

3.74

1.83

4.24

1.89

2.06

1.63

2.09

1.67

4.15

1.69

3.38

1.48

5.00

2.15

4.09

1.88

Discussion

Methods

The hypothesis that thematic music experienced prior to
engaging in a story generation task increases the likelihood
thematic elements associated with that music will be
incorporated into the story is partially supported.
Participants exposed to music that brings to mind concepts
associated with fighting in a war are more likely to
incorporate concepts such as weapons, death and blood into
the stories they write immediately after listening to the
music. However, exposure to war themed music did not
increase their tendency to incorporate the specific terms
brought to mind by the music (as revealed in pilot testing)
into their stories. Exposure to baby themed music did not
appear to affect whether or not concepts associated with
tucking a baby into bed were included in the stories either.
So why did exposure to war themed music affect
performance and exposure to baby themed music did not?
Perhaps because baby themed elements were incorporated
into the stories at higher rates than war themed elements
across all conditions. Specifically, baby themed elements
related to sleeping and dreaming were commonly included
in the stories generated by participants.
We believe participants faced with the task of describing
their “adventure on an alien planet” seemed compelled to
explain how they ended up on that alien planet. A common
solution was to say they fell asleep in bed and dreamt that
they were on an alien planet. If this is a valid explanation for
the lack of influence of baby themed music on performance
in a generation task, then perhaps a more plausible setting
will decrease the use of literary devices such as sleeping and
dreaming in the story generation task.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 tests the proposal that the story generation
task scenario given to participants in Experiment 1 hid the
influence of baby themed music by causing them to
incorporate items associated with that theme (sleeping,
dreaming, bed) into their stories to rationalize being on an
alien planet.
We predict that providing a more “down-to-earth”
scenario will allow the effects of the baby themed music to
be manifested in the story generation tasks by decreasing the
inclusion of the specific baby-themed concepts of sleeping
and dreaming across all conditions as a literary device. We
maintain the hypotheses that experiencing war themed
music prior to engaging in a story generation task will
increase the proportion of war themed items included in the
story compared to when the music is experienced after the
generation task. Similarly, experiencing baby themed music
prior to the generation task will increase the proportion of
baby themed items included in the story compared to when
the music is experienced after the generation task or
compared to when war themed music is experienced prior to
the generation task.

Participants
One-hundred and seventeen Oakland University students
participated in exchange for experimental credit and were
randomly assigned to one of four conditions: 29 listened to
Carousel before generation (Baby Before), 33 after
generation (Baby After), 28 participants listened to
DeLaTerra before generation (War Before) and 27 after
generation (War After). None of the participants provided
data for Experiment 1.

Stimuli and Procedure
The stimuli and procedure were identical to Experiment 1
with the exception that participants were now asked to
spend spent 15 minutes writing a story with the theme “An
Adventure to a Foreign, Undiscovered, yet Inhabited Land.”

Results
Four 2 X 2 ANOVAs were conducted examining the effects
of music theme (Baby, War) and position (Before, After) on
the proportion of MusicConcepts and MusicAssociates
included in the stories.
Analyses revealed a significant music theme X position
interaction on the incorporation of Baby MusicConcepts
incorporated into the story in the generation task, F(1, 117)
= 5.41, p < .05, eta2 = .05. Participants exposed to the baby
themed music prior to the generation task (M = .10. SE =
.02) were more likely to incorporate Baby MusicConcepts
items into their stories than people who were exposed to the
music after the generation task (M = .03, SE = .02) or people
who were exposed to the war themed music before the task
(M = .02, SE = .02). In fact, those exposed to the war
themed music before the generation task were actually less
likely to incorporate Baby MusicConcepts into their stories
than those exposed to the war themed music after the
generation task (M = .06, SE = .03).
Further analyses revealed no main effects or interactions
on the tendency for participants to include the Baby
MusicAssociates,
War
MusicConcepts,
or
War
MusicAssociates in their stories, p > .05. This suggests the
effects of thematic music on incorporating thematic
elements into the story is more complicated than simply
being the effect of whether or not thematic music is heard
prior to the generation task. It appears as if incorporating
thematic concepts into a story depends on the types of
concepts activated by the music AND the context of the
story generation task. The disappearance of the effect of
War themed music on the incorporation of War
MusicAssociates suggests that those War MusicAssociates
are more compatible with people’s understanding of the
types of adventures that are possible on an alien planet then
they are with adventures to an unexplored, yet inhibited
foreign land.
To statistically examine the effects of story scenario on
the tendency to include Baby or War themed elements in a

2336

story generation task, we conducted post-hoc analyses
comparing Experiments 2 results to those in Experiment 1.
We believe this is a valid comparison because the two
experiments differed only in terms of the theme participants
were asked to write a story about. Also, participants were
drawn from the same subject pool during the same year for
both experiments.
Because we are interested in how the story theme
interacts with the placement and the theme of the music to
affect the tendency to incorporate Baby themed or War
themed items into the story, we combined the Baby
MusicConcepts and Baby MusicAssociates variables into a
single variable (BabyAll) that measures the proportion of
both Baby MusicConcepts and Baby MusicAssociates (12
items total) included in the story. The same was done for the
War MusicConcepts and War MusicAssociates, resulting in
WarAll (10 items total).
Table 2. Effects of Music Theme, Position and Story
Theme on Proportion of Total Baby and War Items in
Stories
Story Theme
Alien
Foreign
Music Position M
SE
M
SE
BabyAll
Baby
Before
.07 .01 .06 .01
After
.07 .01 .03 .01
War
Before
.07 .01 .04 .01
After
.06 .01 .04 .02
Baby
Before
.02 .01 .01 .01
WarAll
After
.02 .01 .02 .01
War
Before
.04 .01 .01 .01
After
.02 .00 .00 .00
A 2 X 2 X 2 ANOVA examined the effect of music theme
(Baby, War), position (Before, After) and story theme
(Alien, Foreign) on the inclusion of baby themed items and
war themed items in the story generation task.
The analyses revealed a significant main effect of story
theme on the inclusion of baby themed elements (BabyAll)
in the story, F(1, 254) = 5.91, p < .05, eta2 = .02.
Participants are more likely to include BabyAll items when
writing a story with an alien theme (M = .07, SE = .01) than
when writing a story with a foreign land theme (M = .04, SE
= .01).
Analysis of the tendency to incorporate War themed
elements (WarAll) in the generation task also revealed a
significant main effect of story theme, F(1, 254) = 4.09, p <
.05, eta2 = .02. Participants are more likely to include the
WarAll items when writing a story with an alien theme (M =
.02, SE = .00) than when writing a story with a foreign land
theme (M = .01, SE = .00).
There was also a non-reliable Music Theme X Position
interaction F(1,254) = 2.87, p < .10, eta2 =.01. Participants
are more likely to incorporate WarAll items into their stories
when they hear war themed music before engaging in the
generation task (M = .03, SE = .01) compared to hearing it
after the task (M = .01, SE = .01) or hearing baby themed

music before (M = .02, SE = .01) or after (M = .01, SE =
.01) the task.

Discussion
The hypothesis that a story scenario set on Earth would
allow the effect of listening to baby themed music on the
inclusion of baby themed items in the generation task to be
visible was supported. Participants who listened to baby
themed music prior to engaging in a generation task, were
more likely than those who listened to the music after
writing their story to include items that pilot testing
indicated were specifically activated by the baby themed
music into their stories. The effect of listening to war
themed music on performance in a generation task was
weak enough that it was not visible in the Experiment 2
data. However, combining the Experiment 1 and 2 data
provided enough power to demonstrate listening to war
themed music rather than baby themed music before
engaging in a generation task does increase the number of
war themed components that are included in the generation
task.
To explain the results of the Experiments 1 and 2, we
would like to propose that the story scenario that
participants were writing about interacts with the type of
concept activated by the music to influence the degree to
which participants incorporate thematic elements of the
music into the story. For both story themes it was
demonstrated that whether or not music concepts were
incorporated into the story was influenced by the scenario
for which they were writing the story with both baby
themed music elements and war themed music elements
being more likely to be incorporated into the novel stories
when writing stories set on an alien planet. Interestingly, the
reason why each set of elements was more likely to be
incorporated differs between the two scenarios and themes.
Demonstrating an effect of listening to baby themed
music on the tendency to include baby themed items into the
story in Experiment 2 but not in Experiment 1 is probably
due to participants feeling a need to rationalize the visit to
the alien planet in Experiment 1 causing them to rely on the
plot device of falling asleep and dreaming that they visited
an alien land. This was evident in the fairly high rates of
baby themed items across all four conditions in Experiment
1. Because sleep, dreams, and bed were all “tucking a baby
into bed” themed items, the plot device washed out any
effects that hearing the baby themed music might have had
on the stories participants generated. The plot device was
not necessary for stories about an adventure in an
undiscovered foreign land so only the participants exposed
to baby themed music prior to the generation task included
baby themed elements into their story.
In contrast, the greater tendency to include war themed
elements in the stories in Experiment 1 compared to
Experiment 2 probably was due to the concept of war being
more congruent or plausible with a visit to an alien planet
than a visit to a foreign land. This suggests participants’
knowledge of alien planets and foreign lands is influencing

2337

which thematic elements activated by the music get
incorporated into the story or whether they are incorporated
at all.
The proposal that the thematic elements activated by
listening to thematic music interacts with the knowledge of
the story scenario to affect performance in a generation task
is consistent with some of the previous work on conceptual
expansion and concept activation. Sifonis (1995) (as
discussed in Ward, Smith & Finke, 1999) demonstrated that
participants asked to describe a restaurant for a race of birdlike aliens integrate their category knowledge of birds with
their schema of restaurants to generate a novel exemplar of
“restaurants for bird-like aliens.” These novel restaurants
retained some of the salient features of restaurants on Earth
(e.g., having tables and serving food). However, in the
process of replacing the human customer in the restaurant
schema with birds in the context of an alien planet, the
novel restaurants incorporated features of all three types of
knowledge: restaurants, birds, alien planet (i.e., the
customers sat on perches at tables and were served worm
burgers but didn’t have to pay for their meals because the
civilization had advanced beyond the need to exchange
money for services). Perhaps the themes activated by the
music are, in fact, activating a complex schema rather than
just the individual concepts and their associates that
participants reported during pilot testing. If this is the case,
then the effects of the music on story generation might be
more evident when looking for schematic elements
associated with the theme (e.g., baby theme activating
schema elements associated with children and parents and
school).
Another explanation for a process underlying
performance in the story generation task is that the specific
scenario participants asked to generate stories for activates a
specific form of the thematic element. Solomon and
Barsalou (2001) have argued that properties associated with
a concept are represented differently in different concepts.
For example, the property of “red” is represented differently
for “hair” and “wine” and “blood.” The dominant
representation of the property at the time of retrieval varies
on the basis of context as well as other factors.
Consequently, the specific conceptual properties that are
activated by the thematic music and incorporated into the
generation task might depend on the story context/scenario
of the generation task. If this is the case, then coding the
stories for the features associated with the specific
combination of music theme and story scenario (e.g.,
features of an “undiscovered foreign land in which there are
a lot of babies”), should increase the ability to observe the
effects of the thematic music on performance in the
generation task.
Additional directions for future experiments include
finding music that more strongly activates a particular
theme. Using familiar rather than unfamiliar music should
increase the effect of that music on the performance in the
generation task over the low levels observed in the current
study. Alternately, perhaps music associated with a

particular geographical region (e.g., Arabia, China) would
be more likely to result in those features being included in a
story about a visit to a distant land than music with a theme
that is not geographical in nature.
In summary, the research described in this paper provides
preliminary data suggesting that music can be associated
with concepts and that listening to the music can activate
those concepts and affect performance in a generation task.
Because of the pervasiveness of music in our lives and its
use to help enhance our performance, moods or thoughts,
developing a greater understanding of the influence music
has on those thoughts and behaviors will allow us to
increase the manner in which music benefits us. It will also
increase our understanding of how music is represented in
memory and how that representation is manifested in
performance,

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the students of my Advanced
Experimental Design class, especially Stephanie Camarata,
Angela Hasman and Caitlin Kleist for developing the initial
ideas that resulted in this research. I would also like to thank
Scott Niewinski, Emily Olthoff and Candice Lambert for
data collection and coding. Reviewer number two also
receives my thanks for their insightful and useful comments
that helped me improve this abstract.

References
Bolt, M.G. (2001). Musical soundtracks as a schematic
influence on the cognition processing of filmed events,
Music Perception, 18, 427–54. doi:10.1006
North, A. C., Hargreaves, D. J., and McKendrick, J. (1997).
In-store music affects product choice. Nature, 390, 132.
doi: 10.1038/36484
Daltrozzo, J. & Schön, D. (2009). Conceptual processing in
music as revealed by N400 effects on words and musical
targets. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 18821892. doi: 10.1162
Kastner, M. P. & Crowder, R.G. (1990). Perception of the
major/minor distinction: Emotional connotation in young
children, Music Perception, 8, 189–201.
Marsh, R.L., Bink, M.L., & Hicks, J.L. (1999). Conceptual
priming in a generative problem-solving task. Memory &
Cognition, 27, 355-363.
Orgs, G., Lang, K., Dombrowski, J., & Heil, M. (2008).
N400-effects to task-irrelevant environmental sounds:
Further evidence for obligatory conceptual processing.
Neuroscience Letters, 436, 133–137. doi:10.1016
Solomon, K.O. & Barsalou, L W. (2001). Represention
properties locally. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 129-169.
Ziv, N. & Goshen, M. (2006). The effect of ‘sad’ and
‘happy’ background music on the interpretation of a story
in 5 to 6-year-old children. British Journal of Music
Education,23, 303-314. doi:10.1017/S0265051706007078
Ward, T.B., Smith, S.M. & Finke, R.A. (1999). Creative
cognition. In R.J. Sternberg (Ed.) Handbook of Creativity.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

2338

