UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Maps in the Head and Maps in the Hand

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3f97x15n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Skagerlund, Kenny
Kirsh, David
Dahlback, Nils

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Maps in the Head and Maps in the Hand
Kenny Skagerlund (kenny.skagerlund@liu.se)
Department of Behavioral Sciences, Linköping University
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden

David Kirsh (kirsh@ucsd.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA

Nils Dahlbäck (nils.dahlback@liu.se)
Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden
Abstract
Using the perspective of situated cognition we studied how
people interact with a physical map to help them navigate
through an unfamiliar environment. The study used a mixture
of cognitive ethnography and traditional experimental
methods. We found that the difference between high and low
performing navigators showed up in the speed they completed
their task and also in the way they use maps. High performers
plan routes using a survey method whereas low performers
use a route strategy. We suggest that when people are given a
task that does not match their cognitive style they try to
transform the task to better suit their cognitive abilities and
cognitive style.
Keywords: Map use, navigation, wayfinding, situated
cognition, spatial cognition.

Introduction
Interest in human spatial cognition and navigational
capacity has a long history, ranging from the pioneering
work of Siegel & White (1975) to contemporary
contributions by Montello (1998; 2005) and Hegarty et al.
(2002; 2006). Spatial cognition is concerned with how
people represent space and navigate through it. (Montello,
2005). In the “classical” view, knowledge, from the
perceived environment, is represented as a cognitive map
(Tolman, 1948, Galotti, 2008). Siegel & White (1975)
distinguished three types of knowledge involved in forming
and using cognitive maps: i) landmark knowledge, ii) route
knowledge, and iii) survey knowledge. Landmark knowledge
is information about the particular features at a location.
Route knowledge is information about specific pathways for
moving from one location to another; it may be coded
procedurally or declaratively. Survey knowledge is metric
information about the relative location and estimated
distances between landmarks, the very thing captured in a
standard map, showing the location of all paths and features
in a Euclidean plane. All this work investigates the
representational
architecture
of
internal
spatial
representations, focusing on questions such as whether
cognitive maps are map-like in nature or more like nodes in
a graph representation.

Lawton (1994; 1996) found that people tend to report
using one either an orientation strategy or a route strategy
when navigating, but not both. Orientation strategies are
cognitive processes that use survey knowledge, the umbrella
term for world-centric relations. When a subject thinks in an
allocentric reference frame using global attributes of a
terrain such as cardinal directions, and Euclidean
positioning of landmarks, they are using orientation or
survey strategies (Prestopnik & Roskos-Ewoldsen, 2000)
for wayfinding. Route strategies, by contrast, are based on
an egocentric frame of reference, where paths are defined as
those throughways available from where the subject is at the
moment.
Research on spatial knowledge acquisition and navigation
has mostly been confined to strict laboratory settings and
virtual environments (e.g. Allen, Kirasic, Dobson, Long, &
Beck, 1996; Montello, 1993), or to environments where the
subject is led along a fixed route in an urban area (Kato &
Takeuchi, 2003). In these studies maps have been used
primarily as a diagnostic tool to reveal the subject’s internal
representation. For instance, a subject might be asked to
sketch the route she followed, marking down all the
landmarks she can recall. (Liben, 2010). Little or no
attention has been paid to the actual practices of subjects
when they use maps to navigate.
A map, if properly used, is an artifact that extends a
person’s survey knowledge (Montello, Hegarty and
Richardson 2004). It behaves in the same way as an internal
map except that it is external. Because we interact with
internal and external representations differently, however, it
is worth examining in detail the diverse ways that people
interact with maps. Do all subjects rotate maps? When,
why? How do they gesture? Do they point on the map and
then to the world? How often do they glance at a map?
When?
To study the practices of map use we videoed subjects
using a map of UCSD campus as they found their way from
a starting location to a goal location. In the analysis we
divided our subjects into two groups – route-based
navigators, and survey-based navigators – using the wellknown measures developed by Lawton (1994). We report
here on our findings and offer an explanation of the results

2339

in line with the ideas of situated, distributed and embodied
cognition.
Clark (2008) has coined a term, or principle, to label this
type of interaction in which epistemic actions (Kirsh &
Maglio, 1994) can be incorporated – The Principle of
Ecological Assembly (PEA). This principle states that “the
canny cognizer tends to recruit, on the spot, whatever mix of
problem-solving resources will yield an acceptable result
with a minimum of effort” (Clark, 2008, p.13). But, given
the existence of individual differences in cognitive styles, it
is not obvious that “a minimum of effort” means the same
thing for all people. A specific instance of this is the
difference between persons who have a preference for a
route strategy or a survey strategy. Another aim of the
present work is to study how map use might differ between
people depending on their preferred navigation strategies.
Since we are bridging or trying to relate two different
research traditions, we address our research questions using
a combination of the experimental methods traditionally
used in research on navigation and wayfinding, with
cognitive ethnography used in research on situated and
distributed cognition.

The Santa Barbara Sense of Direction Scale (SBSOD)
was used to measure the participants’ sense of orientation,
or the awareness of location or orientation. This instrument
is a self-report measure which has been found to predict
objective measures of these abilities, such as dead reckoning
(Hegarty et al., 2002). This instrument has proved to be
internally consistent and has sufficient test-retest reliability.
The SBSOD is highly correlated with measures of spatial
knowledge acquired from direct experience in the
environment, and Hegarty et al. (2002) has shown that it is
related to knowledge that involve orienting oneself within
the environment.
The Wayfinding Strategy Scale (Lawton 1994) is a survey
that measures to what extent a person depends on strategies
relying on survey knowledge or route knowledge
respectively. The survey contains 14 items of the sort of
propositions that participants have to grade the degree of
agreement along a 5-point Likert-type scale.
To measure dead reckoning a pointing task was used. At a
number of places the participants were asked to point in the
direction of an unseen landmark; a traditional compass was
used to assess the participants’ error in this task.

Procedure

Method
The study was undertaken on the University of California,
San Diego campus. UCSD is sufficiently complex and
covers a large enough area to be challenging for most
navigators unfamiliar with the campus. It can also be
considered representative of an urbanized area
17 participants were recruited using craigslist, which is an
online ad-service where ads can be placed for a fee. The
participants were between 20 and 58 years, Mean =32.1 (SD
= 13.23), 8 female, 9 male; they were unfamiliar with the
UCSD campus.
To eliminate vision as factor in
performance they had to have 20/20 vision – with or without
corrective lenses or glasses.
Participants were asked to find their way from a starting
point to goal location. Three different start-goal pairs were
used. These pairs were chosen and evaluated during a pilot
study, where they were determined to be equally hard.
Criteria for hardness were the number of salient landmarks,
the density of buildings throughout the area, length (air
distance), visual access.
By using start-goal pairs that
overlapped and crossed through the campus center, the
environmental features and vistas were as equivalent as
possible, leading us to infer they were equally complex.

Materials
The materials used in this study included the official visitor
map of the UCSD campus, which was handed to the
participants and used throughout the navigation task.
Several recording tools were used, including the handheld
video camera – Canon Vixia HG21 - and a head-mounted
video camera – ContourHD 1300 LED 1080p Headcam that captured the behavior of the participants. The motion
pattern of the participants was recorded via a GPS – Victory
Corp. Columbus V-900 Multifunction GPS data logger.

The study itself was divided into two separate sessions. The
first session was a pretest, where participants filled out
electronic counterparts to the physical instances of SBSOD
and the wayfinding strategy scale over the internet. The
surveys could be completed at any time the participants
wished from the moment of agreement of participation in
the study to the day when the experiment session began. The
questionnaire was filled out prior to the experiment session,
which was of vital importance as to ensure validity. If it
would have been completed after the experiment trial, there
would have been a possible risk that participants took into
account their recent navigational performance, and thus
affecting the self-assessment.
On arriving for the second session, a consent form was
filled out by each of the participants, a parking permit was
paid for and given to them if needed, and they were then
told to step into a car for transportation to another location.
From this moment on, the experimental session had
officially started and they were instructed to try to pay
attention to where they are located in the world from that
point onwards. The participant was dropped off at one of the
marked drop-off locations where they were picked up by
another experimenter. On site of the drop-off point the
equipment was set-up, which included mounting the
headcam on the participant and getting a stable GPS signal.
The participant was then told to estimate and point into the
direction of the meeting point, the experimenter then used
the compass to derive the correct azimuth which was then
communicated to the participant.
After having been given the correct direction, the
participant was led non-linearly to the actual starting point
of the navigation task. The starting point was located
approximately 100 meters away, occluded from the drop-off

2340

point. Another dead reckoning task was performed, where
the participants were told to estimate and point into the
direction of the drop-off point this time, after which it was
time to initiate the primary task of the experiment session –
the navigation task. At this point, the participants were
given the campus map and told which building they were
standing next to at the starting point. The participants were
given time to find the building on the map, after which they
were then told what destination they would be finding their
way to. In similar manner, they were given time to locate
the building on the map. Now, they were told to navigate to
the destination by foot preferably using the shortest path.
After any contingent questions and uncertainties had been
mitigated, and after they had been instructed to try to
verbalize their thoughts navigational strategies out loud,
they were given the signal that it was OK for them to begin
the navigation trial.
Throughout the navigation trial, the experimenters where
filming the participants with the handheld camera while at
the same time interviewing them according to a stipulated
script, while given the freedom to ad lib when interesting
observations were made. During the navigation task, the
participant where given two instances of the dead
reckoning-task where the azimuths were jotted down by the
experimenter. Finally, when the participants reached their
destination, they performed one last dead reckoning-task
which concluded the navigation trial.

Coding procedure
Three experimenters were coding the video material, and
although no formal kappa value was calculated to establish
the inter-rater reliability, the experimenters were trained
simultaneously and looked at each other’s code at the outset
and very beginning of the coding to establish a consensus.
The coders also consulted each other whenever any
phenomenon raised any doubts concerning how to code it.
The coding scheme included a time stamp for each
observation, a high level transcription of the think aloud

verbalizations, as well as gestures and other bodily actions
such as body turns and visual references of the environment.
Of specific interest was how participants interacted with the
map. Thus, physical actions and manipulations of the map
were pertinent to incorporate and code for in the coding
schema, such as map rotations and folding of the map, in
conjunction non-physical interactions with the map (e.g.
coding for glances on the map), in order to reveal
regularities of map use with respect to preferences of map
interaction. In addition, gestures such as pointing on the
map, or putting a thumb on the current location on the map,
or running a finger across the map was coded for as well.

Results
In the first part we will report on the quantitative measures
used, to set the ground for the second part where we will
present detailed observations of the use of the map as well
as other orientation strategies used by our participants.

Quantitative results
The results from the measures on The Wayfinding Strategy
Scale, in the table called Orientation score, SBSOD score,
dead reckoning error, number of map alignments and map
consultation frequency, as measured by number of glances
per hour, are presented in table 1 Note that the Orientation
score test was introduced after the first 6 subjects
participation.
All these three measures show considerable variation,
SBOD from 34 to 94, navigation time from 14 to 58
minutes, and map consultation from 77 to 292 glances per
hour, i.e. a ratio of approximately 4:1; the number of map
alignments show an even higher variation, from 0 to 10.
There is a clear dependency between these measures.
Dead reckoning error is negatively related to sense of
direction as measured by SBSOD (r = .-43, p< .05), similar
to results by Hegarty et al (2002). Also, as predicted, there

Table 1: Overview of results on performance measures and variables
Subject
Subject 1
Subject 2
Subject 3
Subject 4
Subject 5
Subject 6
Subject 7
Subject 8
Subject 10
Subject 11
Subject 15
Subject 17
Subject 21
Subject 23
Subject 24
Subject 25
Subject 26

Gender
F
M
M
M
F
F
F
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

Orientation Score SBSOD-Score # Map Alignments
Navigation Time Dead Reck. Err. Tot glances
N/A
53
3
28
69
N/A
37
4
15
11
94
8
48
52,33
N/A
N/A
23
4 N/A
131
N/A
70
3
13
56
N/A
70
8
15
21
69,33
24
34
10
51
24
74
8
24
49,33
28
50
1
22
63
20
86
10
58
77,5
22
60
5
15
26
22
64
9
25
34,25
29
55
5
24
15
25
82
3
15
17,25
31
92
0
14
12,5
4
21
57,66
32
61
26
74
0
14
12

2341

40
36
73
79
21
65
162
55
117
190
75
98
103
31
18
47
61

Glances/hour
85,7
144
91,3
90
96,9
260
190,6
137,5
292,5
196,6
300
235
257,5
124
77,1
134,3
261,4

was a marginally significant negative correlation between
SBSOD and map consultation frequency (r = -.52, p< .051).
To investigate the existence of any potential difference
between people who claim to use orientation strategies in
contrast to people who primarily rely on route knowledge
when engaged in navigation, a median split was performed
on the sample on the orientation score, creating two groups
here named. “Orienters” (n = 5, 𝑥̅ = 29.2, SD = 2.39) and
“Non-Orienters” (n = 5, 𝑥̅ = 22.4, SD = 1.67). The
difference between the two groups was significant t(8) =
5.22, p< .001.
It was noted above that the frequency of map use varied
considerably between the participants, and that this was
correlated with sense of direction. The question is then if the
difference in map use is just a quantitative difference, or if
there also is a qualitative difference in how the maps are
used. One of the most obvious differences in how subjects
use maps turns on alignment and registration: whether
subjects prefer to leave the map it in its native upright
position determined by the orientation of labels, or do they
rotate it so that the features on the map align with what they
see. Using this criterion there is a clear difference in map
use between the two groups. Map alignment frequency is
significantly lower for Orienters (𝑥̅ = 2) than Non-Orienters
(𝑥̅ = 8.4) ( t(8) = 3.15, p <. 01.)
To get a deeper understanding of map use differences we
turn to a detailed analysis of the way subjects interact with
maps and the various orientation strategies used.

Navigation strategies
Our participants all make use of Siegel and White’s (1975)
three basic kinds of navigation information, survey, path
and landmarks. But they do not do so in the same way. They
use different cognitive strategies within each of these broad
categories. When they extract information outside of their
preferred mode they try to transform that information into
their preferred form. To highlight these differences, we
present excerpts illustrating the strategies used by high and
low performers as measured by their orientation score. In
the present study, we did not note any significant
differences between high and low performers in the use of
landmarks. But there are differences in the use of survey and
path information.
Survey information strategy
As many authors have suggested, maps can be seen as an
external form of survey knowledge. Our argument is that
external representations still have to be interpreted and often
a map user will physically interact with a map to facilitate
interpretation. High and low performers interact differently.
Take the case of participant S24. He was a top performer
on all the quantitative measures, one of two subjects who
never rotated or aligned his map throughout the entire
navigation task. S26 was the other. He kept his map in its
canonical label reading position, that is fixed in a north-up
position. Shortly after he began the task he was asked
whether he has a particular strategy in mind. He answers:

“I think so, I mean the idea is that I’m just gonna go
right down here [pointing and tracing downwards
along a depicted walkway on the map] and probably
take a left on Voigt [traces with his finger to the right
along Voigt Dr] and go south on Hopkins Lane (…)”
In the video we see that S24 leaves the map in a north-up
position and slightly tilts it for the experimenter to see the
map. S24 runs his finger quickly down the map – that is, in
a southerly direction – and then hastily makes a
perpendicular turn with is finger and traces rightwards on
the map while saying “and probably take a left on Voigt”.
When he runs his finger southward on the map while
simultaneously claiming that he will go “down here” his
motion is in the same direction as he is. The map is
egocentrically aligned. But when he runs his finger to the
right (east) while saying “left”, however, he is breaking the
egocentric view. Arguably S24 is making an inference based
on an imagined egocentric perspective. He imagines
himself, or rather projects (Kirsh, 2008) his future location
‘down there’ onto the external representation – the map –
and quickly translates between egocentric and allocentric
perspectives. What is striking about this particular incident
is the ease and speed with which he performs this multilayered action.
By comparison one of the low performers, S11, uses the
map in a very different way. She frequently stopped
throughout the navigation task to look at the map and
subsequently tried to align the map to correspond to the
surrounding environment in order to extract and assimilate
information of where to go next. In the following excerpt,
she has a vague idea of where she is, but she is not sure of
her bearings in terms of cardinal directions and exactly
where she should go.
“…I’m trying to find that way. [pointing on the
map] I’m gonna look at it upside down so I can see
where I…then I know ‘cause we were on Voigt
[Drive] before…”
Her ambition is to walk south on Voigt, but she is
uncertain about her bearings. She previously saw a sign for
Voigt Drive and has a rough sense of her self-location. She
then rotates the map to align it with her view in her current
position. In contrast to S24, who showed an impressive
management of directionality in the map and world,
presumably through internal computation of the relation
between world-centric and egocentric information, S11 is
unable (or unwilling) to make these internal transformations
and instead rotates the map, adapting the map artifact to fit
her internal representations. This allows her to deduce
whether she should go left or right on Voigt Drive, i.e.
thinking in terms of a path strategy, instead of thinking
about the world in survey knowledge manner.
Route information strategy
Low-performers preferred to travel on straight roads and
paths. Curving paths make it harder to keep track of one’s
cardinal direction. They also avoided travelling on paths
with high visual complexity – such as dense buildings.
High visual complexity makes it harder to identify one’s

2342

preferred landmarks on a map; the more buildings the more
visual distractors. Again, high-performers had no such
aversions. They are sufficiently proficient in using cardinal
directions that they do not hesitate to use curved paths, or
take opportunistic short-cuts that twist, even if this means
going through dense buildings.
Subject 11 explained why she preferred to walk along a
path that clearly diverted from the direction of the goal
destination and optimal solution:
“I could have weaved through [the buildings] but I
think it would have taken me much longer (…) this is a
straight way, so it’s good, I can avoid going through
all the cluster of buildings, it’s less complex (…) I get
lost very quickly, to me it’s a lot easier to navigate
than having to go through and around buildings…”
S24 has the opposite attitude. In this excerpt, he is
walking on a pre-planned path eastbound but suddenly
decides to take another path:
“I’m gonna head up this path, and I didn’t go that
way [pointing on the map on the original path he was
supposed to take] because it was directly east, and this
path kinda branches southeast, which is the direction
we’re going towards, so I figure I’d take that one.”
In contrast to S11, S24 never hesitated to take a diagonal
path, as long as it was a shorter path. He seemed indifferent
to visual complexity, taking routes that required navigating
through buildings located at the very center of UCSD
campus where several large commercial stores and buildings
are located. The whole time he managed to stay oriented and
solved the navigation task with the least glances to the map
and nearly the least travel time. It seems that high
performers can use the world better. They can find paths
using cardinal directions as a grid, while low performers
instead develop and use paths that will minimize the need to
orient using cardinal directions.
Transforming the information to suit the style
One way of describing the differences between high and low
orienteers is that high orienteers think mostly in a worldcentric manner whereas low orienteers think in a mapcentric manner. For a high orienteer navigation involves
keeping track of one’s bearing. Because they have much
better dead reckoning skills they always have a reasonable
idea of where they are and where they have to go. When
they look at a map it may be to see what is coming up next,
but it is more likely to verify that they are where they think
they are. They want to update their location relative to
where they must go. They can do this by finding their
location on the map in the orientation they have been
holding it. They have no problem tracking themselves going
south on a map facing north. They sense they are going
south. They get too little cognitive saving from reorienting it
to pay the price of the harder readability that comes from
inverting labels.
Low orienteers, however, do their reasoning on the map.
They orient the map so that it is aligned with their currently
perceived view of the world. They put it in correspondence
with the features that are in view so that they can then trace

where they must go on the map to reach the destination.
Since the two, map and world are in alignment, they can
then take their bearing straight off the map. They need to
walk in the same direction in the world as the map. The two
can be laid on top of each other. Straight paths are to be
preferred because each revision of direction requires rechecking the map and that is a cognitive effort. The
cognitive cost exceeds the physical cost of walking farther.
Similarly, it is easier to avoid high feature areas, where
buildings are close together, because the more visual clutter
there is the harder it is to align the map since it requires
checking more buildings and more angles.
Strategy choice and performance
It may seem that low orienteers must be slower than good
orienteers. Whereas in general this is true it is by means
necessary. An efficient map-user can keep the map
reasonably aligned by taking long straight paths. This saves
them the cognitive effort of re-aligning the map, and it saves
time too because realignment can be time-consuming. It is
quite possible that the map-using time saved by taking a
straight path more than compensates for longer distance.
An interesting case is S15, who has a very low score on
the sense of direction test, but also has one of the shortest
navigation times (15 min). S15 seems very aware of her
preferences, as illustrated in the excerpt below.
“I’m gonna go straight [pointing with her arm and
hand in forward direction] and then straight
[pointing with the same arm in an orthogonal
direction to the left] (…) I don’t like diagonals.”
When we look at S15’s details we see that she glanced at
the map 300 times, the most of any participant. But her
glances were brief because she stayed on a map-aligned
course. Given the straight line route she chose this meant
that she could rotate the map just a few times (5).
If we assume that S15’s performance is solid evidence
that she is a good navigator then it does not follow that
navigation ability always correlates with spatial ability. In
previous work on navigation (Hegarty et al, 2006),
navigation ability was found to correlate well with measures
of spatial ability and with self-assessment of sense of
direction. But the case of S15 illustrates that while this may
be true in general there are outliers for whom it is not true.
We hypothesize that people who know their own strengths
and weaknesses in spatial understanding develop interactive
strategies that compensate. They develop techniques for
coordinating map use with route features to minimize time
and cognitive effort.

Discussion
The results presented here show that how maps are used
differs between different people, depending on their
navigation abilities. Navigators with a high orientation
score, keep the map in the same upright position regardless
of how well this matches their current view of the
environment. They have no problem in mapping the view of
the map to their current view of the environment using
internal or mental transformations. Navigators with a low

2343

orientation score, on the other hand, find mental
transformations effortful, and instead prefer to externally
manipulate the map to align it with their current view. These
two also seem to differ in how they plan their route through
the environment. Navigators with a low sense of direction
prefer to walk along straight lines and in the open. Even
though their paths are not the most direct, in effect requiring
them to take detours, they still prefer them as long as they
make the navigation task simpler. Navigators with a high
sense of directions invariably prefer the shortest path even
when that involves cutting across visually complex areas,
following paths that wind. They even take opportunistic
short-cuts on narrow pathways whenever they can.
Another way of looking at the difference between these
two groups is that good navigators, comfortable with using a
survey strategy have no problem using the terrain
information in allocentric form, i.e. as a map. The other
group is more comfortable with a route strategy, they tend
not to use survey strategies and not surprisingly they prefer
terrain information that is presented in egocentric form.
They do this both by initially planning a simple route with
no curves, and they manipulate the map to be able to read
off bearing directly from the map without having to perform
transformations from cardinal to egocentric direction.
The disparities between the two groups suggest that they
confront their navigation task operate in different ways.
Survey strategists have good sense of direction. They
maintain a strong sense of where they came from and where
they have to go. A map for them is a tool to help see the
future but they consult it primarily to get confirmation that
their sense of bearing is correct. The map is more for
feedback than pure planning. Route strategists rely much
more heavily on maps. They plan every step of their route
on the map, and they make point wise decisions about where
they are and where they must go next by orienting the map.
It seems that route strategists do as much computation on
the map as possible, whereas survey strategists do as much
computation on their internal representation of the world.

References
Allen, G. L., Kirasic, K. C., Dobson, S. H., Long, R. G., &
Beck, S. (1996) Predicting environmental learning from
spatial abilities: An indirect route. Intelligence, 22, 327355.
Clark, A. (2008) Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action
and Cognitive Extension. Oxford University Press.
Darken, R. P., & Sibert, J. L. (1996) Wayfinding Strategies
and Behaviors in Large Virtual Worlds. The International
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 8(1), 49-72.
Galotti, K. (2008) Cognitive Psychology: in and out of the
laboratory (4th edition), Wadsworth Publishing.
Gärling, T., Lindberg, E., Carreiras, M., & Böök, A. (1986)
Reference systems in cognitive maps. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 6(1), 1-18.
Hegarty, M. Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., Lovelace,
K & Subbiah, I. (2002) Development of a Self-Report

Measure of Environmental Spatial Ability.Intelligence,
30, 425-447.
Hegarty, M., Montello, D. R., Richardson, A. E., Ishikawa,
T. and Lovelace, K. (2006) Spatial Abilities at Different
Scales: Individual Differences in Aptitude-Test
Performance and Spatial-Layout Learning. Intelligence,
34, 151-176.
Hutchins, E. (1995) How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds.
Cognitive Science, 19(3), 265-288.
Kato, Y., & Takeuchi, Y. (2003) Individual differences in
wayfinding strategies. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 23, 171-188.
Kirsh, D. (1996). Adapting the Environment Instead of
Oneself. Adaptive Behavior, 4(3-4), 415-452.
Kirsh, D. (2009) Projection, Problem Space and Anchoring,
In N.A. Taatge & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the
31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2310-2315). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P., (1994) On Distinguishing
Epistemic from Pragmatic actions. Cognitive Science,
18(4), 513-549.
Lawton, C.A. (1994) Gender Differences in Way-Finding
Strategies: Relationship to Spatial Ability and Spatial
Anxiety. Sex Roles, 30 11/12, 765-779.
Lawton, C.A. (1996) Strategies for indoor wayfinding: The
role of orientation. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
16, 137-145.
Liben, L.S. (2010) Identifying Locations and Direction on
Field and Representational Mapping Tasks: Predictors of
Success. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 10, 105-134.
Montello, D.R. (1998) A new framework for understanding
the acquisition of spatial knowledge in large-scale
environments. In M.J. Egenhofer & R.G. Golledge (Eds.),
Spatial and temporal reasoning in geographic
information systems (143-154). New York: OUP.
Montello, D.R., Hegarty, M., Richardson A.E. (2004)
Spatial Memory of Real Environments, Virtual
Environments, and Maps. In: Allen, G.L (Ed.), Human
spatial memory: Remembering where, 251-285. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaun Associates.
Montello, D.R. (2005) Navigation. In Miyake, A and Shah,
P (Eds.) The Cambridge Handbook of Visuospatial
Thinking (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press), pp.
257-294.
Prestopnik, J.L., & Roskos-Ewoldsen, B. (2000) The
relations among wayfinding strategy use, sense of
direction, sex, familiarity, and wayfinding ability. Journal
of Environmental Psychology, 20, 177-191.
Rupert, R. (2010) Cognitive Systems and The Extended
Mind. Oxford University Press.
Siegel, A.W., & White, S.H. (1975) The development of
spatial representations of large-scale environments. In H.
W. Reese (Ed.), Advances in child development and
behavior (Vol. 10, 9-55). New York: Academic Press.
Tolman, E.C. (1948) Cognitive maps in rats and men.
Psychological Review, 55, 189-208

2344

