UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mental Arithmetic Efficiency: Interactivity and Individual Differences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/041986f4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Vallee-Tourangeau, Frederic

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mental Arithmetic Efficiency: Interactivity and Individual Differences
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
Thinking efficiency as a function of interactivity was
examined in a mental arithmetic task. Participants
carried out single-digit additions, involving either 7 or
11 numbers, as fast and as accurately as possible. They
completed the sums in blocks, five from the ‘easy’ set
first, and five from the ‘hard’ set second. These sets
were interpolated among a series of other tasks that
measured numeracy, working memory capacity, visuospatial processing speed and attention switching, in such
a way as to permit the presentation of the sets twice,
once with each of the sums presented on a piece of paper
and participants placing their hands flat on the table and
once with the sums presented as a set of manipulable
tokens. Efficiency was measured as the ratio of
performance over time invested. A significant
interaction between condition and difficulty was
observed: Efficiency was slightly better in the static
condition for easy sums but declined substantially
relative to the interactive condition for hard sums.
Regression analyses revealed that in the static condition
22% of the variance in efficiency for the harder sums
was explained by numeracy and working memory
capacity, but 45% by numeracy, working memory
capacity and attention switching skills in the interactive
condition. Verbal protocols revealed that paths to
solution and arithmetic strategies were substantially
transformed by the opportunity to manipulate tokens.
Keywords: Mental arithmetic, interactivity, efficiency,
individual differences, distributed cognition

Introduction
Mental arithmetic is clearly an important skill with many
quotidian applications. It is the quintessential example of
what Kahneman (2011) calls “slow thinking”: “(a)
deliberate, effortful, and orderly” (p. 20) mental process
that can be slowed down by a working memory busy
holding information about interim steps and selecting
strategies to proceed closer to the result. To be sure, for
very simple arithmetic problems, answers are retrieved
rather than computed; but as problem complexity
increases, performance is constrained by limited internal
resources.
The role of working memory in mental arithmetic is
clearly revealed with experiments employing a dual-task
methodology: Performance is significantly impaired by
concurrent tasks that tax different components of working
memory (e.g., Logie, Gilhooly, & Wynn, 1994). There is

a substantial body of evidence that implicates working
memory deficits and poor maths performance in primary
school children (e.g., McLean & Hitch, 1999). In adults,
the impact of maths anxiety (Ashcraft & Kirk, 2001) and
test pressure (DeCaro, Rotar, Kendra, & Beilock, 2010) is
explained in terms of the rehearsal and retrieval of
performance related thoughts and memories that limit the
working memory resources that can be committed to
solving the problem.

Interacting with External Resources
When confronted with internal resource limitations,
reasoners naturally mine their surrounding physical space
for additional resources. “Artifacts saturate everyday
environments” (Kirsh, 2009a, p. 284) and they are
routinely recruited to supplement and augment internal
cognitive resources. Within such an extended cognitive
system (Wilson & Clark, 2009) internal and external
resources are coupled by actions, producing a dynamic
distributed problem representation. As a result,
performance may surpass a level of accuracy and
efficiency achievable on the basis of resources internal to
the reasoner alone.
Recent experiments on insight and non-insight
problem solving reveal how interactivity transforms
performance. For example, release from mental set in
Luchins’s well known volume measurement problems is
significantly facilitated when participants interact with
actual jars with water (Vallée-Tourangeau, Euden, &
Hearn, 2011). Additionally, insight in matchstick algebra
problems is substantially enhanced when participants
solve these problems with actual matchstick-like objects
that permit the physical re-arrangement of the problem
representation (Weller, Villejoubert, & ValléeTourangeau, 2011). Performance is facilitated by the
affordances offered by a modifiable problem
representation. In the case of mental set, the physically
available resources are more easily perceived as offering
simpler and less costly solutions (in terms of pouring and
transposing) and help defuse mental set. As for
matchstick algebra, the physical movement of a
matchstick transforms the presentation of the problem
which anchors new mental projections of potential
solutions that in turn can be reified by additional physical
modification. Insight is thus better driven by a concrete
and explicit project-create-project cycle (Kirsh, 2009b).

1060

Mental Arithmetic. As for mental arithmetic, recruiting
artifacts, such as pen and paper, substantially augments
performance largely because working memory content is
nearly completely off-loaded onto the external
environment. In this case, potential working memory
limitations can be compensated by externalising the
algorithmic process. While measures of working memory
processing capacity may well be correlated with unaided
mental arithmetic performance, these correlations would
likely disappear when the process is completely
externalised (or indeed delegated to a computational
device). Thus, examining the role of interactivity in
mental arithmetic may more fruitfully proceed in a
cognitive system where reasoners cannot record subtotals
and remainders in arriving at a solution, but still can
interact and modify a physical problem representation
(Neth & Payne, 2011).
The experiment reported here examined the impact of
interactivity on mental arithmetic. Participants completed
simple additions involving single-digit numbers. These
additions were carried out for sets of 7 or 11 numbers.
Thus one of the independent variables was problem
difficulty. The second independent variable was
interactivity. In one condition, participants completed the
sums by looking at the set of numbers with hands down
on the table in front of them. In a second condition, the
sums were presented as a set of movable tokens:
Participants were free to manipulate and re-arrange the
tokens to arrive at a solution. Engineering an extended
cognitive system such as the one created through
interacting with number tokens may augment
performance and enhance reasoning efficiency. The
shaping and re-shaping of the physical representation of
the problem may encourage and cue different paths to
solution and different arithmetic strategies. Limited
internal resources in the absence of interactivity may
constrain the manner with which participants arrive at a
solution.
Measuring efficiency involves assessing the benefits
accrued as a function of cost or resources invested. An
index of efficiency was calculated as the ratio of
performance accuracy –proportion of correct answers–
over the proportion of time invested to solve the problem
out of the maximum time the slowest participants
required to solve the task (Hoffman & Schraw, 2010,
refer to such a measure as a likelihood model). Efficiency
might be improved in an interactive context because some
aspect of executive control is governed, guided and
constrained by the shifting physical representation of the
problem, freeing internal resources to ensure arithmetic
accuracy. In other words, fewer resources are devoted to
rehearsing subtotals or identifying and re-identifying the
numbers to be added with a dynamic configuration of the
sum to complete, enabling participants to devise more
creative and efficient ways to solve the problems.
Finally, individual differences in terms of skills and

working memory processing capacity were measured and
correlated with performance in the different experimental
conditions. Patterns of correlations can help understand
more precisely how coupling of internal and external
resources lead to better performance. Importantly, the
experiment employed a repeated-measures design. Thus
the same participants completed the easy and hard sets in
both the static and interactive conditions: Betweensubjects variance could not explain differences in
performance across the experimental conditions.

Method
Participants
Forty two university undergraduates (35 females, overall
mean age = 21.8, SD = 6.8) received course credit for their
participation. Three additional participants (all females,
mean age 23.0) were later recruited to provide verbal
protocols while they performed the easy and hard sums in
both conditions.

Material and Measures
Numeracy. Numeracy was measured using the subjective
numeracy scale developed by Fagerlin, Zikmund-Fisher,
Ubel, Jankovic, Derry, and Smith (2007) which consists of
eight questions (such as “how good are you at calculating a
15% tip”). Participants answer using a 7-point scale (1 =
“not good at all” and 6 “extremely good”). An objective
measure of arithmetic skill was designed by having
participants complete as many simple problems (such as 11
– 9 = ?) as they could in 60 seconds.
Visuo-spatial information processing speed. The clerical
checking subtest of the Beta III (Kellog & Norton, 1999)
was used to measure visuo-spatial processing speed. In this
test, participants must identify whether two symbols,
figures or strings of digits are identical or not. The measure
is the number of correct judgments out of a possible 55 in a
2-min period.
Executive function: Shifting. Attention switching skills
were measured using the plus-minus task (Miyake,
Friedman, Emerson, Witzki, & Howerter, 2000). Using
three different series of 30 double-digit numbers,
participants were instructed to add 3 to each in the first
series, subtract 3 to each in the second series, and alternate
between adding and subtracting 3 with the third series. The
switching cost, measured in seconds, was the difference in
completion time for the third series minus the average
completion time for the first two.
Working memory capacity. Working memory capacity
was assessed with a modified reading span test. Sentences
in series ranging in number from 3 to 6 were presented on
index cards to participants which they read aloud. At the

1061

end of a series they were prompted to recall the last word
of each sentence in that series. There were two different
series for each sequence length for a total of 36 sentences.
Working memory performance was measured as the total
number of words recalled.
Arithmetic Task. Participants carried out single-digit
additions, involving either 7 or 11 numbers (see Fig. 1), as
fast and as accurately as possible They completed the
problems in blocks, five from the ‘easy’ set first, and five
from the ‘hard’ set second. Performance was measured as
the proportion of correct sums, the mean absolute deviation
from the actual sums, the mean latency to announce a
solution, and in terms of efficiency. Efficiency was
measured as the ratio of addition accuracy (proportion
correct sums) over time invested in the task. The latter was
measured as the proportion of actual time to complete the
sums divided by the maximum time needed to complete
them in that condition; this maximum was determined by
taking the average of the top quartile latencies. A ratio
smaller than 1 meant that proportion accuracy was smaller
than proportion time invested, indicating inefficient
performance.

4
4

9

5

8

3

5
4

5

3

3

7

8

9

8

6

7

7

Figure 1: Examples of single-digit additions from the ‘easy’
set (7-digit additions) and the ‘hard’ set (11-digit additions).
Participants performed 5 additions from both sets for a total
of 10.

unique configurations of digits, and 90 digits across the
two sets, it was unlikely that participants remembered the
solution to each problem when presented a second time.
Still, to prevent a direct retrieval of solutions during the
second presentation, the participants completed the reading
span test which lasted approximately 10 minutes. After this
test of working memory, participants were presented with
the 10 sums again (either in the interactive or static
condition depending on which they had experienced first).
Thus set size (with two levels) and interactivity (with two
levels) were independent variables that were manipulated
within subjects in a 2x2 repeated measures design. The
experimental session lasted approximately 45 minutes.

Results
The order of presentation of the interactivity conditions did
not significantly influence performance on any of the
dependent measures nor did set repetition: Performance on
the first 10 sums was no different than performance on the
second iteration of the same 10 problems within each
experimental condition. Hence, order and repetition were
not included in any of the analyses reported below.

Percent Correct
The mean percent correct solutions for the easy and hard
sums are plotted in the top left quadrant of Figure 2.
Interactivity did not influence performance for the easy
sums, but substantially enhanced performance for the hard
sums. In a 2x2 repeated measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA), the main effect of condition was significant,
F(1, 41) = 6.58, p = .014, as were the main effect of
difficulty, F(1, 41) = 20.9, p < .001 and the interaction,
F(1, 41) = 12.5, p = .001.

Procedure

Absolute Error

Participants first completed the 8-item subjective
numeracy scale, followed by the objective arithmetic test,
the clerical checking subtest from the Beta III, and the
plus-minus task. They were then presented with the five
additions from the ‘easy’ set. After a 2-min distractor task
(a word search puzzle), participants were presented with
the five additions from the ‘hard’ set. These two sets of
sums were presented twice to the participants. For one
presentation participants performed the additions with their
hands on the table facing them (the static condition) and
announced their answer out loud; for the second
presentation, numbered tokens (2-cm in diameter) were
used, and participants were encouraged to move the tokens
about in helping them add the numbers (the interactive
condition); as in the static condition, participants
announced the solution for each problem out loud. While
the hard set always followed the easy set, the order of
condition (static, interactive) was counterbalanced across
participants. With 10 different problems, involving 10

Non-interactive mental addition did not lead to larger
absolute deviations from the correct solution for the easy
set, but did for the hard set (see top right quadrant of Fig.
2). In a 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA, the main effect of
interactivity was significant, F(1, 41) = 13.8, p = .001, as
was the main effect of difficulty, F(1, 41) = 28.6, p < .001;
the more important pattern was the significant interaction
between condition and difficulty, F(1, 41) = 28.9, p < .001.

Latency to Solution
Set size had a large impact on solution latencies (see Fig 2.
bottom left quadrant). Interactivity influenced latencies in
an interesting manner: For the easy sums, interactivity
slowed down participants (by nearly 2.5 s), but marginally
reduced latencies (by .4 s) with the hard sums. In a 2x2
repeated measures ANOVA, the main effect of
interactivity was not significant, F(1, 41) = 1.45, p = .236,
but the main effect of difficulty was significant, F(1, 41) =

1062

182, p < .001, as was the interaction, F(1, 41) = 6.64, p =
.014.

Efficiency
Participants were more efficient when solving the easy
problems without the tokens (see bottom right quadrant of
Fig. 2). Efficiency dropped marginally for the hard sums
when participants could use the tokens, but dipped
substantially without the tokens. In a 2x2 repeated
measures ANOVA, the main effect of condition was not
significant, F < 1, but the main effect of difficulty, F(1, 41)
= 13.3, p = .001, as well as the condition by difficulty
interaction, F(1, 41) = 10.6, p = .002, were significant.
Percent Correct
Static

Static

Mean Absolute Error

Mean Percent Correct

80%

40%

20%

0%

1
SBJ-N
1

Interactive

5

2

4

3

3

4

2

5

1

6

Hard (11)

Easy (7)

Latency to Solution
Mean Efficiency Ratio

30
25
20
15
10

1.6

Easy (7)

6
ER- S

7
ER-I

.29

.38 *

.32 *

.43 **

.47 **

.16

-.09

.16

-

.26

-.20

-.24

-

.04

-.03

.10

.16

-

.22

-15

-.39 *

-

.26
-

.23
.60 **
-

Path to Solution and Strategies

1.2
1.0

0.6

0

5
Span

1.4

0.8

5

4
Att-S

Note: * p < .05 ** p < .01 . SBJ-N = Subjective numeray; OBJ-N. = Objective
numeracy (basic arithmetic skill); C-C = Clerica l Checking; Att-S = Attention
Switching; Span = Rea ding Span.; ER-S = Efficiency in the static condition;
ER-I = Efficiency in the interactive condition.

1.8

35

3
C-C

Hard (11)

Efficiency Ratio

40

-

2
OBJ-N

7

0
Easy (7)

Mean Latency (s)

Table 1: Correlation matrix involving individual differences
in terms of subjective and objective numeracy, clerical
checking, attention switching, reading span and the
efficiency ratio in the static and interactive condition for the
hard set (involving 11 single digit numbers); df = 40.

Absolute Error

Interactive

60%

explained 22% of the variance in efficiency. In the
interactive condition, the analysis identified a significant
model, F(3, 41) = 10.2, p < .001, that explained 45% of the
efficiency variance; the model included objective
numeracy (β = .447), reading span (β = .426) and attention
switching (β = -.398).

Easy (7)

Hard (11)

Hard (11)

Addition Set Size

Figure 2: Mean percent correct additions in the static (light bars)
and interactive (dark bars) condition (top left quadrant); mean
absolute error per sum in the static (circles) and interactive
(triangle) conditions (top right quadrant); mean latencies in the
four conditions (bottom left quadrant); mean ratio of correct
proportion over proportion of maximum time to complete
problem (or efficiency ratio) in all four conditions (bottom right
quadrant) as a function of set size. Error bars are standard error of
the means.

Predictors of efficiency. To better understand the relative
contribution of different internal resources to performance
in the hard set of additions, initial analyses determined the
nature of the correlations between efficiency and
individual differences (see Table 1). The strongest
correlations were observed in the interactive condition with
objective numeracy, r(40) = .43, p = .005, and attention
switching, r(40) = -.39, p = .01; in the static condition,
objective numeracy was significantly correlated with
efficiency, r(40) = .32, p = .04. A stepwise regression
analysis for the static condition produced a significant
model, F(2, 41) = 5.40, p = .009, composed of objective
numeracy (β = .400) and reading span (β = .350) that

In order to obtain a window onto the paths to solution and
the strategies employed to chart these paths in both
conditions, three additional participants completed the
mental arithmetic tasks while verbalising their progress –
the sessions were also videotaped. Inferential statistics
could not be performed on data from such a small sample,
but very clear differences in strategies emerged in the two
conditions.
The simplest strategy, and in the static condition the one
that taxes working memory the least, is to add the numbers
in the order scanned, without seeking to group numbers to
create more congenial sub-totals. Across the three
participants, and over all problems, the sequential scan
strategy was used exclusively 15 times in the static
condition (or for 50% of the problems) and twice in the
interactive condition. There were 26 instances of grouping
numbers (mostly in pairs) on the path to solution in the
static condition, but 75 instances of such groupings in the
interactive condition. Congenial sub-totals (defined as Σ
MOD 5 = 0) on the path to solution was observed 28 times
in the static condition but 53 times in the interactive
condition. Figure 3 below illustrates the paths to solution
and strategies employed by participant 44 for problem A, a
7-number addition. She clearly employed a sequential
scanning strategy in the static condition, but was much
more creative in the interactive condition, grouping
numbers to produce convenient sub-totals to arrive at the
solution.

1063

Static

4

5
7

6
9

8
Interactive

6

Figure 3: Path to solution and strategy employed for
problem A (a 7-number problem) by participant 44 in the
static and interactive condition.

Discussion
This experiment examined mental arithmetic in conditions
where participants only used their internal cognitive
resources to complete easy and hard sums of single digit
numbers or where they could couple their cognitive
resources to modifiable external resources in completing
the sums. The experiment employed a repeated measures
design such that the same participants completed the
arithmetic problems in both conditions, thus eliminating
between condition variance due to between-subjects
differences. This is a particularly important feature of this
experiment because it ensured that whatever benefits were
conveyed in the interactive condition, these could not be
attributed to better or different internal resources brought
to the task by a different group of participants.
Interactivity substantially enhanced performance in
terms of accuracy and efficiency with the harder sums
involving 11 single-digit numbers: Participants were more
accurate and the wrong answers were closer to the actual
sums in the interactive condition than in the noninteractive condition. Solution latencies offered a gauge of
the effort invested to solve the additions. With the hard sets
the mean latencies were nearly identical between
conditions (35.9 s vs. 35.5 s in the static and interactive
condition, respectively) but mean percent accuracy was
20% higher in the interactive condition. Hence, reasoning
efficiency was substantially enhanced by allowing
participants to couple and regulate their cognitive efforts
with a continuous reconfiguration of the tokens in a
manner that best served their goal. With the easier sums
participants performed marginally better without
manipulating tokens, relying solely on their internal
resources. The degree to which the design of an extended
cognitive system can augment performance is clearly
relative to the degree of task difficulty and the cognitive
ability of the reasoner (Webb & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2009).
Interactivity offered the opportunity to deploy more
creative and efficient paths to solution, which was clearly
beneficial for the harder sums. The improvement in
performance and the greater efficiency in the interactive

condition was not simply a matter of off-loading content
from working memory onto the environment. Rather, a
shifting environment suggests different arithmetic paths
and permits the identification of congenial interim sums
that simplify the task and enhance efficiency. Thus the
opportunity to interact with the tokens substantially
transformed the nature of strategies employed and the
paths to solution. Some of these paths might have been
discovered strategically or accidentally by moving the
tokens. Still, a dynamic physical presentation of the
problem shouldered some of the executive functions
freeing resources to better plan how to achieve the goal
efficiently. These data support the conjecture that
reasoners are better able to deploy arithmetic skills, and
may be more receptive to learning new ones, in an
environment that augments storage and processing
capacity through the coupling of internal and external
resources.

Individual Differences
Profiling participants in terms of cognitive skills and
capacities and then correlating these measures with indices
of performance help identify the cognitive factors that
drive mental arithmetic. This approach has been employed
with some success to identify the skills and capacities
implicated in insight and non-insight problem solving
(Gilhooly & Fioratou, 2009). The resulting data inform the
development of process models of performance in these
problems. Such process models will likely differ for tasks
that are purely reliant on internal cognitive resources in
comparisons with tasks that afford a tighter reciprocal
influence between cognition, perception and action.
In the static condition, basic arithmetic skills and
working memory capacity explained 22% of the variance
in efficiency for the harder sums. In the interactive
condition, nearly 50% of the variance in efficiency was
explained by a model composed of arithmetic skill,
working memory capacity and attention switching. These
findings suggest that participants with better arithmetic
skills, larger working memory capacity and swifter
attention switching abilities were more likely to benefit
from interacting with tokens in arriving at a solution. In
other words, the coupling of internal and external resources
was more effectively deployed by participants with better
internal resources. This pattern of results was also
observed in a recent experiment that contrasted noninteractive and interactive version of Luchins’s volume
measurement problems: Participants scoring higher in fluid
intelligence performed better with the interactive version
of the task (Vallée-Tourangeau et al., 2011). Designing an
interactive version of an otherwise non-interactive static
problem solving task does not benefit every reasoner in the
same way. Future research should also determine whether
non-intellectual factors such as anxiety or self-efficacy
mediate the impact of interactivity on problem solving
performance.

1064

The measure of working memory capacity explained
unique variance in performance efficiency in the noninteractive context for the hard sums. Still, the correlation
between performance and working memory capacity was
modest. This finding suggests one of two things. The first
is that the task may not have taxed working memory that
much. Certainly the degree of absolute departure from the
correct answers in the non-interactive condition suggests
that participants rarely miscalculated sums by a substantial
margin. Future research may thus more fruitfully contrast
non-interactive and interactive conditions with a more
challenging arithmetic task, either by using larger singledigit sets (e.g., sums including 15 or more numbers) or by
using double-digit numbers. A better window onto the role
of interactivity in supplementing working memory
capacity might be proffered by a task that is more reliant
on working memory when it is completed without
interaction. Second, the exact composition of the complex
span measure of working memory should include
arithmetic material and operations. There is evidence to
suggest that span and outcome measures are better
correlated when they share a domain (DeStefano &
Lefevre, 2004).

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Ellie McCourty, Angie Makri,
Svetlana Stefanova, and Joakim Westh Wiencken for
recruiting and running the participants; as well as Ken
Gilhooly, David Gilmore, David Kirsh and Gaëlle
Villejoubert for helpful comments on an earlier version of
this manuscript. Financial support from the Kingston
University Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences Research
Capability Fund is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Ashcraft, M. H., & Kirk, E. P. (2001). The relationships
among working memory, math anxiety, and
performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 224-237.
DeCaro, M. S., Rotar, K. E., Kendra, M. S., & Beilock, S.
L. (2010). Diagnosing and alleviating the impact of
performance pressure on mathematical problem
solving. Quarterly Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology, 63, 1619-1630.
DeStefano, D., LeFevre, J.-A. (2004). The role of working
memory in mental arithmetic. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 16, 353-386.
Fagerlin, A., Zikmund-Fisher, B. J., Ubel, P. A., Jankovic,
A., Derry, H. A., & Smith, D. M. (2007). Measuring
numeracy without a math test: Development of the
Subjective Numeracy Scale. Medical Decision Making,
27, 672-680.
Gilhooly, K. J., & Fioratou, E. (2009). Executive functions
in insight versus non-insight problem solving: An

individual differences approach. Thinking and
Reasoning, 15, 355-376.
Hoffman, B., & Schraw, G. (2010). Conceptions of
efficiency: Applications in learning and problemsolving. Educational Psychologist, 45, 1-14.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. London:
Allen Lane.
Kellog, C. E., & Morton, N. W. (1999). Beta III Manual.
The Psychological Corporation. A Hartcourt
Assessment Company.
Kirsh, D. (2009a). Problem solving in situated cognition.
In P. Robbins & M. Aydede (Eds.), The Cambridge
handbook of situated cognition (pp. 264-306).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kirsh, D. (2009b). Projection, problem space and
anchoring. In N. A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2310-2315). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Logie, R. H., Gilhooly, K. J., & Wynn, V. (1994).
Counting on working memory in arithmetic problem
solving. Memory & Cognition, 22, 395-410.
McLean, J. F., & Hitch, G. J. (1999). Working memory
impairments in children with specific arithmetic
learning difficulties. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 74, 240-260.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A.
H., & Howerter, A. (2000). The unity and diversity of
executive functions and their contributions to complex
frontal lobe tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive
Psychology, 41, 49-100.
Neth, H., & Payne, S. J. (2011). Interactive coin addition:
How hands can help us think. Proceedings of the
Thirty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 279-284). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Euden, G., & Hearn, V. (2011).
Einstellung defused: Interactivity and mental set.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64,
1889-1895.
Webb, S., & Vallée-Tourangeau (2009). Interactive word
production in dyslexic children. In N. Taatgen, H. van
Rijn, J. Nerbonne & L. Schomaker (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (1436–1441). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Weller, A., Villejoubert, G., Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2011).
Interactive insight problem solving. Thinking &
Reasoning, 17, 429-439.
Wilson, R. A., & Clark, A. (2009). How to situate
cognition: Letting nature take its course. In P. Robbins
& M. Aydede (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of
situated cognition (pp. 55-77). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press

1065

