UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Metrical expectations from preceding prosody influence spoken word recognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/83b0r1rx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Brown, Meredith
Salverda, Anne Pier
Dilley, Laura C.
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Metrical expectations from preceding prosody influence spoken word recognition
Meredith Brown (mbrown@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Meliora Hall, Box 270268, Rochester, NY 14627-0268

Anne Pier Salverda (asalverda@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Meliora Hall, Box 270268, Rochester, NY 14627-0268

Laura C. Dilley (ldilley@msu.edu)
Department of Communicative Sciences & Disorders, Michigan State University
116 Oyer, East Lansing, MI 48824

Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Meliora Hall, Box 270268, Rochester, NY 14627-0268
Abstract
Two visual world experiments tested the hypothesis that expectations based on preceding prosody influence the perception of suprasegmental cues to lexical stress. Experiment 1
showed that phonemically overlapping words with different
initial stress patterns compete for recognition. Experiment 2
further demonstrated that fundamental frequency and syllable timing patterns across material preceding the target word
can influence the relative activation of competing alternatives
with different initial stress patterns. The activation of alternatives with initial stress was higher when preceding stressed
syllables had suprasegmental acoustic characteristics similar
to the initial syllable of the target word. These findings suggest that expectations about the acoustic realization of an utterance include information about metrical organization and
lexical stress, and that these expectations constrain the initial
interpretation of suprasegmental stress cues. These results are
interpreted as support for expectation-based forward models in
which acoustic information in the speech stream is interpreted
based on expectations created by prosody.
Keywords: Prosody; spoken word recognition; lexical stress;
visual world paradigm; expectations; lexical competition

Introduction
A growing body of work indicates that expectations about the
acoustic realization of the phonemes and prosody of a spoken
sentence influence how listeners initially interpret incoming
acoustic-phonetic cues during spoken language processing.
For example, manipulations of pitch and duration early in an
utterance influence the interpretation of cues to prosodic and
morphophonemic constituency several syllables downstream
(Dilley & McAuley, 2008; Dilley et al., 2010; Brown et al.,
2011; Dilley & Pitt, 2010). However, little is known about the
types of representations that contribute to these perceptual expectations. The present study investigates whether perceived
prosodic and metrical patterning across preceding portions of
an utterance can influence listeners’ expectations about the
metrical organization of upcoming material, modulating their
interpretation of proximal cues to lexical stress and therefore
influencing the activation of potential lexical candidates.
Lexical stress is a key contributor to sentence-level prominence patterns and rhythmicity. Listeners are sensitive to

segmental and suprasegmental cues to stress during spoken
word recognition (Cutler, Dahan & van Donselaar, 1997).
Although vowel quality is the most potent stress cue to influence lexical processing in English, other suprasegmental cues
such as duration also distinguish stressed from unstressed
syllables, and judgments about these suprasegmental stress
cues are modulated by surrounding prosody in off-line tasks
(Niebuhr, 2009). Cues to stress may influence not only the
recognition of particular words, but also the process of segmenting the speech stream more generally. For example, listeners are more likely to misperceive phrases like “she’s a
must to avoid” as “she’s a muscular boy” than they are to
mishear “in closing” as “enclosing”, suggesting that listeners
preferentially posit word boundaries prior to prominent syllables (Cutler & Butterfield, 1992). This metrical segmentation
strategy is substantiated by the distribution of stressed syllables within the English lexicon: approximately 90% of content words in conversational English have initial stress (Cutler
& Carter, 1987).
Perceived metrical patterning is a potentially powerful
source of expectations in speech perception. Speech prosody
often exhibits characteristics that listeners perceive as patterning (Couper-Kuhlen, 1993; Pierrehumbert, 2000). For example, listeners tend to hear stressed syllables in English as
perceptually isochronous, i.e., as occurring at regular intervals (e.g., Lehiste, 1977). In addition, previous work using
non-linguistic auditory stimuli (e.g. sequences of alternating
tones) has demonstrated that pitch, temporal, and/or amplitude patterning in distal (i.e. non-local) auditory context can
influence the processing of proximal material (e.g. the perceived relative prominence of high vs. low tones; Woodrow,
1911; Thomassen, 1982). The tendency for speakers to use
recurring sequences of pitch accents within an intonational
phrase (Couper-Kuhlen, 1993; Pierrehumbert, 2000) may
likewise contribute to the perceived metrical structure across
syllables in an utterance.
We conducted two visual world experiments to test the hy-

1380

pothesis that expectations based on preceding prosody influence the perception of suprasegmental cues to lexical stress.
Experiment 1 verified that phonemically overlapping words
with different initial stress patterns compete for recognition. Experiment 2 further demonstrated that fundamental
frequency and syllable timing patterns across material preceding the target word can influence the relative activation
of competing alternatives with different initial stress patterns.
The activation of alternatives with initial stress was higher
when preceding stressed syllables had suprasegmental acoustic characteristics similar to the initial syllable of the target word, and vice versa. These findings suggest that expectations about the acoustic realization of upcoming speech
include information about metrical organization and lexical
stress, and that these expectations constrain the initial interpretation of suprasegmental stress cues during spoken word
recognition.

monosyllabic target words were used in the filler items. Eight
filler items were identity-spliced between the first and second
syllables of the target word, whereas the rest were spliced at
some point prior to the target word.
The first author recorded multiple tokens of each sentence
as WAV files at 44.1 kHz, producing each sentence with minimal F0 excursions and slight F0 declination. Each recording
was split into two halves at the end of the first syllable of
the target word, at a point in the waveform with an amplitude
of zero. Identity- and cross-spliced versions of the item containing the SW target word were created by splicing together
the last half of a SW recording either with the first half of
another SW recording or with the first half of a WS recording. Likewise, identity- and cross-spliced versions of the item
containing the WS target word were created by splicing the
last half of a WS recording together with the initial SW and
WS sentence fragments used to create the SW items.

Experiment 1

Procedure The study was divided into three phases. In the
first phase, each of the 304 clip-art pictures used in the visual world experiment was presented to the participant in the
center of the display, with its label printed underneath. Each
picture-label pair was presented for a minimum of 3 seconds.
Participants proceeded at their own pace through the set of
picture-label pairs by pressing the space bar.
The visual world experiment began immediately following
the picture-label exposure phase. Each trial started with the
presentation of a visual display containing four pictures, two
of which corresponded to the phonologically related SW and
WS words on critical trials. The remaining two distractor images were selected such that they were distinct from the two
potential target pictures with respect to visual and semantic
properties and the phonological properties of their labels. After 500 ms of display preview, participants heard a spoken
sentence, and their task was to click on the picture that was
referred to in the sentence. They were not given feedback
on their performance during the experiment. Throughout
the study, eye movements were tracked and recorded using
a head-mounted SR Research EyeLink II system sampling at
250 Hz, with drift correction procedures performed every five
trials.
Immediately after the completion of the visual world experiment, we assessed participants’ ability to generate the appropriate labels for both members of each stress-alternating
word pair. Participants named each of the 48 associated
pictures, presented in a randomized sequence, and their responses were recorded. Responses were scored as correct if
they preserved the phonemes and stress pattern across the initial two syllables (e.g. jury, jury box, and jury members were
all considered correct, but jurors was not).
For the visual world experiment, two lists were constructed
by randomizing the positions of the images on the screen
within each trial and pseudorandomizing the order of trials
within the list. Within each list, half of the experimental trials had SW target words and half had WS target words, and of
these, half were identity-spliced and half were cross-spliced.

The main goal of Experiment 1 was to establish that phonemically overlapping words with different initial stress patterns
compete for recognition. We demonstrate that materials containing a target word with relatively neutral segmental and
suprasegmental stress cues on the initial syllable elicit initial
activation of both initially-stressed and initially-unstressed
lexical alternatives.

Methods
Participants The participants were 16 students from the
University of Rochester. All participants were native English
speakers with normal hearing and corrected-to-normal visual
acuity, and received $7.50 for their participation in the study.
Materials The 24 speech stimuli used in the experiment
were grammatical declarative sentences containing either a
word with initial strong-weak stress (e.g. jury) or a phonemically overlapping word with initial weak-strong stress
(e.g. giraffe). The initial syllables for each related pair of
words were produced with as close to the same vowel quality and pronunciation as possible. Each stimulus began with
at least two disyllabic words with initial primary stress, followed by one or two monosyllabic words (e.g. Heidi sometimes saw). This distal context material was followed by another monosyllabic word (e.g., that) followed by the target
word. Whereas the preceding context for each item was the
same for both SW and WS target words, the sentence material following the target word differed to maximize semantic
coherence (e.g. the jury leaving the courthouse vs. the giraffe
in the city zoo).
To discourage participants from noticing the stress pattern
manipulation, we included 48 filler items for which the visual display contained two pictures whose labels had a different phonological relation (e.g. words with onset-embedded
competitor words, like antlers and ant). For half of the filler
items, one of the phonologically related words was mentioned
in the utterance. In addition, an equal number of SW, WS, and

1381

The assignment of items to each of the four conditions was
counterbalanced across participants, for a total of eight lists.
Six practice trials were included at the start of the experiment
to familiarize participants with the picture selection task.
Analyses For statistical analysis, proportions of fixations to
the target, competitor, and distractor pictures on experimental
trials were averaged across the window starting at 200 ms after the onset of the target word and ending 750 ms later, i.e.,
200 ms after the mean offset of the target word. The mean
proportions were then transformed using the empirical logit
function (Cox, 1970). Effects of target word type and splicing
condition on logit-transformed fixation proportions were analyzed in a multilevel linear regression model. Fixed effects
included picture type, target word type, splicing condition,
trial number, and interactions between these factors. Random effects included intercepts and slopes for participants
and items. Trial number was standardized by subtracting the
mean value and dividing by the standard deviation. To select
the final model, effects were removed stepwise and each reduced model was compared to the more complex model using
the likelihood ratio test (Baayen et al., 2008).

Results and discussion

Proportion of fixations

1.0

0.8

target word
SW

0.6

WS
picture

0.4

competitor
distractor

0.2

target

0.0
0

300

600

900

1200

Time relative to target onset (ms)

1500

Figure 1: Proportions of fixations to target, competitor, and
distractor pictures in Experiment 1. Line color denotes target
word type (SW vs. WS); line texture denotes picture type.
Overall, participants found the referent identification task
easy, and clicked on the incorrect picture on less than 3%
of all experimental trials. These trials were excluded from
further analysis. In addition, we excluded trials for which
the target or competitor picture was not correctly named by
the participant in the third phase of the experiment (18.9%),
since their performance on this task revealed whether they
associated the intended names with the pictures.
Figure 1 shows the proportion of fixations to the target,
competitor, and distractor pictures as a function of condition starting at the onset of the target word. As expected,
hearing the initial sounds of a WS word elicited transient
competition from a phonemically overlapping SW competitor, starting at approximately 250 ms after the onset of the
target word. The proportions of target and competitor fixations were roughly equivalent until approximately 600 ms af-

ter target word onset, when fixations began to converge on the
target picture. Crucially, hearing the initial sounds of a SW
word also elicited competition effects from WS competitors
with approximately the same magnitude and time course.
Multilevel linear regression analyses confirmed the prediction that words with initial WS stress initially compete for
recognition with phonemically overlapping words with initial
SW stress. The logit-transformed proportion of fixations to
the distractor pictures was significantly lower than the transformed proportions of fixations to the target (B=.59, SE=.11,
t=5.16, p<.0001) and competitor (B=.29, SE=.08, t=3.70,
p<.0005) pictures, after taking into account by-participant
and by-item random intercepts, by-participant random slopes
for picture type, and by-item random slopes for the interaction between picture type and splicing condition. Neither the
target word stress pattern nor trial number contributed significantly to model fit, suggesting that competition effects were
similar for SW and WS words and were stable across the experiment. Neither factor was included in the final model. Further, fixed effects of splicing condition did not contribute significantly to variance in fixation proportions. Taken together,
these findings indicate that, for our materials, the competition
between phonemically overlapping words with different initial stress patterns was similar for SW and WS target words.
These results verified that phonemically overlapping words
with different initial stress patterns compete for recognition,
and suggested that statistically-based heuristics or biases to
interpret lexically stressed syllables as the onsets of content
words do not dominate processing, at least when corresponding weak and strong syllables have similar vowel quality and
segmental pronunciation. The overall similarity of lexical
competition effects in identity- vs. cross-spliced items further suggested that we succeeded in creating items with relatively neutral segmental and suprasegmental cues to the lexical stress of the initial syllable.

Experiment 2
The goal of Experiment 2 was to characterize the effects
of preceding prosody on listeners’ initial interpretation of
different-stress cohort pairs. In this experiment, the acoustic characteristics of preceding portions of the utterance distal
to the target word were manipulated, leaving the acoustic realization of the target word and its immediately surrounding
context unchanged. Syllables in the distal context with lexical
or sentence-level stress were manipulated to have the same
relative F0 level (either low or high with respect to surrounding syllables) and to be roughly isochronous. We hypothesized that this prosodic manipulation would bias listeners to
expect upcoming syllables with similar pitch and timing characteristics as preceding prominent syllables to be lexically
stressed, and conversely to expect upcoming syllables with
different pitch and timing characteristics to be unstressed.

Methods
Participants The participants were 32 students from the
University of Rochester who met the same inclusion criteria

1382

waveform

waveform

Heidi

sometimes

saw

that

jury

leaving …

F0 (Hz)
expected
perceived
prominence

Heidi

sometimes

saaaw

that

jury

…

F0 (Hz)

S

W

S

W

S

(W)

(S)(W)

expected
perceived

( S ) prominence
…

S

W

S

W

S

(S)

(W)(S)…

Figure 2: Example item in SW-biasing (left) and WS-biasing (right) conditions. The fundamental frequency (F0) and timing of
stressed syllables within preceding distal context were manipulated to bias listeners to perceive the initial syllable of the target
word as stressed or unstressed. Acoustic properties of the target word and its proximal context were the same across conditions.
as for Experiment 1.
Materials The stimuli used in Experiment 2 were created
by manipulating the prosody of the sentence material preceding the target word in each of the identity- and cross-spliced
items used in Experiment 1, using the pitch synchronous
overlap-and-add algorithm (Moulines & Charpentier, 1990).
All distal F0 manipulations involved removing non-vocalic
pitch points and shifting the remaining pitch points within
each context syllable up by 35 Hz (for high syllables) or down
by 25 Hz (for low syllables). This manipulation preserved
the natural microvariation and F0 declination of the original
recording while imposing salient periodic alternations onto
the F0 contour. F0 manipulations were performed for all
syllables through at least the second syllable following the
offset of the target word. Whether the first syllable of the
target word had low or high F0 varied between items. Temporal manipulations involved compressing or expanding the
rime of the first monosyllabic word within the preceding context such that the duration of the fifth intervocalic interval
(i.e. the interval between vowel onsets in the fifth and sixth
syllables) either matched the mean duration of the following
two intervocalic intervals or was twice the mean duration of
the preceding four intervocalic intervals, following Dilley and
McAuley (2008). Similar prosodic manipulations were performed on filler items.
Two versions of each item were created with different
acoustic characteristics across the distal context preceding the
target word but the same acoustic characteristics across its
proximal context (i.e. the preceding adjacent syllable) and all
subsequent material (Figure 2). In the SW-biasing condition,
syllables in the distal context with lexical and/or sentencelevel stress (e.g. Heidi sometimes saw...) were manipulated to
have the same relative F0 level as the initial syllable of the target word (e.g. high, cf. Figure 2), and the duration of the fifth
syllable was manipulated such that the timing of the sequence
of prominent syllables was approximately isochronous with
the timing of the first syllable of the target word. Whether the
fifth syllable was shortened or lengthened to accomplish this
regularity depended on the structure of the preceding context:
It was shortened when the distal context ended in one monosyllabic word and lengthened when it ended in two. The SWbiasing context was predicted to bias listeners to perceive the

initial syllable of the target word as lexically stressed (consistent with e.g. jury rather than giraffe). This bias was predicted
to increase the initial proportion of fixations to the SW competitor when the target word began with an unstressed syllable, and to decrease the initial proportion of fixations to the
WS competitor for SW target words.
Conversely, in the WS-biasing condition, the F0 of stressed
syllables in the distal context was manipulated to have the
opposite relative F0 level as the initial syllable of the target
word (e.g. low, cf. Figure 2), and the duration of the fifth syllable was manipulated such that the timing of the sequence of
prominent syllables was approximately isochronous with the
timing of the syllables immediately preceding and following
the first syllable of the target word. The WS-biasing context
was predicted to bias listeners to perceive the initial syllable
of the target word as unstressed, and therefore to increase the
initial proportion of fixations to the WS competitor for target
words beginning with a stressed syllable and to decrease the
proportion of fixations to the SW competitor for target words
beginning with an unstressed syllable.
Procedure

The procedure was the same as Experiment 1.

Analyses Proportions of fixations to target, competitor, and
distractor pictures on experimental trials were computed and
averaged across the same time window as in Experiment
1. Effects of word stress, preceding prosody, and splicing
condition on logit-transformed fixation proportions were analyzed using multilevel linear regression. Fixed effects and
random slopes included picture type, target word type, distal
prosody condition, splicing condition, trial number (i.e. the
position of the item in the sequence encountered by the participant), the initial F0 of the target word (low vs. high), and
interactions between factors. Since we were primarily interested in the effects of distal prosody on the relative proportions of fixations to the target and competitor pictures, fixations to the distractor pictures were not included in the analysis. Trial number was included in the analyses due to recent
work suggesting that listeners rapidly adapt to the reliability
of prosodic cues, particularly in counterbalanced experimental designs (e.g. Kurumada et al., to appear; Brown et al., under review). A full explication of prosodic adaptation effects,
however, is beyond the scope of the present paper.

1383

1.0

0.8

Proportion of fixations

Proportion of fixations

1.0

0.6

0.4

0.8

SW-biasing

SW-biasing

0.6
WS-biasing

WS-biasing

0.4
competitor

competitor

distractor
0.2
target

0.2

0.0

distractor
target

0.0
0

300

600

900

1200

1500

0

Time relative to target onset (ms)

300

600

900

1200

1500

Time relative to target onset (ms)

Figure 3: Proportion of fixations to target, competitor, and distractor pictures upon hearing SW (left) and WS (right) target
words in SW- vs. WS-biasing contexts in Experiment 2. Line color denotes target word type; line texture denotes picture type.

Results and discussion

biasing condition than in the SW-biasing condition (B=.17,
SE=.08, t=2.13, p<.05); target fixations did not differ significantly by condition. Although trial number had a significant
main effect, it did not enter into any significant interactions.
Analysis of fixations during the initial processing of WS
words revealed not only a significant interaction between target picture and prosody condition, but also a significant threeway interaction between target picture, prosody condition,
and trial number (Table 2). We explored this interaction by
fitting two additional models to the data, with trial number
centered one standard deviation above and below the mean.
These models revealed that the interaction between target picture and prosody condition was significant early in the experiment (B=.56, SE=.18, t=3.18, p<.005). In the WS-biasing
condition, target fixations were significantly higher (B=.32,
SE=.13, t=2.49, p<.05), whereas competitor fixations were
significantly lower (B=-.24, SE=.10, t=-2.46, p<.05). However, the interaction between target picture and prosody condition was not significant late in the experiment.

Trials in which participants clicked on the incorrect picture
(<2%) or for which participants generated an incorrect label
for the target or competitor picture in the post-test (29.1%)
were excluded from analysis. Figure 3 shows the proportion
of fixations to the target, competitor, and distractor images as
a function of condition starting at the onset of the target word.
Starting at around 350 ms after the onset of SW target words
(Figure 3, left), SW-biasing prosody resulted in higher proportions of target fixations and lower proportions of competitor fixations, with effects persisting for approximately 800
ms. For WS words (Figure 3, right), SW-biasing prosody had
opposite effects, with relatively low proportions of target fixations and relatively high proportions of competitor fixations.
B
intercept
-.65
target picture
.37
WS-biasing prosody
.17
trial number
-.06
target picture x WS-biasing prosody -.29

SE
t
p
.09 -7.20 <.0001
.12 3.11 <.005
.09 1.91 <.1
.03 -2.06 <.05
.12 -2.39 <.05

General discussion

Table 1: Parameters of the final multilevel regression model
of logit-transformed fixation proportions in response to SW
target words in Experiment 2. The model included by-item
intercepts and slopes for picture type and prosody condition.
Multilevel linear regression analyses revealed not only the
predicted three-way interaction between picture type, distal prosody condition, and target word stress pattern (B=.50,
SE=.25, t=2.02, p<.05), but also a significant interaction between these three factors and trial number (B=-.46, SE=.17,
t=-2.73, p<.01). To investigate the source of this significant
four-way interaction, separate analyses were conducted for
SW and WS words. Analysis of fixations during the processing of SW words revealed a significant interaction between
target picture and prosody condition (Table 1). Participants
were more likely to fixate the competitor picture in the WS-

Results from two visual world experiments supported the hypothesis that expectations based on preceding prosody influence the perception of suprasegmental cues to lexical stress.
Experiment 1 showed that initially unstressed words compete
for recognition with phonemically overlapping words with
initial stress, and vice versa. Experiment 2 further demonstrated that F0 and syllable timing patterns across material
preceding the target word influence the relative activation of
competing SW and WS alternatives. The activation of SW alternatives was higher when preceding stressed syllables had
suprasegmental acoustic characteristics similar to the initial
syllable of the target word, while the activation of WS alternatives was higher when preceding stressed syllables had
suprasegmental characteristics dissimilar to the initial syllable of the target word.
These findings show that expectations about the acoustic
realization of upcoming material within an utterance include

1384

intercept
target picture
WS-biasing prosody
trial number
target picture x WS-biasing prosody
target picture x trial number
WS-biasing prosody x trial number
target picture x WS-biasing prosody
x trial number

B
-.61
.30
-.10
-.10
.23
.16
.14

SE
t
p
.06 -10.28 <.0001
.10 3.05 <.005
.08 -1.20 >.1
.06 -1.60 >.1
.12 1.96 <.05
.08 1.93 <.1
.08 1.70 <.1

-.33 .12

-2.82

<.005

Table 2: Parameters of the final multilevel regression model
of logit-transformed fixation proportions in response to WS
target words in Experiment 2. The model included random
intercepts and picture type slopes for participants and items.
information about metrical organization and lexical stress,
and that these expectations constrain the initial interpretation
of suprasegmental stress cues during spoken word recognition. This indicates, in turn, that cues to lexical stress in
sEnglish are not restricted to word-internal cues such as a
syllable’s F0, duration and amplitude, but can also include
sentence-level patterning. This observation suggests that expectations from a variety of sources influence listeners’ interpretation of suprasegmental stress cues.
The observation that prosodic expectations influence the
interpretation of suprasegmental stress cues raises questions
about the mechanisms by which various sources of contextual information are integrated with the incoming signal. Our
findings are congruent with forward-modeling approaches in
which perceptual input is evaluated with respect to internally
generated hypotheses about the acoustic-phonetic realization
of upcoming material. Forward models have been fruitfully
explored within influential theories of motor control (e.g.
Wolpert et al., 1995; Guenther & Micci Barreca, 1997), and
may likewise provide a promising explanatory framework for
aspects of spoken language understanding.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a NSF predoctoral fellowship (MB), NSF grant BCS-0847653 (LCD), and NIH grants
HD27206 and DC0005071 (MKT). We gratefully acknowledge Dana Subik for participant recruitment and testing.

References
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects
and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390–412.
Brown, M., Salverda, A. P., Dilley, L. C., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(2011). Expectations from preceding prosody influence
segmentation in online sentence processing. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 18, 1189–1196.
Brown, M., Salverda, A. P., Gunlogson, C., & Tanenhaus,
M. K. (under review). Rapid integration of prosodic and
discourse cues during spoken-word recognition.

Couper-Kuhlen, E.(1993). English speech rhythm: Form and
function in everyday verbal interaction. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Cox, D. R. (1970). The analysis of binary data. London:
Chapman and Hall.
Cutler, A., & Butterfield, S. (1992). Rhythmic cues to
speech segmentation: Evidence from juncture misperception. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 218–236.
Cutler, A., & Carter, D. M. (1987). The predominance of
strong initial syllables in the English vocabulary. Computer
Speech and Language, 2, 133–142.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D. , & van Donselaar, W. (1997). Prosody
in the comprehension of spoken language: A literature review. Language and Speech, 40, 141–201.
Dilley, L., Mattys, S. L., & Vinke, L. (2010). Potent prosody:
Comparing the effects of distal prosody, proximal prosody,
and semantic context on word segmentation. Journal of
Memory and Language, 63, 274–294.
Dilley, L., & McAuley, J. D. (2008). Distal prosodic context
affects word segmentation and lexical processing. Journal
of Memory and Language, 59, 291–311.
Dilley, L. C., & Pitt, M. A. (2010). Altering context speech
rate can cause words to appear or disappear. Psychological
Science, 21, 1664–1670.
Guenther, F., & Micci Barreca, D. (1997). Neural models
for flexible control of redundant systems. In P. Morasso
and V. Sanguineti (eds.), Self-organization, Computational
Maps and Motor Control (pp. 383–421). Amsterdam:
Elsevier-North Holland.
Kurumada, C., Brown, M., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (to appear).
Pragmatic interpretation of contrastive prosody: It looks
like speech adaptation. Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Lehiste, I. (1977). Isochrony reconsidered. Journal of Phonetics, 5, 253–263.
Moulines, E., & Charpentier, F. (1990). Pitch-synchronous
waveform processing techniques for text-to-speech synthesis using diphones. Speech Communication, 9, 666–688.
Niebuhr, O. (2009). F0-based rhythm effects on the perception of local syllable prominence. Phonetica, 66, 95–112.
Pierrehumbert, J.(2000). Tonal elements and their alignment.
In M. Horne (ed.), Prosody: Theory and experiment (pp.
11–36). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632–1634.
Thomassen, J. M.(1982). Melodic accent: Experiments and a
tentative model. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 71, 1596–1605.
Wolpert, D. M., Gharamani, Z., & Jordan, M. I. (1995). An
internal model for sensorimotor integration. Science, 269,
1880–1882.
Woodrow, H.(1911). The role of pitch in rhythm. Psychological Review, 18, 54–77.

1385

