UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling the Influence of Cognitive Fluency and Stereotype Threat on the Processing of
Implicit Attitudes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5h52z59c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Quek, Boon-Kiat
Ortony, Andrew

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling the Influence of Cognitive Fluency and Stereotype Threat
on the Processing of Implicit Attitudes
Boon-Kiat Quek (boonkiat.quek@northwestern.edu)
Andrew Ortony (ortony@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA, and
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

Abstract
Studies reveal that the processing of implicit attitudes could
be affected by individual differences in cognitive fluency, as
well as by the presence of stereotype threat induced when
subjects were primed with negative prejudices about their
own social group. Using a previously proposed computational
model of human performance on the Implicit Association
Test, we examine possible processing mechanisms in which
cognitive fluency and stereotype threat could influence the
processing of implicit attitudes. Our goal is to extend the
model to provide a cohesive and computationally plausible
account for these effects; this is achieved by manipulating
several model parameters that are analogous to human cognitive ability (in terms of processing speed and information
retention ability) and shifts in confidence criteria for decisionmaking.
Keywords: Implicit attitudes; cognitive ability; simulation;
localist-connectionist networks.

Introduction
Implicit attitudes are generally assumed to underlie people’s
thoughs, actions, choices and behavior (Greenwald & Banaji,
1995). Understanding how such attitudes are processed might
therefore provide some insight about why people behave in the
way they do. Some ways in which such processes could be investigated include affective priming (Fazio, Sanbonmatsu,

Powell & Kardes, 1986) and the Implicit Association Test
(IAT; Greenwald, McGhee & Schwartz, 1998). The IAT
was designed to assess automatic associations between concepts in memory. It relies on a simple two-choice response
time paradigm which measures the time taken by subjects to
classify sequentially presented input stimuli (words or images) into one of two composite categories, each comprising
a target concept (e.g., flower, insect) paired with an attribute
concept (e.g., pleasant, unpleasant). Response latencies are
expectedly shorter when targets are paired with compatible
attributes (e.g., “flower or pleasant”, “insect or unpleasant”), and longer when paired with incompatible attributes
(e.g., “flower or unpleasant”, “insect or pleasant”). The difference in mean response times between compatible and
incompatible categories is known as the IAT effect, and is
taken as the relative preference for one target over another.
Despite its wide application, many issues concerning the
construct validity of the IAT have been raised (e.g., De
Houwer, Teige-Mocigemba, Spruyt & Moors, 2009; Mierke
& Klauer, 2003). Apart from automatic associations, performance on the IAT seems to also depend on various other
factors, such as stimulus familiarity (Ottaway, Hayden &
Oakes, 2001), concept saliency (Rothermund & Wentura,

2004), and extra-personal knowledge about prevailing cultural or societal norms (Karpinski & Hilton, 2001).
Furthermore, several anomalous effects have also been observed. In a recent review, De Houwer, Teige-Mocigemba,
Spruyt and Moors (2009) suggested that the processing of
implicit attitudes could be influenced by differences in cognitive ability, citing McFarland and Crouch (2002) who
observed significant correlations between response latencies
and magnitudes of IAT effects, and Hummert, Garstka,
O’Brien, Greenwald and Mellott (2002) who observed that
IAT effects tended to increase with age. Given that processing speed is an important aspect of cognitive ability (Hunt,
1983) and declines with age (Salthouse, 1996), we will expect subjects with lower cognitive abilities (especially with
age-induced decline) to exhibit longer response latencies
across all tasks on the IAT. Why this is associated with larger IAT effects, however, remains to be determined.
Another intriguing aspect of performance on the IAT is
the possible role of stereotype threat. In a number of RaceIATs, Frantz, Cuddy, Burnett, Ray & Hart (2004) consistently observed that White subjects exhibited stronger proWhite IAT effects on the Race-IAT when they were instructed beforehand that the test might expose their racial
prejudices, as compared to other White subjects in control
groups who were not similarly informed. Frantz et al. suggested that being told beforehand of the actual purpose of
the Race-IAT would present a stereotype threat experience
(Steele & Aronson, 1995) to the informed subjects, where
knowledge of the test’s purpose might induce anxiety over
the risk of confirming negative stereotypes about the racial
attitudes that people in their social group are often presumed
to endorse (e.g., being pro-White or anti-Black). Thus, we
would expect subjects informed of the test’s purpose to have
a greater interest in positive self-presentation and hence
stronger motivation to respond in a more egalitarian manner
(Frantz et al., 2004). Ironically, attempts to avoid the negative stereotype appeared to interfere with performance on
the Race-IAT, producing a stronger pro-White IAT effect
instead of reducing it. However, no suggestions were provided to explain how such task interference might have
taken place, nor the manner in which strategies for coping
with the stereotype threat experience might have backfired.
Both the cognitive fluency effect and the stereotype threat
effect are noteworthy because they have important implications for our understanding of the nature of information
processing that underlie performance on the IAT. In this
paper, we examine some of these implications, and propose

2204

Faces: AfricanAmericans
Response Generator

Associative
Network
“Pleasant”
Words:
happy, wonderful,
joy, peace, love,
glorious, pleasure,
laughter, good

Concept:
POS

Concept:
AfricanAmerican

Association strengths
“Unpleasant”
Words:
evil, horrible, agony,
terrible, hurt, awful,
bad, failure, nasty

Concept:
NEG

Concept:
EuropeanAmerican

Signal
Left

CueL
(press-left)

stimulationL

consummationL
excitationL

TendencyL
(press-left)

IAT Task
Mapper

Signal
Right

ActionL
(press-left)

mutual inhibition

CueR
(press-right)

stimulationR

TendencyR
(press-right)

excitationR

Response:
press-left
OR
press-right

ActionR
(press-right)

consummationR

Faces: EuropeanAmericans

Figure 1. Network model for simulating IAT performance (Quek & Ortony, 2011)

a cohesive information processing account of these two effects, by means of a previously proposed computational
model of implicit task performance on the IAT (Quek &
Ortony, 2011). Our approach is to replicate the observed
effects in simulations by manipulating model parameters
that provide analogs for human cognitive ability and confidence criteria for decision-making. The first simulation
allows us to explore how differences in cognitive fluency
affect response latencies, as well as allowing us to explain
the causes of the larger IAT effects. In the second simulations we examine plausible mechanisms behind how certain
actions taken by subjects to cope with the stereotype threat
would ironically exacerbate IAT effects instead of reducing
them. This, as we discuss, has implications for the effortful
control or influence over performance on the IAT.

Model Overview
In this section, we provide a brief overview of the proposed
computational model; more details can be found in Quek &
Ortony (2011). The model employs a spreading activation
algorithm over a localist-connectionist network (e.g., Page,
2000) to emulate multiple processing pathways from the
visual perception of a stimulus (i.e., a word or image) to the
automatic activation of associated concepts in memory and
motor responses. Nodes in the network represent concepts
while edges or connections represent associations between
them. Propagation of activation through the network is governed by the following rule:
xi (k + 1) = (1 − δ ) xi (k ) + α ∑ x j (k ) ⋅ w j,i (k ) ,
(1)
ε j,i∈E
where xi is the activation level of a node vi , wj,i is the weight
of the connection εj,i from a node vj to vi , E is the set of all
edges, α is the propagation gain and δ is a decay parameter
that reduces activation over time. In each time step k, activation spreads to vi from each neighbor vj at a rate proportional
to the weight wj,i of the connection εj,i between them.
Virtual subjects are each represented by a network of the
topology described in Figure 1. The Associative Network
contains nodes representing the target concepts AFRICANAMERICAN (AA) and EUROPEAN-AMERICAN (EA), generalized

concepts for positivity (POS) and negativity (NEG), input
stimuli such as words belonging to the semantic fields
pleasant and unpleasant (e.g., happy, wonderful, joy, evil,
horrible, hurt), and pictures of European-American and African-American individuals. Connections between these
concepts, for instance, EA↔POS, EA↔NEG, AA↔POS, and
AA↔NEG represent implicit associations between them. As
an example, positive attitudes towards AA can be represented as excitatory AA↔POS or inhibitory AA↔NEG
associations, or both, such that activation of AA will excite
POS but inhibit NEG.
The Task Mapper dynamically transmits activation accumulated from target concepts and evaluative attributes to
nodes cueL and cueR indicating that a left or right key-press
is required. If the current task requires a right response for
“European-American or pleasant”, the Task Mapper routes
both POS and EA to cueR. These connections remain active
throughout the task block but are reconfigured prior to each
subsequent task block (see Quek & Ortony, 2011, Figure 2).
The Response Generator is a network-based instantiation
of the cue-tendency-action model (CTA; Revelle, 1986) of
the dynamic interactions between conflicting tendencies and
competing actions. Using CTA as a template, two responsegenerating pathways (for the left and right key-presses) are
instantiated. Activated cues stimulate tendency nodes that in
turn excite the left and right motor response nodes. When
either actionL or actionR exceeds a response threshold xthres
(set to 1.0 by default), it is taken as the winning action.
The interactions between the above representations occur
in the form of excitations and inhibitions between all input
stimuli to motor response propagation pathways. For example, in a task block requiring a left key-press for “EuropeanAmerican or pleasant” stimuli and a right response for “African-American or unpleasant” stimuli, a picture of a
European-American individual would activate EA, and activation will be transmitted to cueL. However, if the network
is configured with a strong EA↔NEG connection, activation
will also be transmitted to cueR, competing with cueL. This
reduces the rate that activation accumulates in the left response node, and thus a longer time is required for it to
reach the response threshold.

2205

Propagation Gain vs. Response
Time on Compatible Tasks
2500
2000
1500
1000
500

1200

3000

2

R = 0.994

0

Propagation Gain vs. IAT Effect

‐1.00

y = 168x

2500
2000
1500
1000

0.1 0.2
0.3 0.4
Propagation Gain

0.5

y = 51.4x

1000

2

R = 0.951

800
600
400
200

500

0

0
0.0

‐1.05

2

R = 0.987

IAT Effect (ms)

‐0.982

y = 117x

Response Time (ms)

Response Time (ms)

3000

Propagation Gain vs. Response
Time on Incompatible Tasks

0.0

0.1
0.2 0.3
0.4
Propagation Gain

0.5

0.0

0.1 0.2
0.3 0.4
Propagation Gain

0.5

Figure 2. Distributions of response latencies on compatible and incompatible task blocks and corresponding IAT effects with variations in propagation gain α for 250 virtual subjects configured with a relative preference for one target concept over the other.

Simulating the IAT
When simulating the IAT, each virtual subject’s network
is initialized with a set of associative strength configurations, and put through all task blocks. On each trial, the
virtual subject is presented with a verbal or pictorial stimulus and the input node corresponding to the stimulus is set
with an activation of 1.0. The number of iterations taken to
produce a response (i.e., when the activation level of either
the left or right response node reaches its threshold) is recorded. This quantity is transformed by a scaling factor into
mean response times (in milliseconds) of approximately the
same magnitudes as those observed in human subjects (e.g.,
Greenwald et al., 1998; Klauer, Voss, Schmitz & TeigeMocigemba, 2007). The IAT effect is then taken to be the
difference between mean response times in the two combined task blocks.

Modeling Cognitive Fluency Effects
Cognitive ability and intelligence are often considered to be
closely related to information processing speed (e.g., Lansman, Donalson, Hunt & Yantis, 1982; Hunt, 1983). In
addition, the ability to retain information during the execution of cognitive operations is another important aspect
(Salthouse, 1996). An inability to retain products from earlier processing operations due to information decay or
displacement would impair problem solving performance
especially when processing speed is slow. Thus, information
needed for later processing stages might be partially lost by
the time it is needed, in which case additional time would be
required to reprocess it.
To the extent that our computational model could emulate
information processing on the IAT, it should be capable of
replicating both the increase in response latency and the
corresponding increase in IAT effect that arises with a reduction in cognitive ability. This can be achieved by
manipulating both the parameters for propagation gain α and
propagation decay δ in Equation (1), which governs the rate
at which activation is propagated through the network, and

the rate at which activation is reduced or lost in the absence
of excitatory inputs, respectively. Both of these parameters
can be considered as the model’s analog for the aforementioned aspects of general cognitive ability that relate to
information processing and retention.
To examine the effect of variations in the propagation
gain α on response latencies and IAT scores, we generated
instances of the network model for a population (N = 250)
of virtual subjects using the associative strength configuration in which EA↔POS and AA↔NEG were set to 0.5 (i.e.,
excitatory), while AA↔POS and EA↔NEG were set to -0.5
(i.e., inhibitory), representing individuals with positive attitudes towards EA and negative attitudes towards AA. As
shown in Quek & Ortony (2011), this configuration produces an IAT effect in favor of EA. As in earlier simulations,
weights in the network were randomly perturbed with Gaussian noise of ~N(0, 0.12), to ensure inter- and intra-subject
variability. Each virtual subject’s network was then configured with a random value of α (within a reasonable range),
and put through all five standard IAT tasks.
The distributions of response latencies on both compatible
and incompatible task blocks and the corresponding IAT
effects in Figure 2 reveal a distinct inverse relationship between the propagation gain α and the response latencies, as
well as the magnitude of the simulated IAT effects. While
smaller values of α resulted in longer response latencies on
both the compatible and incompatible task blocks, and
stronger IAT effects, the converse is true for larger values of
α. From the different coefficients of curve-fitting indicated
in the figure, we can infer that the increase in magnitude of
the IAT effect with a reduction in α is due to a divergence
between the response latencies of the two task blocks.
We repeated the above simulation by varying the propagation decay parameter δ while keeping the propagation
gain α at its default value. Plots of response latencies and
IAT effects with respect to the decay parameter δ are shown
in Figure 3. The scatter plots reveal a direct relationship
between δ and the response latencies, and magnitudes of the
IAT effects. Faster rates of information decay, as implied by
higher values of δ not only resulted in longer response times

2206

3.13x

750

1800

2

R = 0.589

y = 800e

Response Time (ms)

Response Time (ms)

y = 549e

Propagation Decay vs. Response
Time on Incompatible Tasks

700
650
600
550
500

11.5x

Propagation Decay vs. IAT Effect
1200

2

R = 0.529

1600
1400
1200
1000
800

0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
Propagation Decay

26.6x

2

R = 0.628

800
600
400
200

600
0

y = 226e

1000
IAT Effect (ms)

800

Propagation Decay vs. Response
Time on Compatible Tasks

0
0

0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
Propagation Decay

0

0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
Propagation Decay

Figure 3. Distributions of response latencies on compatible and incompatible task blocks and corresponding IAT effects with variations in the propagation decay δ for 250 virtual subjects configured with a relative preference for one target concept over the other.

on both the compatible and incompatible task blocks, but
also produced stronger IAT effects. The converse is true for
smaller values of δ which, if taken to imply better information retention ability, results in better overall performance
on the IAT. As in the case of propagation gain, the larger
IAT effects with reduction in information retention is due to
a divergence between the response latencies of the two task
blocks, as inferred from their curve-fitted coefficients.
The above simulations demonstrate the efficacy of the
network model in replicating cognitive fluency effects on
the IAT, namely that a lower propagation gain or higher
decay rate (both indicative of lower cognitive ability) in the
model would lead to higher response latencies on both compatible and incompatible tasks, and stronger IAT effects.
Since both response latencies and IAT effect magnitudes
vary inversely with propagation gain, the first simulation
shows consistency with the observed correlation between
response latencies and IAT effect magnitudes reported in
McFarland and Crouch (2002). Higher values of the decay
parameter δ, corresponding to a higher rate at which activation in nodes are leaked or lost over time, appear to impair
virtual subjects’ efficiency and performance on the tests—
an observation consistent with Salthouse (1996).

Modeling Stereotype Threat Effects
The anxiety resulting from stereotype threat could potentially interfere with performance in various ways, for
instance, via both automatic and strategic processes (Beck &
Clark, 1997), and causing a diversion of resources from the
task, heightened self-consciousness, or over-cautiousness
(Steele & Aronson, 1995). Diversion of resources from taskrelevant to threat-relevant information processing translates
to a reduction in the overall information processing
throughput on the task. A slowdown in information processing might even be effortful (Gazzaley, Cooney, McEvoy,
Knight & D’Esposito, 2005). Using our model as an exploratory framework, this would be analogous to a reduction
in the propagation gain α of the network model, or suppression (i.e., negative bias) of activation on all nodes in the

network, or both. In the case of the former, a reduction in
propagation gain would lead to an increase in the amount of
time required for every unit increase in a node’s activation.
In the latter, the negative bias due to the suppression would
need to be countered before activation can be accumulated
to a level that approaches the threshold for a key-press response. The effect is the same as directly increasing the
response activation threshold itself.
This brings us to the second possible coping mechanism,
namely the deliberate act of exercising greater caution in the
completion of the tasks, wherein subjects might require of
themselves a higher degree of confidence before committing
to a response. This explanation is similar in spirit to Brendl,
Markman, and Messner’s (2001) suggestion that subjects
might increase their response activation thresholds in response to an increase in the perceived difficulty of the task
(i.e., with tasks in the incompatible task blocks being more
difficult or demanding than those in other task blocks). In
addition, the increase in confidence criteria is consistent
with Beck and Clark’s (1997) proposal that anxiety activates
reflective modes of thinking. In our terms, the process of
exercising additional caution or adopting more stringent
response criteria is analogous to an upward shift in xthres,
which is the level of activation that actionL or actionR must
reach before a motor action is performed.
We have already shown in the previous section that a decrease in propagation gain would be accompanied by longer
response latencies as well as more pronounced IAT effects
(see Figure 2). Without having to repeat this simulation, the
same reasoning in explaining the relationship between cognitive fluency and performance on the IAT can be applied
here to account for the increase in IAT effects due to slowdowns in information processing (as a result of task interference). Such reductions in the rate of information processing
(or propagation gain, as shown in Figure 2) would have resulted in stronger IAT effects, confirming the observations
in Frantz et al. (2004).
Our next and remaining task is to examine the impact that
increasing the response threshold xthres would have on IAT
performance. So far, xthres has been set to the maximum pos-

2207

0.186

600
500
400
300

0.271

y = 842x

200
0.0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Response Threshold

Response Threshold vs. IAT Effect

1000

2

R = 0.941

Response Time (ms)

Response Time (ms)

y = 556x

Response Threshold vs. Response
Time on Incompatible Tasks

1.0

400

2

0.553

R = 0.926

800

y = 299x

IAT Effect (ms)

700

Response Threshold vs. Response
Time on Compatible Tasks

600

300
200

400

100

200

0
0.0

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Response Threshold

1.0

2

R = 0.894

0.0

0.2 0.4
0.6 0.8
Response Threshold

1.0

Figure 4. Distributions of response latencies on compatible and incompatible task blocks and corresponding IAT effects with variations in response threshold xthres for 250 virtual subjects configured with a relative preference for one target concept over the other.

sible activation level of 1.0, but in this simulation, its value
is varied within a reasonable range to determine how it affects response latencies on the combined tasks and the
corresponding IAT scores. We begin by generating a population of 250 virtual subjects and initializing them with the
same associative strengths as in the previous simulation,
namely with EA↔POS and AA↔NEG set to 0.5 while AA↔POS
and EA↔NEG were set to -0.5. Connections in each virtual
subject’s network were then randomly perturbed with Gaussian noise, before being put through all five standard tasks
on the simulated Race-IAT.
Simulated response latencies on both the compatible and
incompatible task blocks, and corresponding IAT effects are
shown in Figure 4. We observe that higher response thresholds resulted in longer response latencies on both combined
task blocks, as well as more pronounced IAT effects. In addition, the increase in response threshold is accompanied by
higher variance in both response latencies and IAT effect.
Thus, to the extent that an increase in the response activation threshold can be interpreted as the coping strategy of
exercising caution or raising the confidence criterion, such a
strategy could be responsible for a portion of the increase in
IAT effect, as predicted by the simulation.

Discussion
The fact that cognitive ability has a moderating effect on
IAT performance has important implications for the validity
of the IAT as a measure of the automatic associations and
not some other construct. Suppose two subjects have IAT
effect scores in the same direction but with different magnitudes. The fact that one of them has an IAT effect with a
larger magnitude than the other would not necessarily imply
that he or she definitely endorses a stronger positive implicit
attitude towards the favored target concept, or a stronger
negative implicit attitude towards the less preferred target
concept, since the larger IAT effect could be due to differences (e.g., a reduction) in cognitive ability. In the case of
this simulation, the associative strength configurations in all

250 subjects were the same (apart from their superposed
random perturbations), yet they had a wide distribution of
response latencies and IAT effects through just the manipulation of the processing gain and decay rate. For this reason,
other means of calculating IAT effects, such as standardizing IAT scores with the “improved scoring algorithm”
(Greenwald, Nosek & Banaji, 2003) should be utilized if a
reasonable between-subject comparison is desired, although
there is continued debate on this matter (cf. Blanton, Jaccard, Gonzales & Christie, 2006; Nosek & Sriram, 2006).
The computational model that we have employed provides some insight about reactions or strategies that might
be adopted by subjects during the IAT to cope with stereotype threat. The idea that subjects actually engage in the
effortful control of information processing (through either
enhancement or suppression) is supported by empirical evidence from fMRI and EEG studies (Gazzaley, Cooney,
McEvoy, Knight & D’Esposito, 2005). Furthermore, the
ability to exercise greater caution in terms of focusing attentional resources and raising the response threshold or
confidence criterion (Treisman & Faulkner, 1984; Petrusic
& Baranski, 2009) is equally plausible, especially if the
presence of stereotype threat increases the perceived difficulty of the tasks (cf. Brendl, Markman & Messner, 2001).
The remaining research question lies in clarifying the nature
of these mechanisms through experiment involving human
subjects, especially with the advent of neuro-imaging techniques (e.g., Gazzaley et al., 2005; Stanley, Phelps &
Banaji, 2008).

Conclusion
Using a computational model of performance on the IAT,
we examined the influence that cognitive fluency, and
strategies for coping with stereotype threat could have on
the processing of implicit attitudes. By varying several critical model parameters that are analogous to human cognitive
ability (such as processing speed and information retention
ability), the model accounts for the correlation between

2208

longer response latencies and IAT effects that arises with
lower cognitive ability. Furthermore, a reduction in information processing, and the adoption of a more conservative
response criterion (which was modeled as shifts in response
thresholds) was found capable of reproducing the exacerbated IAT effects that were empirically observed when
stereotype threat was present.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback and suggestions. B.-K. Quek is supported by
a postdoctoral fellowship from the Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.

References
Beck, A. T., Clark, D. A. (1997). An information processing
model of anxiety: Automatic and strategic processes. Behavior Research and Therapy, 35, 49–58.
Blanton, H., Jaccard, J., Gonzales, P. M., & Christie, C. (2006).
Decoding the Implicit Association Test: Implications for criterion prediction. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 42, 192–212.
Brendl, C. M., Markman, A. B., & Messner, C. (2001). How do
indirect measures of evaluation work? Evaluating the inference of prejudice in the Implicit Association Test. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 760–773.
De Houwer, J., Teige-Mocigemba, S., Spruyt, A., & Moors, A.
(2009). Implicit measures: A normative analysis and review.
Psychological Bulletin, 135, 347–368.
Fazio, R. H., Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Powell, M. C., & Kardes, F.
R. (1986). On the automatic activation of attitudes. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 229–238.
Frantz, C. M., Cuddy, A. J. C., Burnett, M., Ray, H., & Hart, A.
(2004). A threat in the computer: The Race Implicit Association Test as a stereotype threat experience. Personality and
Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1611–1624.
Gazzaley, A., Cooney, J. W., McEvoy, K., Knight, R. T.,
D’Esposito, M. (2005). Top-down enhancement and suppression of the magnitude and speed of neural activity.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 507–517.
Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (1995). Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem and stereotypes. Psychological
Review, 102, 4–27.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998).
Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: The
Implicit Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 1464–1480.
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2003). Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: I. An
improved scoring algorithm. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 197–216.
Hummert, M. L., Garstka, T. A., O’Brien, L. T., Greenwald, A.
G., & Mellott, D. S. (2002). Using the Implicit Association
Test to measure age differences in implicit social cognitions.
Psychology and Aging, 17, 482-495.
Hunt, E. (1983). On the nature of intelligence. Science, New
Series, 219, 141 - 146.

Karpinski, A., & Hilton, J. L. (2001). Attitudes and the Implicit
Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 774–788.
Klauer, K. C., Voss, A., Schmitz, F., & Teige-Mocigemba, S.
(2007). Process components of the Implicit Association Test:
A diffusion-model analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 353–368.
Lansman, M., Donaldson, G., Hunt, E., Yantis, S. (1982). Ability factors and cognitive processes. Intelligence, 6, 347–386.
McFarland, S. G., & Crouch, Z. (2002). A cognitive skill confound on the Implicit Association Test. Social Cognition, 20,
483–510.
Mierke, J., & Klauer, K. C. (2003). Method-specific variance in
the Implicit Association Test. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 85, 1180–1192.
Nosek, B. A., & Sriram, N. (2007). Faulty assumptions: A
comment on Blanton, Jaccard, Gonzales and Christie (2006).
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 393–398.
Ottaway, S. A., Hayden, D. C., & Oakes, M. A. (2001). Implicit attitudes and racism: Effects of word familiarity and
frequency on the implicit association test. Social Cognition,
19, 97–144.
Page, M. (2000). Connectionist modeling in psychology: A
localist manifesto. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 443–
512.
Petrusic, W. M., & Baranski, J. V. (2009). Probability assessment with response times and confidence in perception and
knowledge. Acta Psychologica, 130, 103–114.
Quek, B.-K., & Ortony, A. (2011). Modeling underlying
mechanisms of the Implicit Association Test. In L. Carlson,
C. Hoelscher, & T.F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp.1330–1335). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Revelle, W. (1986). Motivation and efficiency of cognitive
performance. In D. R. Brown & J. Veroff (Eds.), Frontiers of
Motivational Psychology: Essays in honor of J. W. Atkinson.
Berlin: Springer.
Rothermund, K., & Wentura, D. (2004). Underlying processes
in the Implicit Association Test: Dissociating salience from
associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 133, 139–
165.
Salthouse, T. A. (1996). The processing-speed theory of adult
age differences in cognition. Psychological Review, 103,
403–428.
Stanley, D., Phelps, E., & Banaji, M. (2008). The neural basis
of implicit attitudes. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 17, 164–170.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the
intellectual test performance of African-Americans. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 797-811.
Treisman, M., & Faulkner, A. (1984). The setting and maintenance of criteria representing levels of confidence. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 10, 119–139.

2209

