UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling individual differences in socioeconomic game playing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/44g005bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Asher, Derrik
Zhang, Shunan
Zaldivar, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling individual differences in socioeconomic game playing
Derrik E. Asher1 , Shunan Zhang1 , Andrew Zaldivar1 , Michael D. Lee1 and Jeffrey L. Krichmar1,2
1 Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine
2 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine
Abstract

and conflict with people (Asher, Zaldivar, Barton, Brewer, &
Krichmar, submitted).

Game theory has been useful for understanding risk-taking and
cooperative behavior. In the present study, subjects played the
Hawk-Dove game with simulated and embodied (robotic) neural agents which used a neurobiologically plausible model of
action selection and adaptive behaviors. Subjects had their
serotonin levels temporarily altered through acute tryptophan
depletion (ATD). The traditional assumption for subject data
from Game-theory-ATD or human robot interaction (HRI)
studies is that all participants come from the same underlying
distribution or same group. We used probabilistic graphical
models in order to determine potential sub-group affiliations
based on the subjects’ responses while playing the Hawk-Dove
game. The results from the models indicate sub-groups within
a subject population exist. We find that two-group, one that
tends toward cooperation and the other that tends toward aggression, best describes the effect of subject behavior in response to ATD and embodiment.
Keywords: Adaptive systems; Human robot interaction;
Neurotransmitters; Cognitive Robotics; Bayesian inference;
Graphical models; Individual Differences.

Subjects played a series of Hawk-Dove games against
robotic and simulated agents. The effects of serotonergic levels on adaptive behavior in these games were tested by simulating serotonergic lesions in the neural agent, which results
in a more aggressive agent, or lowering the CNS serotonin
levels of people through a dietary manipulation called acute
tryptophan depletion (ATD), which has been shown to decrease cooperation and lower harm-aversion (Crockett, Clark,
Tabibnia, Lieberman, & Robbins, 2008 ; Wood, Rilling, Sanfey, Bhagwagar, & Rogers, 2006).
A major finding of the study was that people changed their
overall strategies in response to changes in the neural agents
state. Subjects tended to deploy either Tit-For-Tat (T4T) or
Win-Stay, Lose-Shift (WSLS) strategies during game play.
In a T4T strategy, a subject copies the most recent move of
the opposing player. In a WSLS strategy, a subject selects the
same action that led to a positive payoff in the previous game
(Win-Stay), or a different action from the previous game if
that action led to zero or negative payoff (Lose-Shift). When
playing against a more aggressive neural agent, which had
a lesion to its serotonergic system, subjects switched from a
Win-Stay, Lose-Shift (WSLS) strategy to a Tit-For-Tat (T4T)
strategy. This change in strategy was independent of whether
the neural agent was a robot or a computer simulation, and
independent of subject tryptophan levels.

Introduction
Economic game theory has had a long, productive history of
predicting and describing human behavior in cooperative and
competitive situations (Maynard Smith, 1982 ; Nowak, Page,
& Sigmund, 2000 ; Skyrms, 2001). The theory of games has
also been used to illuminate the neural basis of economic and
social decision-making (Lee, 2008 ; Rilling & Sanfey, 2011).
However, these studies typically have people play against opponents with set strategies and predictable behavior. Moreover, in most of these studies, subjects are making decisions
while sitting in front of an antiseptic computer screen. The
present study addresses these issues by having subjects play
a socioeconomic game, known as Hawk-Dove, against an autonomous robot with the ability to adapt its behavior to the
game situation.
Neuromodulatory systems, such as dopamine and serotonin, appear to be applicable to decision-making in social
situations. The serotonergic (5-HT) and dopaminergic (DA)
systems oppose each other with respect to predicting punishment (5-HT) versus predicting reward (DA) (Boureau &
Dayan, 2011).
We developed a computational model of neuromodulation
and action selection based on the assumptions, that dopamine
levels are related to the expected reward of an action, and
serotonin levels are related to the expected cost or risk of an
action (Asher, Zaldivar, & Krichmar, 2010 ; Zaldivar, Asher,
& Krichmar, 2010). The model of neuromodulation and action selection demonstrated the ability to adapt to the game
situation and its opponent’s strategy. The model was embedded in both simulated and embodied neural agents to investigate reciprocal social interactions in games of cooperation

In the present study, we test whether embodiment and lowering serotonin has an effect on individual subject behavior
during Hawk-Dove game playing by using hierarchical latent
mixture models with Bayesian inference. This framework for
developing and evaluating structured cognition offers a principled and comprehensive approach for modeling individual
differences and their use of cognitive strategies (Lee, 2008 ;
Lee, Zhang, Munro, & Steyvers, 2011). The hierarchical nature of the models allows variation in the parameters controlling cognitive processes across individuals to be accommodated. We find that two categories of subjects, one that tends
to be more aggressive and one that tends to be more cooperative, best describes subject behavior in response to ATD and
embodiment.

Experiment
Subjects
Eight subjects (three female; mean age: 26.6 years; standard
deviation of age: 3.8 years) participated in this study.

90

Hawk-Dove Game

was drawn to determine baseline blood plasma tryptophan
levels. Following the blood draw, subjects ingested one of
the mixture drinks (either Tryp+ or Tryp-). A second blood
sample was drawn approximately 5 hours after ingestion of
the mixture to confirm reduction (Tryp- condition) or maintenance (Tryp+ condition) of blood plasma tryptophan levels.
Roughly 5.5 hours after consumption of the mixture, human
subjects then participated in a series of Hawk-Dove games
against a neural agent.

The Hawk-Dove game consisted of a human and a neural
agent choosing a single action in response to a territory of
interest (TOI). The Hawk-Dove game, which is similar to
Prisoner’s Dilemma, was chosen because it is amenable to a
physical instantiation with a robot. Moreover, it has an additional strategic element since choices are different depending
on who arrives at the TOI first. At the start of the game, the
TOI and the human subjects’ location were randomly placed
on a playing grid. The current location of the robot was used
as a starting position. The player who arrived at the neutral
TOI first had the opportunity to take one of two possible actions: Escalate (i.e. an aggressive, confrontational tactic) or
Display (i.e. a nonviolent, cooperative tactic). The player
who arrived second responded with one of the two aforementioned actions. After each game, a payoff was calculated. If
both players chose Escalate, they received a penalty that is
set before the game. If both players chose Display, they split
the value of the TOI resource. If one player chose Escalate
and the other chose Display, the player who chose Escalate
received the entire value of the resource.
We also developed a simulated variant of the Hawk-Dove
game, where subjects played against a robot icon on an interactive screen. The same neural model used for the real
robot dictated the control of the robots icon and its decisionmaking. This simulated setup allowed us to judge whether
physical embodiment had an effect on human behavior.

Experimental Conditions and Data
We were interested in two experimental conditions per subject. In the Simulation vs. Robot condition, subjects would
play games against a computer agent or against the robot; In
the Tryp+ vs. Tryp- condition, subjects would play games
against a neural agent with an intact simulated neuromodulatory system or a simulated lesion of its serotonergic system.
The Escalate or Display decisions for each game were collected for both the subject and neural agent for all games in
each condition. The dependent variables of interest are the
percentage of games per condition a subject chose the Escalate tactic and the use of either the Tit-For-Tat (T4T) or WinStay, Lose-Shift (WSLS) strategies. Human subjects played
20 games of Hawk-Dove per condition. For detailed experimental conditions, see Asher et al. (submitted).

Data Analysis

Acute Tryptophan Depletion (ATD)

Bayesian Hierarchical Model Approach

ATD was used to temporarily alter the levels of serotonin
in the brain via a decrease in blood plasma tryptophan, the
amino acid precursor to serotonin. Because free blood plasma
tryptophan levels, and the corresponding serotonin levels in
the brain, vary with the amount of dietary tryptophan and the
rate of protein synthesis, these levels can be altered by a low
protein diet in combination with a specially prepared ‘protein
shake’. This protein shake contains an amino acid load (lacking tryptophan), which has two effects. First, it stimulates
protein synthesis in the liver, which uses up blood plasma
tryptophan. Second, the amino acids that are given in the protein shake compete with tryptophan for transport across the
blood-brain barrier, which restricts entry of tryptophan into
the brain and leads to lower levels of serotonin in the brain
(e.g. Bell, Hood, & Nutt, 2005 ; Hood, Bell, & Nutt, 2005).

To investigate the influences of lowering serotonin levels and
of agent embodiment on individual decision-making, we used
hierarchical latent mixture models with Bayesian inference.
Hierarchical Bayesian inference has been demonstrated as a
flexible and interpretable way of extending simple models of
cognitive processes (e.g. Lee, 2008 ; Rouder, Lu, Speckman,
Sun, & Jiang, 2005 ; Wetzels, Vandekerckhove, Tuerlinckx,
& Wagenmakers, 2010). The hierarchical nature of the models allows variation in the parameters controlling cognitive
processes across individuals to be accommodated. The latent
mixture nature of the models allows the use of entirely different cognitive strategies across individuals to be modeled.
Formally, we recast the cognitive models as probabilistic graphical models and used Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods for computational Bayesian inference.
This approach to Bayesian inference over richly-structured
cognitive models has been applied to data covering a diverse
set of cognitive skills. For example, Bayesian graphical models have been used to make inferences about the use of strategies, such as WSLS or T4T, from sequences of choice data in
bandit problems and other sequential decision-making tasks
(e.g. Lee et al., 2011 ; Newell & Lee, 2011).
Using hierarchical latent mixture models, we addressed the
question of how ATD and embodiment can affect subjects’
decisions to compete (i.e., escalate) or cooperate (i.e., display). We modeled the probability of escalating through a
logistic model. Specifically, the logit of the probability of es-

General Procedures
In a double-blind study, human subjects were randomly assigned on the first experimental day to receive either the control mixture (Tryp+) with tryptophan or the mixture without
tryptophan (Tryp-). The mixtures were administered as a specially prepared protein shake. The Tryp+ and Tryp- shakes
contained 16 and 15 amino acids respectively.
Each subject then returned to participate in the other condition at least seven days later to ensure the return to baseline
blood plasma tryptophan levels between experimental days.
On the morning of each experimental day, a blood sample

91

µφ

predictors of interest (ATD and embodiment). In total we
built six graphical models for every decision-making and predictor pair. In this section, we show a concrete example of
how we model the relationship between escalation and ATD;
all other models were built along a similar line.
As shown in Figure 1, nodes represent variables of interest, and the graph structure is used to indicate dependencies
between the variables. Arrows run into nodes from their direct influences (parents). Formally, the model represents the
assumption that, given its parent nodes, each node is independent of all other nodes in the graph except its descendants.
Each subject is assumed to produce data through the same
generative model with different parameters. The plate with i
subjects corresponds to independent replications for all subjects. Each subject is assumed to have their own baseline
of escalation, φi , independently drawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean µφ and variance σφ (termed as hyperparameters). Each subject i is also associated with a latent
group identity, Zi , with Zi = 1 indicating that the subject
comes from a ‘down group’ that shows less escalation decisions with ATD, and Zi = 2 indicating that the subject comes
from an ‘up group’ that shows more escalation decisions with
ATD.
The plate with j conditions corresponds to independent
replications for all experimental conditions. t j is an observed
variable, with t j = 1 indicating the control condition (Tryp+),
and t j = 2 indicating the treatment condition where the subjects received ATD (Tryp-).
In the control condition, random fluctuations around the
baseline are drawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean of
0 and a variance σc . In the ATD condition, the increment
in escalation depends on which group the subject is from.
For example, if subject i is from the ‘up group’, the increment of escalation, denoted by ψuij in the graphical model,
will be drawn from a Gaussian with a positive mean µu and
variance σc and added to the baseline φi . If subject i is from
the ‘down group’, however, the increment ψdij will be drawn
from a Gaussian with a different positive mean µd and variance σc and deducted from the baseline1 .
The probability of escalation for subject i on the kth game
of day j, denoted by θi jk , is determined through the logistic
function by the overall level of escalation. The observed escalation decision of each subject on each game, di jk , is a binary
variable which is assumed to be independent and identically
generated by θi jk through a Bernoulli distribution. Overall,
one would determine the likelihood of the observed data for
all subjects for each combination of the hyperparameters, and
each choice of individual parameters.
We use the conventions of representing continuous variables with circular nodes and discrete variables with square
nodes, and unobserved variables without shading and observed variables with shading, and stochastic variables with

σφ

φi

Zi

tj

θijk

u
ψij

µu

s
ψij

σc

d
ψij

µd

dijk
k games
j conditions
i subjects
Ψuij

∼ Gaussian

µu , σ c

Ψsij ∼ Gaussian 0, σ


c

Ψdij ∼ Gaussian µd , σ

φi ∼ Gaussian

θijk =









µφ , σ φ




c


1
1+exp(−(φi +Ψsij ))
1
1+exp(−(φi +Ψu
ij ))
1
1+exp(−(φi −Ψdij ))

µφ


∼ Gaussian 0, 1


σ φ , σ c ∼ Uniform 0, 1

µu , µd ∼ Gaussian 0, 1 I(0,

∞)


Zi ∼ Bernoulli 0.5
if tj = 1

if tj = 2 and Zi = 2
if tj = 2 and Zi = 1

.

Figure 1: Generic process of escalation or strategy usage under the effect of ATD or embodiment. φ: baseline tendency
of escalation or strategy usage; ψu , ψd and ψs : additive effects of escalation or strategy usage associated with the experimental conditions; t: indicator of experimental condition;
θ: probability of escalation or strategy usage; d: observed escalation decision or strategy usage; Z: latent group indicator;
µφ ,σφ ,µu ,µd ,σc : hyper-parameters of prior distributions. Experimental conditions are either Tryp- vs. Tryp+, or Robot
vs. Sim.


∼ Bernoulli θ
calatingd for
each subject in each condition is assumed to follow a Gaussian distribution defined by its mean and variance
(hyperparameters in the hierarchical model), with the mean
modeled as the sum of the baseline level of escalating for the
subject, and an additive effect associated with ATD. To give
a full account of the data, the hierarchical model is designed
to address individual differences at two levels, the baseline
level, which depends on the subjects, and the additive level,
which depends on the interaction between subjects and experimental conditions. Our justification is that it is possible that
the effect of ATD or embodiment can vary across different
individuals, resulting in either an increase or decrease in the
likelihood of escalating a fight.

The Graphical Model

1 Even

though in theory, ψuij and ψdij could flip in sign following
the way this model is specified, this almost never happened in the
sampling process when the MC chains have converged.

We use graphical models to describe the relationship between
subject decision-making (escalation, T4T and WSLS) and

92

single borders and deterministic variables with double borders. In addition, the plate encloses subsets of the graph that
have independent replications in the model. For example,
the probability of escalation for each subject in each game
is a continuous variable that is not directly observable, but is
determined by the overall level of escalation, therefore it is
represented by a circular, unshaded, double-bordered node.
On the other hand, the binary escalation decision is generated with probability and directly observable, therefore it is
represented by a square, shaded node with a single border.
We built another model that captures the relationship between escalation and the effect of embodiment (Robot vs.
Simulation). There are only two differences from the graphical model shown in Figure 1. First, t j represents embodiment with t1 indicating robot and t2 indicating simulation;
secondly, Zi = 1 indicates the latent group that shows more
escalation when playing against simulation, and Zi = 2 indicate the group that shows more escalation when playing
against robot.
In addition to escalation decisions, we are also interested
in whether general strategies that subjects employed for the
Hawk-Dove game were related to ATD and embodiment.
Similar to the generative model shown in Figure 1, the observed T4T-type (WSLS-type) decisions are Bernoulli variables generated by probabilities of T4T (WSLS) usage, which
are determined by an overall level of T4T (WSLS) usage that
is the sum of a baseline level of usage and additive effect from
ATD or embodiment.

(a) Escalation, Tryptophan

(b) Escalation, Robot

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1
2

4

6

8

2

(c) T4T, Tryptophan

4

6

8

(d) T4T, Robot

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1
2

4

6

8

2

(e) WSLS, Tryptophan
2

1.5

1.5

1

1
4

6

8

6

8

(f) WSLS, Robot

2

2

4

2

4

6

8

.

Figure 2: (a): Estimated group identities based on ATD’s
effect on escalation. Horizontal axis shows subject indices.
Vertical axis shows the posterior mean of the latent variable
Z, with Z = 1 indicating ‘down’ group and Z = 2 indicating ‘up’ group based on the effect of tryptophan depletion.
Red (dark) dots are subjects who were more likely to escalate when tryptophan depleted and green (light) dots are subjects who were less likely to escalate when tryptophan depleted. Error bars show the 95% Bayesian CI of the posterior mean. Gray dots imply ambiguous group identities. (b):
Estimated group identities based on embodiment’s effect on
escalation. Red dots are subjects who were more likely to
escalate when playing against a robot. (c): Estimated group
identities based on ATD’s effect on T4T usage. Red dots indicate more T4T-type decisions when tryptophan depleted. (d):
Estimated group identities based on embodiment’s effect on
T4T usage. Red dots indicate more T4T-type decisions when
playing against a robot. (e)-(f): Estimated group identities on
of the effect of ATD and embodiment on WSLS usage.

Results
Inferring Strategies
All the graphical models were implemented using WinBUGS
which uses MCMC methods. We evaluated all six graphical
models by drawing 1000 posterior samples after a ‘burn-in’
period (early steps of MCMC where samples are not recorded
so that the Markov chain is allowed time to converge) of 100
samples.
The results showed that both serotonin levels and the embodiment of a robot were influential factors in individual subject decision-making (See Figure 2). For example, panel
(a) provides evidence that there are at least two sub-groups
within a subject population with respect to how escalation
may be altered by ATD. Subject 2, 6 and 8 fall in the ‘down’
group, and subject 1, 3, 4, 5 and 7 fall in the ‘up’ group. Panel
(b) shows two sub-groups within a subject population with respect to how escalation may be altered by embodiment. Subject 3, 5 and 6 fall in the ‘down’ group (less escalation when
playing with a robot), while all other subjects fall in the ‘up’
group (more escalation when playing with a robot). Individual differences in strategy usage were also affected by ATD
and embodiment, as shown in Figure 2c through f. For example, Figure 2c shows individual differences in the effect of
ATD on the proportion of T4T-type decisions. The red (dark)
dots are subjects who had more T4T-type decisions when
tryptophan depleted and the green (light) dots are subjects

who had less T4T-type decisions when tryptophan depleted.
In Figure 2d, red (dark) dots represent subjects who had more
T4T-type decisions when playing against robot. Similarly,
Figure 2e and 2f represent individual differences in how ATD
and embodiment affect their usage of WSLS. All conditions
show a tendency that subjects can be categorized into subgroups with regard to how ATD or embodiment may affect
strategy usage.
In general, subgroups are more clear when the effect of
tryptophan depletion rather than the embodiment type is considered. Potential connections of subgroup identities across
conditions for each subject is an interesting point raised here
and will be addressed in future research.

93

Escalation Decisions

Predictions of Behavioral Patterns

T4T Decisions

To check the models’ ability to describe the data accurately,
we examined the posterior predictions of escalation decision
and strategy usage for all subjects in all conditions. The posterior predictive is the prediction about observed data for each
possible combination of parameter values under the model,
where each combination is weighted according to its posterior
probability. Our goal is not game-by-game prediction, rather,
it is the prediction of overall rate of escalation decision and
strategy usage in a specified condition, as captured in Figure
3. The x-axis shows experimental conditions, and the y-axis
shows the proportion of escalation decisions or strategy usage. Each gray line is a subject. The colored (dark) lines
are posterior predictives (summarized in the same way as the
data) for each model, with filled vs. open circles representing
whether subjects were inferred in the ‘up’ or ‘down’ groups
corresponding to the condition (ATD or embodiment). It is
clear that our models were able to capture individual differences and fit the data well, especially for the effect of ATD
and embodiment on escalation and T4T usage. Predictions of
proportions of WSLS-type decisions had larger fluctuations,
but the general pattern of change in WSLS usage associated
with ATD and embodiment were captured.

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

Tryp+

0.4

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

WSLS Decisions

Tryp−

Tryp−

Tryp+

0.3

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5
Tryp−

Tryp+

Robot

Sim

Robot

Sim

Robot

Sim

Figure 3: Predicted escalation rate by the model for all subjects with a comparison to the real data. Tryptophan depleted
and non-depleted condtions labeled as ‘Tryp-’ and ‘Tryp+’.
The broken lines are predictions from the models, with filled
vs. open circles representing subjects who show more escalation when tryptophan depleted vs. subjects who show less
escalation when tryptophan depleted. The solid lines are the
data. Labels of ‘Robot’ and ‘Sim’ indicate whether the game
was played against the robot or the simulation.

Conclusions
In contrast to the results observed in our population analysis
of subject behavior during Hawk-Dove game play (Asher et
al., submitted), we found strong influences of lowering serotonin levels and of agent embodiment on individual decisionmaking by using hierarchical latent mixture models with
Bayesian inference. The results from Figure 2 and Figure 3
show that individual differences likely exist within a subject
population. Specifically, it appears that there are two groups
of subjects within a given population. Our hypothesis is that
within Game-theory-ATD and HRI studies, there exist two
opposing subgroups within any given population of typical
human subjects. These subgroups may exist due to inherent
genetic variation. It is interesting to note that the results from
Game-theory-ATD and HRI studies are mild when considering a single subject group. However, if one considers that
there exist two groups with opposing affects, the results for
these kinds of studies may be significantly more robust.
ATD had a strong effect on subject behavior and this behavior could be categorized in two groups: subjects who
were more aggressive when tryptophan depleted and subjects
who were less aggressive when tryptophan depleted. Aggressive, uncooperative behavior has been reported in behavioral
studies in which serotonin levels were lowered through ATD
(Schweighofer et al., 2008 ; Tanaka et al., 2007). However, individual variation both due to experience and genetic background can affect behavior. For example, there
is widespread variation in the serotonin transporter gene 5HTTLPR (Homberg & Lesch, 2011). Subjects carrying the
short allele variant of the 5-HTTLPR outperform subjects
with the long allele in an array of cognitive tasks and show

increased social conformity under normal conditions. However, subjects carrying the long allele variant perform better
under stressful conditions. The prevalence of these and other
genetic polymorphisms in the human population suggests that
there is an evolutionary advantage for this variability, such as
optimizing competition or cooperation in different situations.
Embodiment had a strong effect on subject behavior and,
similar to the ATD effect, this behavior could be categorized
in two groups: subjects who were more aggressive when
playing against a robot and subjects who were less aggressive when playing against a robot. Playing an opponent who
is interactive and personified has previously been observed to
evoke strong responses in subjects. For example, in the Ultimatum Game, subjects rejected more offers made by a human partner than those offers made by a computer, suggesting
that participants had a stronger emotional reaction to unfair
offers from humans than from a computer (Sanfey, Rilling,
Aronson, Nystrom, & Cohen, 2003). Indeed, such embodied models have been shown to elicit strong reactions in humans (Breazeal & Scassellati, 2002 ; Kidd & Breazeal, 2004)

94

.

and to exhibit more natural and complex behavior than pure
simulations (Krichmar & Edelman, 2002, 2005). However,
it appears that individuals responded differently and idiosyncratically to the presence of a robot in the present study.
Our results highlight the following ideas: first, the hierarchical latent mixture model’s ability to capture individual
differences; secondly, serotonin levels have differing effects
on subject decision-making, and lastly embodiment plays a
role in how likely subjects are willing to cooperate with an
agent. Our results suggest that there are at least two opposing subgroups with respect to Game-theory-ATD and HRI
studies. We suggest the possibility that these subgroups may
have emerged as a result of genetic variation. A next step
towards investigating this hypothesis involves genetic testing of polymorphisms responsible for subject variance and
their decision-making in competitive and cooperative games
of Game theory along with human robot interactions.

tioning in a brain-based device. Cerebral Cortex, 12, 818830.
Krichmar, J., & Edelman, G. (2005). Brain-based devices
for the study of nervous systems and the development of
intelligent machines. Artificial Life, 11, 63-77.
Lee, D. (2008). Game theory and neural basis of social decision making. Nature Neuroscience, 11, 404-409.
Lee, M. D. (2008). Three case studies in the Bayesian analysis of cognitive models. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
15, 1-15.
Lee, M. D., Zhang, S., Munro, M., & Steyvers, M. (2011).
Psychological models of human and optimal performance
on bandit problems. Cognitive Systems Research, 12, 164174.
Maynard Smith, J. (1982). Evolution and the theory of games.
Cambridge University Press.
Newell, B., & Lee, M. (2011). The right tool for the job?
comparing an evidence accumulation and a naive strategy
selection model of decision making. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 24, 456-481.
Nowak, M., Page, K., & Sigmund, K. (2000). Fairness versus
reason in the ultimatum game. Science, 289, 1773-1775.
Rilling, J., & Sanfey, A. (2011). The neuroscience of social
decision making. Annual Review Psychology, 62, 23-48.
Rouder, J., Lu, J., Speckman, P., Sun, D., & Jiang, Y. (2005).
Unknown title. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 195223.
Sanfey, A., Rilling, J., Aronson, J., Nystrom, L., & Cohen, J.
(2003). The neural basis of economic decision-making in
the ultimatum game. Science, 300, 1755-1758.
Schweighofer, N., Bertin, M., Shishida, K., Okamoto, Y.,
Tanaka, S., Yamawaki, S., et al. (2008). Low-serotonin
levels increase delayed reward discounting in humans. J
Neurosci, 17, 4528-4532.
Skyrms, B. (2001). The stag hunt. In Presidential address
pacific division of the american philosophical association.
Tanaka, S., Schweighofer, N., Asahi, S., Shishida, K.,
Okamoto, Y., Yamawaki, S., et al. (2007). Serotonin
diferentially regulates short- and long-term prediction of
rewards in the ventral and dorsal striatum. Public Library
of Science ONE, 12, 2.
Wetzels, R., Vandekerckhove, J., Tuerlinckx, F., & Wagenmakers, E. (2010). Bayesian parameter estimation in the
expectance valence model of the Iowa gambling task. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 54, 14-27.
Wood, R., Rilling, J., Sanfey, A., Bhagwagar, Z., & Rogers,
R. (2006). Effects of tryptophan depletion on the performance of an iterated prisoner’s dilemma game in healthy
adults. Neuropsychopharmacology, 31, 1075-1084.
Zaldivar, A., Asher, D., & Krichmar, J. (2010). Simulation of how neuromodulation influences cooperative behavior. Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes on Artificial Intelligence (LNAI 6226).

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
(EMT/BSSE Award No.: 0829752) and the Office of Naval
Research (Award No.: N000140910036). MDL and SZ acknowledge support from the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research Award FA9550-11, and Australian Research Council Grant DP110100797.

Références
Asher, D., Zaldivar, A., Barton, B., Brewer, A., & Krichmar,
J. (submitted). Reciprocity and retaliation in social games
with adaptive agents. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous
Mental Development.
Asher, D., Zaldivar, A., & Krichmar, J. (2010). Effect of neuromodulation on performance in game playing: A modeling study. In IEEE 9th international conference on development and learning (p. 155-160).
Bell, C., Hood, S., & Nutt, D. (2005). Acute tryptophan
depletion. part II: clinical effects and implications. Aust N
Z J Psychiatry, 39, 565-574.
Boureau, Y., & Dayan, P. (2011). Opponency revisited: competition and cooperation between dopamine and serotonin.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 36, 74-97.
Breazeal, C., & Scassellati, B. (2002). Robots that imitate
humans. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 481-487.
Crockett, M., Clark, L., Tabibnia, G., Lieberman, M., & Robbins, T. (2008). Serotonin modulates behavioral reactions
to unfairness. Science, 320, 1739.
Homberg, J., & Lesch, K. (2011). Looking on the bright side
of serotonin transporter gene variation. Biol Psychiatry, 69,
513-519.
Hood, S., Bell, C., & Nutt, D. (2005). Acute tryptophan
depletion. part I: clinical effects and implications. Aust N Z
J Psychiatry, 39, 558-564.
Kidd, C., & Breazeal, C. (2004). Effect of a robot on user
perceptions. In (p. 3559-3564).
Krichmar, J., & Edelman, G. (2002). Machine psychology:
autonomous behavior, perceptual categorization and condi-

95

