UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multimodal Temporal Perception in Musicians: Evidence for Both Segregated and
Supramodal Attentional Systems?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6px022j0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Lim, Ahnate
Sinnett, Scott

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multimodal Temporal Perception in Musicians: Evidence for Both Segregated and
Supramodal Attentional Systems?
Ahnate Lim (ahnate@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
Abstract
Although musical training has been correlated with
modulations of early perceptual and attentional processes, the
majority of investigations neglect the possibility of cross
modality enhancements. We investigated the effects of
musical training by measuring spatial and temporal attention
in a temporal order judgment task in auditory, visual, and
crossmodal conditions with and without non-predictive cues.
In Experiment 1, musicians had lower detection thresholds
when compared to controls in all conditions (marginal in
auditory). Experiment 2 showed mixed findings, with
musicians demonstrating reduced capture from visual cues on
the visual task compared to controls, and lower detection
thresholds on the auditory task with visual cues. Adding
spatial cues to the temporal order judgment tasks increased
temporal thresholds for both groups, but only when they
occurred within the same modality as the task, and not when
presented in a different modality. The findings support both
supramodal and segregated accounts of attentional resources.
Keywords: attention; perception; musicians; temporal order
judgment; multisensory; visual; auditory; crossmodal

Introduction
The human attentional system is impressively competent at
processing information, considering how the efficiency and
selectivity of attention facilitates perception and goal
directed behavior amidst a constant plethora of stimuli.
Interestingly, the neurological underpinnings of attention
may change under certain conditions. This “plasticity” has
been associated with compensations for losses in one
sensory modality with enhancements in another modality
(Röder et al., 1999). Furthermore, improved behavioral
performance may also occur as a side effect of specific
activities or hobbies such as video game playing (Granek,
Gorbet, & Sergio, 2010; Green, Li, & Bavelier, 2010, but
see Boot, Blakely, & Simons, 2011) and musical training
(Hodges, Hairston, & Burdette, 2005; Lim & Sinnett, 2011).
Although the topic of non-musical cognitive benefits
(e.g., mathematics, spatial-reasoning and linguistics)
occurring as a result of musical training has been the focus
of much research (for a summary, see Rauscher, 2003),
there has been less emphasis on the effects of precise
mechanisms of attention and perception. There is evidence
from numerous studies conducted with musicians
suggesting greater neuroplasticity when compared with nonmusicians (see for example, Gaser & Schlaug, 2003; Münte,
Altenmüller, & Jäncke, 2002). Although it should be noted

that these brain differences could equally be attributed to a
predisposition that leads people to become musicians, rather
than any specific training related enhancement. Even so,
behavioral evidence from studies comparing musicians to
non-musicians demonstrates improved perceptual abilities
on various tasks in different modalities. These have included
visual perceptual speed and discrimination (Helmbold,
Rammsayer, & Altenmüller, 2005; Patston, Hogg, &
Tippett, 2007) as well as auditory temporal discrimination
(Hodges et al., 2005; Jones & Yee, 1997).
These studies also highlight an interesting possibility of
training effects on attention: crossmodal enhancements (e.g.,
visual enhancements after auditory training). Some authors
have suggested that the attentional system operates in a
supramodal fashion, with all senses having access to a
single reservoir of attentional resources (see Farah, Wong,
Monheit, & Morrow, 1989; Pavani, Husain, Ládavas, &
Driver, 2004; but see also Sinnett, Costa, & Soto-Faraco,
2006; C Spence & Driver, 1996; Wickens, 1984, for
examples of a segregated attentional system). Thus, by
testing musicians for enhanced attentional and perceptual
capabilities in the visual modality, we can indirectly assess
whether training in one sense (i.e., auditory musical
training) leads to performance enhancements in another.
This would provide support for a supramodal attentional
system, and would closely align with recent investigations
involving video game players, where auditory enhancements
were observed despite the training being mostly visual
based (Donohue, Woldorff, & Mitroff, 2010; Green, Pouget,
& Bavelier, 2010).
The temporal order judgment (TOJ) task is an ideal tool to
assess temporal processing differences between musicians
and non-musicians. More importantly, the TOJ task can be
presented under both unimodal and crossmodal conditions.
The task requires participants to determine the correct order
of subsequently presented stimuli, and allows for two
measures of perceptual processing to be calculated: the just
noticeable difference (JND), and the point of subjective
simultaneity (PSS). The JND is a measure of the resolution
or threshold of temporal discrimination, while the PSS is the
time in which one stimulus can be presented before the
other such that they are still perceived as occurring
simultaneously (e.g., in a crossmodal task, it can indicate
whether auditory or visual stimuli must be presented first
for them to be perceived as simultaneous).

1906

Humans are generally proficient at temporal
discrimination. In studies examining within and cross-modal
(visual, auditory, tactile) TOJs, Hirsh and Sherrick Jr.
(1961) found that participants could discriminate temporal
order between stimuli (JND) when presented as quickly as
20ms apart. Crucially, in crossmodal tasks (i.e., audiovisual
presentations) the visual stimuli had to lead auditory stimuli
by approximately 40-80ms for participants to perceive them
as being presented simultaneously (PSS; see also Zampini,
Shore, & Spence, 2003). Furthermore, research suggests that
the resolution of temporal acuity is better in the auditory
modality than in vision or touch (Chen & Yeh, 2009).
Given the efficacy at which humans can discriminate
temporally, it is worth noting that significant gains or losses
in TOJ performance can occur as a result of brain injury
(Sinnett, Juncadella, Rafal, Azanon, & Soto-Faraco, 2007)
or training (Donohue et al., 2010). This suggests that
temporal perception is perhaps dependent on attentional
mechanisms, and not purely a sensory-based process. Aside
from studies showing enhancements on TOJs in video game
players (e.g., Donohue et al., 2010), recent research has
extended findings of better performance (lower JNDs) in the
auditory modality to musical-conductors (Hodges et al.,
2005) and in the visual modality to performing-musicians
(Lim & Sinnett, 2011). Nevertheless, it is worth noting that
research with musicians has not yet looked at crossmodal
TOJs and the possibility that musical training, mostly
auditory in nature, might have effects on visual TOJs.
Expert musicians were compared with non-musicians on a
series of TOJ tasks that were presented under unimodal
(visual or auditory), or crossmodal conditions. Given
evidence from previous research, we expected to see lower
JND scores for musicians when compared with controls in
all conditions, but did not expect any differences in PSS
scores.

as the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA). The SOA length is
manipulated to increasing or decreasing intervals that
correspondingly makes the task easier or harder. A staircase
approach was used in this experiment to adjust SOAs (see
Stelmach & Herdman, 1991). The SOA started at 167ms
and, for each successive trial, either decreased or increased
(by 16.7ms) in a stepwise manner dependent on whether the
participant answered the previous trial correctly. As the
experiment progressed, each trial’s SOA decreased making
the order of occurrence difficult to determine. It can be
inferred then, that as time progresses, changes in stepwise
direction (up and down) will increase, reflecting increasing
uncertainty in the participant. The task terminates once a
total of twelve turning points have occurred.
Stimuli were presented on a 21” iMac using Bootcamp
and DMDX software. Participants were seated at an eye to
monitor distance of approximately 60cm. Prior to each trial
a fixation-cross (0.5°) flanked by two square placeholders
(1.4°) on the left and right was presented (see Figure 1).
Stimuli for the visual task were horizontal and vertical lines
(0.9°) and occurred centrally within the placeholders. For
the auditory stimuli, processed samples of a dog and crow
sound (350ms) were used (played at approximately 75db).
In the crossmodal condition, the visual stimulus consisted of
a black square (0.9°) within the placeholder, whereas the
auditory stimulus was 50ms of white noise.

Experiment 1
Participants
Twenty musicians (age = 28 ± 12; 5 females) were recruited
from the music department at the University of Hawaii at
Manoa, local music studios, and through flyers. Musicians
were required to have at least three years of formal training
in music, and to have a regular practice schedule of at least
six hours/week over the past six months. Control
participants (n = 20; age = 22 ± 5, 16 females. Note, pooled
t-test comparisons showed no differences between males
and females for any of the conditions, all p > .1) were
recruited from undergraduate courses, and had little or no
training in music. All participants received either $10 or
course credit for their participation. Ethical approval was
obtained from the University’s Committee on Human
Subjects.

Stimuli and Apparatus
The basic TOJ task involves presenting participants with
two stimuli separated by variable time intervals, referred to

Figure 1. Stimuli for the three TOJ tasks in Experiment 1.

Procedure
In all three conditions participants made unspeeded
responses signaling which stimulus they believed had
appeared first using one of two keyboard buttons. Onscreen
instructions were presented first, followed by a short
sequence of practice trials that included accuracy feedback.
Presentation side (i.e., left or right) and stimuli order (e.g.,
horizontal or vertical line first) were randomized, as was the
order of experimental conditions (e.g., audio, visual,
crossmodal) for each participant.

Results
Calculations of the JND and PSS were based on approaches
used by previous studies (C. Spence, Baddeley, Zampini,
James, & Shore, 2003; Stelmach & Herdman, 1991). Data
from musicians and controls were pooled into separate
groups. The average ratio of responses "horizontal line first"
(e.g., for visual condition; for auditory condition ratio of
crow sounds were used, etc.) was then plotted as a function

1907

occurring simultaneously (Hirsh & Sherrick Jr, 1961;
Zampini et al., 2003).
Secondly, the temporal threshold for musicians was
significantly lower in all conditions (visual, auditory, and
crossmodal), although it should be noted that only marginal
significance was observed in the auditory condition (p =
0.07). Given that musical training is largely auditory in
nature, a more robust difference in auditory JND scores was
expected. It is possible that the “realistic” auditory stimuli
used in our experiment may be more difficult than simpler
tones, and therefore any effect might be somewhat masked.
Furthermore, it might be possible that as the sounds were
non-tonal, musicians may not have had a distinct advantage.
Lastly, given that humans discriminate temporal events
better in the auditory modality when compared to the visual
modality, it is possible that performance was similar due to
a ceiling effect.
Lastly, and also supported by Zampini et al. (2003), JND
scores for the crossmodal condition increased nearly threefold when compared to unimodal conditions, demonstrating
that the task was more difficult.
PSS
25

ms

0

*

-50
-75
Auditory

Visual

Crossmodal

JND
200
160
120

Controls

*

Musicians

*

80
40
0
Auditory

Visual

Crossmodal

Figure 2. PSS and JND scores for Experiment 1. For PSS
scores, positive indicates stimuli crow/horizontal/audio, and
negative indicates dog/vertical/visual stimuli appearing first.
Error bars indicate 95% CIs.

Discussion
There are two important findings that merit discussion.
First, with the exception of the visual condition, no
differences were observed for PSS between musicians and
non-musicians. In the visual condition it is possible that
there was a small bias towards horizontal lines for
musicians, but note that performance hovered around zero
as expected. The largest PSS differences were seen in the
crossmodal condition. Specifically, visual stimuli had to
precede auditory stimuli for both musicians and controls (by
43 and 63ms, see Figure 2) for them to be perceived as

-25

-100

ms

of the time in which the horizontal line preceded the vertical
line. Data was then fit using a logistic function:
1
𝑓 𝑥, 𝑎, 𝑏 =
1 + exp −(𝑥 − 𝑎)/𝑏
which was then used to obtain the JND and PSS estimates
(similar to C. Spence et al., 2003). The PSS corresponds to
parameter a, and is usually expected to fall at 0ms (or close)
in unimodal conditions, as there is no reason to assume that
a particular visual (or auditory) stimulus would be preferred
over the other. It is more informative in the crossmodal
condition as any shift would indicate whether auditory or
visual events must precede the other for subjective
simultaneity to be perceived. The JND relates to parameter
b, which is adjusted to obtain the 75% JND as follow:
JND!" = ln 3 ∙ 𝑏
Given that data was pooled within each group (musicians
and controls), confidence intervals (95%) for each group’s
estimates and comparison p-values were calculated using a
parametric bootstrap method with 999 replications (Efron &
Tibshirani, 1993; for similar use of the bootstrap, see
Azañón & Soto-Faraco, 2007).
Auditory condition Differences between musicians and
controls were non-significant for PSS (2ms, CI = -8 to
12ms; vs. 9ms, CI = 1 to 16ms; p = 0.31; respectively) and
approaching significance for JND scores (43ms, CI = 34 to
53ms; and 56ms, CI = 45 to 68ms; p = 0.07).
Visual condition The average PSS score for musicians’ was
significantly lower than controls by 10ms (-4ms, CI = -9 to
2ms; vs. -14ms, CI = -22 to 5ms; p = 0.037; respectively),
with negative PSS values indicating a possible bias in
responses towards horizontal lines. The average JND score
for musicians’ was also significantly lower than controls by
18ms (29ms, CI = 23 to 35ms; vs. 47ms, CI = 37 to 56ms; p
= 0.006).
Crossmodal condition Differences between musicians and
controls were non-significant for PSS (-43ms, CI = -60 to 25ms; and -63ms, CI = -93 to -30ms; p = 0.261;
respectively). It is worth noting that the negative PSS results
indicate a bias in response towards the auditory modality
(visual stimuli needed to be presented prior to auditory
stimuli for simultaneity to be perceived). Musicians’
average JND score was significantly lower than controls by
59ms (104ms, CI = 80 to 127ms; and 163ms, CI = 112 to
207ms; p = 0.021).

Experiment 2
Spatial cues can also be incorporated into the TOJ tasks,
allowing for a measure of how attention is oriented and
captured. The presentation of exogenous cues prior to
stimuli onset in a TOJ task creates a ‘prior entry’ effect,
where attention is directed towards the cued side and
subsequently affects performance on the task, regardless of
whether or not the cue is predictive of location (see Shore,
Spence, & Klein, 2001)
Exogenous orienting can occur from any stimulus that
causes a reflexive or automatic capture of attention (e.g.,
bright flashes, loud sounds, etc.). By presenting an

1908

exogenous cue in the TOJ task prior to the onset of stimuli,
the cued side will be perceived as having occurred first. The
PSS score then indicates how much in advance the uncued
side must be presented before the cued for simultaneity to
be perceived (see Shore et al., 2001). Thus, Experiment 2
included all of the unimodal conditions of Experiment 1
with the addition of within and crossmodal cues to
determine whether spatial attention would differ between
musicians and non-musicians. If musical training can
improve spatial and temporal processing, it would be
expected that musicians should have a smaller orienting
effect, which would be manifested in lower PSS and JND
scores than controls across all conditions. This would be
indicative of improved temporal processing (JND) and less
influence from peripheral distraction (smaller PSS).
Furthermore, to our awareness this would be the first time
multimodal cued TOJ tasks were conducted on musicians.

as the slope, the JND scores are expected to be similar for
each stimulus type.
Unimodal Cues Auditory condition: The magnitude of the
PSS shifts was not significantly different between musicians
and controls (23ms, CI = 12 to 37ms; vs. 29ms, CI = 17 to
42ms; p = 0.259; respectively, see Figure 3). Similarly,
there were no differences in JND scores between the two
groups (92ms, CI = 77 to 110ms; vs. 109ms, CI = 93 to
125ms; p = 0.106). Visual condition: The magnitude of PSS
shifts was significantly lower for musicians than controls by
29ms (30ms, CI = 10 to 46ms; vs. 59ms, CI = 48 to 71ms; p
= 0.023). On the other hand, JND scores for both groups
were not significantly different (80ms, CI = 63 to 93ms; vs.
84ms, CI = 75 to 96ms; p = 0.29).

PSS - With Cues
75

*

60
45

ms

Participants, Apparatus, and Procedure

30

The same participants from Experiment 1 also took part in
Exp. 2 (all conditions from both experiments were
interleaved and fully randomized). The discussion of the
experiments is separated here for ease of understanding.
Stimuli and procedure were identical to those in Exp. 1,
except for the addition of exogenous non-predictive cues in
all conditions. In the visual condition, the cue was created
by thickening the placeholder box of the respective side to a
thickness of 4 pixels for 45ms. In the auditory condition, the
cue was a laterally presented 500Hz sine wave lasting 45ms.
The crossmodal condition consisted of two tasks: the first
was an auditory TOJ task with visual cues, while the second
was a visual TOJ task with auditory cues. All cues were
randomly determined and had an equal chance of validly or
invalidly cuing the target stimuli.

15
0
Audio cues

Visual cues

Auditory task

Visual cues

Audio cues

Visual task

JND - With Cues
200

Controls

160
ms

120

Musicians

*

80
40
0
Audio cues

Visual cues

Auditory task

Results
The JND and PSS scores were calculated using similar
methods as in Exp. 1, by pooling musicians and control
participants into two separate groups. For each of the four
conditions, data from the two groups were fit to a weighted
logistic function according to which stimuli was cued (e.g.,
horizontal/vertical bar, dog/crow sound, etc). The overall
PSS value for each condition was computed as half the
distance between each of the PSS values for the two curves.
The average of the two JND values for each curve was used
as the overall JND score. This approach essentially
calculates the PSS for each type of stimulus cued, and
averages the effect (see Shore et al., 2001). In order to
gauge the influence of the cue, the two fitted curves were
compared against one another. Logically, if the two curves
were to map out on top of one another then the average
would be 0 (PSS), as would be expected if the cue did not
have any effect (assuming no bias for one stimulus type or
the other). Thus, the larger the difference between the
logistic fits for each cue, the larger the PSS, and by
extension the greater effect that the cues had in general. This
can similarly be applied to the calculation of JND, although

Visual cues

Audio cues

Visual task

Figure 3. PSS and JND scores for Experiment 2. Asterisks
indicate significant (p < .05) between group differences.
Error bars indicate 95% CIs.
Crossmodal Cues Auditory TOJ with visual cues: The
magnitude of the PSS shifts did not significantly differ
between musicians and controls (8ms, CI = 1 to 14ms; vs.
9ms, CI = 1 to 15ms; p = 0.39; respectively). On the other
hand, JND scores were significantly lower by 16ms for
musicians compared to controls (47ms, CI = 42 to 56ms; vs.
63ms, CI = 53 to 73ms; p = 0.014). Visual TOJ with
auditory cues: The magnitude of the PSS shifts did not
significantly differ between musicians and controls (10ms,
CI = 6 to 14ms; vs. 13ms, CI = 8 to 18ms; p = 0.19).
Similarly, there were no differences in JND scores between
the two groups (31ms, CI = 26 to 35ms; vs. 35ms, CI = 29
to 38ms; p = 0.088).
Cross experiment comparisons: Further understanding of
the cuing effects can be determined by comparing the results
from the cued tasks in Experiment 2 to the no-cue unimodal
tasks (auditory and visual) of Experiment 1. When doing so,
JND differed for unimodal conditions but not for

1909

crossmodal conditions. That is, the additional cues in
Experiment 2 made the unimodal tasks harder for both
musicians and non-musicians, as evidenced by longer
temporal thresholds (JND) in both the auditory and visual
modalities (all p < .01). However, when the cues were
presented in a separate modality (i.e., the crossmodal
conditions of Exp. 2), JND scores were indistinguishable
from the unimodal no cue conditions (Exp. 1) for both
musicians and non-musicians (all p > .05). Collectively, this
may suggest that a difficult unimodal task can be made
easier when presented as a crossmodal task (Sinnett et al.,
2006; Sinnett et al., 2007; C Spence & Driver, 1996).

Discussion
Robust findings from cross-experiment analyses broadly
suggest that unimodal cues have detrimental effects on JND
scores, whereas crossmodal cues do not. These results were
similar for both musicians and controls. Excluding these
cross experiment analyses, the only observed significant
differences in Experiment 2 between musicians and controls
were the lower PSS scores in the visual unimodal condition
for musicians, and the lower JND score in the auditorytask/visual-cues condition for musicians. The lower PSS
score indicates that musicians were captured less by the
unimodal visual cues than non-musicians, while the lone
JND difference seemingly suggests that crossmodal
processing was easier for musicians, but only when judging
temporal order for auditory targets that were cued visually.

General Discussion
There are a number of important findings. To begin with,
performance differences between musicians and controls
were mixed in the auditory condition (musicians did have
significantly lower JND scores in the auditory-task/visualcues condition of Experiment 2, as well as marginally lower
JNDs in the auditory condition in Experiment 1 [p = .07],
while the unimodal auditory condition of Experiment 2 was
not significant). Thus, we do not see as strong a trend as
Hodges et al. (2005), where auditory JND scores were
significantly lower for musical conductors when compared
to controls. This may be due to the use of different stimuli
and experimental conditions. In the present experiment
realistic sounds (dog and crow) were used, while auditory
tones were used in Hodges et al.’s studies. Thus it is
possible that pitch discrimination skills would not aid
musicians in the auditory task used here. Furthermore, it is
also possible that differences in auditory temporal
processing may exist between conductors and performing
musicians. It is worth noting however, that across all task
types, JND scores for musicians were numerically lower
than those for controls, although these differences were
statistically significant in only four out of the seven
conditions (Exp 1: auditory (marginal), visual, and
crossmodal; Exp 2: Audio-task/visual cues).
Pertinent to the discussion is the tentative support for a
supramodal account of attentional resources, supported by
the fact that musicians outperformed controls on several

non-auditory related tasks, including smaller capture from
visual cues, and lower JNDs for visual and crossmodal
conditions (without cues). That is, it appears that musical
training might have lead to improved visual processing.
Having said that, as musical training involves much
exposure to auditory stimuli, it was reasonable to expect
enhancements in the auditory modality, although this was
not consistently observed. Enhancements in the visual
modality however, could be attributed to 1) better
attentional resources, and/or 2) concomitant training in the
visual modality from reading music while at the same time
listening to and playing music, etc. Since we cannot rule out
the second possibility however, these results can only be
seen as tentative support for a supramodal account, pending
further investigation with specific training conditions.
Interestingly however, the robust findings of Experiment 2
where crossmodal PSS and JND scores were in fact lower
than their unimodal counterparts (all p < .05 and p < .001;
respectively), may provide stronger evidence for the exact
opposite viewpoint: that is, a segregation of attentional
systems (e.g., Sinnett et al., 2006; Wickens, 1984).
Nevertheless, the current set of data makes it difficult to
arrive at a decisive claim on either side of the debate, and
may suggest a two-part attentional system that operates with
both segregated and supramodal capacities. Indeed, it is
likely that many previous findings supporting one
theoretical account or the other may indeed be constrained
by the varying methodologies used.
The segregated account is supported by the novel finding
that was observed across both musician and control groups
regarding the selective deficits in JND for only unimodal
cues and not crossmodal cues. That is, when a within
modality cue was added to the task, JND scores increased
significantly for both musicians and control participants.
However, when the cues were presented across modalities
(i.e., a visual cue and an auditory TOJ task, or vice versa),
performance was significantly better, and in fact did not
differ from the no-cue conditions. This possibly suggests
that the threshold of temporal detection may be robust to
crossmodal distraction, while at the same time be vulnerable
to distractions within the same modality.
As the between group differences in the auditory task in
Experiment 1 were only marginally significant, this may
suggest that auditory temporal acuity is less amenable to
improvement through training (at least for the stimuli and
task conditions used here), and that concomitant training
effects are perhaps more robust in the visual domain.
Importantly, the visual enhancements observed in JND in
Experiment 1 lend support to the idea that attentional
allocation, and therefore the improvement through training,
may not be constrained within particular sensory modalities,
but instead distributed to multiple modalities. Nevertheless,
an important criticism of studies that used “trained”
populations such as musicians and video game players, is
the extent to which observed differences in experimental
settings can actually be attributed to prior training. Boot et
al. (2011), for instance, claimed that participants are often

1910

aware of the purpose of the study as they are specifically
recruited for their expertise, and that this awareness and
potential motivational factor may very well influence
performance. Unfortunately, our recruitment strategy for
musicians did not allow us to keep them blind to the
purpose of the study, and they may have been influenced by
such knowledge. To this extent, our between group
conclusions are largely speculative. Moreover, the nature of
musical training in sighted individuals is in itself a
multimodal experience, and further training studies would
be better equipped to draw conclusions by controlling for
the type of training each participant receives.

References
Azañón, E., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2007). Alleviating the
crossed-hands deficit by seeing uncrossed rubber hands.
Experimental brain research, 182(4), 537-548.
Boot, W. R., Blakely, D. P., & Simons, D. J. (2011). Do
Action Video Games Improve Perception and Cognition?
Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Chen, K., & Yeh, S. (2009). Asymmetric cross-modal
effects in time perception. Acta psychologica, 130(3),
225-234.
Donohue, S., Woldorff, M., & Mitroff, S. (2010). Video
game players show more precise multisensory temporal
processing
abilities.
Attention,
Perception,
&
Psychophysics, 72(4), 1120.
Efron, B., & Tibshirani, R. (1993). An introduction to the
bootstrap (Vol. 57): Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Farah, M., Wong, A., Monheit, M., & Morrow, L. (1989).
Parietal lobe mechanisms of spatial attention: modalityspecific or supramodal? Neuropsychologia, 27(4), 461470.
Gaser, C., & Schlaug, G. (2003). Brain structures differ
between musicians and non-musicians. Journal of
Neuroscience, 23(27), 9240.
Granek, J., Gorbet, D., & Sergio, L. (2010). Extensive
video-game experience alters cortical networks for
complex visuomotor transformations. Cortex, 46(9).
Green, C. S., Li, R., & Bavelier, D. (2010). Perceptual
learning during action video game playing. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 2(2), 202-216.
Green, C. S., Pouget, A., & Bavelier, D. (2010). Improved
Probabilistic Inference as a General Learning Mechanism
with Action Video Games. Current Biology, 20(17),
1573-1579.
Helmbold, N., Rammsayer, T., & Altenmüller, E. (2005).
Differences in primary mental abilities between musicians
and nonmusicians. Journal of Individual Differences,
26(2), 74-85.
Hirsh, I., & Sherrick Jr, C. (1961). Perceived order in
different sense modalities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62(5), 423-432.
Hodges, D. A., Hairston, W. D., & Burdette, J. H. (2005).
Aspects of multisensory perception: the integration of
visual and auditory information in musical experiences.

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1060, 175185.
Jones, M., & Yee, W. (1997). Sensitivity to time change:
The role of context and skill. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23(3),
693.
Lim, A., & Sinnett, S. (2011). Exploring Visual Attention in
Musicians:
Temporal,
Spatial
and
Capacity
Considerations. Paper presented at the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Münte, T., Altenmüller, E., & Jäncke, L. (2002). The
musician's brain as a model of neuroplasticity. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 3(6), 473-478.
Patston, L., Hogg, S., & Tippett, L. (2007). Attention in
musicians is more bilateral than in non-musicians.
Laterality, 12(3), 262.
Pavani, F., Husain, M., Ládavas, E., & Driver, J. (2004).
Auditory Deficits in Visuospatial Neglect Patients.
Cortex, 40(2), 347-365.
Rauscher, F. (2003). Can Music Instruction Affect
Children's Cognitive Development? ERIC Digests
Retrieved
10
October,
2011,
from
http://www.ericdigests.org/2004-3/cognitive.html
Röder, B., Teder-Sälejärvi, W., Sterr, A., Rösler, F.,
Hillyard, S., & Neville, H. (1999). Improved auditory
spatial tuning in blind humans. Nature, 400(6740), 162166.
Shore, D. I., Spence, C., & Klein, R. M. (2001). Visual prior
entry. Psychological Science, 12(3), 205-212.
Sinnett, S., Costa, A., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2006).
Manipulating inattentional blindness within and across
sensory modalities. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 59(8), 1425 - 1442.
Sinnett, S., Juncadella, M., Rafal, R., Azanon, E., & SotoFaraco, S. (2007). A dissociation between visual and
auditory hemi-inattention: Evidence from temporal order
judgements. Neuropsychologia, 45(3), 552-560.
Spence, C., Baddeley, R., Zampini, M., James, R., & Shore,
D. I. (2003). Multisensory temporal order judgments:
When two locations are better than one. Perception &
psychophysics, 65(2), 318.
Spence, C., & Driver, J. (1996). Audiovisual links in
endogenous covert spatial attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 22(4), 1005-1030.
Stelmach, L. B., & Herdman, C. M. (1991). Directed
attention and perception of temporal order. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 17(2), 539-550.
Wickens, C. D. (1984). Processing Resources in Attention.
In R. Parasuraman & R. Davies (Eds.), Varieties of
attention (pp. 63). New York: Academic Press.
Zampini, M., Shore, D., & Spence, C. (2003). Audiovisual
temporal order judgments. Experimental brain research,
152(2), 198-210.

1911

