UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Object discovery and inverse physical reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01p2m718

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Carroll, Christopher
Kemp, Charles

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Object Discovery and Inverse Physical Reasoning
Christopher D. Carroll (cdcarroll@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Charles Kemp (ckemp@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

inference from causes to effects. We refer to this approach
as inverse reasoning because it achieves backward
reasoning by inverting the process of forward reasoning.
One natural way to formalize the inverse reasoning
approach makes use of Bayesian inference, which specifies
the normative relationship between backward and forward
reasoning. Specifically, given some observations D and a
hypothesis H about the existence and properties of the
unobserved causes, Bayes’ theorem requires that

Abstract
Unobserved objects are typically discovered by making
backward inferences from effects to causes. The inverse
reasoning account proposes that inferences of this kind are
carried out by postulating unobserved causes that best support
the forward inference from causes to effects. We evaluated
the inverse reasoning account by asking people to reason
about hidden attractors and repellers that caused an observed
particle to move about an arena. We found that people often
evaluated specific hypotheses in a manner consistent with the
inverse reasoning account but that hypothesis discovery
involved processes that were inconsistent with inverse
reasoning.

( | )

( | ) ( ).

(1)

Backward and forward reasoning are captured by the
posterior P(H|D) and likelihood P(D|H), respectively.
Bayes’ theorem therefore suggests that backward reasoning
should be carried out by combining the forward inferences
specified by the likelihood with judgments of plausibility
specified by the prior P(H). In our setting, this approach
suggests that a configuration of unobserved attractors and
repellers is a good explanation for a particle’s motion to the
extent that (1) the configuration predicts the particle’s
motion and (2) the configuration is relatively parsimonious.
Inverse reasoning implies that backward inferences will be
consistent with forward inferences, but does not imply that
backward inferences will always be accurate. Studies of
physical reasoning have documented situations where
people's forward inferences deviate from the predictions of
classical mechanics (e.g., Clement, 1982; McCloskey,
1983), and faulty forward inferences could produce faulty
backward inferences through inverse reasoning.
The inverse reasoning approach has a mixed record as an
account of human reasoning. On one hand, the approach has
been successfully used to develop models of causal
reasoning (e.g., Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005), perception
(e.g., Yuille & Kersten, 2006), sensorimotor control (e.g.,
Kording & Wolpert, 2006) and social reasoning (e.g., Baker,

Keywords: object discovery; inverse reasoning; inverse
problem; Bayesian inference; physical reasoning

Introduction
Inferences about unobserved objects are common in both
scientific and everyday reasoning. Scientists originally
postulated the existence of the planet Neptune to explain
perturbations in the orbit of Uranus. Similarly, a jilted lover
may postulate the existence of a romantic competitor in
order to explain the behavior of his or her partner. This
paper describes an experimental study of object discovery
that is loosely inspired by the discovery of Neptune.
Participants observed particles that moved along paths such
as the one in Figure 1 and attempted to infer the unobserved
attractors and repellers responsible for the particle’s motion.
Object discovery typically involves reasoning from
effects (e.g., an observed motion) to causes (e.g., an
unobserved attractor). Here we refer to inferences from
causes to effects as forward inferences and inferences from
effects to causes as backward inferences. We explore the
hypothesis that forward and backward reasoning are tightly
coupled, and that backward inferences are made by
postulating unobserved causes that best support the forward

Figure 1: This sequence of bird’s-eye-view snapshots shows a particle’s motion over time. The particle in this “wall-motion”
scene moved along a diagonal path until it reached the top wall. It then continued along the wall.

180

Saxe, & Tenenbaum, 2009). On the other hand,
psychologists have documented several respects in which
backward inferences seem inconsistent with inverse
reasoning (e.g., Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982;
Fernbach, Darlow, & Sloman, 2011). People often, for
example, erroneously ignore or underutilize the prior when
estimating the posterior (Bar-Hillel, 1980).
Based on these findings it is not clear whether the object
discovery task considered in this paper should produce
results that are consistent with inverse reasoning. Because
physical reasoning is a core aspect of cognition that is
present early in development (Spelke, Breinlinger,
Macomber, & Jacobson, 1992), one might expect that
backward physical reasoning will tend be consistent with
normative inverse reasoning. Previous studies of physical
reasoning provide some evidence for this claim. For
example, Sanborn, Mansinghka, and Griffiths (2009) found
that backward inferences about the relative masses of
colliding objects were consistent with a Bayesian account of
inverse reasoning. Object discovery, however, appears to be
more challenging than the tasks considered by previous
studies of backward physical reasoning. Inferring hidden
properties of observed objects (e.g., the mass of a colliding
object) is a relatively well-constrained problem, but object
discovery is a more open-ended problem that involves
inferring the existence and number of the hidden objects, the
locations of those objects, and the properties of those
objects. To preview our results, we found that when
participants evaluated specific hypotheses about the
locations and properties of the hidden objects, their
inferences were broadly consistent with inverse reasoning.
When asked to generate their own explanations, however,
many participants gave responses that were incompatible
with the inverse reasoning account.

The simplest possible observed trajectory is a straight
line, and the obvious explanation for this trajectory is that
the particle is either moving towards an attractor or moving
away from a repeller. The particle motions presented in the
discovery phase (Figure 2.i) include some of the next
simplest cases. Each motion can be explained in at least two
ways. First, there is a parsimonious explanation that invokes
a relatively small number of stationary attractors and
repellers. For example, the “wall-motion” scene (Figure 1
and Figure 2.a.i) can be explained by assuming a single
repeller (see the first row of Figure 2.ii). Second, each
explanation had a less parsimonious explanation where the
particle always moved directly towards an attractor or
directly away from a repeller, but where the attractors and
repellers spontaneously appeared, disappeared, or moved.
The second row of Figure 2.ii shows a less parsimonious
explanation of the wall-motion scene.
Our primary goal is to explore whether participants
generate the parsimonious explanations during the discovery
and evaluation phases. If participants agree that the
parsimonious explanations are in fact parsimonious and
valid, then the inverse reasoning account predicts that these
explanations should be generated during the discovery phase
and rated favorably during the evaluation phase. If
participants fail to generate these explanations in the
discovery phase but tend to prefer them in the evaluation
phase, this result would be inconsistent with the inverse
reasoning view.
The prediction phase asked participants to generate
particle trajectories for several kinds of configurations. Each
configuration can be viewed as an explanation (plausible or
implausible) of a motion observed during the discovery
phase. Some of the prediction trials presented participants
with their own explanations from the discovery phase. For
our purposes, however, the most important prediction trials
are those that presented participants with the parsimonious
explanations for the three motions in Figure 2.i. Including
these trials allowed us to assess whether participants agreed
that the parsimonious explanations could in fact explain the
observed motions – if not, it would be unsurprising if these
explanations were rarely chosen during the discovery phase.

Experimental overview
To explore the problem of object discovery we conducted an
experiment where participants reasoned about “attractors”
and “repellers” that controlled the movements of some
observed “particles.” The attractors and repellers were
unobserved, and participants attempted to infer their
locations given the observed particle motions.
There were three experimental phases: the discovery,
prediction, and evaluation phases. In the discovery phase,
participants observed the motion of a particle and were
asked to infer the locations of hidden attractors and
repellers. In the prediction phase, participants were given
the locations of one or more attractors or repellers and were
asked to predict the trajectory that a particle would follow.
In the evaluation phase, participants were given two
possible explanations of a particle motion and were asked to
decide which explanation was better. Note that the
discovery and evaluation phase both assessed backward
reasoning and that the prediction phase assessed forward
reasoning.

Method
Participants
Thirty undergraduates at Carnegie Mellon University
participated for course credit.

Materials and Procedure
Participants were asked to imagine themselves working for
a scientist who studies “attractors” and “repellers.” The
instructions explained that the participants would view
scenes where “particles” moved within a rectangular arena.
Participants learned that the particle motions were caused by
attractors and repellers located outside the arena.

181

Figure 2: Experimental method and results for the (a) wall-motion, (b) center-return, and (c) curved-motion scenes. (i) The
discovery phase. The paths illustrate the motion of the particle, and the circles illustrate the location of the particle in the first
and second response pictures. (The particle in the center-return scene moved from its initial position to the top wall, paused,
and then returned to the center.) The surrounding area is a heatmap. Areas where attractors were often placed are shown as
brighter areas and areas where repellers were often placed are shown as darker areas. (ii) The evaluation phase. The pictures
at left show the experimenter-provided explanations. Repellers and attractors are shown as large black and large white circles,
respectively. The histograms shows the preference ratings (-3 = strongly preferred own explanation; 3 = strongly preferred
experimenter-provided explanation). (iii) The prediction phase. The paths in the figure represent the paths drawn by the
participants. Trivial prediction trials (i.e., those involving a single attractor or repeller) are not shown.

182

Participants then viewed three scenes that demonstrated
the properties of the attractors and repellers. Each scene was
displayed as a sequence of bird’s-eye-view snapshots
showing the motion of the particle over time. The first two
scenes showed that particles move towards attractors and
away from repellers, depicted as green and red circular
objects, respectively. The third scene showed that a particle
placed between two attractors moved towards the closer
one, and the instructions explained that distant attractors and
repellers exert less force than close ones.

presents some of the prediction trials. The prediction
pictures in Figure 2.a.iii, b.iii, and c.iii top correspond to the
parsimonious explanations. There were other prediction
trials that corresponded to less parsimonious explanations.
Three other prediction trials presented each participant with
the configurations that corresponded to his or her own
explanations in the discovery phase.
Evaluation phase
In the evaluation phase, participants once again viewed the
wall-motion, center-return, and curved-motion scenes. In
explaining each scene, participants chose between their own
explanations and the parsimonious explanation. The
parsimonious explanations are shown as the first, third, and
fifth rows in Figure 2.ii.
For each forced choice, the participant rated his or her
preferred explanation as “much more,” “more”, or “slightly
more” likely to be the true explanation than the competing
explanation. Because participants occasionally generated the
parsimonious explanations themselves, participants were
sometimes presented with a choice between two identical
explanations. For these situations, participants were
provided with a “these explanations are identical” button.
We coded responses on a scale ranging from -3 (own
explanation “much more likely” to be the true explanation)
to 3 (parsimonious or alternative explanation “much more
likely” to be the true explanation). When a participant
claimed that the explanations were identical, his or her
preference was coded as 0.
Three other trials required the participants to choose
between their own explanations and some less parsimonious
explanations. These alternative explanations, shown in the
second, fourth, and sixth rows of Figure 2.ii, required
additional assumptions to explain the particle motion. These
trials served to control for the task demand of asking the
participants to choose between their own explanation and an
experimenter-provided explanation. To further limit any
task demands, all competing explanations were described as
responses provided by other participants.

Discovery phase
Participants were asked to explain a number of scenes where
the attractors and repellers were not visible. After
completing a practice trial, participants generated
explanations for the three scenes in Figure 2.i. Participants
also generated explanations for 12 variants of the three
primary scenes, but we do not discuss these results here
because the variant scenes did not have analogues in the
prediction and evaluation phases. In the wall-motion scene
(Figure 2.a.i), the particle traveled along a diagonal until it
reached the top wall of the arena. It then continued along the
top wall of the arena. In the center-return scene (Figure
2.b.i), the particle moved from the center of the arena to the
top wall, paused, and then returned to the center. In the
curved-motion scene (Figure 2.c.i), the particle moved along
a curved path from the lower-left corner of the arena to the
lower-right corner of the arena.
Participants explained each particle motion by specifying
where the attractors and repellers would have been at two
different points in the particle’s motion (see Figure 2.i). The
instructions explained that the participants were being asked
to report the locations of the attractors and repellers in two
distinct response pictures because “there may be some
situations where you think that something has changed.”
Responses were made using a computer interface that
showed the two response pictures and a summary of the tobe-explained particle motion. Participants could place
attractors and repellers by clicking on any location outside
the arena. Participants could move or erase placed attractors
and repellers. A “reuse” button located between the two
response pictures copied the attractors and repellers in the
first picture to the second picture.
Participants were allowed to provide up to three
explanations for each scene. Each explanation was entered
on a separate screen. Participants were allowed to provide
written explanations to supplement the picture-based
explanations, but few participants did so.
After providing the explanations, the participants rated
each provided explanation on a scale ranging from 1 (very
unlikely to be the true explanation) to 7 (very likely to be
the true explanation). Participants were also asked to rate
the likelihood that the true explanation was “fundamentally
different” from the provided explanation(s).

Results
The inverse reasoning account predicts that participants
ought to generate the parsimonious explanations during the
discovery phase and endorse them during the evaluation
phase. In contrast, we found that participants rarely
generated the parsimonious explanations during the
discovery phase but often preferred them during the
evaluation phase. We begin by documenting this general
result and then provide more detailed descriptions of the
results for the discovery and prediction phases.

Parsimonious explanations
A wall-motion explanation was coded as parsimonious
when it invoked a single stationary attractor or repeller. A
center-return explanation was coded as parsimonious when
it invoked two balancing repellers above and below the
arena or two balancing attractors to the left and right of the

Prediction phase
Participants were asked to predict the particle paths given
the locations of the attractors and repellers. Figure 2.iii

183

Proportion

1

Generated
Endorsed

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.2
0

Wall-motion

Figure 4: Particle motions predicted by participants given
their own explanations for the wall-motion, center-return,
and curved-motion scenes.

Center-return Curved-motion

Scene

posited an attractor in the first response picture), and 5
participants generated other explanations. Responses to the
curved-motion scene were more variable, and there was less
agreement on the locations of the attractors and repellers
(see Figure 2.i.c). Most of the participants posited multiple
attractors and repellers that were simultaneously present.
For example, 7 participants posited three or more stationary
and constantly present attractors and repellers, and 12
participants posited two or more attractors or repellers that
were simultaneously present at some point during the
motion but were either non-stationary or not constantly
present. The remaining non-parsimonious explanations most
commonly posited a single attractor or repeller along the
particle’s path of motion in each response picture. Overall,
then, responses to the discovery phase reveal a variety of
strategies, but one consistent element is that many
participants placed objects in line with a particle’s
instantaneous direction of motion.

Figure 3: Proportions of the participants generating a
parsimonious explanation in the discovery phase and
endorsing the parsimonious explanation in the evaluation
phase.
arena. A curved-motion explanation was coded as
parsimonious when it invoked exactly two stationary
attractors or repellers and did not invoke any moving,
appearing, or disappearing attractors and repellers. Our
coding criteria were intended to be conservative: note, for
example, that any curved-motion explanation with two
stationary objects was coded as parsimonious regardless of
the locations of these objects.
Figure 3 shows that participants rarely generated
parsimonious explanations in the discovery phase but often
preferred them in the evaluation phase. The differences
between the rates of generation and endorsement were
significant for each scene (Fisher’s exact test yields p < .01
in all cases). This finding cannot be attributed to task
demands alone: as shown by the distribution of the
preference ratings in Figure 2.ii, participants did not prefer
non-parsimonious explanations (rows two, four, and six) to
the same extent that they preferred the parsimonious
explanations (rows one, three, and five).

Prediction
Figure 2.iii summarizes the responses on selected prediction
trials. The critical question for present purposes is whether
participants agreed that the parsimonious explanations
would indeed account for the observed motions during the
discovery trials. When provided with the parsimonious
explanations, 15 of the 30, 24 of the 30, and 23 of the 30
participants predicted that the particle would approximately
reproduce the particle motions from the discovery trials for
the wall-motion, center-return, and curved-motion scenes
respectively. Note that these counts are substantially higher
than the number of participants who generated the
parsimonious explanations during the discovery phase. The
prediction data therefore provide further evidence that some
participants failed to generate the parsimonious explanations
during the discovery phase even though they considered
these explanations to be valid.
Although participants did not always predict that the
parsimonious explanations would produce the observed
motion, their predictions were usually sensible given some
additional assumptions. For example, various participants
seemed to assume that friction would stop the particle when
it hit the wall in the parsimonious wall-motion prediction
trial, that momentum would carry the particle past the center
in the parsimonious center-return prediction trial, and that
the motion of the particle would be influenced only by

Discovery
The difference between the results for the discovery and
evaluation phases suggests that object discovery in our
paradigm is not accurately characterized as inverse physical
reasoning. Figure 2.i gives some sense of how participants
were approaching the discovery task. Each plot in this
column is a “heatmap:” locations where participants often
placed attractors are shown as brighter areas and locations
where repellers were often placed are shown as darker areas.
For the wall-motion trials, 14 participants posited one
hidden object along the particle’s diagonal trajectory and
one hidden object along its horizontal trajectory, 5
participants posited a single attractor or repeller that moved,
and 8 participants generated combinations or variations of
those explanations. For the center-return trials, 12
participants posited appearing and disappearing attractors
and repellers along each path of motion, 9 generated an
explanation that involved balancing attractors or repellers
but also invoked other attractors and repellers (e.g., had
balancing repellers in the second response picture but

184

nearby repeller in the parsimonious curved-motion
prediction trial.
Figure 4 shows the participants’ predictions given their
own explanations for the wall-motion, center-return, and
curved-motion scenes. Some predicted motions diverged
dramatically from the particle motion in the to-be-explained
scene, and the discrepancies for the curved-motion scene
were especially dramatic. These discrepancies should be
interpreted cautiously, however, because the participants
may have made different assumptions during the discovery
and prediction phases. For example, it was natural to assume
that the particle had an initial velocity in the first response
picture of a trial in the discovery phase (the particle had
already moved), but there was no reason to assume a
particle velocity in the prediction phase. As a result, future
studies are needed before concluding that participants
sometimes generate explanations that are truly incompatible
with the trajectories that they have observed.

example, many participants explained the curved-motion
scene by placing a repeller at the focal point of the curve,
and it is tempting to view this inference as a loose analogy
to orbital motion. Like any other kind of creative behavior,
object discovery is likely to be difficult to characterize in
full detail. Future studies, however, can aim to characterize
some of the psychological processes involved.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NSF grant CDI0835797 and by the Pittsburgh Life Sciences Greenhouse
Opportunity Fund.

References
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113 , 329349.
Bar-Hillel, M. (1980). The base-rate fallacy in probability
judgments. Acta Pscyhologica (44) , 211-233.
Bonawitz, E. B., & Griffiths, T. L. (2010). Deconfounding
hypothesis generation and evaluation in Bayesian models.
In S. Ohlsson, & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of
hte 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2260-2265). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Clement, J. (1982). Students' preconceptions in introductory
mechanics. American Journal of Physics, 50 , 66-71.
Fernbach, P. M., Darlow, D., & Sloman, S. A. (2010).
Neglect of alternative causes in predictive but not
diagnostic reasoning. Psychological Science, 21 (3) , 329336.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51 ,
334-384.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982).
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kording, K. P., & Wolpert, D. M. (2006). Bayesian decision
theory in sensorimotor control. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 10 (7) , 319-326.
McCloskey, M. (1983). Intuitive physics. Scientific
American, 24 , 122-130.
Sanborn, A. N., Griffiths, T. L., & Navarro, D. J. (2010).
Rational approximations to rational models: Alternative
algorithms for category learning. Psychological Review,
117 (4) , 1144-1167.
Spelke, E. S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J., & Jacobson,
K. (1992). Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review,
99 (4) , 605-632.
Yuille, A., & Kersten, D. (2006). Vision as Bayesian
inference: analysis by synthesis? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 10 (7) , 301-308.

Discussion
Our data support the conclusion that hypothesis evaluation
is consistent with the inverse reasoning account but that
hypothesis discovery is not. In some respects, the failure of
the participants to discover the parsimonious explanations is
quite surprising. The parsimonious explanations were
straightforward, requiring the participant to posit at most
two stationary attractors or repellers. It should have been
possible for participants to discover the parsimonious
explanations, and some of them indeed did so. In other
respects, the failure of the participants to discover the
parsimonious explanation makes sense. Even in the simple
object discovery task presented in this paper, there are
infinitely many explanations that might be considered. The
inverse reasoning account is often unhelpful in these
situations. Bayes’ theorem admonishes the reasoner to
consider all the possible explanations for the observations,
but does not provide guidance when doing so is impossible.
Although generating the best explanation from an infinite
class may be computationally challenging, evaluating the
merits of a handful of selected hypotheses seems
substantially easier. It is therefore not surprising that
hypothesis evaluation was broadly – although perhaps not
absolutely – consistent with the normative inverse reasoning
account. The dissociation between discovery and evaluation
is consistent with the view that people rely on non-Bayesian
strategies to generate candidate explanations for evaluation,
but are able to approximate Bayesian reasoning when
deciding which of these candidates is best (Bonawitz and
Griffiths, 2010).
Participants may have used several different kinds of
strategies to generate candidate explanations during the
discovery phase of our experiment. For example, an initial
explanation might have been generated using the idea that
objects often move directly towards attractors. If needed,
this initial explanation might have been improved using
search heuristics such as hill-climbing. The process of
discovery might also rely on analogical reasoning—for

185

