UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Olfaction in a hunter-gatherer society: Insights from language and culture

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/51t1d191

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Wnuk, Ewelina
Majid, Asifa

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Olfaction in a hunter-gatherer society: Insights from language and culture
Ewelina Wnuk (ewelina.wnuk@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Asifa Majid (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
According to a widely-held view among various scholars,
olfaction is inferior to other human senses. It is also believed
by many that languages do not have words for describing
smells. Data collected among the Maniq, a small population
of nomadic foragers in southern Thailand, challenge the
above claims and point to a great linguistic and cultural
elaboration of odor. This article presents evidence of the
importance of olfaction in indigenous rituals and beliefs, as
well as in the lexicon. The results demonstrate the richness
and complexity of the domain of smell in Maniq society and
thereby challenge the universal paucity of olfactory terms and
insignificance of olfaction for humans.
Keywords: olfaction; language of perception; smell terms;
Maniq; Aslian.

Introduction
For centuries, great thinkers and scientists have
underestimated the sense of smell in humans. Olfaction is
often singled out as the least useful perceptual sense, whose
role in life is negligible. “Of all the senses it is the one
which appears to contribute least to the cognitions of the
human mind” (Condillac, 1754/1930, p. xxxi). Darwin
(1874) deemed it to be “of extremely slight service” (p. 17),
while to Kant (1798/2006) it appeared as “the most
dispensable” (p. 50) of the senses. It has also been claimed
that olfaction is of “little special value across cultures”
(Gardner, 1993, p. 61) and that man “has left the world of
smells” (Burton, 1976, p. 109). Neuroscientists have
expressed the belief that smell is insignificant for humans
and that, in fact, it is “extremely rudimentary” (Grinker,
1934, p. 313), vestigial (Pinker, 1997), or as Stanley-Jones
(1957) phrased it, the human rhinencephalon is
“untenanted” (p. 594).
Hand in hand with these ideas came the popularization of
the belief that olfactory language is impoverished. Dan
Sperber (1974/1975), a co-author of the cognitive approach
to communication known as Relevance Theory, wrote:
Even though the human sense of smell can distinguish
hundreds of thousands of smells and in this regard is
comparable to sight or hearing, in none of the world’s
languages does there seem to be a classification of smells
comparable, for example, to colour classification.…
There is no semantic field of smells. (pp. 115–116)
According to Henning (1916), “olfactory abstraction is
impossible” (p. 66), while Kant (1798/2006) remarks on a

margin of his manuscript: “Smell does not allow itself to be
described, but only compared through similarity with
another sense” (p. 51).
In spite of the fact that smell is either devalued or ignored
in the accounts of many fields of science, there is a growing
body of literature which attempts to bring to the fore the
importance of smell across cultures (e.g. Classen, Howes, &
Synnott, 1994). However, to date there are relatively few
studies providing detailed descriptions of olfactory
vocabularies in various languages. The current article is
intended as a contribution to filling that gap by providing a
description of the olfactory lexicon in the language of the
Maniq, a group of nomadic hunter-gatherers living in
southern Thailand. At the same time, it adds to the
knowledge on olfaction of the larger linguistic group of
Aslian (belonging to the Austroasiatic family), which is a
locus of considerable olfactory elaboration in the cultural
and linguistic realm (Burenhult & Majid, 2011). The Maniq
data challenges the view that olfaction is of little value to
humans as well as the idea that olfactory lexica are
necessarily impoverished and lacking in abstract terms. This
is important evidence, since the generalizations cited earlier
are made primarily on the basis of WEIRD (Western,
Educated, Industrialized, Rich, Democratic) communities
(Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010) and we know that
even apparently basic processes such as visual perception
may vary across populations (Segall, Campbell, &
Herskovits, 1966).
In order to give as comprehensive account as possible of
the complex domain of smell in the Maniq language and
culture, the topic was explored with the use of multiple
methods: ethnographic observation and interview, linguistic
elicitation and experimentation. We begin by providing a
cultural background to the role of olfaction in the beliefs
and practices of the group. We then go on to discuss Maniq
smell terminology and, finally, turn to the analysis of
speakers’ similarity judgments of Maniq smell terms with
the use of multidimensional scaling.

The Maniq and their Language
Maniq [maˈniʔ] is spoken by 240-300 people living in
scattered groups in the Banthad mountain range of southern
Thailand (more specifically, in Trang, Satun and
Phatthalung provinces). Maniq people belong to the larger
ethnographic cluster of Semang with a traditionally mobile
lifestyle and hunter-gatherer mode of subsistence. Despite

1155

on-going deforestation and pressure towards sedentism,
many Maniq are still nomadic and continue to hunt animals
and forage wild plants. Their economy is further supported
by income from tourists and small-scale exchange of forest
produce. Maniq language belongs to the Northern Aslian
branch of Aslian, which forms part of the Austroasiatic
family.

Indigenous Beliefs and Practices
Smell offers a heuristic method of making judgments about
odor-emitting sources. Whether to approach something or
stay clear of it might depend on the olfactory input one gets
from the environment. This function of olfaction is said to
be basic for all humans and is believed to be tightly related
to the fact that we perceive and categorize smells according
to their pleasantness (Yeshurun & Sobel, 2010).
There are numerous examples of odors in the Maniq
world which have very clear associations in terms of
whether their source is desirable or not. The Maniq make
constant use of this information in a variety of contexts –
ranging from everyday foraging activities, through
indigenous medicine to the ritualized uses of scents. This
section explores a number of instances which reflect the
relevance of odor in the beliefs and practices of the tribe.
A large number of medicinal herbs collected by the
Maniq have intense aromas, the majority of which can be
described by the term lspəs ‘to be fragrant’. Exemplars
include: kasay ‘Dianella ensifolia’, kuɲit ‘turmeric
(Curcuma domestica)’, biha ‘Triomma malaccensis’ and
pʰlɛy ‘Cassumunar ginger (Zingiber montanum)’ (from Thai
phlai). The fact that pleasing odors and healing or diseasepreventive powers come together in a sizeable group of
plants seems to be perceived not as a coincidence, but
instead speakers perceive a causal relationship between
them. A Maniq woman asked whether a rhizome of the
cassumunar ginger she wore in a necklace protected her
against illness answered affirmatively adding ʔɛʔ lspəs ‘it is
fragrant’. This links to an idea found among the closelyrelated Aslian groups (e.g. Jahai, Batek), namely that on
some occasions odor is believed to be the curing agent of
medicine (Burenhult & Majid, 2011; Endicott, 1979).
The beneficial properties of aromatic herbs extend beyond
health-protective talismans such as necklaces, headbands
and wristbands. A good example of this is the plant called
kasay ‘Dianella ensifolia’, whose roots are ‘burnt in fire
during windstorms’ (tɔt buwaʔ ʔɛʔ hayhɔy) in order to
appease the wind (cf. the use of kasay and other fragrant
plants during thunderstorms among some Aslian groups;
Dallos, 2011; Endicott, 1979). At the same time, kasay is a
multi-purpose medicine which apart from being boiled in
water and used to treat stomachache is also burnt in fire in
order to produce smoke to be inhaled by the sick.1
The Maniq do not offer detailed explanations of how

smoke counters disease or wind, but considering how
frequently the term lspəs is mentioned in such contexts one
can be confident that smell plays an important role. A
valuable insight into understanding these practices can be
gained from the description of a similar act (blowing
incense smoke on the body of a sick person) performed by
the Batek:
The smoke is supposed to enter the body and cause the
disease to flee. This is because the odour of the smoke is
good (bed'èt) and that of the disease bad (jebéc), and they
cannot mix. If the smoke goes in, the disease must leave.
Alternatively, some say the good-smelling smoke draws
the disease out of the body by attracting it, causing it to
follow the smoke as it wafts upward from the patient's
body. (Endicott, 1979, pp. 107-108)
Another situation in which a good-smelling smoke is used
for fighting against a bad force is perhaps one of the most
salient and common Maniq rituals of ‘burning animal hair’2
(tɔt sɔk ʔay) and ‘bones’ (ʔiyeŋ). It is performed on hot days
when the sun has a yellow color and when it releases the
characteristic smell hamis3. Hamis descends into the forest
and spreads around causing illness among the people.
Maniq, like other Semang (Benjamin, 1985; Endicott, 1979;
Lye, 2004), believe that a cool and shaded environment is
healthy and provides protection against disease. Exposed
locations without too many trees, on the other hand, are
dangerous since the sun heats people’s bodies and turns
their eyes red. At such moments, the shelters provide safe
refuge from both the heat as well as the malicious hamis.
Burnt animal hair and bones give off a pleasant smell,
caŋɛs, which together with the smoke floats up to the sun
and neutralizes hamis. This belief is a vivid illustration of
how much power is attributed to odor in that it can have
direct physical effects on the human body and the sun. Yet,
people can actively defend themselves by releasing good
odors thus forcing out harmful ones and bringing a balance
to their immediate environment.
Smells are held as projections of their sources which can
directly affect the human body or the environment. As
Classen (1993) puts it noting the same phenomenon in a
number of cultures across the world, “Involved here is the
notion of odor as ‘essence’, containing the intrinsic identity
of its source of origin” (p. 99). By this token, according to
the Maniq viewpoint, invasive and dangerous odors
constitute danger while benevolent ones can be employed as
cures and defense mechanisms.

Language of Olfaction
The cultural importance of olfaction is accompanied by a
remarkably complex set of odor distinctions in the language.

2

1

The latter practice was used by a man whose condition
(immobilizing pain in the legs) was attributed to the ‘soil spirit’
(tames tieʔ).

Burning hair (though in this case, it is human hair) is reported
to be another thunderstorm-appeasing practice among the Batek,
Lanoh and Temiar (Dallos, 2011; Endicott, 1979).
3
The Batek, too, believe that the sun has an unpleasant odor
(pel’èng) (Endicott, 1979).

1156

These provide additional support for the claim that the
domain of smell is of special value for Maniq society.

Table 1: Maniq smell terms with their corresponding
exemplars. Numbers in brackets indicate the number of
consultants who listed that exemplar. Unidentified animal
and plant species are given in square brackets.

Smell Terminology
In this section, we discuss the main Maniq smell terms.
Twelve of these were elicited in a free naming task using
“Sniffin’ Sticks” (Hummel, Sekinger, Wolf, Pauli, & Kobal,
1997), where Maniq speakers described different odor
stimuli. Due to space limitations, the results of that task
will not be reported here. Three additional terms (palɛŋ,
caŋə, caŋɛs) were attested during other language elicitation
sessions.
In order to move towards understanding the meaning of
the smell terms, an exemplar listing task was conducted
with the speakers. In this task, consultants were presented
with smell terms, one by one, and asked the question “What
smells x?”. Participants were free to list as many exemplars
as they wished. The task was carried out in Maniq. Table 1
lists the terms together with their exemplar sources elicited
from 8 speakers. Numbers in brackets next to each exemplar
indicate the number of consultants who gave that response.
Six participants contributed responses to the entire (or
almost entire) set of smell terms whereas 2 speakers
commented on a limited number of terms while another
participant was being interviewed. All data is taken into
account, though in situations where one of the speakers
repeated the response heard from another speaker, it is
counted only once. Most plants were identified with the help
of Maneenoon (2001). It was not possible to identify some
of the plant and animal species – these are given in square
brackets.
Maniq smell terms share a number of semantic properties.
First, they are dedicated to describing olfactory sensations
rather than being general descriptors applicable across
sensory domains.4 Second, they are abstract, meaning that
they do not make direct reference to the source of the smell
(like e.g. fruity), but rather denote an odor quality. This
quality is often a common feature of a range of diverse
objects, though examples of terms associated with
essentially one referent seem to occur, too (e.g. hamis).
Note that some smell terms seem to have clearly
identifiable prototypical sources, e.g. kamɛh, palɛŋ, while
others do not have such salient core exemplars, e.g. miʔ
ɲətuʔ, miʔ bayɔ̃ɸ. On the whole, unique listings of
exemplars are common, which may, to some extent, be an
artifact of the listing task, or the small number of
participants. It may also be indicative of a certain amount of
subjectivity in the understanding of smell terms, but this is
not clear at this point.
Another important aspect of odor terminology in Maniq is
its presence in everyday conversation. The smell lexicon
does not consist of specialist terms known to a limited group
of people, nor is it restricted to particular contexts or
4

The only exception here is the term bayɔ̃ɸ which, apart from
describing smell, refers to color – a specific kind of white, e.g. of
fog or old individual’s hair.

Term
caŋə
caŋɛs

caŋus
hamis
haʔĩt

kamɛh
kamloh

lspəs

palɛŋ

paʔɔ̃ʔ

miʔ
bayɔ̃ɸ
miʔ
danɔw

miʔ
huhũɸ

miʔ
latɨŋ
miʔ
ɲətuʔ

1157

Exemplars
tubers (Dioscorea spp.) (4), food (2), cooked
meat (2), rice (1), pork (1)
animal hair (2), burnt animal hair (2), burnt
animal fat (1), sun (1)
soap (3), washing oneself (2), fruit
(Goniothalamus sp.) (1), leaves (1), [kind of
fruit] (1), clothes (1), talcum powder (1), sun
(1)
sun (6), air/smoke coming from the sun (2)
rotting animal (4), animal (1), plantain squirrel
(Callosciurus notatus) (1), Prevost’s squirrel
(Callosciurus prevostii) (1), [kind of squirrel]
(1), bats (1)
[kind of millipede A] (5), [kind of millipede B]
(1), [kind of millipede C] (1), ipoh poison (1),
[kind of bat] (1), forest (1)
smoke from fire (3), old shelter (1), bathing (1)
tubers (Dioscorea spp.) (3), bearcat (Arctictis
binturong) (2), new shelter (1), clean and dry
clothes (1), fruit (Ficus chartacea) (1), forest
(1), tree (1), animal (1), food (1), medicine to
drink (1)
blood (5), raw meat (1), [kind of plant] (1),
searching for tubers (1), sun (1)
pouring/getting water (2), tuber (Dioscorea
daunea) (2), mud (1), digging tubers in mud
(1), cooking muddy tubers (1), wet or dirty
clothes (1), rotting bamboo tube (1), soil (1),
mushroom (1), petai (Parkia speciosa) (1),
Parkia timoriana (1), sweat (1), urine (1), old
shelter (1)
old shelter (2), soil (2), shelter (1), mushrooms
(1), skin of a dead animal (1), rotten wood (1),
bamboo for water (1), rotting leaf (1), head of
macaque/leaf monkey (1)
mushrooms (2), rotten wood (2), rotten
mushrooms (1), old shelter (1), animal bones
(1), durian seed (1), snakes (1), forest (1),
searching for tubers (1), soil (1)
snakes (2), soil (2), searching for tubers (1),
digging tubers (1), mushrooms (1), sweat (1),
rotten wood (1), walking in the forest (1),
making fire (1), smoke (1)
soil (2), burning fire (1), [type of fire wood A]
(1), [type of fire wood B] (1), [kind of flower]
(1), [kind of fruit] (1), mushrooms (1), tree (1),
walking in the forest (1)
tree sap (1), leaves (1), garlic (1), soil (1),
forest (1)

registers of speech. Talking about smell is a mundane
activity which all members of the community engage in on a
daily basis. What is more, smell is an important reference
point in a number of areas of life, such as medicinal
practices and rituals.
Formally, Maniq smell terms can be subdivided into
stative verbs and noun phrases. The verbs can take verbal
affixes, though most frequently they do not bear any
morphology (excluding the apparent frozen morphology in
ls-pəs, where the initial half-syllable has the shape of the
iterative affix). A few of the verbs, namely caŋɛs, caŋus and
caŋə, apart from being close semantically, are
phonologically similar. They do not, however, show
evidence of a productive derivational relationship.
As for the noun phrases, all of them are headed by the
noun miʔ ‘smell’. They appear to be lexical noun phrases
since none of the modifiers, with the exception of bayɔ̃ɸ5,
occurs outside of the “miʔ+…” phrase. For that reason, it is
rather difficult to establish the word class affiliation of these
modifiers, though elicited aspect-inflected forms for three of
them (danɔw, latɨŋ and ɲətuʔ) suggest that they might be
verbs.
All of the above terms serve as phenomenon-oriented
descriptions. The controlled activity of smelling as well as
the uncontrolled experience of perceiving smell are both
expressed by the verb ʔɔ̃ɲ ‘to smell’. It is worth noting that
the Maniq ʔɔ̃ɲ forms a clear and distinct category uniquely
relating to olfaction with no extensions into other sense
modalities.

Organization of the Smell Lexicon
Taking into account the large number of smell terms as well
as the considerable range of exemplars associated with most
of them, it is unclear what principles might underlie the
organization of the smell lexicon. One way of gaining
insight into that organization is to investigate the
relationships between the smell terms by collecting
similarity judgments from speakers, following a similar
procedure used to study color lexica (Shepard & Cooper,
1992). Since the Maniq are a non-literate community, this
task was carried out with the use of the triadic comparison
method, which does not require reading. Following data
collection, the results from 11 Maniq speakers were pooled
together to create a similarity matrix analyzed with
multidimensional scaling analysis.

Stimuli and Method
Stimuli for the experiment were the 15 smell terms given in
Table 1. The experiment was based on the triadic
comparison method as discussed by Weller and Romney
(1988). A complete triad test with 15 items would involve
455 triads, which would be time-consuming and tiring for
5
Bayɔ̃ɸ is a stative verb occurring in a variety of syntactic
contexts with a number of verbal affixes. Note, however, that
whenever the word is used to denote smell, it occurs in the
nonderived form.

participants. For that reason, we have used a balanced
incomplete block design (λ=1) of 35 triads. The letter λ
represents “the number of triads in which each pair of items
occurs” (Burton & Nerlove, 1976, p. 249). To increase the
reliability of the design without adding more triads, we
followed the recommendation of Burton and Nerlove (1976)
to administer two different triad compositions, with each
composition randomly presented to half of the participants.
Smell terms were randomly assigned a number and the
triads were created following the directions of Burton and
Nerlove. The only modification of Burton and Nerlove’s
design was the randomization of the order in which triads
were presented – items were randomized within and across
triads to avoid frequent repetition of terms in close
proximity.

Participants
The participants were 11 Maniq speakers (6 male, 5 female)
aged approximately 20-45 years. All were native speakers of
Maniq, who also had a good command of Southern Thai, the
unrelated majority language of the region.

Procedure
Each participant was tested individually. The task was run
exclusively in Maniq to preclude the influence of Southern
Thai. Speakers were orally presented with 3 smell terms at a
time and asked the following question: “Which one is not
the same/similar?” (the meaning of the Maniq term m̥ɨn,
from Thai mĕuan ‘same, similar’, has scope over both
sameness and similarity). The response was coded on a
response sheet and the next triad was presented until all
triads were complete.
In order to ensure that the task was proceeding as
intended, a series of precautions were taken. Before starting
the task, the researcher informed the participants that they
would be presented with words relating to smell. The
critical question “Which one is not the same/similar?” was
used each time with the initial triads to make sure the
participants remembered what they were asked to do. As
they became accustomed to the task, the question was
repeated every few triads. Three objects (three similar
leaves from the same plant) were placed in a row in front of
the consultants to act as anchors to the words in the triad. In
order to avoid a situation in which a consultant fell into a
response set, words were assigned to objects sometimes
from right to left and sometimes from left to right. When
presenting a triad, target words were pronounced slowly
several times with neutral intonation, unless a consultant
gave a response immediately after hearing the triad once.
Many consultants responded with the following phrases:
“These are together” and “This one is alone” or “These are
similar” and “This one is not similar”. In case of any
uncertainties on the side of the speaker or the researcher, the
triad was read out again and the question was repeated. On
the rare occasions when the consultant could not make a
choice after being asked the question several times, the
researcher proceeded to the next triad and came back to the

1158

problematic one at the end. All participants were able to
complete the study.

Results and Discussion
A 15x15 similarity matrix was constructed by summing
over all participants the number of times each pair of smell
terms was judged similar. The matrix served as input into
the scaling procedure carried out with the use of the
PROXSCAL algorithm in SPSS. The resulting twodimensional solution yielded a stress value (Stress-I) of
.098, a dispersion-accounted-for value of .99 and a Tucker’s
coefficient of congruence value of .995. Figure 1 shows the
overall results from all 11 participants.

with food objects whereas those at the top are associated
with nonfood objects. Again, this aspect appears to reflect
odor perception since edibility was found to distinguish
odorant samples (Chrea et al., 2004; Zarzo, 2008). An
important caveat to this interpretation is that the focus is
placed on the smell object rather than the smell quality
itself. For instance, the terms palɛŋ or haʔĩt refer to raw or
rotting animal meat, which are not edible within this
community. Nevertheless, they refer to meat, which is an
edible object.
Since many smell terms relate to multiple exemplars,
some of which may be edible while others not, we focused
on the smell term prototypes, which for the current purposes
are defined as items listed by more than 1 speaker.
Inspecting the plot, we see that most terms conform to the
edibility distinction. All items in the upper part of the plot
relate to exemplars which are considered to be inedible by
the Maniq, e.g. miʔ huhũɸ (snakes and soil), hamis (sun and
air/smoke coming from the sun), kamɛh (millipedes) and
kamloh (smoke from fire). As for the opposite side, most
items link to edible exemplars, e.g. palɛŋ (blood), lspəs
(tubers, bearcat), yet there are a few terms among whose
prototypical exemplars we find inedible objects – miʔ bayɔ̃ɸ
(old shelter and soil) and miʔ danɔw (rotten wood). So,
there is evidence consistent with viewing Dimension 2 in
terms of edibility but a further examination is required to
fully establish the facts.
A follow-up study could collect speakers’ judgments on
various possible semantic parameters, to see which best
predicts the attested dimensions.

Conclusions
Figure 1: Two-dimensional MDS of 15 Maniq smell terms
based on triadic comparison (N=11).
The distribution of smell terms is considerably more
stretched on the first dimension. Items are more densely
concentrated on the left-hand side, while the right-hand side
is more sparsely populated, especially if we look at the
almost empty area in the upper right quarter.
The first dimension is readily interpretable as
distinguishing between pleasant and unpleasant smell terms,
the former located on the right- and the latter on the lefthand side. Though the stimuli were words rather than actual
smells, this aspect of the results is comparable with studies
using odorants, which report the primary role of the hedonic
dimension in smell perception and categorization (e.g.
Dubois 2000; Schiffman, Robinson, & Erickson 1977).
Pleasantness is also of great importance when considering
neurophysiological responses to smells (cf. Yeshurun &
Sobel 2010 for an overview) and there is some evidence
suggesting this reflects the molecular structure of odorants
(Khan et al., 2007).
The interpretation of the second dimension is less
straightforward, yet a likely solution is the contrast of
edibility vs. inedibility. Items at the bottom are associated

This paper illustrates the richness and complexity of the
domain of smell in Maniq society. The different
methodologies employed provide insights into the smell
lexicon, its underlying structure, and the deep cultural
significance of different smell categories. Despite the fact
that many cultures, especially those which are part of the
developed world, are undergoing gradual deodorization,
there appear to be a number of societies with a long tradition
of vibrant interest in odor (cf. Classen, Howes, & Synnott
1994). As we hope to have demonstrated with this paper,
Maniq adds to the literature regarding the special cultural
value of smell across the world, and at the same time
reinforces our observation that the Aslian-speaking
communities of the Malay Peninsula provide a rewarding
setting for studying such smell cultures and their linguistic
elaboration of the domain (Burenhult & Majid, 2011).
Moreover, it highlights the importance of looking beyond
WEIRD people in our theories of cognition (Henrich et al.,
2010).
Smell is an integral part of the intimate knowledge of the
rainforest’s fauna and flora shared by the tribe. What is
more, for the Maniq, odor has a metaphysical dimension
whereby it is treated as the projection of its source able to
“act on its behalf”. This is illustrated by the wind-appeasing
ritual involving the burning of kasay as well as the

1159

medicinal practices of the group including both curing and
prevention (the best example being the emission of smell to
ward off the disease spreading with the odor of sun).
Contrary to the view that the language of odor is nonabstract and steeped in metaphors (Henning, 1916; Kant,
1798/2006; Sperber, 1974/1975), Maniq, and its Aslian
brethren, possess rich smell vocabularies of over a dozen
abstract terms. These terms are known to the whole speech
community and are employed in everyday conversation.
Finally, the internal structure of the Maniq smell lexicon
is remarkably similar to the dimensions of variance typically
found in studies of odor categorization in speakers without
an abstract olfactory lexicon. This suggests that odor lexica
may reflect a pan-human olfactory space. Further
investigation is needed to explore the extent to which
olfactory language follows olfactory perception and
cognition, and the extent to which perception and cognition
might mirror language in the domain of olfaction.

References
Benjamin, G. (1985). In the long term: Three themes in
Malayan cultural ecology. In K. L. Hutterer, A. T.
Rambo, & G. W. Lovelace (Eds.), Cultural values and
human ecology in Southeast Asia. Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan, Center for South and Southeast
Asian Studies.
Burenhult, N., & Majid, A. (2011). Olfaction in Aslian
ideology and language. The Senses and Society, 6(1), 19–
29.
Burton, M. L., & Nerlove, S. B. (1976). Balanced designs
for triads tests: Two examples from English. Social
Science Research, 5(3), 247–267.
Burton, R. (1976). The language of smell. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Chrea, C., Valentin, D., Sulmont-Rossé, C., Ly Mai, H.,
Hoang Nguyen, D., & Abdi, H. (2004). Culture and odor
categorization: Agreement between cultures depends
upon the odors. Food Quality and Preference, 15(7-8),
669–679.
Classen, C. (1993). Worlds of sense: Exploring the senses in
history and across cultures. London: Routledge.
Classen, C., Howes, D., & Synnott, A. (1994). Aroma: The
cultural history of smell. London: Routledge.
Condillac, E. B. de. (1930). Condillac’s treatise on the
sensations. (M. G. S. Carr, Trans.). London: The Favil
press. (Original work published 1754).
Dallos, C. (2011). From equality to inequality: Social
change among newly sedentary Lanoh hunter-gatherer
traders of Peninsular Malaysia. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.
Darwin, C. (1874). The descent of man, and selection in
relation to sex (2nd ed.). London: John Murray.
Dubois, D. (2000). Categories as acts of meaning: The case
of categories in olfaction and audition. Cognitive Science
Quarterly, 1(1), 35–68.
Endicott, K. M. (1979). Batek Negrito religion: The worldview and rituals of a hunting and gathering people of

Peninsular Malaysia. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gardner, H. (1993). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple
intelligences. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Grinker, R. R. (1934). Neurology. Springfield, IL: C.C.
Thomas.
Henning, H. (1916). Der Geruch. Leipzig: J. A. Barth.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The
weirdest people in the world. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 33(2-3), 61–83.
Hummel, T., Sekinger, B., Wolf, S., Pauli, E., & Kobal, G.
(1997). ‘Sniffin’Sticks’: Olfactory performance assessed
by the combined testing of odor identification, odor
discrimination and olfactory threshold. Chemical Senses,
22(1), 39-52.
Kant, I. (2006). Anthropology from a pragmatic point of
view. (R. B. Louden, Trans.). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. (Original work published 1798).
Khan, R. M., Luk, C.-H., Flinker, A., Aggarwal, A., Lapid,
H., Haddad, R., & Sobel, N. (2007). Predicting odor
pleasantness from odorant structure: Pleasantness as a
reflection of the physical world. Journal of Neuroscience,
27(37), 10015-10023. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.115807.2007
Lye, T.-P. (2004). Changing pathways: Forest degradation
and the Batek of Pahang, Malaysia. Lanham: Lexington
Books.
Maneenoon, K. (2001). Ethnobotany of Sakai tribe in
Trang, Phatthalung and Yala provinces (Master’s thesis).
Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works. New York: Norton.
Schiffman, S., Robinson, D. E., & Erickson, R. P. (1977).
Multidimensional scaling of odorants: Examination of
psychological and physicochemical dimensions. Chemical
Senses, 2(3), 375-390.
Segall, M. H., Campbell, D. T., & Herskovits, M. J. (1966).
The influence of culture on visual perception.
Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill Co.
Shepard, R. N., & Cooper, L. A. (1992). Representation of
colors in the blind, color-blind, and normally sighted.
Psychological Science, 3(2), 97-104.
Sperber, D. (1975). Rethinking symbolism. (A. L. Morton,
Trans.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(Original work published 1974).
Stanley-Jones, D. (1957). Posture and the rhinencephalon: A
new interpretation. The Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 125(4), 591-598.
Weller, S. C., & Romney, A. K. (1988). Systematic data
collection. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Yeshurun, Y., & Sobel, N. (2010). An odor is not worth a
thousand words: From multidimensional odors to
unidimensional odor objects. Annual Review of
Psychology, 61, 219–241.
Zarzo, M. (2008). Psychologic dimensions in the perception
of everyday odors: Pleasantness and edibility. Journal of
Sensory Studies, 23(3), 354–376.

1160

