UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Order effects in diagnostic reasoning with four candidate hypotheses

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2864s16w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Rebitschek, Felix G.
Scholz, Agnes
Bocklisch, Franziska
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Order effects in diagnostic reasoning with four candidate hypotheses
Felix G. Rebitschek (felix.rebitschek@uni-greifswald.de)
University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology

Agnes Scholz (agnes.scholz@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de)
Chemnitz University of Technology, Department of Psychology

Franziska Bocklisch (franziska.bocklisch@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de)
Chemnitz University of Technology, Department of Psychology

Josef F. Krems (josef.krems@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Chemnitz University of Technology, Department of Psychology

Georg Jahn (georg.jahn@uni-greifswald.de)
University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology

alternatives, but none is decisive by itself. The order in
which symptoms are encountered can influence the final
diagnosis because the initial diagnostic hypotheses may
affect how the subsequent symptoms are weighed and
integrated (e.g., Chapman, Bergus & Elstein, 1996). If
symptoms are observed in sequence, the initially
encountered symptoms trigger diagnostic hypotheses
(Mehlhorn, Taatgen, Lebiere, & Krems, 2011).
Sequential symptom processing towards the initial
hypothesis demonstrates a confirmation bias (Nickerson,
1998), which would be overcome if all alternative
diagnostic hypotheses could be considered in parallel. In
previous studies such impartial symptom integration
sometimes succeeded for two alternative diagnoses
(McKenzie, 1998), but doubts have been raised whether
more than two alternative diagnoses can be considered
impartially in parallel (Dougherty & Hunter, 2003).
According to normative Bayesian information integration,
the order of symptom presentation should not matter.
Symptom patterns equally supportive of two alternative
diagnoses should produce equal proportions of these
diagnoses. However, already updating of a single hypothesis
can be biased by the order, in which pieces of evidence are
encountered (Wang, Johnson, & Zhang, 2006). Hogarth and
Einhorn (1992) specified circumstances under which
normative updating of a single belief is possible and no
order effects should occur (e.g. stepwise simple evaluation
of short and consistent sequences). Yet, models of
sequential information integration including the belief
adjustment model of Hogarth and Einhorn (1992) typically
postulate a disproportionately large influence of early
encountered information resulting in a primacy effect.

Abstract
Sequentially observed symptoms in diagnostic reasoning have
to be integrated to arrive at a final diagnosis. In our
experiments employing quasi-medical problems, four
sequentially presented symptoms were consistent with
multiple diagnostic hypotheses. We tested whether symptom
order creates biases in symptom evaluation. Early symptoms
induced a bias towards the initial hypothesis even though an
alternative hypothesis was equally supported. In two
experiments, stepwise ratings were prompted to explicitly
highlight alternative hypotheses. Explicit highlighting
eliminated the bias towards the initial hypothesis if only two
hypotheses competed, but the bias remained if more than two
hypotheses were associated with symptoms in a sequence.
Our results are consistent with process models of information
integration that specify how early information can frame the
processing of later information. Extending previous results
obtained with fewer contending hypotheses, we show limits in
impartially considering more than two hypotheses.
Keywords: Order Effects; Diagnostic Reasoning; Multiple
Candidate Hypotheses; Construction Integration Theory

Introduction
When humans explain observations in their environment,
they apply knowledge about possible causes and the effects
that each cause can bring about. Explaining observed
symptoms by a diagnosis that specifies the most probable
cause can be difficult for symptoms which are ambiguous
and thus consistent with multiple diagnoses or inconsistent
and hard to subsume under a single diagnosis (Johnson &
Krems, 2001). Imagine the sequential integration of
symptoms in medical diagnosis in its simplest form: You, a
physician, become aware of a symptom pointing towards
different possible diseases your new patient might have
caught. Bit by bit you take notice of a second, third and a
fourth symptom. Some of them are unspecific, others
strengthen your belief in a diagnosis and weaken

905

specific alternatives could unpack the complement of the
focal hypothesis into specified alternative diagnoses.

When multiple diagnostic hypotheses compete, such a
strong influence of early information can take the form of a
bias towards the diagnosis that is most strongly supported
by the first symptom. The memory dynamic resulting in a
confirmation bias in sequential symptom integration can be
described in terms of the construction-integration theory of
text comprehension by Kintsch (1998) (Baumann,
Mehlhorn, & Bocklisch, 2007). After observing the first
symptom, the first construction-integration cycle results in
high activation of the candidate hypothesis most strongly
supported by the first symptom. Subsequent constructionintegration cycles start from this state. Thus, initial
symptoms and preliminary hypotheses frame the processing
of later symptoms.
Recently, HyGene (Thomas, Dougherty, Spenger, &
Harbison, 2008), which models memory processes in
hypothesis generation for a specified set of symptoms has
been extended to capture effects of sequential symptom
processing in detail (Lange, Thomas, & Davelaar, 2012).
The activations of symptom representations compete in
working memory as symptoms are sequentially encountered,
however, framing of symptom processing by preliminary
hypotheses is not yet implemented in HyGene.
Our main goal was to study framing of symptom
processing by preliminary hypotheses and its effects on final
diagnoses in diagnostic reasoning with multiple candidate
hypotheses. So, the reported experiments examine
sequential diagnostic reasoning with four candidate
diagnoses. Differing from previous studies (Koehler, 1991),
we will not set a single hypothesis, whose probability has to
be rated. Instead, participants have to choose among four
candidate hypotheses. We determine effects of symptom
order by evaluating proportions of final diagnoses for
ambiguous symptom sequences, which equally support
alternative diagnoses.
Whereas framing by preliminary hypotheses should bias
towards initial hypotheses, increasing the saliency of
alternative diagnoses should decrease biased symptom
processing. We examine both explicit and implicit
highlighting of alternative diagnoses. Alternative diagnoses
were explicitly highlighted by asking participants to rate the
current support for each possible diagnosis after each
symptom. This procedure constantly reminds participants of
the competing hypotheses.
Implicit highlighting of alternative diagnoses was
attempted by presenting inconsistent symptom sequences.
Symptoms inconsistent with the initial hypothesis could
increase the salience of diagnostic alternatives. In terms of
support theory (Tversky & Koehler, 1994), symptoms
inconsistent with the focal hypothesis that strongly suggest

Experiments
Participants were told that they should evaluate symptoms
of workers in a chemical plant to determine which of four
chemicals had most likely affected each worker. In all four
experiments, the diagnostic reasoning tasks referred to the
same knowledge about symptoms and causes, which was
acquired in a learning phase. Firstly, participants learned
which symptoms belonged to which symptom classes and
subsequently, with which probability each of the four
chemicals caused symptoms from a symptom class (see
Table 1).
Each diagnostic reasoning trial consisted of four
sequentially presented symptoms after which participants
had to respond with a diagnosis. Diagnostic symptoms
pointing more strongly to one chemical also pointed weakly
to a second chemical. For example, an “Ab”-symptom
would point strongly to A and weakly to B. In addition,
there were unspecific symptoms, which were caused with
equal probability by all four chemicals. These were denoted
with “x”. Thus, an Ab-x-Ba-x symptom sequence could
induce A as the initial hypothesis but was ambiguous
because it contains equal support for A and B. Such a
sequence is ambiguous, but it is still consistent because all
symptoms are consistent with both A and B.
In Experiment 1, we presented such ambiguous symptom
sequences (AB) together with sequences that more strongly
supported A (AAB) or B (ABB). The A-diagnosis was
strongly supported by the first symptom, which should
result in a higher proportion of A- than B-diagnoses for
ambiguous AB-items (primacy order effect). In Experiment
2, participants rated the current support for each of the four
alternative hypotheses after each symptom. This explicit
highlighting of alternative diagnoses should reduce order
effects. In Experiment 3, the procedure was identical to
Experiment 1, however, inconsistent symptom sequences
such as Cd-Ab-x-Ba were presented that may implicitly
highlight alternative diagnoses. Finally, in Experiment 4 the
inconsistent symptom sequences were presented as in
Experiment 2 with ratings of all alternative diagnoses after
each symptom to highlight alternative diagnoses explicitly
as well.

Method
Participants Forty (28 female; mean age 23.6, SD = 2.8)
undergraduate students from the University of Greifswald
and 39 (30 female; mean age 22.1, SD = 2.7) undergraduate

906

Table 1: Domain knowledge participants had to acquire at
the beginning
Group Chem. Strong
Weak
Unspecific
symptoms
symptoms
symptoms
concerning concerning concerning
GasiR
Eyes
Respiration Circulatory
form
problems,
Pain
GasiB
Respiration Eyes
Circulatory
form
problems,
Pain
Fluid
W
Skin
Neurolog.
Circulatory
problems,
Pain
Fluid
K
Neurolog.
Skin
Circulatory
problems,
Pain
Note. The original materials were in German.

students from Chemnitz University of Technology took part
in experiments 1 and 2.
Forty (32 female; mean age 21.5, SD = 2.2) undergraduate
students from the University of Greifswald and 39 (26
female; mean age 23.5, SD = 3.2) undergraduate students
from Chemnitz University of Technology took part in
experiments 3 and 4.
Material The four alternative diagnoses were introduced as
chemicals that cause symptoms when they affect workers.
Each chemical caused symptoms from one symptom class
(e.g. Eyes) “almost always” (see Table 1). These were
symptoms with a strong causal link to the respective
chemical. In addition, each chemical caused symptoms from
a second symptom class “occasionally”. These were weak
symptoms for the respective chemical. As shown in Table 1,
there were two pairs of chemicals. Within a pair, strong and
weak symptoms did overlap. For example, the symptom
class “Eyes” was strong for R and weak for B, “Respiration”
was strong for “B” and weak for “R”. Furthermore, there
were two unspecific symptom classes that each chemical
could cause “occasionally”.
Each symptom class contained two symptoms. For
example, the “Eyes”-symptoms were “Tears” and “Eyelid
swelling”. The symptom sequences presented in the
diagnostic reasoning trials consisted of four symptoms.
Table 2 shows the item types and the symptom orders that
they subsume. We constructed each symptom order with
each chemical in the “A”-role and each possible assignment
of symptoms. For example, if “W” was the “A”-chemical,
and “K” was the “B”-chemical for “Ab-x-Ba-x”, one
possible symptom assignment would be “Rash-StingParalysis-Swoon”.

In each experiment ambiguous AB-items were presented.
In Experiments 1 and 2, the additional item types were AAB
and ABB. AB, AAB and ABB item types contain Ab- and
Ba-symptoms which both could have been caused by A or
B. AB items thus are ambiguous, but they are not
inconsistent. In Experiments 3 and 4, the additional item
types were CAB and ABC subsuming inconsistent symptom
sequences (see Table 2). Inconsistent sequences confronted
participants with a “Cd”-symptom that could not be caused
by A or B and that was strong for C and weak for D. CAB
and ABC items are inconsistent and they are ambiguous
with regard to A and B.
Procedure In all four experiments, participants were first
introduced to the cover story and then acquired knowledge
about the chemicals and symptom classes. They studied a
table of symptom classes and symptoms and were tested
until they could assign symptoms to symptom classes with
100% accuracy. Then they studied a table similar to Table 1
and were tested until they could assign the correct chemical
or the correct set of chemicals to a symptom-frequency
combination with 100% accuracy. Then, the diagnostic
reasoning task was explained and participants were told that
the symptoms to be diagnosed were caused by exactly one
of the four chemicals.
In each diagnostic reasoning trial in Experiments 1 and 3,
four symptoms were presented serially in the center of the
screen. Each symptom was shown for 2 s followed by a
fixation cross shown for 1 s. After the fourth symptom,
participants were prompted to enter one of the four
chemicals as their final diagnosis. Then, they were asked to
rate their confidence from 1 (very unsure) to 7 (very sure).
In Experiments 2 and 4, the trial procedure was similar

907

ambiguous AB-items in Experiment 1, whereas in
Experiment 2, the proportion of A-diagnoses did not deviate
from the proportion of B-diagnoses, t(38) = -0.10, p = .924.
Mean confidence ratings are shown in the top half of Table
4. Space limitations preclude a detailed analysis but it is
apparent that confidence was reduced for the ambiguous
AB-items.

except that after each symptom participants rated for each
chemical how likely it had caused the symptoms seen so far
on a scale from 0 to 100. These ratings are not reported in
the present paper. We just consider the effect that this
procedure had on the final diagnosis.
Table 2: Orders of symptoms related to first (A) and
second (B) respectively third (C) and fourth (D) chemicals;
included x stands for unspecific symptoms
Experiment
Item type
Order
1 and 2
AAB Consistent
Ab-Ab-x-Ba
Ab-Ab-Ba-x
Ab-x-Ab-Ba
1 and 2
ABB Consistent
Ab-x-Ba-Ba
Ab-Ba-Ba-x
Ab-Ba-x-Ba
1 and 2
AB Consistent
Ab-x-x-Ba
Ab-x-Ba-x
Ab-Ba-x-x
3 and 4
AB Consistent
x-Ab-Ba-x
x-Ab-x-Ba
x-x-Ab-Ba
3 and 4
CAB Inconsistent Cd-Ab-Ba-x
Cd-Ab-x-Ba
Cd-x-Ab-Ba
3 and 4
ABC Inconsistent Ab-Ba-Cd-x
Ab-Ba-x-Cd
Ab-x-Ba-Cd

Exp.
1

Table 3: Means of proportions of diagnoses
Item
A (SD)
B (SD)
C (SD) D (SD)
type
AAB
.91 (.15) .09 (.15)
AB
.65 (.20) .35 (.20)
ABB
.14 (.21) .86 (.21)

2

AAB
AB
ABB

.83 (.16)
.50 (.21)
.09 (.10)

.17 (.16)
.50 (.21)
.91 (.10)

3

AB
ABC
CAB

.62 (.26)
.60 (.25)
.48 (.25)

.28 (.19)
.22 (.17)
.20 (.19)

.12 (.12) .06 (.10)
.26 (.20) .06 (.08)

AB
ABC
CAB

.50 (.21)
.45 (.22)
.42 (.22)

.44 (.19)
.29 (.15)
.39 (.17)

.21 (.18) .06 (.07)
.14 (.12) .05 (.08)

4

Note. Proportions for AB items in Experiments 3 and 4 do not sum
to 1 because proportions of wrong C and D diagnoses are omitted
from the table.

In each experiment, each participant was presented with
each of nine symptom orders (see Table 2) with each of the
four chemicals in the A-role resulting in 36 trials in total.
The assignment of symptoms to symptom orders was
chosen randomly and the trials were presented in
randomized order. In addition, four training trials were
presented in each experiment.

Experiments 3 and 4 In Experiments 3 and 4, the
ambiguous item type AB and inconsistent item types ABC
and CAB were presented. Note that with respect to A and B,
the item types ABC and CAB contain equal support as well.
Thus, normatively equal proportions of A- and B-diagnoses
should be elicited by all three item types. Mean proportions
of final diagnoses are shown in the bottom half of Table 3.
For AB-items the results are similar to Experiments 1 and
2. Without explicit highlighting of diagnostic alternatives in
Experiment 3, there was a clear bias towards A-diagnoses
compared with B-diagnoses (primacy order effect)
confirmed by a paired t-test, t(39) = 4.94, p < .001, d = 0.78,
whereas with explicit highlighting in Experiment 4, the
proportion of A-diagnoses did not deviate from the
proportion of B-diagnoses, t(38) = 1.02, p = .315.
For ABC and CAB items, the leading strong symptom
took effect in Experiment 3. The proportion of A-diagnoses
was higher for ABC than for CAB items, t(39) = 3.42, p =
.001, d = 0.47, and the proportion of C-diagnoses was
higher for CAB than for ABC items, t(39) = 4.12, p < .001,
d = 0.84. Nonetheless, A-diagnoses were more frequent than

Results
Experiments 1 and 2 Mean proportions of final diagnoses
are shown in the top half of Table 3 separated by item type.
In both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2, the proportion of
A-diagnoses decreased from AAB to AB to ABB items
reflecting the decrease in relative support of A. Withinsubjects contrasts confirmed this decrease in the proportion
of A-diagnoses by significant linear trends, F(1, 39) =
230.84, p < .001, ƞ2 = .86, and F(1, 38) = 474.09, p < .001,
ƞ2 = .93, respectively.
Focusing on ambiguous AB-items, equal proportions of
A- and B-diagnoses each about 50% would be expected
normatively. In Experiment 1, there was a clear bias towards
A-diagnoses compared with B-diagnoses for AB-items,
confirmed by a paired t-test, t(39) = 4.54, p < .001, d = 0.72.
Thus, we obtained a clear primacy order effect for

908

C-diagnoses for both item types reflecting the superior
support by a strong and a weak symptom as opposed to a
single strong symptom. Despite equal support for A and B,
A-diagnoses were also more frequent than B-diagnoses for
both item types suggesting a primacy order effect in ABC
and a similar order effect in CAB, in which the Absymptom can frame the integration of the later Ba symptom.
In Experiment 4, there was hardly any effect of the leading
symptom on A- and C-diagnoses for ABC and CAB. The
proportion of A-diagnoses was comparable for ABC and
CAB, t(38) = 0.65; p = .520, and the proportion of Cdiagnoses was even lower for CAB than for ABC items,
t(38) = -2.02; p = .050; d = -0.46.

Discussion
We have investigated effects of symptom order in a
diagnostic reasoning task with four candidate hypotheses.
Ambiguous symptom sequences (AB-items) equally
supporting two alternative diagnoses revealed a clear
primacy order effect if participants only responded with a
final diagnosis (Experiments 1 and 3). Consistent with the
processing assumptions of construction-integration theory,
the initial hypothesis suggested by the first symptom framed
the integration of subsequent symptoms. An equally
supported alternative diagnosis was therefore chosen less
often. This order effect is in line with the notion that
alternative hypotheses are typically not considered
impartially in parallel. Instead, symptom processing
proceeds with respect to a focal hypothesis if subsequent
symptoms are consistent.
Inconsistent symptoms were not an effective means to
highlight alternative diagnoses in Experiment 3. There was
still a considerable primacy order effect favoring A over B
in ABC- and CAB-items despite equal support. Explicit
highlighting of alternative diagnoses, however, was
effective. In Experiments 2 and 4, participants rated the
current likelihood of each candidate hypothesis after each
symptom and thus were led to consider alternative
diagnoses. This eliminated the primacy order effect for ABitems. As noted in previous studies, impartial consideration
of two alternative diagnoses in parallel can succeed under
favorable conditions.
Yet, eliciting ratings of all alternative diagnoses after each
symptom did not eliminate the primacy order effect if an
inconsistent symptom pattern added a third and presumably
even a fourth candidate hypothesis to the set of contenders
(ABC- and CAB-items in Experiment 4). In these cases, we
did not only observe an advantage for the alternative that
was supported by a strong symptom before its equally
supported rival (A before B), but also an effect of the last
strong symptom. Forcing the participants to consider the
current support for all alternatives after this last strong
symptom before the final diagnosis resulted in a recency
effect. The proportion of final diagnoses was increased for
the alternative most strongly supported by the last strong
symptom for the inconsistent items ABC and CAB in
Experiment 4. Our results are consistent with process
models of information integration that specify how early
information can frame the processing of later information
(Kintsch, 1998, Baumann et al., 2007). They are also
consistent with descriptive models predicting order effects
in belief updating, hypothesis testing, classification, and
judgment and decision making (Hogarth & Einhorn 1992,
Koehler, White, & Grondin, 2003) and are a further instance

Table 4: Means of confidence ratings of related diagnoses
E. Item A (SD)
B (SD)
C (SD)
D (SD)
type
1 AAB 5.66 (0.96) 4.08 (1.80)
AB
3.77 (1.19) 3.69 (1.29)
ABB 4.63 (1.11) 5.47 (1.14)
2 AAB 5.10 (1.07) 4.06 (1.34)
AB
3.49 (0.94) 3.38 (1.06)
ABB 3.54 (1.16) 5.16 (0.95)
3 AB
ABC
CAB

4.05 (1.45) 3.36 (1.52)
3.52 (1.45) 3.08 (1.40) 2.83 (1.51) 2.33 (1.35)
3.41 (1.38) 3.23 (1.41) 3.06 (1.52) 2.29 (1.24)

4 AB
ABC
CAB

4.00 (1.75) 3.80 (1.43)
3.64 (1.66) 3.32 (1.38) 3.32 (1.81) 3.08 (1.60)
3.92 (1.57) 3.39 (1.47) 2.94 (1.47) 3.25 (1.75)

On top of a decreased primacy order effect, which
increased A-diagnoses compared to B diagnoses for ABC
items, there was a stronger influence of the last diagnostic
symptom than in Experiment 3. The proportion of Bdiagnoses was higher for CAB than ABC, t(38) = -3.02, p =
.004, d = -0.63, and the proportion of C-diagnoses was
higher for ABC than CAB. B-proportions in ABC could be
reduced simply because of a primacy order effect favoring
A. The difference in C-proportions, however, is not open to
such an alternative explanation and suggests an increased
influence of the last diagnostic symptom in Experiment 4.
Mean confidence ratings are presented in the bottom half
of Table 4 and show that inconsistent symptom sequences
reduced confidence compared to ambiguous AB-items.

909

Koehler, D. J., White, C. M., & Grondin, R. (2003). An
evidential support accumulation model of subjective
probability. Cognitive Psychology, 46, 152-197.
Kostopoulou, O., Mousoulis, C., Delaney, B. C. (2009).
Information search and information distortion in the
diagnosis of an ambiguous presentation. Judgment and
Decision Making, 4(5), 408-418.
Lange, N. D., Thomas, R. P., & Davelaar, E. J. (2012). Data
acquisition dynamics and hypothesis generation. In N.
Rußwinkel, U. Drewitz, & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Cognitive
Modeling
(pp.
31-36),
Berlin:
Universitaetsverlag der TU Berlin.
McKenzie, C. R. M. (1998). Taking into account the
strength of an alternative hypothesis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 771-792.
Mehlhorn, K., Taatgen, N. A., Lebiere, C., Krems, J. F.
(2011). Memory Activation and the Availability of
Explanations in Sequential Diagnostic Reasoning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 37, 1391-1411.
Nickerson, R. S. (1998). Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous
phenomenon in many guises. Review of General
Psychology, 2, 175-220.
Thomas, R. P., Dougherty, M. R., Sprenger, A., &
Harbison, J. I. (2008). Diagnostic hypothesis generation
and human judgment. Psychological Review, 115, 155185.
Tversky, A., & Koehler, D. J. (1994). Support theory: A
nonextensional representation of subjective probability.
Psychological Review, 101, 547-567.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., & Zhang, J. (2006). The order
effect in human abductive reasoning: An empirical and
computational study. Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 18 (2), 215-247.

of confirmation bias (Nickerson, 1998). Studies with more
than two contending alternatives are rare. Here, we have
shown that the number of relevant contenders matters. The
primacy order effect was overcome with two competing
alternatives by explicit highlighting. With inconsistent
items, more than two hypotheses had to be considered.
Constrained by working-memory capacity unpacking of the
set of alternatives was incomplete and rather the most likely
alternatives were taken into consideration (Dougherty &
Hunter, 2003).
Our results may not generalize to instances of diagnostic
reasoning in everyday life, in which symptoms can be
evaluated more thoroughly without time pressure and search
for further information is possible. However, there are
situations, in which incoming information has to be
processed quickly. For example, physicians evaluating case
histories are influenced by early emerging hypotheses (e.g.,
Kostopoulou, Mousoulis, & Delaney, 2009). The difficulties
in considering more than two contenders impartially in the
present experiments clearly illustrate the limits in diagnostic
reasoning with multiple alternative diagnoses in similar
situations.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by German Research
Foundation (DFG) Grants JA 1761/7-1 and KR 1057/17-1.

References
Baumann, M., Mehlhorn, K., & Bocklisch, F. (2007). The
activation of hypotheses during abductive reasoning. In
D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 29th Annual Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Chapman, G. P., Bergus, G. R., & Elstein, A. S. (1996).
Order of information affects clinical judgment. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 9, 201-211.
Dougherty, M. R. P., & Hunter, J. E. (2003). Hypothesis
generation, probability judgment, and individual
differences in working memory capacity. Acta
Psychologica, 113, 263-282.
Hogarth, R. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1992). Order effects in
belief updating: The belief-adjustment model. Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 1-55.
Johnson, T. & Krems, J. F. (2001). Use of Current
Explanations in Multicausal Abductive Reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 25, 903-939.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Koehler, D. J. (1991). Explanation, imagination, and
confidence in judgment. Psychological Bulletin, 110, 499519.

910

