UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perception of Ambiguous Drawings and the Construction and Inhibition of its Alternative
Interpretation – Reflections on Consciousness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1jx8q38r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Bliznashki, Svetoslav
Popova, Maria
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perception of Ambiguous Drawings and the Construction and Inhibition of its
Alternative Interpretation – Reflections on Consciousness
Svetoslav Bliznashki (valsotevs@gmail.com)
Mariya Popova (popova.mariya@gmail.com)
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.com)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian
University 21, Montevideo Str., Sofia 1618Bulgaria

Abstract
Based on some of our previous experimental findings
concerning the negative priming which occasionally occurs
during perception of ambiguous drawings we propose a
simple mathematical model which we believe may account
for important aspects of our data. We tested some (but not all)
of the crucial predictions of our model using a newly
developed set of asymmetric ambiguous drawings. The results
further supported the phenomenon of negative priming taking
place during perception of ambiguous drawings and were
consistent with the predictions of the model.
Keywords: ambiguous drawings; negative priming; vector
reflection.

Introduction
Early gestalt psychologists pointed out that human beings
are incapable of perceiving two interpretations of an
ambiguous drawing simultaneously. Only one of the
interpretations seems to be consciously available at any
given moment. Numerous studies show that the conscious
experience of a particular interpretation of an ambiguous
drawing is subject to context effects (e.g. Balceits &
Dunning, 2006; Fisher, 1968; Long & Olszweski, 1999,
2004; Rock & Mitchener, 1992; Kokinov et al., 2007,
2009), i.e. depending on the context we can experience
either of the two interpretations. These context effects raise
the question whether both interpretations are built in parallel
but only the stronger is experienced, or depending on the
context only the relevant interpretation is built. This
question is analogous to the question asked by Swinney
(1979) whether both meanings of a homophone are accessed
when the word is encountered or only the meaning relevant
to the context. The answer provided by Swinney is that both
meanings are accessed. His explanation is in terms of an
autonomous lexical access device that does not interact with
the context. However, in the case of perception of a picture
it is impossible to think in terms of access to pre-stored
meanings of the picture, it is clear that the interpretations
have to be constructed on the fly. Thus if it turns out that the
alternative interpretation is also primed, that would mean
that both interpretations are constructed in parallel. Such
results would potentially cause a re-interpretation of
Swinney’s results since that would mean that this is not a
specific linguistic phenomenon that could be explained by
the specific organization of the language system and more
general explanations should be sought for.

Kokinov, Biznashki, Kosev, and Hristova (2007) were
interested in how analogy could cause re-representation and
re-interpretation of an ambiguous picture. In a further
extension of Experiment 1, Bliznashki and Kokinov decided
to use additionally Swinney’s methodology (a post-test
Lexical Decision Task, called LDT for short) in order to
evaluate whether the unseen interpretation will be primed. If
this was the case, that would be evidence in favor of the idea
that parallel processes are constructing both interpretations.
The results of this experiment confirmed the hypothesis of
parallel representation building of both interpretations,
however, they were rather surprising since we obtained
negative priming, i.e. we obtained evidence that the unseen
interpretation was inhibited (Kokinov, Vankov, Bliznashki,
2009). This was in accordance with some simulation data
with the AMBR model which also exhibited inhibition of
the corresponding concepts.
We were happy with these results, but there was a puzzle
that remained unresolved and which we found very
challenging. In this experiment we used an asymmetric
drawing with one interpretation being easy to perceive and
the other one being hard to notice. We also varied the
context in which the drawing was provided by pushing the
participants in the study to perceive either the easy or the
hard interpretation in order to solve a complex analogical
task. We were happy to prove that the relational structure of
the task exerted strong influence upon subjects’ perception
(which was the main goal of our studies) but we were
puzzled to find out that the negative priming was not always
present. More specifically the negative priming occurred if
and only if subjects were contextually prompted to perceive
the weak (hard-to-see) interpretation of the drawing. In that
case the strong (easy-to-see) interpretation showed
pronounced negative priming during a Lexical Decision
Task which followed immediately after the presentation of
the ambiguous drawing, while if the participants saw the
easy to see interpretation, there was no negative priming of
the alternative interpretation. In our current study we try to
explain that finding in formal terms as well as to replicate
the results in an experiment specifically designed to detect
priming of an unperceived interpretation of ambiguous
drawings (which was not the case with our previous studies
which focused primarily on exploring the parallel nature of
different processes which took place during analogical
reasoning).

1344

Mathematical Model and Predictions
Modeling our results was a challenging enterprise. To see
why consider the simple competitive learning network (e.g.
Knight 1990) shown in figure 1.

c

Figure 1. A standard competitive learning network; the two
output units are inhibiting each other; all other connections
are positive; the node “c” represents external context.
Let’s suppose such a network is trained to classify two sets
of drawings – one set consisting of drawings of rabbits and
another consisting of drawings of dogs. Now suppose that
after a successful learning phase the network is presented
with a linear combination of two exemplars with the
weights of the combination reflecting the degree to which
the elements of the input vector retain their similarity to the
original exemplars. In most cases the network will “see” the
easier interpretation and (given a relevant activation
function) will inhibit the harder interpretation. How can we
make the network “see” the harder interpretation? One way
we might achieve that is by allowing a context node to pour
activation towards the relevant output node. This would be
analogous to our previous experiments during which we
pressed subjects to see the harder interpretation of an
ambiguous drawing by placing the drawing in a particular
context. As long as the inhibitory connection/s between the
output nodes remain constant and uninfluenced by the
inputs to the network, however, all our manipulations will
result in the more relevant interpretation winning the
competition and the inhibition of the alternative. This
contradicts with our data since as already explained negative
priming seemed to be present only for the strong
interpretation when the weak one was supported by context.
Because of that we tried to explain our data by a model
which will not rely on constraint satisfaction.

between conscious and subliminal perception. Subliminal
perception is modeled by simply constructing a vector in
WM as a linear combination of concepts/percepts in LTM.
Conscious perception is modeled by the categorization of
the constructed vector as an example of one of the existing
concepts in LTM. The vector from LTM which shows the
highest positive correlation with the vector in WM is
supposed to represent its designated category. In cases of
ambiguity the newly constructed vector in WM exhibits non
negligible positive correlation with more than one vectors
residing in LTM. In such cases SVRACA reflects the WM
vector along all axes (LTM vectors) which the WM vector
correlates positively with except for one. The one exception
is the single axis which the WM vector still correlates
positively with after the reflection operation. All other axes
correlate negatively or negligibly with the WM vector. In
that state the system is said to have resolved the ambiguity.
In other words conscious perception of an entity is said to
occur when a WM vector is fully constructed and when it is
roughly orthogonal or negatively correlated with all vectors
in LTM except for one with which it exhibits a relatively
high correlation. Thus in SVRACA vector reflection is
considered a metaphor for consciously perceiving only one
interpretation of an ambiguous stimulus at any given time.
In SVRACA the main operation – reflection is executed in a
probabilistic fashion (i.e. a stochastic process decides
around which axes the WM vector is reflected and which
axis remains constant) and in determining the probabilities
of reflection both the internal and external context play
crucial role. Internal context (or perceptual context) is
represented by the weights of the linear combination which
constitutes the WM vector. The larger a weight the more
probable the WM vector will not be reflected along the axis
the weight is associated with. External context is
represented by a vector of probabilities with each
probability reflecting the relative strength with which
environment pushes towards a particular interpretation. The
interaction between internal and external context
probabilistically determines which interpretation of an
ambiguous stimulus is perceived. Figure 2 illustrates how
SVRACA works and some of its predictions:
Y
unambiguous
perception of Y
r2
A’’

Simple Vector Reflection Achieving Conscious
Appraisal (SVRACA): conceptual description.
In SVRACA we regard concepts as orthogonal vectors
residing in a high dimensional space. Each newly perceived
entity is represented as a linear combination of the already
existing concepts in memory. The vectors representing
concepts are considered analogous to Long Term Memory
(LTM) while vectors representing newly perceived entities
are supposed to be analogous to the content of Working
Memory (WM). SVRACA makes a clear distinction

forbidden area ambiguity
A
X

area of previously unseen
entities; possible
learning; forbidden for
reflection from other
areas.

r1

A’

unambiguous
perception of X

Figure 2. LTM vectors are X and Y, WM vector is A. A is
ambiguous since it correlates positively (makes sharp
angles) with both X and Y.

1345

SVRACA will reflect A either around the X axis (this
reflection is indicated as r1 in the figure) or around the Y
axis (r2). In the first case the result is A’ – a vector
unambiguously perceived as X while in the second the
result is A” – a vector unambiguously perceived as Y.
Which reflection takes place – r1 or r2 is determined by
taking into account both perceptual and external context.
Ignoring external context for the moment we see that A is
much closer to X and consequently it will be much more
probable that r1 occurs. If that is the case A’ will result and
X but not Y will be considered to have been consciously
perceived. A’ now is practically orthogonal to Y (a very
small and possibly undetectable negative correlation exists
between A’ and Y). Thus the system has perceived the
strong interpretation (X) of the ambiguous stimulus (A) and
the alternative interpretation (Y) is neither primed nor
suppressed. In the other scenario r2 occurs (because of
external context or by pure chance) and A’’ is perceived
unambiguously as Y. Here however the unperceived
interpretation (X) correlates very strongly and negatively
with A”, i.e. SVRACA predicts that in this case (perceiving
the weak interpretation for whatever reason) the
unperceived interpretation will be negatively primed. That is
exactly what we have observed in our previous studies. It
may seem quite arbitrary that we chose vector reflection as
the main operation which deals with ambiguity so let’s state
our reasons at the very beginning. First of all reflection is a
computationally cheap operation. Second it makes a direct
use of a meaningful representation of ambiguous stimuli. If
an ambiguous stimulus is represented as a linear
combination of unambiguous stimuli then reflection is
probably the cheapest way to attain an unambiguous
representation while maintaining the base representational
scheme. Third, reflection allows us to model our stimuli as
vectors in a high dimensional space which in turn opens the
door for exploiting many of the advantages of using highly
distributed representations. Fourth, vector reflection may
serve as a useful and mathematically sound metaphor for
conscious experience. Another such metaphor is reaching a
stable state in a recurrent neural network but as we already
saw at least some neural architectures don’t provide a
straightforward way of explaining the selective negative
priming which is the topic of our study. Moreover it is not at
all inconceivable representing SVRACA as a complex
recurrent neural net in the future. Last but not least a model
based on vector reflection not only makes sense of currently
available data but also makes useful and testable predictions
which will be discussed later.

SVRACA: semi formal description.
Currently SVRACA supports 10 LTM vectors residing in a
10000 dimensional space. LTM vectors are orthogonal to
each other and can be said to form a basis of a 10
dimensional space. Each vector is standardized to have a
mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. Thus all vectors
can be conceived as being of unit length. Here we will
discuss the simplest case of ambiguity where a WM vector

is a linear combination of only two LTM vectors (e.g. an
ambiguous drawing which can be interpreted as a rabbit or
as a dog). A simulation begins with the system being
supplied with a vector of coefficients w which serve as
weights for the linear combination. In the simplest case the
system is supplied with two coefficients. The sums of
squares of the coefficients must be equal to 1 (||w||=1) and
thus the length of the linear combination is also equal to 1.
The system proceeds by forming a linear combination of as
many vectors from LTM as there are coefficients in w. This
construction stage reflects encoding a stimulus by the
perceptual system and it requires a certain amount of time.
Our simulations involve applying w to randomly chosen
vectors from LTM since the next stage involves SVRACA
determining the relationship of the WM vector to each of
the LTM vectors. SVRACA performs a linear regression on
WM and collects all coefficients larger than some threshold
value (e.g. 0.01). The vectors in LTM corresponding to
these coefficients are those which make a significant
contribution to the linear combination in WM. The larger a
coefficient the closer the WM vector to the LTM vector
associated with that coefficient. If all coefficients in w are
close to 0 (i.e. below a threshold of 0.1) or negative,
SVRACA identifies the WM vector as a previously
inexperienced entity and the simulation stops (see the lower
left quadrant in figure 2). If all entries in w are close to 0 or
negative except for one than SVRACA identifies the WM
vector as belonging to the category in LTM associated with
the only positive coefficient (see the lower right and the
upper left quadrants in figure 2). If more than one entry in w
is positive SVRACA interprets the situation as ambiguous
and tries to resolve the ambiguity by reflection (see the
upper right quadrant in figure 2). In the absence of any
external context SVRACA reflects the WM vector around
all axes associated with positive coefficients except for one.
The probability of any axis remaining unaffected by the
reflection operation is proportional to its squared
coefficient. For example the probability of WM being
reflected around all axes but the third is equal to w(3)^2.
External context is represented by a set of weights each
ranging from 0 to infinity. The elements of the vector of
context weights, denoted c, are subject to only one
constraint namely that each of them should be 0 or positive.
When external context is present the probability p of each
axis being the only one unaffected by reflection is equal to:
p=((w.*c+w).^2)./sum((w.*c+w).^2)
(1)
where “.” designates element-wise operations, p is the
vector of probabilities that each axis is the only one
unaffected by reflection, w is the vector containing the
weights determining the WM vector and c is the vector
containing the weights representing the strength of external
context towards each LTM axis. After a singe axis is chosen
to be unaffected by reflection SVRACA reflects the WM
vector around all other axis with positive weights. This is
achieved by setting to 0 all elements in w which were
initially negative as well as the element corresponding to the
unaffected axis. This newly formed vector is called

1346

reflection vector and is denoted by wr. Now all positive
elements in wr refer to axes WM is to be reflected around
and all other elements are 0. If we denote the collection of
vectors in LTM which are involved in the linear
combination WM as V (V is now a matrix with dimensions
10000xlength(w)) the reflection WMr is achieved by:
WMr=WM+V*(-2*wr)
(2)
where WMr is the reflected version of WM, V is the
collection of all vectors in LTM originally participating in
the formation of WM and wr is the reflection vector. The
final step in a SVRACA simulation is to examine the
relationship of WMr to the vectors in LTM in order to
decide which LTM concept is the only positively related
one to WMr (i.e. which concept WMr is perceived as). The
relationship between any two concepts in SVRACA (LTM,
WM, WMr) is defined as the cosine of the angle between
the vectors in question. Since all vectors are defined as
being of unit length the cosine of the angle between two
vectors is also equal to the product moment correlation
between them. Thus after reflection WMr will in most cases
be positively correlated with only a single vector in LTM,
negatively correlated with all other vectors in LTM which
participated in the formation of WM and orthogonal to all
vectors in LTM which were not involved in the construction
of WM in the first place. The signs and magnitudes of these
correlation coefficients are supposed to predict priming
(positive or negative) in real world situations.
A Typical Simulation is described next. We supply
SVRACA with a highly asymmetrical concept which is a
linear combination of two LTM vectors with coefficients
w=[0.95 0.3122]. We see that the WM vector is much closer
to the LTM1 vector than to LTM2 vector. The context
vector, however reflects the opposite picture: c=[0 5], i.e.,
the LTM1 vector is absolutely irrelevant to the situation
while the LTM2 would be very useful. Since both numbers
in w are positive SVRACA recognizes the ambiguity (i.e.
identifies the LTM vectors correlating positively with WM)
and calculates the probabilities p of consciously perceiving
each of the two possible interpretations according to (1):
p=[0.2045 0.7955]. We see that the contextual influence
radically changes the odds towards a conscious perception
of LTM2. Next SVRACA stochastically determines around
which axis to reflect WM based on the just obtained
probabilities. Among 100 simulations with the same input
parameters SVRACA interpreted the ambiguous WM as
LTM1 16 times, and as LTM2 84 times. The reflection
operation (2) resulted in WMr correlating -0.3122 with
LTM2 and 0.95 with LTM1 in the 16 cases (conscious
perception of LTM1) and 0.3122 with LTM2 and -0.95 with
LTM1 in the 84 cases (conscious perception of LTM2). If
we take the square of these correlation coefficients while
keeping in mind their signs we see that when LTM1 is
consciously perceived LTM2 remains practically unprimed
– its overlap with WMr is equal to -0.0975. In the second
case however when LTM2 is consciously perceived LTM1
exhibits pronounced negative priming – the magnitude of

the negative overlap (i.e. the signed coefficient of
determination) between WMr and LTM1 is -0.9025. In
other words SVRACA predicts practically no priming of the
unperceived interpretation when the system perceives the
strong interpretation and strong negative priming of the
unperceived interpretation when the weak interpretation is
perceived due to external context. We proceed with an
empirical study testing these predictions.

Experiment
Design and Stimuli
We attempted to test our current predictions and further
verify our previous findings by developing a new set of
ambiguous drawings. We developed 3 pairs of asymmetrical
drawings. Each pair contained an easy-to-see and a hard-tosee version of a particular picture. The first pair of
ambiguous drawings can be seen as either a rabbit or a dog
(figure 3). The two variants of this drawing included an
easy-to-see rabbit (hence a hard-to-see dog) and an easy-tosee dog (hence a hard-to-see rabbit). The second ambiguous
drawing can be seen as either a duck or a goat. The third
drawing embodied a mouse and a frog and its two variants
depicted an easy-to-see mouse (a hard-to-see frog) and an
easy-to-see frog (a hard-to-see mouse).

Easy rabbit/hard dog

Easy dog/hard rabbit

Figure 3. The two variants of the first ambiguous drawing.
Table 1: Percentages of people who saw each interpretation
Version:

Strong
rabbit
(weak dog):
Strong
dog
(weak rabbit):
Strong
duck
(weak goat):
Strong
goat
(weak duck):
Strong mouse
(weak frog):
Strong
frog
(weak mouse):

% who saw
the strong
interpretation
95

% who saw
the weak
interpretation
5

78

22

71

29

95

5

84

16

88

12

The variants of each drawing were validated in a simple
picture naming task in which each variant of each drawing
was presented on a computer screen (among many fillers

1347

depicting unambiguous drawings) and subjects were simply
required to name what they saw. Each subject saw only one
version of an ambiguous drawing (to avoid priming effects)
and each version was seen by 100 subjects. Thus 200
subjects participated in the standardization procedure. Table
1 shows the percentages of people who interpreted each
version in each way.
For each variant of a picture we compared statistically
(chi squared tests) the percentages of people seeing the
strong and the weak interpretation of a drawing and all
comparisons yielded highly significant results. Thus our
stimuli indeed represented asymmetrical ambiguity. In the
study we used the drawings as follows: each subject was
presented with a single version of each ambiguous drawing
only. The drawing was placed in a context which favored
either the easy or the hard interpretation. There were three
conditions in a repeated measures design: in the first
condition subjects were contextually prompted to see the
easy version of a drawing; in the second condition subjects
were prompted to perceive the hard version; in the control
condition subjects saw an unambiguous version of a
drawing.

Procedure
Each subject saw three drawings in three conditions in three
target trials. Each target drawing appeared as a possible
solution to a simple analogical task of the type A:B::C:?
with two possible answers. The ambiguous drawing was one
of the possible answers and the only way to solve the task
correctly was to perceive the ambiguous drawing in its
intended interpretation. The analogical task served as a
context which prompted participants to perceive consciously
only one of the possible interpretations in each drawing. In
the first condition (called Easy Condition or EC from now
on) subjects were required to perceive the easy
interpretation of a drawing in order to solve the task
correctly. In the second condition (called Hard Condition or
HC) subjects were required to perceive consciously only the
hard interpretation of a drawing. In the third condition
(Control Condition or CC) subjects were presented with an
unambiguous version of the drawing which was obviously
the correct response to the analogical task. Each subjects
saw only one version of an ambiguous drawing in order to
avoid priming effects. Subjects were required to respond
with the solution to each analogical task verbally in front of
a microphone by naming the option they felt best fitted the
analogy. After the response the microphone triggered the
start of a LDT. A word appeared at the center of the
computer screen and subjects were required to indicate
whether it was a meaningful word in Bulgarian or a random
sequence of letters by pressing a button. After each target
trial a meaningful word appeared which referred to the
supposedly unperceived interpretation of the just presented
ambiguous drawing. In the CC where an unambiguous
version of one of the ambiguous drawings was presented the
word in the LDT referred to the other interpretation of the
corresponding ambiguous drawing. The timing of the study

was as follows: an analogical task remained on the screen
until the subject responded to it in front of the microphone.
Immediately after the response a white screen with a
fixation cross at the center appeared and remained for
350ms. After that a string of letters appeared at the center of
the screen and remained there until subjects indicated by
pressing one of two buttons whether the letters comprised a
meaningful word or not. After the response a blank screen
lasted 7sec. before the beginning of the next trial. The
experiment contained three target trials and seventeen filler
trials (the filler trials were the same as the target ones with
the exception that the analogical tasks didn’t contain
ambiguous drawings and the LDT following them could
contain both words or non-words after each analogical task;
in contrast only words followed the target trials). The order
of presentation of the three conditions as well as the order of
presentation of the three drawings and the variants of each
drawing were counterbalanced between participants
resulting in 24 different lists. Each subject participated in
only one list. We give examples of the first two lists in order
to clarify the procedure: A subject in the first list was firstly
supposed to see an easy duck (i.e. the easy-to-see duck
variant of the duck/goat drawing was presented in a task that
required the subject to see a duck in order to solve the task
correctly) – EC, than she was supposed to see a hard frog
(i.e. a hard-to-see frog variant of the frog/mouse drawing
was presented in a task that required the subject to see a frog
in order to solve the task correctly) – HC and finally she
saw an unambiguous dog in a task that required her to see a
dog in order to solve the task correctly – CC. In the EC
condition she responded to the word “goat” during the LDT,
in the HC she responded to the word “mouse”, and in the
CC she responded to the word “rabbit”. A participant in the
second list was firstly supposed to see a hard dog (respond
to the word “rabbit” during LDT) – HC, then she was
supposed to perceive an unambiguous goat (respond to
“duck”) – CC and finally she was supposed to see an easy
frog (respond to “mouse”) –EC. The remaining 22 lists
exhausted all other possible combinations of variants of
pictures to be perceived (and hence words to react to during
LDT) and orders of presentation of conditions. In total we
collected Reaction Times (RT) to six words all appearing in
each of the three conditions. Those RTs constituted our
dependent measure.

Participants
Sixty eight undergraduate students (45 females and 23
males) from New Bulgarian University participated in the
study for obtaining credits.

Results and Discussion
Fifteen subjects failed to perceive the hard-to-see
interpretation in the HC condition and were replaced. Five
subjects were replaced because some of their RTs to target
words during the LDT exceeded our threshold of 1500ms.
After replacement of those subjects we were left with 48
participants – exactly two participants per list. The decision

1348

to have two valid participants per list was made prior to the
beginning of the study. The average RTs for each condition
are presented in table 2.
Table 2: Average RTs for the LDT in each condition.
Standard deviations are presented in parentheses.
Condition:
Control Condition (CC)
Easy Condition (EC)
Hard Condition (HC)

RT
774ms. (134)
777ms. (130)
824ms. (146)

We analyzed our data with a linear mixed model (e.g.
Hoffman, 2007; Brysbaert, 2007) in which we entered
subjects and items (i.e. words in the LDT) as random factors
simultaneously. Our design allowed only for the inclusion
of random intercepts for each random factor. The fixed
factor was “Condition” with three levels for each subject
(EC, HC, CC). The analysis showed a highly significant
overall result for our independent variable – F(2,
89.301)=5.718, p=0.005. Multiple comparisons (performed
via the SIDAK method) revealed a significant difference
between CC and HC (p=0.01), EC and HC (p=0.017) and
virtually no difference between CC and EC (p=0.997). We
see that the results corroborate our previous findings and are
perfectly consistent with the predictions of SVRACA: when
subjects perceived consciously the hard-to-see interpretation
words referring to the easy-to-see interpretation become
negatively primed compared to a control condition
involving no ambiguity but not vice versa (i.e. no priming is
detected when subjects perceive consciously only the easyto-see interpretations). It is important however not to
overgeneralize these findings. Fifteen subjects in our study
(22%) failed to perceive the hard-to-see interpretation in the
HC (i.e. perceived only the easy interpretation or reported
perceiving both interpretations) even in the presence of
strong context. This wasn’t unexpected since our study
involved a condition in which subjects were required to
perceive consciously only a very hard interpretation of an
ambiguous figure. No contextual influence exists which can
assure that this happens 100% of the time. Nevertheless we
feel compelled to point out that given these circumstances
our findings extend only to subjects which were “context
sensitive” enough to comply with our experimental
manipulation. The future directions of our work include
testing other explicit predictions of SVRACA. Such
predictions include: priming positively only the strong
interpretation of an ambiguous drawing when the figure is
presented subliminally; smaller effects compared to the just
presented when symmetric ambiguous drawings are
involved (i.e. when dealing with drawings with two equally
easy to perceive interpretations SVRACA predicts that
negative priming will again occur due to reflection but the
amount of priming will be considerably smaller since
reflection of a bisecting angle vector will result in a smaller
negative correlation with the unperceived concept in LTM);

generally smaller effects of positive priming during
subliminal presentation of ambiguous stimuli.
The obtained results are coherent with analogous results
obtained by Nievas and Mari-Beffa (2002) who discovered
negative priming of the non-selected meaning of a
homograph, but only if the non-selected meaning is the
dominating one. The combination of their and our data
shows that the phenomenon of negative priming of the
alternative representation is broader and holds both for
linguistic and perceptual task and thus should be interpreted
as unconsciously building a representation of both
alternatives and inhibiting the stronger one if for contextual
reasons we are pressed to use the weaker interpretation.

1349

References
Balcetis, E., Dunning, D. (2006). See What You Want to
See: Motivational Influences on Visual Perception.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2006,
Vol. 91, No. 4, 612–625
Brysbaert, M. (2007). The language-as-fixed-effect
fallacy: Some simple SPSS solutions to a complex
problem. Report written for RTN-LAB Version 2.0.
Fisher, G. H. (1968). Ambiguity of form: Old and new.
Perception &Psychophysics, 4, 189–192.
Hoffman, L., Bovaird, J. (2007). Multilevel models for
the experimental psychologist: Foundations and
illustrative examples. Beh. Res. Methods, 39, 101-117
Locker, L., Hoffman, L., Bovaird, J. (2007). On the use of
multilevel modeling as an alternative to items analysis
in psycholinguistic research. Behavior Research
Methods 2007, 39 (4), 723-730
Long, G. M., & Olszweski, A. D. (1999). To reverse or
not to reverse: When is an ambiguous figure not
ambiguous? Am. Journal of Psychology, 112, 41–71.
Long, G. M., & Toppino, T. C. (2004). Enduring interest
in perceptual ambiguity: Alternating views of reversible
figures. Psychological Bulletin,130, 748–768.
Nievas, F., Mari-Beffa, P. (2002). Negative priming from
the non-selected meaning of the homograph. British
Journal of Psychology (2002), 93, 47–66
Knight, K. (1990). Connectionist ideas and algorithms.
Communications of the ACM, vol. 33, no. 11, 59-74
Kokinov, B., Bliznashki, S., Kosev, S., Hristova, P.
(2007). Analogical Mapping and Perception: Can
Mapping Cause a Re-Representation of the Target
Stimulus? In: Proc. of the 29th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Kokinov, B., Vankov, I., Bliznashki, S. (2009). How
Analogy Could Force Re-representation of the Target
and Inhibition of the Alternative Interpretation. In: New
Frontiers in Analogy Research. Sofia: NBU Press.
Rock, I., & Mitchener, K. (1992). Further evidence of
failure of reversal of ambiguous figures by uninformed
subjects. Perception, 21, 39–45.
Swinney, D. (1979). Lexical Access during Sentence
Comprehension: (Re)consideration of context effects. J.
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 645-659

