UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pragmatic interpretation of contrastive prosody: It looks like speech adaptation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jw49594

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kurumada, Chigusa
Brown, Meredith
Tanenhaus, Michael

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pragmatic interpretation of contrastive prosody: It looks like speech adaptation
Chigusa Kurumada
kurumada@stanford.edu
Dept. of Linguistics
Stanford University

Meredith Brown
Michael K. Tanenhaus
mbrown@bcs.rochester.edu
mtan@bcs.rochester.edu
Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Sciences Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
University of Rochester
University of Rochester

Abstract
Drawing on insights from recent work on phonetic adaptation,
we examined how listeners interpret prosodic cues to two opposing pragmatic meanings of the phrase “It looks like an X”
(e.g., “It looks like a zebra (and it is one)” and “It LOOKS like
a zebra (but its actually not)”. After establishing that different prosodic contours map onto these meanings (Experiment
1), we demonstrated that prosodic interpretation is shifted by
inclusion of another alternative (Experiment 2); the reliability a speaker’s use of prosody to signal pragmatic alternatives
(Experiment 3); and most importantly by the distribution of
cue values along a continua (Experiment 4). We conclude
that listeners derive linguistically meaningful categories from
highly variable prosodic cues through rational inference about
assumptions that are shared in the conversational context and
adaptation to distributional characteristics of prosodic cues.
Keywords: Prosody, contrastive accent, Gricean pragmatics,
speech adaptation, rational inference

Figure 1: Waveforms (top) and pitch contours (bottom) of the
utterance “It looks like a zebra”. The affirmative interpretation It is a zebra is typically conveyed by the pattern on the
left, while the negative interpretation It is not a zebra is conveyed by the pattern on the right.

1998). The other is to adapt phonetic categories to the distributional characteristics of the acoustic input. For example,
Clayards, Tanenhaus, Aslin, and Jacobs (2008) provided evidence that listeners adapt their perceptual categories according to the mean and the variance of a bimodal distribution
along a VOT continuum (e.g. /b/-/p/).
Importantly, the way listeners integrate different kinds of
information in speech perception is compatible with the hypothesis that they make rational inferences (Kleinschmidt &
Jaeger, 2011). Listeners can weight different kinds of information according to their reliability, adjust phonetic categories based on more reliable information, and ignore deviation from the expected patterns when there is an ad-hoc
source for the unfamiliar pronunciations (Kraljic, Brennan,
& Samuel, 2008).
The current study draws on these insights to explore
the hypothesis that listeners navigate prosodic heterogeneity
by adapting their interpretations through rational inference.
We focus on the construction “It looks like an X”, which
can evoke different pragmatic meanings depending on its
prosodic realization. A canonical accent placement (as illustrated in Figure 1, left panel, henceforth noun-focus prosody)
typically elicits an affirmative interpretation (e.g. It looks like
a zebra and I think it is one). When the verb “looks” is
lengthened and emphasized with a contrastive accent (L+H*)
and the utterance ends with a L-H% boundary tone (Figure 1,
right, verb-focus prosody), it can trigger a negative interpretation (e.g. It LOOKS like a zebra but its actually not one; see
also Dennison & Schafer, 2010).
We explored the adaptation hypothesis in four rating experiments. Experiment 1 established that listeners systematically derive different pragmatic interpretations based on
noun- and verb-focus prosodic contours. Experiments 2 and
3 demonstrated that pragmatic interpretations are systemati-

Introduction
In a famous scene in the movie Taxi Driver, Robert DeNiros
character repeatedly utters, You talkin’ to me. As he changes
pitch contours, the intended meaning of the utterance shifts
from a question to a challenge. As the example illustrates, prosody carries information about a speakers intentions. However, the acoustic features of prosodic alternatives, as well as the mappings between prosodic patterns and
intended meanings vary considerably across speakers. For
example, although rising boundary tones can distinguish between questions and assertions in many languages, many
questions in fact do not end with a rising boundary tone. Also
speakers who use “up-talk” often end assertions with a rising
boundary tone. Likewise, a pitch accent preceded by an initial drop (fall-rise: often annotated as L+H* in the ToBI convention (Silverman et al., 1992)) can signal the presence of
contrast. However, characterizing the acoustic properties that
signal this contrast in natural speech is far from straightforward. L+H* and a simple rise (H*) have overlapping interpretations that are highly dependent on utterance context (Ito
& Speer, 2008; Watson, Tanenhaus, & Gunlogson, 2008).
How, then, do listeners navigate the lack of invariance in
prosodic cues to pragmatic meaning? We propose that listeners solve the variability problem for prosody in the same
way as they solve the variability problem for phonetic features, namely by adaptation. Just as prosodic contours vary
according to both random and systematic factors, phonetic
features of speech contain massive variability, which presents
a challenge to listeners who are to derive discrete phonemic
categories. It has been suggested that the speech perception
system deals with the lack of invariance in two ways. One is
to store separate, speaker-, group-, and context-specific representations of tokens from the same categories (Goldinger,

647

cally modulated by speaker-specific use of particular prosodic
contours in different linguistic contexts and the reliability
with which a speaker signals pragmatic contrasts prosodically. In Experiment 4, we exposed listeners to affirmativeand negative-interpretation tokens with different distributions
of constituent duration and fundamental frequency (f0) values, sampled from a continuum of noun- and verb-focus
prosodic contours. Consistent with the adaptation hypothesis,
listeners’ judgments shifted according to the distributional
properties of the input. Taken together, our results provide
novel evidence that listeners make optimal use of speaker
and context-specific information to derive pragmatic meaning from contrastive prosody.

a) 100-point scale rating

b) 3AFC

100

0.6

Prosody
Noun-focus
Verb-focus

0.5

Proportion

Response

80

60

40

0.4

0.3

20
0.2
0

Noun-focus

Verb-focus

1

2

3

Figure 2: a) The likelihood estimation based on a 100-point
scale by prosodic patterns. The crosses within the boxes indicate the mean values. b) Proportions of the responses given
in the 3AFC questions [1 = MORE likely to be an X, 2 = no
difference, 3 = LESS likely to be an X. The solid line and the
dotted line represent the responses based on the noun-focus
prosody and the verb-focus prosody, respectively.

Experiment 1
We elicited listeners’ interpretations of “It looks like an X”
in two types of rating tasks to establish that the proposed
prosodic contours result in different pragmatic inferences.

Methods
(i.e., it is an X) based on the noun-focus prosody. A mixed
effects regression analysis (Gelman & Hill, 2006) confirmed
that the difference was statistically significant after controlling random effects of subjects and items (β = −13.38, p <
.001). Notice, however, that mean values for both prosodic
patterns (indicated by the crosses in Figure 2-a) were above
50%. Judgments were thus strongly biased towards the affirmative interpretation.
Figure 2b plots responses in the 3-alternative forced choice
task. The difference between the prosodic patterns was significant (β = .41, p < .001): When participants first heard
the verb-focus prosody, the noun-focus prosody was rated as
more likely to refer to a denotation of the noun (61%) compared to 28% for the verb-focus when it followed the the
noun-focus prosody.
Overall, participants made distinct pragmatic interpretations based on the two prosodic patterns. However, the judgments were far from categorical and strongly biased towards
the affirmative reading. Taking this as our point of departure,
we evaluated the adaptation hypothesis by manipulating factors which we predicted would shift listeners’ judgments.

Participants We used an online crowd-sourcing platform
(Amazon’s Mechanical Turk) for the experiment. We posted
65 separate HITs (Human Intelligence Tasks: experimental
tasks for participants to work on) and received 63 HITs from
distinct individuals. Participants were all self-reported native
speakers of American English. They received $0.80 for completing the task and the mean task duration was 11 minutes.
Stimuli 24 imageable high-frequency nouns were embedded in the sentence frame “It looks like an X”. Two tokens of
each item with noun-focus and verb-focus prosodic patterns
were recorded by a native speaker of American English.
Procedure Participants were first presented with a cover
story in which a school teacher described animals and objects
in an encyclopedia with pictures that were not directly accessible to his students. In response to a question from a child
about what he saw on the page, the teacher said, “It looks like
an X” (e.g., It looks like a zebra). The participants’ task was
to judge whether the teacher was referring to a picture of the
target noun (e.g., a zebra) or something else.
For each item, participants first heard one of the two target
prosodic patterns, and rated how likely it is that the teacher
is looking at a picture of the target noun or a picture of
something else. Likelihood was indicated using a 100-point
scale (0 = something else, 100 = a picture of the noun referent). Next, they heard the same item produced with the other
prosodic pattern and answered a 3-alternative forced choice
question: If the teacher had used the second intonation pattern, the likelihood of the picture depicting an exemplar of X
(e.g. a zebra) would be (a) greater, (b) the same, or (c) less.

Experiment 2
The adaptation hypothesis posits that noun-focus and verbfocus prosodic contours are not directly mapped onto two
distinct pragmatic meanings. Rather, these pragmatic interpretations are obtained through inference based on linguistic and non-linguistic information shared in a particular discourse context. Grice (1989) proposed that utterance meanings are derived through comparison among potential expressions that could have been used in the same situation. We
hypothesized that “It looks like an X” would elicit more negative interpretations when the set of sentences produced by
the speaker also included a stronger statement (e.g., It is an
X), on the grounds that the speaker would have simply used
this stronger statement to express the affirmative meaning.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2a plots responses in the 100-point-scale rating task.
Participants rated items with noun-focus prosody higher than
those produced with the verb-focus prosody, indicating that
they were more likely to derive the affirmative interpretation

648

Crucially, when the stronger statements were added, participants were more likely to select a competitor picture (indicating a negative interpretation) for both the noun-focus and
verb-focus contours. This suggests that the pragmatic interpretation of prosody is not solely determined by the acoustic
characteristics of utterances, consistent with the predictions
of the adaptation hypothesis. Expectations based on contextand speaker-specific knowledge modulate pragmatic interpretations of contrastive prosody.

Experiment 3
The adaptation hypothesis predicts that listeners are more
likely to adapt to cues that are used reliably and systematically. Experiment 3 manipulates the overall reliability with
which particular prosodic contours are associated with particular pragmatic meanings.
Figure 3: Proportions of competitor pictures chosen in the
target and the control conditions in Experiment 2. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.

Methods
Participants We posted 80 separate HITs and received 76
HITs from distinct individuals.
Stimuli 26 items of “It looks like an X” (16 training and 10
test items) were recorded in each of the two target prosodic
patterns. For each of the training items, two continuation
phrases were recorded to disambiguate the intended meaning. One continuation supported the affirmative interpretation
(e.g., “It looks like a zebra because it has black and white
stripes all over its body”). The other pattern supplied feedback confirming the negative interpretation (e.g., “It looks
like a zebra but it’s not; it has stripes only on its legs”).

Methods
Participants We posted 50 separate HITs and received 48
HITs from distinct individuals.
Stimuli An additional 24 stimuli in the form of “It is an
X” (e.g.“It is a zebra”) were recorded by the same speaker as
in Experiment 1. Two lists were created based on the items
from Experiment 1 and these newly added items. In the control condition, all items were in the form of “It looks like
an X”: 12 with verb-focus prosody and 12 with noun-focus
prosody. In the target condition, 8 of the 12 noun-focus items
were replaced by tokens of “It is an X”. Each participant was
randomly assigned to the control or test condition.

Procedure Participants were presented with a cover story
in which a mother and a child were naming animals and objects in a picture-book. The exposure phase included 16 trials
in which participants heard the mother tell the child, “It looks
like an X”. Their task was to choose the likely referent of N
between a target and competitor picture (e.g. a zebra and an
okapi). They then heard a continuation phrase disambiguating the intended referent.
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of two conditions. In the reliable-speaker condition, items with nounfocus and verb-focus prosody (8 items each) were invariably
associated with affirmative and negative continuations, respectively. In the unreliable-speaker condition, half of the
items with noun-focus prosody were followed by negative
continuations and half of the items with verb-focus prosody
were followed by affirmative continuations.
The test phase was identical across conditions. In this
phase, participants made 10 additional judgments in the same
format without any feedback. For each item, they were also
asked to rate confidence in their judgment on a 7-point scale.

Procedure Participants were presented with the same cover
story as that in Experiment 1 and instructed to select an intended referent of an X out of two pictures: a target picture
(e.g. a zebra) and a competitor (e.g. an okapi, a four-legged
animal with black and white stripes only on its legs) after
listening to each sentence. Participants completed 24 consecutive trials with no feedback.

Results and Discussion
Analyses were conducted on the items that were common to
the two conditions (i.e., we excluded responses to ”It is an
X” in the target condition and the corresponding sentences in
the control condition). Figure 3 illustrates the proportion of
a competitor picture chosen in each condition. A mixed logit
regression (full factorial; maximum random effects (Jaeger,
2008)) confirmed that there were significant main effects of
prosody (β = 1.9, p < .0001) and conditions (target vs. control, β = 1.18, p = .061) as well as a significant interaction term between them (β = 0.83, p < .05), with verb-focus
prosody eliciting more competitor responses in both conditions.

Results and Discussion
As illustrated in Figure 4, the verb-focus prosody systematically biased judgments towards competitor pictures (β =
1.78, p < .0001) in both conditions. Crucially, we also found
a significant negative interaction term between prosody and

649

Proportion of a competitor picture chosen

Confidence rating (1~7)

Prosody
0.6

Verb-focus

Reliable

Unreliable

Verb-focus Noun-focus

Verb-focus Noun-focus

7

Noun-focus

6

0.5

5

Response

Proportion

0.4

0.3

0.2

4
3
2

0.1

1
0

0.0

Reliable

Unreliable

Figure 5: The responses in the confidence rating questions in
Experiment 3.

Figure 4: Proportions of competitor pictures chosen in the
target and the control conditions in Experiment 3. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.

Stimuli The stimuli created for Experiment 3 were divided
into six regions corresponding to each of the four initial words
(i.e. 1 it 2 looks 3 like 4 a) and the portions of the final word associated with each of the two tonal targets (i.e.
the H* and L-L% in the noun-focus contour and the L- and
H% in the verb-focus contour). The turning point in the f0
contour within the final word was used to delineate the final
two regions (e.g., 5 zeb 6 ra, as illustrated in Figure 1).
The f0 of each region was sampled at 20 equally spaced time
points, and measures from each time point were aggregated
across items to derive mean f0 contours for noun-focus and
verb-focus utterances, following (Isaacs & Watson, 2010).
Likewise, the durations of each region were averaged across
items by contour type. Twelve-step continua for each item
were derived from these mean f0 contours and durations by
interpolating between values within each region and then manipulating the F0 and duration of each recording to match the
interpolated values using the pitch-synchronous overlap-andadd algorithm implemented in Praat (Moulines & Charpentier, 1990; Boersma & Weenink, 2008).

speaker reliability: In the unreliable-speaker condition, the
effects of prosody on judgments, and particularly on negative
interpretations of contrastive prosody, were weaker overall
(β = −1.07, p < .004). That is, participants down-weighted
the contrastive accent as a cue to a competitor object after
exposure to a speaker who did not use the cue systematically.
Confidence rating data exhibited the same pattern. Confidence ratings were lower overall for utterances with verbfocus prosody (β = 0.3, p < .001), whereas speaker reliability did not significantly affect confidence ratings (p > .2).
We also found a significant negative interaction between these
two factors (β = −.2, p < .0001). When exposed to an unreliable speaker, participants gave responses based on verb-focus
prosody with diminished degree of confidence.
In sum, participants take into account prosodic features
idiosyncratic to a particular speaker when deriving pragmatic meanings from prosodic contours. They down-weight
prosodic information when it is an unreliable cue to intended
meaning.

These items (12 steps * 26 words) were normed by 50 people using the same 2AFC picture-selection paradigm as in
Experiment 3 without feedback. The results of this norming study are summarized in Table 1. Items from most of
the continuum steps were more likely to elicit affirmative responses. The items at Step 10 were judged to be the most
ambiguous as to the pragmatic interpretations. Based on these
norming responses, we postulated that the prosodic cue values for the Noun-focus and the Verb-focus stimuli form distributions with different means and variance, as schematically
shown in Figure 6a. The distribution of cue values for the affirmative interpretation (solid line) has a mean value close to
the midrange of the continuum and has relatively high variance. In contrast, the distribution for the negative interpretation (dashed line) is considered to have a mean value closer to

Experiment 4
Experiment 4 was designed to provide a stronger test of one
of the central assumptions of the adaptation hypothesis. If listeners are sensitive to the probabilistic nature of prosodic cues
in the input, they should adapt their pragmatic interpretations
according to the distribution of tokens in the input. Using
resynthesized 12-step continua between noun-focus and verbfocus prosodic contours, we examined how different distributions of prosodic patterns in an initial exposure phase affect
listeners’ interpretation of utterances in the test phase.

Methods
Participants We posted 360 separate HITs and received
complete responses from 324 individuals.

650

b) Hypothesized response pattern in
the negative-bias condition

a) Postulated distributions
based on norming

Noun-focus

c) Input tokens [affirmative-bias]

Token frequency

8

4

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Continuum Steps

2

b) proposed experimental manipulation
of contour distributions

Verb-focus

10 11 12

Noun-focus

4

6

8

10

12

2

4

6

8

10

12

Figure 7: a) Proportions of target pictures chosen (affirmative interpretation) in the norming study. X-axis: Continuum
steps (1 = prototypical noun-focus prosody, 12 = prototypical
verb-focus prosody). Solid line represents lowess smoothing and dashed line indicates where the stimuli elicit most
ambiguous responses (50% chance of a target picture chosen); b) A hypothesized pattern of category recalibration in
the negative-bias condition in Experiment 4.

Verb-focus

d) Input tokens [negative-bias]

8

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

a) Norming results

Table 1: Proportion of a target picture chosen at each step in
the norming study.
Steps
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Percentages (%) 84 79 80 80 75 77 78
8
9 10 11 12
60 60 48 37 37

4

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

Continuum Steps

participants’ categorization functions would shift towards the
negative interpretation, as illustrated in Figure 7b.
Procedure The procedure of the experiment was nearly
identical to Experiment 3. Participants were exposed to tokens of “It looks like an X” and selected either a target picture or a competitor picture as the more likely referent. In
the exposure phase, they heard 30 items: 15 with affirmative
continuations and 15 with negative continuations. The distribution of items sampled from a 12-step continuum differed
across conditions, as illustrated in Figure 6c and 6d. In the
test phase, which was identical across conditions, participants
completed 12 trials in the same format without feedback.

Figure 6: a) A schematic representation of distributions of
prosodic cue values postulated based on the norming data. b)
Proposed experimental manipulation of contour distributions.
c) and d) Input frequencies of tokens sampled from each step
of the continuum in the training phase of the affirmative-bias
in the negative bias conditions. X-axis: continuum steps. Yaxis: Token frequencies of input utterances. Tokens indicated
as white bars were disambiguated as affirmative interpretation and those indicated as shaded bars were disambiguated
as negative interpretation.

the higher end of the continuum, with relatively low variance.
Based on these assumptions, we created two sets of exposure items for the current experiment. In the affirmativebias condition, the distributions of the exposure items were
meant to approximate the distributions observed in the norming study. Participants heard items sampled from Steps 4-9
with affirmative continuations and items from Steps 11 and 12
with negative continuations (Figure 6c). On the other hand,
in the negative-bias condition, we tried to reverse this pattern and provided input in the distribution patterns, which are
schematically illustrated in Figure 6b. In this condition, listeners heard items from Steps 1 and 2 with affirmative continuations and items from Steps 4-9 with negative continuations.
Notice that in either of the conditions participants heard the
same number of items from Steps 7-9 while they are identified as items from different categories (Figure 6d).
The adaptation hypothesis predicts that exposure to these
affirmative-bias and negative-bias distributions should result
in recalibration of the categorization function. Figure 7a plots
the proportions of target pictures chosen at each step along
the continuum in the norming study. We hypothesized that

Results and Discussion
Responses are plotted in Figure 8. In the affirmative-bias
condition, as predicted, participants’ judgments did not deviate from those in the norming study. Items from most of
the steps were associated with the affirmative interpretation
and the items from Step 10 was judged to be most ambiguous
as to their pragmatic meanings.
In the negative-bias condition, however, a wider variety of
items were assigned the negative interpretation (i.e., it is not
an X). As shown in Figure 8, the proportion of affirmative
interpretations drops to 50% around Step 7. Items that had
been normed to be highly ambiguous (i.e., those from Steps
10) were more reliably assigned the negative interpretation.
These results lend strong support for the adaptation hypothesis: Pragmatic interpretation of contrastive prosody does not
result from an invariant mapping between sound and meanings. Depending on the patterns of input, participants can
rapidly and flexibly adjust their classification criteria so that
they can make optimal use of the incoming input.

651

Percentage of a target picture chosen

Acknowledgments
Norming
Affirmative-bias
Negative-bias

0.8

Thanks to Eve V. Clark, Christine Gunlogson and Sarah
Bibyk for valuable discussion.

0.7

References
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2008). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer (version 5.0.26) [computer program].
(Retrieved June 16, 2008, from http://www.praat.org/)
Clayards, M., Tanenhaus, M. K., Aslin, R. N., & Jacobs,
R. A. (2008). Perception of speech reflects optimal use
of probabilistic speech cues. Cognition, 108(3), 804 809.
Dennison, H. Y., & Schafer, A. J. (2010). Online construction
of implicature through contrastive prosody. In Speech
prosody 2010 conference.
Gelman, A., & Hill, J. (2006). Data analysis using regression
and multilevel/hierarchical models. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Goldinger, S. D. (1998). Echoes of echoes? an episodic
theory of lexical access. Psychological Review, 105(2),
251–279.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words (Vol. 65)
(No. 251). Harvard University Press.
Isaacs, A., & Watson, D. (2010). Accent detection is a slippery slope: Direction and rate of f0 change drives listeners comprehension. Language Cognitive Processes,
25(7), 1178–1200.
Ito, K., & Speer, S. R. (2008). Anticipatory effects of intonation: Eye movements during instructed visual search.
Journal of Memory and Language, 58(2), 541–573.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
anovas (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 434–
446.
Kleinschmidt, D., & Jaeger, T. F. (2011, June). A Bayesian
belief updating model of phonetic recalibration and selective adaptation. In Acl workshop on cognitive modeling and computational linguistics. Portland, OR.
Kraljic, T., Brennan, S. E., & Samuel, A. G. (2008). Accommodating variation: dialects, idiolects, and speech
processing. Cognition, 107(1), 54–81.
Moulines, E., & Charpentier, F. (1990). Pitch-synchronous
waveform processing techniques for text-to-speech
synthesis using diphones. Speech Communication, 9(56), 453-467.
Silverman, K., Beckman, M., Pitrelli, J., Ostendorf, M.,
Wightman, C., Price, P., et al. (1992). ToBI: A standard
for labeling English prosody. In International conf.
on spoken language processing (Vol. 2, pp. 867–870).
Banff.
Watson, D., Tanenhaus, M., & Gunlogson, C. (2008). Interpreting pitch accents in online comprehension: H* vs.
L+H*. Cognitive Science A Multidisciplinary Journal,
32(7), 1232–1244.

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Continuum steps

Figure 8: Percentages of target pictures chosen in the test
phase [Experiment 4]. Dotted, solid, and dashed lines represent responses from the norming, the affirmative-bias, and the
negative-bias conditions, respectively. X-axis plots the continuum steps. Step 1: prototypical noun-focus prosody; Step
12: prototypical verb-focus prosody.

General Discussion
Our results provide novel evidence about how listeners navigate variability in prosodic information to make inferences
about an intended meaning of an utterance. We first confirmed that listeners derive affirmative and negative interpretations for “It looks like an X” based on two distinct prosodic
patterns (noun-focus and verb-focus contours). The pragmatic inference associated with the contrastive interpretation,
however, is affected by the range of linguistic contrasts provided in the context: Introducing a stronger statement (“It is
an X”) increases the proportion of contrastive implicatures for
the “It looks like an X” construction. Listeners also rapidly
adjust to speaker-specific use patterns of prosodic cues to
pragmatic meanings. Finally, listeners optimize pragmatic interpretations based on probabilistic distributions of prosodic
cue values. After hearing 30 tokens of input, listeners adjusted their classification criteria to reflect the properties of
the distribution to which they were exposed.
These results provide strong support for the adaptation hypothesis: Listeners take into account the reliability of the
mapping between prosodic patterns and intended meanings
for a particular speaker when evaluating whether a prosodic
contour provides evidence for a contrastive inference. Also,
in order to effectively process noisy input, listeners integrate
multiple acoustic cues as well as information idiosyncratic to
a particular context. In future research we plan to extend our
approach to a wider range of constructions and prosodic contours in order to further evaluate the hypothesis that adaptation to prosody can be understood within a rational inference
framework.

652

