UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Problem-Solving Strategy Selection in Relation to Formal Schooling

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/426468ns

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Saleh, Mennat-Allah
Sturm, Christian

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Problem-Solving Strategy Selection in Relation to Formal Schooling
Mennat-Allah Saleh (mennat-allah.saleh@student.guc.edu.eg)
Department of Media Engineering and Technology
German University in Cairo
New Cairo City -Main Entrance Al Tagamoa Al Khames, Egypt

Christian Sturm (christian.sturm@guc.edu.eg)
Department of Media Engineering and Technology
German University in Cairo
New Cairo City -Main Entrance Al Tagamoa Al Khames, Egypt
Abstract

Keywords: Cognitive Psychology, Cognitive Modeling, Problem Solving, Literacy, Deductive Reasoning.

that are present in all individuals, but are used differently
across cultures. It was used in combination with cross cultural
psychology, which is the study concerned with the thinking
principles that are generated from cultural differences (Adler
& Gielen, 2001). This field has been used by many researches
to study how education affects cognitive behaviors, memory,
problem solving and logical reasoning (Segall, Dasen, Berry,
& Poortinga, 1999).
Based on this previous work and the given circumstances
in Egypt, it was decided to look at reasoning and algorithmic
problem solving tasks together with the mental models created during the process for both literate and illiterate subjects
including different educational domains.

Introduction

Problem Space

A study of the literacy-generated cognitive cultural gap was
carried out on subjects of different literacy background ranging from illiterate individuals to university students in different
majors. The characteristics that aid literate and illiterate people
in solving mathematical problems efficiently were identified
and analyzed. A field research was carried out in the field of
algorithmic problem solving and in the reasoning domain, followed by constructing a software cognitive model to represent
the findings. Findings showed that in both domains cognitive
ability did not improve with level of literacy, rather the formality of the problem solving strategy selected demonstrating a
link between these two domains.

The interaction with illiterate people is a common experience in Egypt. More than one third of the adult population is
not able to read and write (UNICEF, 2012). One could conclude that due to these every-day encounters, illiterates would
be appreciated as they represent an important part of Egyptian’s workforce and are preservers of Egyptian’s rich cultural heritage. The Egyptian society, however, marks clearly
its division not only based on economic power. Throughout
the country, illiteracy is commonly associated with a lack of
mental and cognitive capabilities that leads to a tremendous
depreciation of this group by the literate part of the society
(Hollingshead, 1975). Given the nature of this stereotype,
the area of problem-solving strategies has been chosen for
comparison. The motivation of the research is to explore this
cultural gap and find ways to bridge it.
Several approaches to cultural differences in problemsolving have been explored in the past. Tedre et al. have
shown how computation is done across different cultures and
looked at the education of computer science students (Tedre,
Sutinen, Kahkonen, & Kommers, 2003). Gerdes looked in
a similar way at the cultural differences on math and mathematical problem solving (Gerdes, 2005). Several researches
suggest that human reasoning is based on building personalized mental models; hence using mental models in attempting to formalize and represent reasoning is a valid approach
(Knauff, Mulack, Kassubek, Salih, & Greenlee, 2002). In
addition to formulating the models, the field of cognitive psychology also draws attention to the basic thinking principles

Domain Selection
It was hypothesized that the level of a person’s formal schooling is related to the level of formality regarding their approach
to the selection of problem solving strategies.The functionally illiterate subjects in this context are compared to the
formal schooling subjects as having a lower level of schooling formality (Kosmidis, Zafiri, & Politimou, 2011). Hence,
domains that need a formal and strategic approach were selected for this research. The goal was to identify and quantify
problem-solving strategies easily. Numeric problem solving,
algorithmic problem solving and reasoning meet this requirement. As the relationship between literacy and numeracy has
been widely studied in this context already, the two latter domains were selected.

Algorithm Domain
The main focus while testing the algorithmic domain was to
identify the subjects strategies in conjunction with the level
and type of education while solving a procedural algorithmic
problem. The subjects were asked for a self-report on their
strategies. This report was contrasted with the steps they
actually took in solving the problem. The Towers of Hanoi
problem was used to test this domain due to its strong mathematical basis and the possibility to easily adapt it to different
cultural contexts. This was specifically important for the illiterate subjects that are not used to any kind of formal testing
situations encountered in the lab. The most important characteristic of the Towers of Hanoi consists in the variety of

2276

correct strategies to solve it. Hence, this did not limit the
subjects options to only one correct way, but would allow
them to select the strategy they are most comfortable with
based on their personal literacy backgrounds (Gunzelmann &
Anderson, 2001). The expected problem solving strategies
were: analogy, divide and conquer, mean-ends analysis, trial
and error, random strategy, research and working backwards
(Chiew & Wang, 2004). In addition to the problem solving
strategy, the mental model created by the solver during the
test was of special interest, too. It was expected that solvers
would have one of the following mental models:
• Formal Representation: Using logic and formal mathematical representation for the problem.
• Previously-Prepared Mental Model: Solver solves the entire problem in their mind before solving on board.
• On-the-go Mental Model: Subjects build an image of the
disks in their mind and use it to solve the problem virtually
before physically, a few steps at a time.
• No Representation
A dynamic, additional element in form of a random disk
was introduced by the test facilitator during the test in order
to be able to distinguish between subjects that would apply a
previously prepared model and subjects that would create the
models on-the-go. The subject was asked to proceed with the
solution using the additional disk. This procedure provided
the opportunity to check, in addition, the degree of agility
of the subjects strategy as well as their understanding of the
problem. The point in time as well as the type of disk added
was determined by the facilitator during the test based on the
subject’s performance.

never been able to solve it as they are not able to use pen
and paper for their solution. Therfore, a smaller version of
the puzzle with only 3 instead of 5 variables was created as
stated below:
A street has 3 houses, each house has a different color, and
in each house the owner has a different nationality and owns
a different pet. Given these following clues, what is the color
of the fish’s house?
• The cat lives in the center house.
• The green house is on the left.
• The French lives in the blue house.
• The German owns a dragon.
• The Egyptian lives in the red house directly to the right of
the dragon.
Subsequently, the subjects were asked to answer the following question: what is the color of the fish’s house?
The spatial memory is used for solving the Towers of
Hanoi Problem while deductive syllogistic reasoning tasks
tend to make use the verbal memory (Handley, Capon, Copp,
& Harper, 2002). Studies have shown that the performance of
both types of memory is independent from each other. Measuring the performance, however, was not the main objective
to measure in this study but rather the strategy selection. This
selection, as mentioned before, is hypothesized to depend on
the subjects formal schooling independent from the type of
memories. Therefore, it is expected that the subjects show a
similar selection of strategies for both domains chosen here.

Hypothesis and Test Design

Reasoning Domain
Reasoning was used as a problem solving domain in this research based on the previous work of Tulviste et al. (1978).
They have shown that reasoning is a skill that improves
strongly with the level of literacy (Tulviste, Riikliku, &
Toimetised, 1978). Several types of reasoning were considered for this study. Syllogistic deductive reasoning was selected as studies have shown that it is a skill that comes with
formal schooling and evolves to be used in everyday life on
different types of problems. In addition, the mental proof theory shows that syllogistic deductive reasoning is approached
by solvers using one of the following techniques (Knauff et
al., 2002; Rips, 1994): spatial reasoning, visual reasoning or
reasoning using formal logic, entailing a variety of strategies
with different levels of formality that relates to the level of
the subjects formal schooling. The Zebra puzzle was suggested as a research test question (Stangroom, 2010). The
approach needed to solve the problem, however, requires that
the subjects use a formalized written schedule. This would
have forced them to select one strategy over the others for
correctness instead of their own personal preference. Moreover, it would have meant that illiterate subjects would have

General Hypothesis

Figure 1: Towers of Hanoi strategy selection tree
It was hypothesized that the strategy selected for the Towers of Hanoi would be based on the formality of the subject’s
education as shown in figure 1. In addition, it was hypothesized that the subjects may move between different strategies when solving the problem. This shift, however, would
be minimal as the general tendency is expected to be clear
and stable.

2277

Subject
Computer Science
Applied Arts
Illiterates

Test Design
The following profiles were defined for the test subjects in
order to test the hypotheses mentioned above:
• 20 computer science university students, who received
training in formal logic.

Table 1: Towers of Hanoi Mental Model Hypothesis

• 20 Illiterate subjects, who are now in their early stages of
literacy classes. The short class-room experience equipped
them with the necessary preparation and tolerance towards
participating in the experiments.

Subject
Computer Science
Applied Arts
Illiterates

• 20 applied arts university students, who have only received
formal schooling but no training in formal logic. They
have, however, strong spatial reasoning skills.
The content of the test has been adapted to Egyptian illiterate. The deductive reasoning problem became the narration of
a story replacing nationalities with common names and pets
with farm animals. The Towers of Hanoi problem was contextualized by representing the disks with water buckets of
different sizes and the pegs with floor tiles. The explanation
of the problem was based on a story to justify the reason for
moving the buckets.
During the test, the subjects’ age, study-major (if applicable) and duration in literacy class (if applicable) were captured. This data defined the independent variables as follows: Level of literacy, type of education and training in formal logic. In addition, the subjects were asked questions regarding their approach, mental representations and changes in
strategies. The strategy was classified as either: none, on-thego or prepared beforehand. The following dependent variables were recorded: completion of task (y/n), time for task
completion, number of attempts in deductive reasoning, approach to deductive reasoning, Towers of Hanoi strategy selection, Towers of Hanoi strategy change, Towers of Hanoi
adaptation to dynamic disk addition.

Subject-Specific Hypothesis
Figure 2 and tables 1 and 2 represent the three hypotheses of
each subject background.

Mental Representation
Numerical and Formal
Visual model
Visual model or none

Approach
Formal Logic
Spatial Reasoning
Intuition

Memory
Verbal Memory
Spatial Memory
N/A

Table 2: Deductive Reasoning Hypothesis
ming course, applied arts students and Illiterate subjects. No
modifications were recommended for applied arts and illiterate tests. . All of the engineering students, however, were already familiar with the solution to the Towers of Hanoi problem. Therefore, another control group with a lower level of
formal training was added. This new group consisted of computer science students in their sophomore year. The results
recorded for the deductive reasoning question were observed
by asking the subject questions about their strategy and deducing their approach from the paper they used in solving.
After the test, it was concluded that there is no observed difference when using spatial or visual reasoning and that both
strategies may have different mental representations, but they
use the same inference technique.

The Main Test Results
The Towers of Hanoi problem was analyzed in two steps: the
observation and the inference. The observed results are the
strategies recognized by the facilitator. They were recorded
because it was difficult for some of the subjects to properly
explain their own approach. They included:
• The Random strategy was recorded when the subject
showed no learning pattern and moved the disks haphazardly often reaching no correct solution.
• The Trial and Error strategy was recorded when the subject
first started moving disks randomly and then appeared to
recognize incorrect moves and avoided repeated them, this
was often observed when the board reaches a similar state
to a previously encountered stage and the subject seemed
to recall their previous error.
• The Wrong Towers strategy was recorded when the subject
used the right pattern of movements but choose the wrong
destination for the movement of the first disk.

Figure 2: Towers of Hanoi Hypothesis

Test Results and Discussions

• The Correct strategy was recorded when the subject used
the right pattern of movements from the first move without
any errors.

A pretest was conducted using the above test design on engineering students who have studied the Constraint Program-

The inferred results were reported by the subjects’ own explanation of their strategy. They were used in addition to the
observed strategies for the final analysis and included:

Pretest

2278

• Random strategy was recorded when the subject says that
they did not understand the game and they just moved the
disks in any fashion attempting to reach a solution.
• Trial and Error strategy was recorded when the subject says
that at first they started without knowing how to proceed,
but with time they understood the game and learned from
their errors.
• Pattern Recognition occurs when the subject identifies patterns. A pattern is a group of disks stacked in a certain way
on the board. The pattern recognized by subjects were either the 3-disk pattern, disks stacked on top of each other
or the flat pattern. The flat pattern means that three disks
are placed on the board, while each disk is placed on a different tower. The subjects would always follow a learned
set of moves upon identifying any of the patterns.
• Mean Ends Analysis was recorded when the subject says
they solved the problem by breaking it down and attempting to move the largest disk to the destination first, which
required moving all the disk stacks above it to the intermediate tower and so forth. This strategy was recorded when
the subjects identified the recursive nature of the problem.

equally divided upon all strategies before and after disk addition except for the unselected random strategy.
• As hypothesized, 100% of the illiterate subjects (20) used
spatial reasoning to solve the deductive reasoning problem. The subjects were evenly divided between all the four
strategies of the Towers of Hanoi before disk addition. This
contradicted the initial belief that all illiterates would approach the problem in a random way. Upon dynamic disk
addition, most of the subjects would either continue using
their current strategy or use a strategy that is one degree
less formal according to the hierarchy shown in figure 3.
The results clearly indicate that illiterates were affected by
the disk addition process.

Statistical Results Analysis
The different strategies were numbered according to the pyramid shown in figure 3. In order to determine the significance
of the results, the Kruskal Wallis test was used.
Subject
Constraint Programming
Arts
Engineering
Illiterates
*p < .01

The following are the observed and inferred results for each
group of test subjects:

N
20
20
20
20

Min
4.0
2.0
3.0
1.0

Max
2.0
4.0
4.0
4.0

• Computer science students trained in constraint programming were almost equally divided between using the formal approach (12) and spatial reasoning (8) for the deductive reasoning problem as opposed to the original hypothesis of a high tendency for formal approach. Those who
choose a formal approach tended to use mean-ends analysis to solve the Towers of Hanoi before and after adding
the dynamic disk. The ones that used spatial reasoning
were divided between trial and error and mean-ends analysis before adding the disk and continued to use their selected strategy after addition of the disk.

Table 3: The statistical analysis of all groups before addition
H=12.65*

• Engineering subjects tended to choose spatial reasoning
(17) over formal approach (3) for solving the deductive
reasoning problem, as opposed to the hypothesis that they
would have a tendency for a formalized approach. For the
Towers of Hanoi, most of them used mean-ends analysis
before disk addition. Only a few used pattern recognition,
too. The majority that used mean-ends continued after the
disk addition with mean-ends, whilst only a few applied
Trial and Error. Those who selected pattern recognition
were equally divided upon the four strategies after disk addition.

Table 4: The statistical analysis of all groups after
addition
H=12.30*

• Applied Arts subjects mostly selected spatial reasoning
(18) as hypothesized. A surprising 10%, however, approached the deductive reasoning problem with a formal
strategy (2). The applied arts subjects were the most diversified in their strategy selection showing that their education did not seem to limit their approach. They were

Subject
Constraint Programming
Arts
Engineering
Illiterates
*p < .01

N
20
20
20
20

Min
4.0
2.0
2.0
2.0

Max
2.0
4.0
4.0
4.0

Median
4.0
2.0
4.0
2.0

Median
4.0
2.0
4.0
2.0

Both tests were statistically significant at a 1% level of significance. Therefore, we can state that the literacy and formal
schooling background significantly affects the selection of
problem-solving strategies when solving the Towers of Hanoi
problem. In addition and in line with the initial assumption,
there was no correlation found between the task performance
and the level of formality of the selected strategy (p =.08).
This means that the use of formal methods did not lead to a
faster performance in comparison to using spatial reasoning.
Finally, the effect of literacy on the type of mental model created in the Towers of Hanoi problem was tested. The results
showed no statistical significance (p=.94). This shows that all
four subject domains created spatial, beforehand or no mental models depending on a different parameter other than their

2279

educational backgrounds. It also showed that strategy selection in the Towers of Hanoi problem is not entirely dependent on the mental model created as opposed to the original
hypothesis, since the selection of the strategy proved to be
dependent on the subject’s educational background.
The original hypothesis of the tree of problem selection
strategies was not confirmed. It was rather observed that the
strategy selection was done using the pyramid shown in figure 3. The strategies are ranked according their proximity to
the most optimum Towers of Hanoi algorithm with one being
the least optimum. It was observed that subjects would start
at a level of the above pyramid depending on their level and
type of formal education, their working background and their
understanding of the problem and rules. Subjects go up the
pyramid but never down. No subject was observed to move 2
levels up the pyramid, they only move up 1 level per game or
none at all. Once an additional disk was introduced, however,
most subjects would move down the pyramid considering the
new situation a new problem. Some of the subjects did not
even capitalize on the previous knowledge they obtained before the addition of the new disk.

Modeling Reasoning
The reasoning problem strategies were modeled separately
for formal representation and spatial reasoning.
Formal reasoning was modeled using Constraint Programming. Constraint Programming (CP) is a recent paradigm
based on artificial intelligence and declarative programming
(Rossi, Beek, & Walsh, 2006). Its advantage over other programming methodologies is its abstraction. The houses are
represented as a data domain from 1 to 3 and the pets, nationalities and colors as sets of variables that associate with these
domains. By placing the puzzle restrictions above on the representation, the CP solver finds the house that has no pet and
allocates the fish to it.
The spatial reasoning model was simulated the way the
solvers described their approach. A list of possible streets was
kept in the subject’s brain at a time. Each street had its unique
configuration of houses. Upon presenting the subject with an
additional clue from the puzzle, the subject attempts to add
this to his current streets list. A clue can either be added to an
existing street, if it can be merged with one, delete an existing
street, if it presents a contradiction showing the initial street
was not correct, or create a new street, if that clue cannot be
represented sufficiently within the existing context. At the
end of the puzzle, the subjects have eliminated all incorrect
streets and are left with one street.

Modeling Towers of Hanoi
The following four strategies are modeled separately:
• Random Strategy: Each move entails moving a randomly
selected disk to a random tower.

Figure 3: Towers of Hanoi Observations

Software Model
As a first step towards possible future prediction of cognitive
behaviors of subject profiles, a software model was used to
represent the strategies observed. It was implemented to formalize and represent the test results and experiment with new
strategies. It was also implemented as a guidance for predicting problem solving strategy selection and execution based
on a given subject profile. Having such a tool can help educational institutes in understanding the mindset of their target
groups as well as guide them through their cognitive development needs which will assist in curricula formation.Four
agents were created, one for each subject background and
the agents navigated between the strategies implemented below according to the percentage of subjects within that background recorded to use that strategy. The model was created on Java as its object-oriented nature facilitated the implementation and its high-level characteristic allowed enough
abstraction to represent only the details examined during the
tests.

• Trial and Error: The trial and error strategy implementation
was divided into two modules: representing memory and
using learning, and representing how the subject learned
from their movements. Only the first module was implemented and the second was left as future work. The approach represented the subject’s memory as a pre-set number of movements that they have executed. The memory
starts as initially empty. Before undergoing any movement,
the agent checks if the current game uses a configuration
that the subject has already learnt, in this case it switches
to the pattern identification strategy below. If the game
represents a pattern that the subject did not learn yet, it
marks the current move. The subject selects a disk using
a random generator in this case. After the second module mentioned above will be implemented, however, it will
be constricted by learning. Once a move is executed, it is
saved into the subject’s memory. If there is no space in
the memory, the oldest move is deleted. Now, the agent
checks upon the last sequence of moves starting from the
marked one. If they have solved the pattern correctly up to
the pattern threshold, then the subject learned the pattern.
A pattern threshold is the initial number of difficult moves
the subject needs to do to understand a pattern. The rest
of the moves then come easily as described and observed
during tests.

2280

• Pattern Identification: The 3-pattern and flat pattern as described in Test Results and Discussions section are implemented. The first disk destination is selected randomly.

and adapt to different problems presented to them to predict
their understanding and cognitive behavior.

References

• Mean-Ends Analysis: The algorithm moves all disks
smaller than the nth disk to the intermediate tower. The
nth disk is then moved to the destination tower. Finally, all
the disks at the intermediate tower are moved on top of the
nth disk at the destination using the same fashion.

Conclusion
This research has tested the hypothesis that cognitive ability improves with literacy is a common misconception. It is
rather the case that the selection of given strategies is affected
by the literacy background.. The hypothesis was proven correct in both the domain of reasoning and algorithmic problems. The relationship between these two domains was also
examined in this research. It was hypothesized that individuals who select a formal problem solving strategy in one of
them would select a formal one in the other. This formality
would be directly traced back to their level of formal schooling. The hypothesis was confirmed. It was shown that, despite the fact that deductive reasoning is located in a different
part of the working memory than algorithmic problem solving and that both cognitive processes are completely independent, the level of formal schooling equally impacts both.
A software model was based on the findings of the research
and represented agents from the following literacy backgrounds: Illiterates, Computer Science, Constraint Programming and Applied Arts students. The agents used the different cognitive approaches of each subject domain to solve the
Towers of Hanoi problem and a deductive syllogistic reasoning problem adapted from the Zebra puzzle.

Future Work
The software model can be enhanced by adding the second
element of the Trial and Error learning system using reinforcement learning technique. It may also be broadened after
adapting more tests to present a general thinking pattern in
the domains of algorithmic problem solving and reasoning
by the agents. This would mean that the model, given any
newly introduced problem within these two domains, would
be able to simulate the behavior of a given subject’s profile.
Finally, the model may be built on a pre-existing cognitive
framework which will improve its accuracy and make it more
representative of the human brain.
This model can be used to enhance the understanding of
the different cognitive profiles in the Egyptian society. It can
be used by Education Scientists to understand the cognitive
gap generated by the literacy cultural gap and make use of the
country’s ”cultural capital” as referred to by Pierre Bourdieu
(Bourdieu, 1984). This capitalization can best be practiced by
analyzing the reason behind these cognitive gaps and adapting the school, university as well as literacy classes curricula
to make use of this information. In addition, the newly improved model can be used to test how students would think

Adler, L., & Gielen, U. (2001). Cross-cultural topics in psychology. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction: A social critique of the
judgement of taste. Harvard University Press (Cambridge,
Mass.).
Chiew, V., & Wang, Y. (2004, aug.). Formal description of the
cognitive process of problem solving. In Cognitive informatics, 2004. proceedings of the third IEEE international
conference on (p. 74 - 83).
Gerdes, P. (2005). Ethnomathematics as a new research field,
illustrated by studies of mathematical ideas in african history. Philosophia Mathematica III, 13, 135161.
Gunzelmann, G., & Anderson, J. R. (2001). An ACT-R
model of the evolution of strategy use and problem difficulty. In Proceedings of the fourth international conference
on cognitive modeling (p. 109-114).
Handley, S. J., Capon, A., Copp, C., & Harper, C. (2002).
Conditional reasoning and the tower of hanoi: The role of
spatial and verbal working memory. British Journal of Psychology, 93(4), 501–518.
Hollingshead, A. B. (1975). Four factor index of social status. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Sociology,
Yale University, New Haven, CT..
Knauff, M., Mulack, T., Kassubek, J., Salih, H. R., & Greenlee, M. W. (2002). Spatial imagery in deductive reasoning:
a functional MRI study. Cognitive Brain Research, 13(2),
203 - 212.
Kosmidis, M. H., Zafiri, M., & Politimou, N. (2011). Literacy
versus formal schooling: Influence on working memory.
Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 26(7), 575-582.
Rips, L. (1994). The psychology of proof. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Rossi, F., Beek, P. v., & Walsh, T. (2006). Handbook of
constraint programming (foundations of artificial intelligence). New York, NY, USA: Elsevier Science Inc.
Segall, M., Dasen, P., Berry, J., & Poortinga, Y. (1999). Human behavior in global perspective.
Stangroom, J. (2010). Einstein’s riddle: Riddles, paradoxes
and conundrums to stretch your mind. Allen & Unwin.
Tedre, M., Sutinen, E., Kahkonen, E., & Kommers, P. (2003,
aug.). Appreciating the knowledge of students in computer
science education in developing countries. In Information
technology: Research and education, 2003. proceedings.
itre2003. international conference on (p. 174 - 178).
Tulviste, P., Riikliku, T., & Toimetised, U. (1978). On the
origins of theoretical syllogistic reasoning in culture and in
the child. , 474, 3-22.
UNICEF.
(2012,
30 January).
Unicef
statistics
[Computer
software
manual].
http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/egypt statistics.html.

2281

