UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Re-learning labeled categories reveals structured representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1ph895cn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Hendrickson, Andrew
Kachergis, George
Fausey, Caitlin
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Re-learning labeled categories reveals structured representations
Andrew T. Hendrickson; George Kachergis; Caitlin M. Fausey; Robert L. Goldstone
({athendri, gkacherg, cfausey, rgoldsto} @indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 East Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
How do people learn to group and re-group objects into
labeled categories? In this paper, we examine mechanisms
that guide how people re-represent categories. In two
experiments, we examine what is easy and what is hard to
relearn as people update their knowledge about labeled
groups of objects. In Study 1, we test how people learn and
re-learn to group objects that share no perceptual features.
Data suggest that people easily learn to re-label objects when
the category structure remains the same. In Study 2, we test
whether more general types of labeling conventions -- words
that do or do not correspond with object similarities -influence learning and re-learning. Data suggest that people
are able to learn either kind of convention and may have
trouble switching between them when re-structuring their
knowledge. Implications for category learning, second
language acquisition and updating representations are
discussed.
Keywords: categories,
knowledge change

labels,

learning

and

transfer,

Introduction
An eighth-grade science student will happily tell you that
she has just learned the electrons and nucleus of an atom are
very similar to the planets and sun in our solar system. She
now has a “multi-body orbiting systems” category with both
of these systems as members. This approach is a classic
example of transferring knowledge: information she
previously learned about the solar system can be applied to
the atom. But the story doesn’t end there: a physicist will
tell you the truth is that an atom doesn’t really work that
way, electrons are quantum wave functions that do not orbit
a central point. New information causes the analogy to
break down and if the eighth-grader continues to study
physics she will learn new categorizations because the solar
system belongs with systems explained by Newtonian
mechanics while the atom belongs with quantum systems.
The process of relearning categories and reshaping
knowledge is important not only for shifting from novice to
expert but also for learning new ways to use words. Many
languages group objects, relations and events in different
ways (e.g., Majid, Boster, & Bowerman, 2008; Malt,
Sloman, & Gennari, 2003; Wolff, Jeon, & Yu, 2009) and
second language learners must categorize in new ways in
order to speak their second language conventionally.
In laboratory category learning tasks, relearning has been
studied using highly structured, binary dimensions. Using 3dimensional binary stimuli, Kruschke (1996) found a clear
hierarchy in the speed of relearning. Preserving the same

classification rule but reversing the response options is
relearned the fastest, and switching to a new classification
rule that involves a previously relevant dimension is more
quickly learned than a rule using a previously irrelevant
dimension. This pattern of results is consistent with the
reversal learning literature (e.g., Kendler & D’Amato, 1954)
and successfully modeled with straightforward extensions of
many attention-shifting exemplar-based categorization
models (e.g., Kruschke, 1996).
The main goal of this work is to examine category relearning for categories that are not clearly defined by rules.
Many categories in the world and in language do not obey a
simple rule-based classification scheme, and it is interesting
to consider the challenges that learners may face as they
structure and re-structure their knowledge about these
categories. In this work, we focus on how people learn to
group and re-group objects into labeled categories.
Examining how people re-learn to group objects into
categories has the potential to reveal insights into three
important issues. First, does existing evidence about
category learning and re-learning (e.g., with rule-based
categories) extend to other kinds of categories? This is
important to understand for more general theories of
knowledge development. Second, how do people represent
labeled groups of objects? What role does a label play in
structuring knowledge (e.g., label-as-feature vs. label-ascategory-marker, Deng & Sloutsky, 2012; Gelman &
Markman, 1986)? This hotly-debated issue may benefit
from data about patterns of re-learning because transfer
paradigms are a useful way to assess what has been
represented, on the logic that people are better able to relearn structures that closely match what they had originally
represented (e.g., Kruschke, 1996). Finally, second language
learners are a large part of the world’s population and when
people learn a new language they often must learn to
categorize objects in different ways. What are the
mechanisms that guide this re-representation?
As a first step toward these aims, here we consider a
variety of potential changes between initial learning and
relearning. In the experiments described below, people first
learn a category structure and then are asked to relearn
across a variety of potential changes. These changes reflect
potential real-world relearning situations and the question
becomes: what is easy and what is hard to re-learn as people
re-structure their knowledge about labeled groups of
objects?

1668

Study 1: Re-learning with unrelated objects
In Study 1, we examined several learning and re-learning
relationships. In all scenarios, participants first learned to
label nine objects. These nine objects were grouped into
three categories; three labels were paired with three objects.
After learning the initial categorization, participants relearn. We manipulated what information remained constant
and what changed between learning phases. Participants
faced re-learning scenarios in which either the objects, the
labels, the grouping of objects, and/or the mapping between
groups and labels changed (see Table 1). Scenarios in which
people quickly adapt to new object-label mappings are
likely to be scenarios that conserve whatever representations
they learned from labeling the original nine objects.
Scenarios that people find more difficult likely overlap less
with the learned representations. Thus, how easy it is to
adapt to new object-label mappings has the potential to
reveal some aspects of how people represent labeled objects.
Several patterns of re-learning data would be informative.
In particular, the data may distinguish whether learners
represent the information in the following ways: (a)
Learners associate each distinct object with its appropriate
label, or (b) Learners associate objects with labels, and also
represent that the three similarly labeled objects are related
to each other. That is, despite the fact that objects never
appear together participants may learn the object groupings
by virtue of sharing a label. Relearning patterns can also
disambiguate between the potential interference or benefit
of relearning new pairings or groupings of old objects
compared to novel objects. We examine these questions in
the following experiment.

Figure 1: (a) An initial learning structure with 9 objects
randomly assigned to 3 labels (by row). (b) A re-learning
structure in the Re-Group & Re-name condition. Old objects
grouped in a different way with novel labels.

Method
Participants. 180 Indiana University undergraduates
participated for course credit. 38 participants failed to
complete the study in the allotted time and were excluded
from analyses. Participants were randomly assigned to one
of seven conditions (n = 19 to 23 for each condition).
Materials. Figure 1 shows the objects and labels that one
participant might see during (a) learning and (b) re-learning.
For object stimuli, 72 unique segments were formed by
fitting a spline through 8 randomly perturbed points along a
90-degree arc. Objects were created by combining 4
segments; a unique set of 18 objects was created for each

participant by sampling without replacement from the set of
segments and arranging them to form a continuous outline.
Labels were novel words from the set of {beme, vade, kipe,
coge, zune, tyfe}. Other than the final “e” for all words, no
letter was repeated across labels.
Design. All participants completed an original learning
phase and then a re-learning phase. For each participant,
nine of 18 objects and three of six labels were randomly
selected for the initial learning phase. The remaining
objects and labels were used in re-learning if needed.
Conditions were defined by the changes between learning
and re-learning (see Table 1).
Table 1: Re-learning Conditions in Study 1
Re-learning
Condition
Learned

Items
Objects Labels
Old
Old

Grouping Structure
Conserved
Yes
No
!

Object-Label Associations
Conserved
Yes
No
!

Re-map
Re-name

Old
Old

Old
New

Re-group
Re-group & Re-name

Old
Old

Old
New

!
!

!
!

Recycled Name
Novel

New
New

Old
New

!
!

!
!

!
!

!
!

In some cases, new mappings between objects and labels
were prompted only by substituting either new objects or
new labels for the old objects and labels already learned. For
example, a participant in the Recycled name condition
might have used “beme” to label three objects during
learning and then learned to re-use “beme” to label a novel
three objects during re-learning. Similarly, a participant in
the Re-name condition might have first learned that three
objects were all called “beme” and then re-learned that they
are all called “zune,” a name that had not been presented
before. In these conditions, participants saw one set of
objects [or labels] during learning and a different set of
objects [or labels] during re-learning.
In other cases, new mappings between objects and labels
reorganized the structure of previously learned categories
using old objects. For example, consider a participant who
first learned that three objects are each called “beme,”
another three are each called “zune,” and a final three are
each called “coge.” In Re-map, they might later re-learn
that the first three are now called “zune,” the second three
“coge,” and the third three “beme.” The grouping of objects
is intact, the mapping between objects and labels is not. In
Re-group, they might later re-learn that “beme” is now used
for one object previously called “beme,” one object
previously called “coge,” and one object previously called
“zune.” This breaks the grouping of objects. In Re-group &
Re-name, they might later learn to use “kipe,” a label not
previously presented, to label three objects that had
previously been called “beme,” “coge,” and “zune.” This
breaks the grouping of objects and uses new labels.
Two other conditions gave participants no conflict with
what was learned before – in one they continued with the

1669

same objects, labels, and mapping between them as they had
originally learned (Learned) and in another they learned
about totally new objects and labels (Novel).
Procedure. On every trial, participants saw one object and
three possible labels (Figure 2). The starting position of the
cursor was equidistant from all response options and the
location of labels was randomly determined on every trial.
Participants were asked “Which category does this belong
in?” The object and labels remained on the screen until the
participant made a response. Afterward, feedback appeared
above the object for 1200 ms: “Correct [Incorrect]! This is
a _____.” Feedback included the correct label for all
responses. There was a 400 ms pause between trials.

Figure 3: Participants’ mean accuracy by condition across
re-learning in Study 1. Re-learning was faster than Original
Learning. Of the re-learning conditions, Learned, Re-name,
and Re-map show higher performance than the others.

Figure 2: A sample trial.

objects were conserved from learning to re-learning (i.e., the
first three rows of Table 1). The other cluster was
characteristic of three conditions: Novel (14 of 19),
Recycled Name (14 of 20), and Re-group & Re-name (17 of
23). The Re-group condition was equally split between both
clusters (10 of 20 in each).

Participants completed the learning phase in blocks of 9
trials. In each block, every object was presented once.
Participants continued in this learning phase until they were
correct on at least 8 out of 9 trials in a block for 4
consecutive blocks. Thus, everyone learned the original
categories to criterion.
Participants then started the re-learning phase, reading
these instructions: "You are doing great. In the next section
the categories may change.” The re-learning phase
consisted of 5 blocks in which all of the 9 stimuli were
presented 3 times.

Discussion

Results
Initial Learning. The minimum number of blocks to reach
criterion during the initial learning was 7 and the maximum
number was 94. Participants reached criterion with a mean
of 34.1 and a median of 31.0 blocks.
Re-learning. People’s performance in the relearning phase
depended on block and condition. Re-learning data were
analyzed using an ANCOVA, with categorization accuracy
as the dependent variable, condition (7 levels) as a factor,
and block (5 blocks) as a covariate. There were main effects
of Condition (F(6, 135) = 23.1, p < 0.0001) and Block
(F(1,561) = 491.5, p < 0.0001), and a significant interaction
between Condition and Block (F(6,561) = 12.9, p < 0.0001).
In order to interpret the interaction between Condition and
Block, the trajectory of accuracy across block for each
subject was clustered into groups and the distribution of
each category within clusters was compared. The
trajectories were clustered with methods to estimate the
appropriate number of clusters (Kaufman & Rousseeuw,
1990). This technique identified two clusters, where one
cluster was characteristic of three conditions: Learned (all
19 subjects), Re-name (19 of 20), and Re-map (16 of 21).
These were conditions in which the original grouping of

Performance during relearning depended on whether or not
the groupings of objects were maintained from learning to
re-learning. The three conditions in the higher accuracy
cluster – Learned, Re-map, and Re-name – all conserved the
grouping of objects from learning to relearning. The
conditions strongly consistent with the lower accuracy
cluster – Re-Group & Rename, Recycled Name, and Novel
– did not preserve any groupings, either because they
consisted of novel objects or because the three objects
mapped to one label in relearning had not been mapped to a
common label during learning.
The participants in the Re-group condition were equally
split between the two clusters. In this condition, the nine
objects that people saw during learning and re-learning were
the same. Three of these were associated with the same
name (one per label) during learning and re-learning, while
the remaining six became associated with a different name
during relearning (due to re-grouping the objects). The split
between clusters suggests participants in this condition may
have used different strategies, with some individuals less
disrupted by the re-grouping because they were able to use
object-label mappings that were identical between learning
and re-learning but others learned representations that
strongly relied on groupings, which were not conserved.
Study 1 suggests that labels — novel or re-purposed —
are relatively easy to re-map to a group of objects. Learning
new object groupings or re-groupings is more difficult.

1670

These data suggest that learners may have successfully
represented more than object-to-label mappings for each
individual object and instead capitalized on structure among
objects. We discuss this idea further after considering
another interesting case of learning and re-learning.

Study 2: Re-learning with related objects
The objects in Study 1 could be grouped into categories in
only by using the labels because the objects shared no
segments. How do people learn and re-learn related objects?
In what way(s) does similarity among objects influence
object grouping and impact re-learning?
To examine these issues, we again used a category
learning and re-learning paradigm in Study 2. There are
three main differences in Study 2: (a) objects were created
such that they had structured similarity because some
objects contained the same segments in the same locations;
(b) the nature of mapping between objects and labels was
manipulated to be consistent or inconsistent with object
similarity. The mapping from training could either persist or
switch from learning to re-learning; (c) all re-learning
scenarios used novel labels and old objects. The non-control
conditions in Study 2 all involved breaking the grouping of
objects with the goal of understanding how relearning is
influenced by the mapping between object similarity and
category labels.

Objects: Four segments per object, columns indicates a
location. Within a column, the same number indicates an
identical segment. Across columns, numbers are unrelated.
Learning & Relearning: Letters indicate labels. In “One”
columns, a label matches one segment (Learning-One,
Segment 2; Relearning-One, Segment 4). In “Many”
columns, no single feature matches a label.

Figure 4: Example categories (Study 2). “One”: shared
segment in upper right. “Many”: All unique segments.

Method
Participants. 107 Indiana University undergraduates
participated in this study for course credit. 30 participants
(evenly distributed across conditions) did not complete the
study in the allotted time and were excluded from analyses.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of six
conditions (n = 11 to 14 per condition).
Materials. Objects were created by combining four
segments from a set of 72 segments. Nine objects were
created for every participant. Instead of randomly selecting
unique segments without replacement for each location of
every object, some segments repeated across objects.
Specifically, two segments of every object also appeared
in exactly two other objects (see columns 2 and 4 of the
stimuli dimensions in Table 2). No two objects shared more
than one segment and the location of the repeated segments
was constrained so that they were not adjacent to each other.
The other two locations were unique segments sampled
without replacement (columns 1 and 3).
Further, in order to avoid possible preferences for a
particular spatial location (e.g., whatever appears in the “top
left quadrant” is easier to learn because of looking
tendencies), a random number between 1 and 360 was
selected for every participant and all objects for that person
were rotated that many degrees.
In all conditions, different labels were used during
learning and re-learning. For learning, three labels were
randomly sampled without replacement from the same set of
labels used in Study 1. The remaining three labels were used
during re-learning.
Table 2: Stimuli and condition structure in Study 2

Design. Categories were defined by the nature of segmentto-label mapping. The One category structures had a one-toone mapping between segments in a location and labels (see
Table 2). The Many structures did not have a one-to-one
mapping, and never shared a segment within a category.
Conditions were defined by the type of structures in
learning and re-learning. Learning and re-learning
structures were combined so that some participants
continued in the same style of mapping (One-One; ManyMany conditions) while others switched (One-Many; ManyOne conditions). All participants in these conditions learned
new ways to group objects during re-learning regardless of
the type of mapping in learning and re-learning, the group of
objects that shared the same label changed.
Two additional control conditions did not change the
category structure between learning and re-learning though
novel labels were introduced. In “Same One” participants
started and remained in a “One” structure and in “Same
Many” participants stayed in a “Many” structure.
Procedure. Learning and re-learning was exactly like Study
1. After re-learning, people did a re-test in which they tried
to recall the label that they had originally learned for every
object. They were instructed “In this final section we will
ask you about the first labels you learned. You will not be
told if you were correct or not, please do the best you can.”
The re-test trials only displayed the original labels and no
feedback was provided. People saw each object 8 times.

1671

Results
Initial Learning. People reached criterion in about the same
number of blocks during each kind of initial training (One:
M = 35.2, Many: M = 41.7, t(75) = 1.5, p = 0.14).

significant effect of Block was found (F(1,222) < 1, p =
0.5). There was no significant interaction between Condition
and Block (F(5, 222) = 1.4, p = 0.21).
To better understand the marginal effect of Condition,
pair-wise post-hoc tests showed that the accuracy in the
Many-Many condition (M = 0.73) was significantly lower
than Same-Many (M = 0.91, p = 0.006). All other conditions
were not significantly different (p > 0.01).

Discussion

Figure 5: Participants’ mean accuracy in Re-learning
(Study 2). The Same conditions are easy, followed by
Many-Many, Many-One, and to some extent One-One. OneMany is more difficult, like the Original Learning.
Relearning. People’s performance in the relearning phase
depended on block and condition (Figure 5). Re-learning
data were analyzed using an ANCOVA, with accuracy as
the dependent variable, Condition (6 levels) as a factor and
Block (5 blocks) as a covariate. There were main effects of
Condition (F(5,71) = 12.7, p < 0.0001) and Block (F(1,302)
= 275.4, p < 0.0001), and a significant interaction between
Condition and Block (F(5, 302) = 9.5, p < 0.0001).
Like Study 1, a clustering analysis was performed using
the accuracy data across block for every participant and was
best fit with 3 clusters. The highest accuracy cluster was
most consistent with the two conditions in which object
groupings did not change from learning to re-learning: Same
Many (10 of 12) and Same One (12 of 14). A second cluster
was most consistent with the two conditions that did change
groupings but started with the Many mapping: Many-One (7
of 11) and Many-Many (9 of 12). The third cluster was most
consistent with the One-Many condition (10 of 13). The
One-One condition was equally consistent with the second
and third clusters (6 of 13 in each). Thus, switching from a
One structure, where a segment and label are paired, to a
Many structure, where many segments map to a label,
appeared to be particularly challenging.
Re-test. After re-learning, people’s memory for the
originally learned labels did not appear to be strongly
influenced by Condition or Block. Memory accuracy was
analyzed using an ANCOVA with accuracy in the re-test as
the dependent measure, Condition (6 levels) as a factor and
Block (4 blocks) as a covariate. A marginal effect of
Condition was found (F(5,70) = 2.2, p = 0.062). No

When people learned novel labels for objects, they had the
easiest time if the original groupings of objects were
preserved. Using new words to talk about old groups was
equally easy whether or not the original groupings were
mapped to labels based on repeated, shared segments or
based on individual items. If the grouping of objects was
disrupted, however, people who had originally learned a
Many mapping (i.e., item-specific association with labels)
re-learned faster than those who had learned a One mapping
(i.e., repeated-segment association with labels).
Why is it easier to learn new labels for new groups after
having first learned an item-specific labeling convention
than after having learned a labeling convention that
capitalizes on perceptual similarity? Learning that words are
used for similar objects (i.e., One-One and One-Many) may
have directed attention to a common, predictive feature for
each word. Re-learning to label these objects may be hard
when this feature is no longer predictive. But shifting
attention to different features might be easier if you have
learned that words are used on an object-by-object basis –
this is a useful approach during “re-learning” even when the
particular mappings change. Thus, generalizations about
“labeling conventions” may influence later re-learning.
Interestingly, people may learn labeling conventions that
capitalize on perceptual similarity in different ways. In this
study, participants in the One-One condition were equally
split between the two clusters. The group of people who
were clustered with the Many-Many and Many-One
conditions may have been able to re-learn easily because
they discovered the new shared feature during re-learning.
In addition to the original associations between objects and
labels, these people may have learned that there is a feature
that predicts a label. They then successfully transferred this
generalization during re-learning. The other group of people
in this One-One condition may have learned the original
association between a shared feature and its label but not the
higher order pattern and could not later shift their attention.
Re-learning is even more challenging if people must
overcome not only a learned association between a specific
feature and a label, but also the higher-order generalization
that there will be one feature that predicts each label. This is
the situation of learners in the One-Many condition, and
indeed, they performed the worst during re-learning.
Is there more than one way to successfully re-learn after
having learned a labeling convention that is item-specific?
This is an open question. In the Many-Many and Many-One
conditions, people initially learned item-specific mappings

1672

between objects and labels. In the re-learning, even though
people in the “Many-One” condition could have learned to
associate labels with shared features, they also could have
learned these associations in an item-specific way. The fact
that people in the Many-Many and Many-One conditions
showed similar re-learning trajectories suggests that this
may have been a common strategy. Thus, it is possible
people in all re-learning scenarios were likely to continue
using whatever labeling convention they had originally used
(either item-specific, or shared feature). It just happens to be
that an item-specific strategy leads to success throughout
learning and re-learning, while a labeling convention that
relies on perceptual similarity (shared features) does not.

General Discussion
Data from two experiments suggest that people easily learn
to re-label objects when the category structure remains the
same from original to subsequent learning. Further, people
can learn multiple labeling conventions – words do or do
not correspond with object similarities – but may have
trouble switching between them when restructuring their
knowledge. Like advantages for using relevant dimensions
when re-learning rule-based categories (Kruschke, 1996),
there are advantages to using existing category structures
when re-learning arbitrary or similarity-based categories.
The advantage for shared structure, as well as shared
labeling conventions, may help to explain some difficulties
that adults face when learning a second language. It should
be especially hard to learn new labels for objects that are
organized differently in the two languages compared to
objects that are categorized similarly. Moreover, an
intriguing possibility is that once learners have made higherorder generalizations about the kinds of non-linguistic
structure that predict labels, they may find it hard to "start
from scratch" and build new associations as they construct
different similarity spaces. Interesting test cases of this idea
would be to see if L2 learners make systematic labeling
errors based on L1 structure (and change over the course of
L2 learning), and also whether object similarity spaces are
predictably different in bilinguals than monolinguals.
Labels may play a critical role in forming categories and
shaping representations (e.g., Goldstone, 1994; Goldstone &
Hendrickson, 2009) and these representational changes may
persist during subsequent use. The re-learning tasks used
here raise interesting questions about how labels may wax
and wane as drivers of representation and re-representation.
We suggest that a focus on change over time, together with
approaches that test knowledge structures at a single
moment will enrich our understanding of these issues.
Learning any particular structure can be a double-edged
sword. Subsequently learning a very similar structure may
be easy, but it may be much harder to learn very different
structures. In the case of language, different labeling
conventions may promote relatively richer or shallower
encoding of individual object representations. For example,
if it is possible to successfully label objects by paying
attention to a single shared feature, then using labels to learn

these categories may promote a representation that
prioritizes this feature. But, if it is necessary to pay attention
to multiple aspects of objects in order to talk about them,
then people will (e.g., Slobin, 2003). Thus, the complexity
of the mapping between labels and structures might shape
subsequent representations via perceptual learning
(Goldstone & Hendrickson, 2009). It may be easy to use
them in some situations, but harder in others.
In general, transferring knowledge to new situations is
easier after deeply encoding the relevant structure and
certain kinds of initial exposure promote this kind of
encoding (e.g., Day & Golstone, 2011; Gentner &
Markman, 1997). It is an interesting open question to
consider what aspects of language learning – what labeling
conventions, used at what points of learning about the
relevant structures and categories in one’s world – support
different trajectories of developing object representations.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by National Science
Foundation REESE grant 0910218, Department of Education
IES grant R305A1100060, and National Institute of Health and
National Research Service Award HD007475-17.

References
Day, S., & Goldstone, R. L. (2011). Analogical transfer from a
simulated
physical
system. Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Deng, W., & Sloutsky, V.M., (2012). Carrot eaters or moving
heads: Inductive inference is better supported by salient features
than by category labels. Psychological Science.
Gelman, S.A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and induction in
young children. Cognition.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structural alignment in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist.
Goldstone, R .L. (1994). The role of similarity in categorization:
Providing a groundwork. Cognition.
Goldstone, R. L., & Hendrickson, A. T. (2009). Categorical
Perception. Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science.
Kaufman, L., & Rousseeuw, P.J. (1990). Finding Groups in Data:
An Introduction to Cluster Analysis. Wiley, New York.
Kendler, & D’Amato, (1954). A comparison of reversal shifts and
non-reversal shifts in human concept formation behavior.
Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Kruschke, J. K. (1996). Dimensional relevance shifts in category
learning. Connection Science.
Majid, A., Boster, J.S., & Bowerman, M. (2008). The crosslinguistic categorization of everyday events: A study of cutting
and breaking. Cognition.
Malt, B.C., Sloman, S.A., & Gennari, S.P. (2003). Universality and
language specificity in object naming. Journal of Memory and
Language.
Slobin, D.I. (2003). Language and thought online: Cognitive
consequences of linguistic relativity. In D. Gentner & S. GoldinMeadon (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in the
investigation of language and thought. MIT Press.
Wolff, P., Jeon, G., & Yu, L. (2009). Causal agents in English,
Korean and Chinese: The role of internal and external causation.
Language and Cognition.

1673

