UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reading direction is sufficient to account for the optimal viewing position in reading: The
case of music reading

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1sw838jd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kwailing Wong, Yetta
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reading direction is sufficient to account for the optimal viewing position in
reading: The case of music reading
Yetta Kwailing Wong (yetta.wong@gmail.com)
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
604, Knowles Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Abstract

right-hemisphere-dominant language functions have a
shifted OVP more towards the end of a word compared with
the left-hemisphere-dominant individuals (Brysbaert, 1994;
Hunter et al., 2007).

The Optimal viewing position (OVP), the position where
word recognition is the best, is biased to the left for English
words. Several explanations have been proposed to account
for this phenomenon, including the left hemispheric
dominance for language, asymmetric information structure of
words, and reading direction. However, it is unclear which
factor(s) is necessary or sufficient to cause an asymmetric
OVP. Using music reading, which shares only the reading
direction but not the other two factors with word reading, we
show that the OVP for three-note sequences is significantly
biased to the left only for expert readers but not for novices.
The degree of asymmetry in the OVP curve for music readers
increases with individual reading skill, suggesting that their
OVP is gradually shifted to the left during the development of
reading skills. These suggest that habitual reading direction is
sufficient to account for a biased OVP to the left.

Second, the OVP for words is affected by the information
structure of the words. For example, the OVP shifts to the
informative position of the words in terms of word identity
or meaning, both when the informative part is at the word
beginning (e.g., the left part of an English word) or at the
end (e.g., the right part of an English word; O’Regan et al.,
1984; Deustch & Rayner, 1999). Also, adding a prefix shifts
the OVP towards the word end while a suffix shifts the OVP
towards the word beginning (Farid & Grainger, 1996). Since
the initial letters are in general more informative about the
identity of the word than the last letters for English, the
OVP for English words is on the left (Brysbaert & Nazir,
2005; Farid & Grainger, 1996).

Keywords: optimal viewing position, word reading, music,
expertise, visuospatial bias

Introduction
It has been well documented that where we look within a
word or a sentence determines our reading performance. For
example, we recognize English words the best when we
fixate to the left of the middle of the words, i.e., the optimal
viewing position (OVP) for English words is on the left
(also called ‘convenient viewing position’; O’Regan, 1984;
Brysbaert & Nazir, 2005). This cannot be explained by the
acuity function of our eyes, which is the highest at the fovea
but drops symmetrically in the left and right visual
periphery (Bouma, 1970). Why is the OVP for English word
asymmetric and biased to the left, but not to the right?
Multiple factors have been proposed to account for this
phenomenon. The first factor is related to the cerebral
hemispheric dominance for language processing (Brysbaert
& Nazir, 2005). When we fixate at the left part of a word,
most of the letters falls onto the right visual field, where
information is initially projected to the left hemisphere. As
the language center for most people is in the left
hemisphere, word recognition is more efficient when we
fixate at the left part of a word as compared with when we
fixate at the right part of a word (where most of the word
falls onto the left visual field and is initially projected to the
right hemisphere). Supporting this account, individuals with

Third, the OVP for words can be explained by reading
direction. In left-to-right scripts, since the newly arriving
information and the next eye movement is on the right,
attention is directed more to the right visual field. With
years of reading training, perceptual span for reading (the
region around fixation from which useful information is
extracted) extends further to the right compared with the left
(Deutsch & Rayner, 1999). The OVP for English words is
on the left because a left fixation leaves most of the word in
the right visual field where English readers learn to
recognize the word better (Brysbaert & Nazir, 2005). Prior
work shows that the OVP for right-to-left scripts (e.g.
Arabic) have a more symmetrical OVP (Farid & Grainger,
1996).
While many factors can modulate the OVP for words,
which one(s) is necessary and/or sufficient for an
asymmetric OVP to occur? In word reading, it is impossible
to isolate and test the effect of each factor. Here, we tested
whether reading direction alone is sufficient to lead to a leftbiased OVP with the domain of music reading. While music
reading shares the left-to-right reading direction with
English reading, it does not involve strong hemispheric
lateralization as experts learn to recruit both hemispheres for
music reading (Wong & Gauthier, 2010). In addition, music
notation does not follow as strict morphological/

2540

orthographical rules as English text does. Therefore it is
unlikely that music sequences in general have an
asymmetric information distribution as that in English
words1. Therefore, music reading allows us to test whether
reading direction is sufficient to cause a left-biased OVP.

with 8 females and 5 males (Mage = 22.4, s.d. = 5.42) and
0.31 years of music reading experience (ranging from 0-3
years). All reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision
and gave informed consent according to the guidelines of
the Ethics Committee of the University of Hong Kong.

Here we used three-note sequences and single notes (i.e.,
the shortest note sequences) as our stimuli. A sequential
matching task which did not require music knowledge was
used so that we were able to measure the OVP in both
experts and novices. In addition, we took advantage of the
wide range of music reading ability among the participants
to examine how the OVP changes with reading skills. We
hypothesized that the OVP is gradually shifted to the left
(for left-to-right scripts) when one’s reading skill improves.
To test this hypothesis, we examined the relationship
between the degree of asymmetry of the OVP curve and
individual music reading fluency. The hypothesis predicts
that the degree of asymmetry of the OVP curve should
increase with individual reading fluency.

Stimuli and Design

Methods
Participants
Forty-two participants completed the experiment for cash
payment or course credits. All participants were righthanded (according to the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory;
Oldfield, 1971) except three participants (one intermediate
and two novice readers) who were subsequently excluded
from data analysis. Twenty-six participants had been
formally trained in music reading and were further divided
into the expert and intermediate group according to their
performance in the perceptual fluency test (see below). The
thirteen experts included 12 females and 1 male (Mage =
20.2, s.d. = 1.69) with 13.4 years of music reading
experience on average (ranging from 10-20 years). The
twelve intermediate readers included 11 females and 2
males (Mage = 21.8, s.d. = 4.36) with 9.3 years of experience
reading music on average (ranging from 2-17 years). The
thirteen novices reported that they could not read music,
1
There is no consensus and no formal study (to our best
knowledge) on the information structure of music sequences.
However, probable combinations of sequences (e.g. melodies) are
defined by specific music pieces without general morphological,
orthographical or phonological structure applicable to all pieces. In
this experiment, no musical context, key signatures or accidentals
(e.g. sharps or flats) were provided and the sequences only varied
along the most common C major scale. In this case, all
combinations of the notes are highly probable such that the notes
are unlikely more predictable by the left or right part of the
sequences. Although some pitch pairs may be more frequent than
others in general (e.g. tonal pitch pairs such as ‘C’ and ‘E’ are used
more frequently compared with tritone pairs such as ‘C’ and ‘F#’),
such predictiveness of tone pairs should be largely symmetrical
(e.g. ‘C’ is unlikely followed by ‘F#’, and ‘F#’ is also unlikely
followed by ‘C’). As a result, there is presumably no information
structure biased to the left or right for music sequences, at least
under the current context.

The experiment was conducted on PCs with the Eyelink
1000 eyetracker (SR Research Ltd, Canada), and Matlab
using the Psychtoolbox and the Eyelink Toolbox extension.
The eyetracker was positioned on the desk and sampled
pupil location at 500 Hz. The tracking mode was pupil and
corneal reflection. The standard nine-point calibration
procedure was administered at the beginning of the task; the
procedure was repeated whenever the drift correction error
was larger than one degree of visual angle during the
experiment. The acceleration threshold was 8000 degree/s2
and the threshold for saccade velocity was 30 degree/s.
Participants viewed the stimuli at 62 cm from the monitor
using a chin rest.
The stimuli were generated with Matlab. 400 three-note
sequences were randomly generated, with the constraint that
there were no repeated notes within each sequence and no
repeated sequences within the set. The sequences subtended
about 3º x 3º. Each sequence was paired with a distractor
sequence, in which one of the notes was shifted for one step
up or down (counterbalanced). Single notes included 11
quarter notes from the note below the bottom staff line (D4)
to the note above the top line (G5). They subtended about
1.6º x 3.2º in visual angle. The contrast of the single note
stimuli was reduced to half to avoid ceiling performance.
The distractor of each single note was the note either one
step up or down (counterbalanced).
A sequential matching task was used (Figure 1a). Each
trial started when a central fixation was confirmed by the
eyetracker. Then, a target stimulus was presented (for 600
ms for sequences and 80 ms for single notes) while
participants maintained a central fixation. If the eyetracker
detected an eye fixation away from the center, the trial was
aborted and an error message was presented to the
participant. Next, a second stimulus was presented in the
upper or lower visual field at 3.6º from the central fixation.
Participants were instructed to saccade to this image and
judged whether the two stimuli were identical or not by key
press as fast and as accurately as possible.
The critical manipulation was the position of the first
target stimulus such that participants fixated at different
viewing positions. For sequences, the target was presented
at 2º left, 1º left, 0º, 1º right, or 2º right from the central
fixation such that participants’ central fixation fell onto the
far-right, right, center, left, or far-left part of the sequences
respectively (Figure 1b). For single notes, the target was
presented at 2.5º left, 0º or 2.5º right from fixation. The

2541

dependent measure was the sensitivity (d’) and response
time (RT).
Trials with different fixation positions were randomized.
For sequences, there were 400 trials with 80 trials for each
fixation position. For single notes, there were 180 trials with
60 trials for each fixation position. Participants were tested
with single notes before the sequences. For each type of
stimulus, 20 practice trials with feedback were provided
before testing (without feedback).

was selected (counterbalanced across stimuli) and replaced
by a different letter randomly drawn from the set. The string
was shown at the same lowered contrast as the sequences.

Results
One novice and one intermediate reader were excluded
from data analyses because their perceptual fluency for
notes was > 3 s.d. away from the mean of the rest of the
group. Therefore, thirteen experts, twelve intermediate and
twelve novice readers were included.

OVP for sequences
We observed a left-biased OVP for note sequences in
experts, which was not found in the other two groups. A 3 x
5 ANOVA with Group (Experts, Intermediates, Novices)
and Fixation Position (Far Left, Left, Center, Right, Far
Right) on d’ revealed a significant main effect of Group,
F(2, 34) = 10.2, p = .0003, in which experts performed
better than the other groups in general (LSD tests, p < .05).
A main effect of Fixation Position was significant, F(4, 136)
= 18.8, p ≤ .0001, which marginally interacted with Group,
F(8, 136) = 1.89, p = .066 (Figure 2a).
Figure 1. The sequential matching task (a) and the five
fixation positions relative to the note sequences (b).
Participants kept central fixation indicated by the black dot.
The blue line was marked for illustration purposes and was
not actually presented during the test.

Measure of perceptual fluency
We assessed fluency in music reading with a sequential
matching paradigm and used this as an indicator of
individual music reading ability since it is more direct and
objective compared with other measures such as years of
experience and self-rated ability (Wong & Gauthier, 2010).
On each trial, a central fixation was presented for 200 ms,
followed by a 500 ms pre-mask, and a four-note sequence
for a varied duration. After a 500 ms post-mask, two fournote sequences appeared side-by-side, one identical to the
first sequence, and the other with one of the notes shifted by
one step (with up/down shifts counterbalanced). The task
was to select the matching sequence by key press. The
presentation duration threshold for 80% accuracy was
estimated four times, each with 40 trials, using the QUEST
algorithm (Watson & Pelli, 1983). Sequences were
randomly generated using notes ranging from the note
below the bottom line (a ‘D’ note) to the note above the top
line (a ‘G’ note). Contrast for all the stimuli was lowered by
about 60% to avoid a ceiling effect.
To control for individual differences not specifically tied
to expertise with notes, perceptual fluency for four-letter
strings was measured in an identical procedure. The strings
were randomly generated with 11 letters: b, d, f, g, h, j, k, p,
q, t, and y. These letters were selected because they contain
parts extending upward or downward, similar to musical
notation. To create distractor strings, one of the four letters

Figure 2. Matching performance for three-note sequences
in d’ (a) or RT (b) with different fixation positions
relative to the first presented images.
To increase statistical power, we limited our analyses
within the expert and novice groups, as the OVP function
for intermediate readers was similar to the other two groups
(Figure 2a). Results were similar to the above, except that
the Group x Fixation Position interaction reached
significance, F(4,92) = 3.47, p = .011. Sheffé tests (p < .05)
revealed that d’ was similar across positions for novices,
suggesting that none of the viewing positions was ‘optimal’.
For experts, in contrast, d’ was similar between the Far Left,
Left and Center positions, while d’ for the Center position

2542

was better than the Right and Far Right positions.
Importantly, d’ for the Left position was better than the
Right, and that for the Far Left position was better than the
Far Right, suggesting the OVP for three-note sequences was
biased to the left for experts.

For RT, the main effect of Fixation Position was
significant, F(4, 68) = 8.14, p = .0003, with faster responses
at the Center than the other two positions (LSD tests, p <
.05; Figure 3b). The main effect of Group and its interaction
with Fixation Position was not significant (Fs < 1).

Within the intermediate readers, we did not observe any
clear pattern for the OVP function. A one-way ANOVA
with Fixation Position on d’ was significant, F(4,44) = 4.69,
p = .003. Sheffé tests (p < .05) revealed that d’ at the Center
position was better than the Far Right but no different from
the Far Left. However, d’ was similar between Left and
Right positions, and between Far Left and Far Right
positions. Therefore we could not conclude that the OVP
function for the intermediate readers was biased to either
side of the sequences.
For RT, the 3 x 5 ANOVA with Group (Experts,
Intermediates, Novices) and Fixation Position revealed a
main effect of Group, F(2, 34) = 7.36, p = .002, in which
intermediate readers responded significantly slower than the
other two groups (LSD tests, p < .05; Figure 2b). A main
effect of Fixation Position was significant, F(4, 136) = 3.08,
p = .018, in which performance at the Far Left position was
slower than the Left in general (Sheffé tests, p < .05). The
interaction between Group and Fixation Position did not
reach significance (p > .2). When the intermediate readers
were excluded, only the main effect of Fixation Position
was significant in a similar manner as the above.

Figure 3. Matching performance for single notes in d’ (a)
or RT (b) with different fixation positions relative
to the presented images.

OVP for single notes
A left OVP was observed in intermediate readers but not
in experts or novices. A 3 x 3 ANOVA with Group
(Experts, Intermediates, Novices) and Fixation Position
(Left, Center, Right) on d’ revealed a significant main effect
of Group, F(2, 34) = 5.41, p = .009, in which the only group
difference was that experts performed better than novices in
general (LSD tests, p < .05). A main effect of Fixation
Position was observed, F(2, 68) = 48.8, p ≤ .0001, in which
performance was better at the Center than the Left positions
and at the Left than the Right positions (LSD tests, p < .05).
The interaction between Group and Fixation Position was
significant, F(4, 68) = 4.26, p = .004 (Figure 3a).
We subsequently analyzed the effect of Fixation Position
for each group separately. The main effect of Fixation
Position was significant in each group, all ps < .004. For
experts and novices, performance was the best at the Center,
while performance at the Left and the Right position was
similar (LSD tests, p < .05), suggesting that the OVP curve
was largely symmetrical. However, for intermediate readers,
performance at the Center was better than the Left position,
which was in turn better than the Right position. In other
words, we observed a left OVP with single notes only for
the intermediate readers but not for experts or novices.

Perceptual fluency
As expected, experts had the highest perceptual fluency
for notes, followed by the intermediate group and then by
the novices. A one-way ANOVA for Group (Experts,
Intermediates, Novices) on duration threshold for notes
revealed a significant main effect of Group, F(1, 34) = 19.8,
p ≤ .0001, where the performance for each group was
significantly different (MExp = 316.5 ms; MInt = 680.4 ms;
MNov = 930.9 ms; LSD tests, p < .05). In contrast, duration
threshold for letters was similar for all groups (MExp = 186.4
ms; MInt = 207.5 ms; MNov = 233.9 ms; F < 1), suggesting
that experts have a higher perceptual fluency for notes,
which cannot be explained by a general perceptual
advantage.

Predicting the degree of asymmetric OVP with
perceptual fluency with notes
Does the degree of asymmetry of the OVP curve increase
with one’s reading ability? We addressed this question by
computing the degree of asymmetry of the OVP curve for
note sequences using the measure d’Left - d’Right in each
music reader (novices were excluded in this analysis). A
significant correlation was observed between the degree of
asymmetry and individual perceptual fluency, r = -.48, p =
.015, df = 23 (Figure 4a). A similar trend was observed at

2543

far positions (d’FarLeft – d’FarRight), though it did not reach
significance (r = -.27, p = .19). These suggest that the left
viewing position of sequences becomes more optimal
during the development of music reading skills.
For single notes, the correlation between the degree of
asymmetry of the OVP curve (d’Left – d’Right) and individual
perceptual fluency approached significance in an opposite
direction (r = .37, p = .066, df = 23; Figure 4b). The
advantage of left viewing position gradually diminished
with better music reading skills.

Our results also suggest that a biased OVP is gradually
developed through reading training. For novices,
recognition performance is similar across viewing positions
and none of the viewing positions is ‘optimal’. When music
reading skills develop, the OVP is gradually shifted to the
left, suggested by the correlation between the degree of
asymmetry in the OVP curve and individual music reading
ability. Note that our results cannot be explained by the
reading habits of other languages (e.g., Chinese and English
for our participants), since all of the participants had the
same left-to-right reading habit, while only experts
produced a left OVP for music sequences.
While our results suggest that reading direction is a major
factor leading to a left-biased OVP in reading, the OVP may
also be modulated by other factors, such as the lefthemispheric lateralization for language functions
(Brysbaert, 1994; Hunter et al., 2007) and an asymmetric
information structure of words (Deutsch & Rayner, 1999;
Farid & Grainger, 1996). It is worth noting that different
types of word information may become important
depending on the OVP task, such as word naming,
identification, lexical decision, or word matching tasks (e.g.,
O’Regan, 1984; Deutsch & Rayner, 1999; Nazir et al., 2004;
Farid & Grainger, 1996; Stevens & Grainger, 2003). To
evaluate the effect of general information structure of words
on the OVP, one should consider whether any observed
OVP pattern is solely determined by the characteristics of
the specific sets of word stimuli, especially for the
distribution of information important for the testing task. In
any case, even without an asymmetric information
distribution or hemispheric dominance, as in the case of
isolated music sequences in the current study, a left OVP
can still be observed. It suggests that these are not necessary
factors leading to a biased OVP.

For single notes
Figure 4. Scatter plots between perceptual fluency for
notes and individual degree of asymmetry of the OVP for
note sequences (a) and single notes (b).

Discussion
For three-note sequences
For three-note sequences, performance was in general the
best at the center position, consistent with the highest acuity
at fovea. Importantly, we observed an OVP biased to left in
music reading experts but not in intermediate or novice
readers. Since music reading shares a left-to-right reading
direction with word reading but not the hemispheric
dominance or asymmetric information distribution, our
results suggest that extensive reading experience in the leftto-right reading direction is sufficient to lead to a left-biased
OVP in reading.

For single notes, we observed a left-biased OVP among
intermediate readers but not in experts or novices, and the
left bias of the OVP decreased with enhanced music reading
fluency. There are multiple ways to interpret these findings.
First, the performance for experts approached ceiling for all
viewing positions (the mean d’ was larger than 3 and the
mean accuracy was larger than 90% for all viewing
positions) such that potential differences across viewing
positions failed to emerge. Indeed, within the experts whose
average accuracy for the Left and Right positions < 90%, a
left-viewing advantage emerged numerically (d’ = 2.39 for
Left; d’ = 2.08 for Right; N = 5), supporting the idea that a
ceiling effect prevented a left OVP to be observed among
experts. According to this explanation, the OVP for both
music sequences and single notes are both biased to the left.
Another possible explanation is that the asymmetric OVP
effect for single notes simply becomes weaker as in the case
of word reading that the asymmetric OVP effect was weaker
in short words than long words; Hunter et al., 2007; Ellis,

2544

Young, & Anderson, 1988). This may be caused by a
weakened influence from reading direction on short
sequences as experts are able to skip them during reading,
and such tendency may become larger with better music
reading skills.
It has been proposed that reading direction may partly
underlie visuospatial asymmetry effects observed in the
processing of some visual stimuli, such as identity or affect
judgments for faces (Vaid & Singh, 1989; Brady, 2011), or
bisection of straight lines (Chokron & Imbert, 1993; see also
Kazandjian & Chokron, 2008). Our current results suggest
that the visual field asymmetry caused by habitual word
reading direction is not generalizable to all domains of
object recognition. Specifically, a left-biased OVP for
English words is presumably shared by all of our
participants who are either English or Chinese-English
bilingual readers (O’Regan et al., 1984), while the visual
field asymmetry for musical notation varied across groups.
In particular, our novices, who did not have music reading
experience and thus were most vulnerable to potential
transfer effects from word reading habits, did not show a
bias that was consistent with the asymmetry observed in
word processing. Further studies should investigate why the
visuospatial biases stemmed from reading direction
generalize to faces and line bisection but not to musical
notes.

Conclusions
In this study, we demonstrate with the case of music
reading that a left-to-right reading direction is sufficient to
lead to a left-biased OVP in expert reading. The OVP for
music sequences may gradually shift to the left in the course
of music reading training as reading skills improve. Our
failure of observing a left-biased OVP in music sequence
processing in novices suggests that the asymmetry effect
created by word reading habits is not generalizable to all
domains of object recognition. In contrast, it may be a result
of learning changes during the development of reading
expertise.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project code: HKU 745210H to J.H. Hsiao).

References

Brysbaert, M., & Nazir, T. (2005). Visual constraints in
written word recognition: Evidence from the optimal
viewing position effect. Journal of Research in Reading,
28, 216-228.
Chokron, S. & Imbert, M. (1993). Influence of reading
habits on line bisection. Cognitive Brain Research, 1,
219-222.
Deutsch, A., & Rayner, K. (1999). Initial fixation location
effects in reading Hebrew words. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 14(4), 393-421.
Farid, M., & Grainger, J. (1996). How initial fixation
position influences visual word recognition: A
comparison of French and Arabic. Brain and Language,
53, 351-368.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cottrell, G. W. (2009). Not all expertise is
holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of Chinese
character recognition. Psychological Science, 20(4), 455463.
Hunter, Z. R., Brysbaert, M., & Knecht, S. (2007). Foveal
word reading requires interhemispheric communication.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19:8, 1373-87.
Kazandjian, S., & Chokron, S. (2008). Paying attention to
reading direction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9, 965.
Nazir, T. A., Ben-Boutayab, N., Decoppet, N., Deutsch, A.,
& Frost, R. (2004). Reading habits, perceptual learning,
and recognition of printed words. Brain and Language,
88, 294-311.
O’Regan, J. K., Lévy-Schoen, A., Pynte, J., & Brugaillère,
B. (1984). Convenient fixation location within isolated
words of different length and structure. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 10(2), 250-257.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9(1), 97-113.
Stevens, M., & Grainger, J. (2003). Letter visibility and the
viewing position effect in visual word recognition.
Perception & Psychophysics, 65(1), 133-151.
Vaid, J. & Singh, M. (1989). Asymmetries in the perception
of facial affect: Is there an influence of reading habits?
Neuropsychologia, 27, 1277-87.
Watson, A. B., & Pelli, D. G. (1983) QUEST: a Bayesian
adaptive
psychometric
method.
Perception
&
Psychophysics, 33 (2), 113-20.
Wong, Y. K., & Gauthier, I. (2010). A multimodal neural
network recruited by expertise with musical notation.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22:4, 695-713.

Bouma, H. (1970). Interaction effects in parafoveal letter
recognition. Nature, 226, 177.
Brady, N. (2011). Understanding spatial bias in face
perception and memory. In Spatial dimension of social
thought. T. W. Schubert & A. Maass (Ed.). Mouton de
Gruyter.
Brysbaert, M. (1994). Interhemispheric transfer and the
processing of foveally presented stimuli. Behavioural
Brain Research, 64, 151-161.

2545

