UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reexamining Visual Orientation Anisotropies: A Bias Towards Simple Horizontal Stimuli on
Temporal Order Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6bm66781

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Lim, Ahnate
Sinnett, Scott

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reexamining Visual Orientation Anisotropies: A Bias Towards Simple Horizontal
Stimuli on Temporal Order Judgments
Ahnate Lim (ahnate@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
Abstract
Although not currently a widely accepted notion, evidence
suggests an anisotropy between horizontal and vertical
orientations in visual processing. While there is evidence of
an early neurological bias due to a greater number of cortical
neurons tuned to the horizontal orientation, recent behavioral
evidence suggests a “horizontal effect”, where performance
for broadband horizontal stimuli is worse compared to
vertical and oblique. Importantly however, this effect has only
been observed for complex stimuli and is speculated to
counterbalance for the greater occurrence of horizontal
stimuli in the environment. In this experiment, we used a
staircase temporal order judgment task in three spatial
configurations (horizontal, vertical, and both) to test for 1) a
bias towards either horizontal or vertical simple stimuli, and
2) whether performance would vary across different planes of
stimuli presentation. A bias towards horizontal stimuli was
observed, but only when presented in the horizontal plane.
Theoretical implications are discussed.
Keywords: Horizontal bias; visual processing; anisotropy,
stimulus orientation; temporal order judgment

Introduction
Research has shown that in humans as well as many other
species, visual (and tactile) stimuli are processed differently
depending on their orientation. One of the more commonly
observed biases in visual perception is a phenomenon
termed the “oblique effect”, where stimuli presented in an
oblique orientation are usually processed worse (i.e., in
speeded detection, identification, resolution acuity and
contrast sensitivity tests) than stimuli presented in the
horizontal or vertical position (Appelle, 1972; Essock, 1980;
for tactile, see Essock, Krebs, & Prather, 1997). Crucially,
this phenomenon operates on at least two different levels.
First, it has been linked causally to lower level vision, where
it is attributed to differences in the number of cortical
neurons in V1 tuned to stimulus orientation (Anzai, Bearse,
Freeman, & Cai, 1995). Secondly, the effect also appears to
be manifested in higher level cognitive processes such as
memory, learning, and perception (for review, see Essock,
1980). The distinction between these two levels has in fact
led to their classification as Class 1 and Class 2 oblique
effects, respectively (Essock, 1980).
Apart from the well known oblique effect, studies that
have attempted to compare anisotropies of horizontal and
vertical orientations themselves against each other may not

have done so carefully (Hansen & Essock, 2004). It is worth
noting that the current prevailing viewpoint is that
horizontal and vertical stimuli are treated equally at the
physiological level. Notwithstanding this dogma, there is
considerable evidence suggesting that there is more neural
circuitry in the visual cortex devoted to processing
horizontal contours than vertical contours (Chapman &
Bonhoeffer, 1998 (Figs. 1 and 2); Chapman, Stryker, &
Bonhoeffer, 1996 (Figs. 1 and 2); Coppola, White,
Fitzpatrick, & Purves, 1998; Mansfield, 1974; Mansfield &
Ronner, 1978; Tiao & Blakemore, 1976). For instance, a
study examining a large database of neurons in the cat’s
striate cortex found that the largest population of cells are
activated by orientations close to the horizontal position (Li,
Peterson, & Freeman, 2003). Accordingly, it is curious that
such a horizontal over vertical preference has not
correspondingly been observed in behavioral tasks.
In fact, and despite the seeming neurological advantage
for processing stimuli in the horizontal orientation, a study
by Essock, DeFord, Hansen, and Sinai (2003) recently
found diminished behavioral performance for horizontally
presented stimuli (termed the “horizontal effect”).
Furthermore, with complex “realistic” stimuli, they found
that perceived orientation for broadband spatial content
using horizontal, vertical, and oblique gratings was actually
lowest for horizontal gratings, while oblique was instead
seen best—a result seemingly contrary to the oblique effect,
but solely at face value since the horizontal effect only
appears to operate on complex stimuli. Interestingly, they
explain these robust effects as being possibly due to a
“whitening” mechanism that decreases the saliency of
horizontal stimuli (which is argued to be most prevalent in
natural scenes), thereby increasing the saliency of other
broad-spectrum objects (such as predators, for instance).
Further research by Hansen and Essock (2004) replicated
these findings in an experiment that used both simple and
more complex “realistic” gratings. The classic “oblique
effect” was seen with the simple gratings, whereas a
“horizontal effect” (similar to Essock et al., 2003) was
observed with the complex gratings. Additionally, the
authors conducted an aggregate analysis of various natural
scenes and found the prevalence of stimuli orientation in
these scenes to be most prevalent in the horizontal
orientation, then vertical, with the least prevalent being

1912

oblique. They speculated that the horizontal effect may be a
compensatory filter that at some level balances out for the
greater abundance of such stimuli in the environment.
Hence, there appears to be evidence for both a bias
towards, and a bias against horizontal oriented stimuli. That
is, evidence at the physiological level suggests that the
greater number of neurons tuned to horizontal orientations
may lead to a bias in favor of horizontal detection. On the
other hand, evidence also implicates the existence of a filter
that may operate correctively against a bias towards greater
occurrences of horizontal stimuli in the environment.
In light of these somewhat varying (but not mutually
exclusive) viewpoints, several questions become relevant to
the discussion. One is whether this “horizontal effect” is
robust across all levels of perceptual processing. Recall that
thus far the horizontal effect has only been observed with
complex stimuli, therefore it is important to explore whether
the same mechanism operates with simple stimuli, or if
instead this mechanism only selectively operates in more
complex “natural” scenes—as has been demonstrated in at
least two studies (Essock et al., 2003; Hansen & Essock,
2004). Another issue is that, if this horizontal effect is
somehow related to the prevalence of horizontal stimuli in
natural scenes, might behavior change when presented with
experimental layouts which contain more or less horizontal
elements, and which are also holistically setup in a
horizontal or vertical manner? Lastly, given that there
appears to be a neurological bias towards detection of
horizontally oriented stimuli as compared to vertically
oriented (which to our awareness has never been
demonstrated on behavioral measures), the question remains
whether such a bias could in fact be detected at a behavioral
level using simple stimuli? To better answer these
questions, we designed an experiment consisting of a
behavioral temporal detection task to test whether this bias
exists with simple stimuli, using different experimental
spatial layouts that contain varying elements of horizontal
and vertical orientations.
The temporal order judgment task (TOJ) is an established
psychophysical tool designed to assess the temporal
processing of successively presented items. The task
requires participants to determine the correct order of
successively presented stimuli, and allows for two measures
of perceptual processing to be calculated: the just noticeable
difference (JND), and the point of subjective simultaneity
(PSS). The former is a measure of the resolution or
threshold of temporal discrimination, while the latter is the
time in which one stimulus can be presented before the
other such that they are still perceived as occurring
simultaneously. Therefore, if a bias towards horizontal
stimuli were to be observed, for instance, the PSS scores
would indicate that the vertical stimuli must precede the
horizontal (by a specific amount of time) for them to be
perceived as occurring simultaneously.
It is worth noting that since humans are generally
proficient at temporal discrimination (Hirsh & Sherrick Jr,
1961), the TOJ task is well suited for detecting small biases

in orientation processing. That is, using such a task would
leave room for less error from extraneous variables such as
task difficulty and interference from other cognitive
processes that may come into play with other more complex
stimuli and tasks.
For these reasons, the TOJ task appears to be particularly
well suited for assessing threshold detection differences
between horizontally and/or vertically presented stimuli.
Subsequently, and to the best of our knowledge, this is the
first time an adaptive step-function TOJ task has been used
to investigate the anisotropy of stimulus orientation while
also employing an adaptive staircase approach and the use
of different experimental spatial configurations. The
staircase approach will ensure that the majority of trials will
occur at or close to threshold level.
In light of 1) existing neurological evidence for a
horizontal bias, and 2) the lack of evidence for a countering
“horizontal effect” for simple stimuli (the effect has only
been observed for complex stimuli), we hypothesize that
participants should be biased towards detecting horizontal
stimuli better than vertical, although it is unclear whether
the magnitude of this bias will be detectable here.

Methods
Participants
Participants (n = 33; mean age = 23 ± 4; 24 females) were
recruited from undergraduate courses at the University of
Hawaii at Manoa, and were offered course credit for their
participation. All participants were naïve as to the purpose
of the experiment and had normal or corrected to normal
vision. Ethical approval was obtained from the University’s
Committee on Human Subjects.

Stimuli
Visual stimuli were presented on a 20”, Intel Core2Duo
iMac using Bootcamp and DMDX software (Forster &
Forster, 2003). Observers sat approximately 60 cm from the
display. The targets in all tasks were vertical and horizontal
lines that occurred within placeholder squares (2° wide).
These placeholders flanked a fixation cross in one of three
different layouts (see Figure 1). These layouts corresponded
to the three different tasks in this experiment.

Procedure
Throughout each trial, the fixation cross and the two (in the
horizontal and vertical layouts) or four (in the combined
layouts) placeholders would remain on the display (see
Figure 2). A target (either horizontal or vertical line,
equiprobably) would appear in one of the place holders (also
equiprobably) for a specified stimulus onset asynchrony
(SOA) interval, followed by the other stimulus in the
opposite place holder. The stimuli remained on the screen
until participants then made an unspeeded forced choice
response on the keyboard to indicate either “horizontal” or
“vertical” first responses. An adaptation of Stelmach and
Herdman’s (1991) step-function procedure was used to

1913

determine the SOAs for each trial. Each trial began with an
SOA of 167 ms. Depending on whether a correct or
incorrect response was made, the SOA would respectively
increase or decrease (by 16.7 ms) on the next trial. The
experiment terminated after a total of 12 correct/incorrect
reversals occurred.
In all three tasks, participants were first presented with
onscreen instructions followed by a short sequence of
practice trials, with accuracy feedback directly appearing
after each trial. The experimenter monitored completion of
the practice trials and ensured that participants understood
the task requirements (repeating the practice session if
necessary). Target presentation location (i.e., left, right, up
or down) and stimuli order (e.g., horizontal or vertical line
first) were randomized, as was the order of experimental
tasks (i.e., horizontal, vertical, and combined) for each
participant.

Figure 1. The three TOJ configurations. Each participant
was tested on all three configurations. Note that on each trial
in the combined layout, the task could occur on either the
horizontal or vertical plane.

simultaneous. Note that this measure is usually expected to
fall at 0 ms (or close to it, unless there is a bias in response).
Additionally, the minimum amount of time that must
separate two events such that they are still accurately
perceived
as
occurring
successively
(and
not
simultaneously) can be measured. This is referred to as the
just noticeable difference (JND) and is essentially a measure
of the resolution or threshold of temporal discrimination.
For this study we are more interested in the PSS than the
JND, as the PSS can provide a measure of bias towards
horizontal or vertical stimuli.
The calculation of both the PSS and JND was based on
approaches used by previous research (for examples of other
studies using similar methodologies and analyses, see
Spence, Baddeley, Zampini, James, & Shore, 2003;
Stelmach & Herdman, 1991). To begin with, the data from
each of the three tasks were pooled together according to
layout. The average ratio of responses "horizontal line first"
was then plotted as a function of the time in which the
horizontal line preceded the vertical line. For TOJ tasks,
response rates typically follow a sigmoidal curve, from
which data can be fit using the following logistic function:
1
𝑓 𝑥, 𝑎, 𝑏 =
1 + exp −(𝑥 − 𝑎)/𝑏
where the response rate is mapped as a function of the SOA
(x), with two estimated parameters of central tendency (a)
and slope (b; see C. Spence, et al., 2003).
Data was fit to this equation by minimizing the weighted
sum of squares to obtain parameter estimates for a and b.
The PSS, or SOA at which the participants considered the
two stimuli to be simultaneous, corresponds to parameter a.
The JND, or smallest interval between two stimuli giving a
correct judgment probability 75% of the time, is directly
related to parameter b (analogous to the slope of the central
portion of logistic function). Here the relationship is that a
steep slope will result in a smaller JND, and a shallow slope
in a larger JND.

Figure 2. Example stimuli and time course for the TOJ task
(horizontal layout displayed here; similar sequence occurred
for the other layouts).

Results
The results from the TOJ task can be analyzed to determine
the point of subjective simultaneity (PSS). The PSS is the
point in time in which one stimulus can be presented before
the other such that they are still perceived as being

Figure 3. A typical TOJ response curve. Any bias in
performance would be observed as a lateral shift of the
curve, and correspondingly, the PSS score.

1914

1

Note that there is a growing consensus that certain exploratory
techniques such as confidence intervals may be as useful as
confirmatory ones (for a review, see Loftus & Masson, 1994). For
details on bootstrap CIs, see Efron & Gong (1983).
2
Given the existence of prior evidence for a bias towards
horizontal orientations over vertical (see Introduction), a bootstrap
comparison analogous to a one tailed t-test was used throughout.

1915

200

-20

-10

0

10

20

10

20

Frequency

0

50 100

200

Vertical Layout

-20

-10

0

100
0

50

Frequency

150

200

Combined Layout/ Horizontal Task

PSS scores

-20

-10

0

10

20

50

Frequency

Combined Layout/ Vertical Task

0

Horizontal layout. In the horizontal only configuration,
there was a significant bias towards responding horizontal
first (p < .05). The magnitude of the PSS bias was 7ms,
meaning that for horizontal and vertical lines to be
perceived as occurring simultaneously, vertical lines had to
precede horizontal lines by 7ms on average (CI = 1 to
12ms).
Vertical layout. In the vertical only configuration, the PSS
was not significantly different than zero (p = 0.3), with a
2ms bias towards horizontal first responses (CI = -3 to 8ms).
Combined layout. In the combined layout, when pooling
the data across layouts, there was a significant PSS bias
towards responding horizontal line first (p < .05). The
magnitude of this bias was 6ms (CI = 1 to 10 ms).
As the combined layout consisted of trials where the
horizontal and vertical targets only occurred in either the
horizontal or vertical plane (see Figure 1), we conducted a
further analysis between these two sub-types to determine
any differences in performance within the layout.
The PSS for the horizontal trials was significantly biased
towards the horizontal stimulus (p < .05). The magnitude of

50 100
0

Frequency

Horizontal Layout

100 150 200

Confidence intervals (95%) for each group statistic were
calculated using a parametric bootstrap method with 999
replications (for a similar bootstrap method employed in a
TOJ study, see Azañón & Soto-Faraco, 2007; for an
overview of the bootstrap, see Efron & Tibshirani, 1993).
Given the unique nature of our dataset, we used a parametric
bootstrap resampling approach for the statistical analyses
due to particular benefits over more traditional means. That
is, due to the varied number of trial observations and
different response patterns resulting from the adaptive
staircase paradigm, each individual’s data points could vary
significantly, and fitting the logistic function individually
did not always converge or yield meaningful estimates.
Thus, pooling data from all participants in each layout
allowed for a better distribution of scores across all SOAs
for the logistic fit from which we were able to extrapolate
the overall PSS and JND values for each task using the
above functions, and to subsequently estimate population
parameters using bootstrapped confidence intervals1.
Furthermore, and in order to determine whether a PSS
score, or bias towards a particular orientation was
significant, we compared the results from each layout to a
logistic function with identical parameters and
characteristics, with the exception that the PSS was centered
on 0 ms. This effectively allowed us evaluate the null
hypothesis of whether the bias was significantly different
from zero2.

-20

-10

0

10

20

PSS (horizontal bias in ms)

Figure 4. Parametric bootstrap resamples for each
configuration (red lines denote 95% confidence intervals).
Positive PSS scores reflect a bias towards horizontal
stimuli, whereas negative scores reflect a bias towards
vertical. A zero PSS score would indicate lack of bias for
either type of stimuli.

this bias was 10ms (CI = 4 to 17 ms). In contrast, the PSS
for the vertical trials not significantly different than zero (p
= 0.4) with a 1ms bias towards horizontal stimulus (CI = -4
to 7ms).
Given that both trials occurred within the same task
configuration, we also ran a direct parametric bootstrap
comparison test between the horizontal and vertical trials,
and found that horizontal biases between the two trial types,
as reflected by the magnitude of the PSS shifts (10ms vs
1ms) was significantly different (p < .05).
PSS!

Milliseconds!

20.0!
15.0!
10.0!
5.0!
0.0!
-5.0!
-10.0!
Horizontal! Vertical! Combined! Combined!
(h)!
(v)!

JND!
55!
Milliseconds!

50!
45!
40!
35!
30!
25!
Horizontal! Vertical! Combined! Combined!
(h)!
(v)!

Figure 5. PSS (positive values indicate bias towards
horizontal stimulus; negative towards vertical) and JND
scores across the three tasks, with 95% confidence intervals.

JND scores
Across all conditions, JND scores were 40ms on average,
and as expected, scores did not significantly vary (all p >
0.1). This confirms that the detection thresholds were
similar in all configurations (see Figure 4), and that PSS
differences across horizontal and vertical tasks were
unlikely to be caused by extraneous variables such as the
difficulty levels of the tasks.

Discussion
Several novel findings were seen in this experiment. To our
awareness, this is the first empirical investigation to
examine performance among thousands of trials (the
majority of them near threshold level SOAs) in a TOJ task
to explore orientation bias between horizontal and vertical
simple stimuli. We believe that this unique setup may have

allowed for the detection of orientation anisotropy between
horizontal and vertical stimuli. Accordingly, an average bias
of 9ms towards horizontal lines was observed during a
horizontal task, suggesting that the vertical line must be
presented on average 9ms before the horizontal line for
simultaneity to be perceived. Thus, all things being equal,
the horizontal orientation is preferred and appears to be
processed more efficiently. Furthermore, this anisotropy
was non-symmetrical in nature. That is, even in
counterbalanced configurations with vertical placeholders,
no similar bias towards vertical lines was observed (in fact,
a very slight bias of 2ms on average towards horizontal lines
was still observed in the vertical tasks, although this was not
significant).
These findings are important for at least two reasons.
First, in contrast to the prevailing view of equal treatment by
the visual system for horizontal and vertical orientations,
there is evidence that there may actually be an anisotropy
between horizontal and vertical orientations. In fact, a bias
towards the horizontal orientation has been observed at the
neurological level in the visual cortex of several non-human
animals (Chapman et al., 1996; Coppola et al., 1998; Li et
al., 2003; Mansfield, 1974; Tiao & Blakemore, 1976) with
visual systems expected to be ontogenetically analogous to
humans. Thus our findings are the first to show a bias
towards horizontally oriented simple stimulus, which
speculatively may align with such findings of larger
observed proportions of horizontally tuned cortical neurons.
As stated by Essock et al. (2003), this result may not have
been observed in the past due to the difficulty in obtaining
large and unbiased samples. The use of the adaptive
staircase design and parametric bootstrap analysis used here,
however, offers a way of addressing this problem.
Nevertheless, it is curious finding that we only observed this
bias in the presence of a horizontal “plane”.
The fact that similar biases were only seen when
performing the horizontal task (both in the horizontal and
combined layouts) may suggest two possibilities: first, that
the process of performing a horizontal task may facilitate
the horizontal bias. The second possibility is that the process
of performing a vertical task may inhibit the horizontal bias.
Whether facilitation or inhibition (or both) is/are responsible
for these results is beyond the scope of this paper. However,
given the fact there we observed small (but non-significant)
biases towards horizontal stimuli even for vertical tasks, we
speculate that the inhibition argument may carry more
weight.
Moreover, these results may dovetail with findings
relating to the prevalence of horizons in natural scene
layouts. Indeed, much of the world is sprawled out in a
horizontal fashion due to the constraint of gravity, and it is
thus conceivable for organisms to both have evolved visual
systems that differentially process horizontal configurations
for greater efficiency, and also to behaviorally adapt to such
regularities in the natural world. Indeed, several
examinations have been conducted on the statistical
frequency of visual orientations in both naturalistic and

1916

man-made environments, and have found greater
occurrences of horizontally oriented stimuli (Baddeley &
Hancock, 1991; Hansen & Essock, 2004; Keil & Cristóbal,
2000). To further add to this picture, learning may also play
a vital role, as there is evidence of cross-cultural differences
in visual anisotropies that can not be accounted for by mere
exposure to a carpentered environment (Timney & Muir,
1976).
Interestingly, our findings can also be seen in a way to
supplement the “horizontal effect”, which has been
observed with complex broadband stimuli (Essock et al.,
2003; Hansen & Essock, 2004). Specifically, in these
studies the evidence for a “whitening” of (i.e., bias against)
horizontally perceived orientations only occurred when
complex broadband stimuli were used. From this study, we
have confirmed that not only does the “horizontal effect”
not apply to simple stimuli (lines), but also revealed the
opposite: that in fact a bias towards simple horizontal
stimuli can occur under conditions when a horizontal plane
or task is present. Consequently, it is clear that
comprehensive theoretical accounts of visual processing
must ultimately reconcile and take into account these
different phenomenological findings and the respective
mechanisms responsible for such multi-level anisotropies.

References
Anzai, A., Bearse, M. A., Freeman, R. D., & Cai, D. (1995).
Contrast coding by cells in the cat's striate cortex:
monocular vs. binocular detection. Visual Neuroscience,
12, 77-93.
Appelle, S. (1972). Perception and discrimination as a
function of stimulus orientation: The "oblique effect" in
man and animals. Psychological bulletin, 78(4), 266.
Azañón, E., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2007). Alleviating the
crossed-hands deficit by seeing uncrossed rubber hands.
Experimental brain research, 182(4), 537-548.
Baddeley, R. J., & Hancock, P. J. B. (1991). A statistical
analysis of natural images matches psychophysically
derived orientation tuning curves. Proceedings:
Biological Sciences, 219-223.
Chapman, B., & Bonhoeffer, T. (1998). Overrepresentation
of horizontal and vertical orientation preferences in
developing ferret area 17. Neurobiology, 95(5), 2609.
Chapman, B., Stryker, M. P., & Bonhoeffer, T. (1996).
Development of orientation preference maps in ferret
primary visual cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience,
16(20), 6443-6453.
Coppola, D. M., White, L. E., Fitzpatrick, D., & Purves, D.
(1998). Unequal representation of cardinal and oblique
contours in ferret visual cortex. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 95(5), 2621.
Efron, B., & Gong, G. (1983). A leisurely look at the
bootstrap, the jackknife, and cross-validation. American
Statistician, 36-48.
Efron, B., & Tibshirani, R. (1993). An introduction to the
bootstrap (Vol. 57): Chapman & Hall/CRC.

Essock, E. A. (1980). The oblique effect of stimulus
identification considered with respect to two classes of
oblique effects. Perception, 9(1), 37-46.
Essock, E. A., DeFord, J. K., Hansen, B. C., & Sinai, M. J.
(2003). Oblique stimuli are seen best (not worst!) in
naturalistic broad-band stimuli: a horizontal effect. Vision
research, 43(12), 1329-1335.
Essock, E. A., Krebs, W. K., & Prather, J. R. (1997).
Superior sensitivity for tactile stimuli oriented
proximally-distally on the finger: Implications for mixed
class 1 and class 2 anisotropies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23(2),
515.
Forster, K., & Forster, J. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1),
116.
Hansen, B. C., & Essock, E. A. (2004). A horizontal bias in
human visual processing of orientation and its
correspondence to the structural components of natural
scenes. Journal of Vision, 4(12).
Hirsh, I., & Sherrick Jr, C. (1961). Perceived order in
different sense modalities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62(5), 423-432.
Keil, M. S., & Cristóbal, G. (2000). Separating the chaff
from the wheat: Possible origins of the oblique effect.
Journal of the Optical Society of America A, 17(4), 697710.
Li, B., Peterson, M. R., & Freeman, R. D. (2003). Oblique
effect: a neural basis in the visual cortex. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 90(1), 204-217.
Loftus, G. R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1994). Using confidence
intervals in within-subject designs. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 1(4), 476-490.
Mansfield, R. (1974). Neural basis of orientation perception
in primate vision. Science, 186, 1133.
Mansfield, R., & Ronner, S. (1978). Orientation anisotropy
in monkey visual cortex. Brain Research, 149, 229–234.
Spence, C., Baddeley, R., Zampini, M., James, R., & Shore,
D. I. (2003). Multisensory temporal order judgments:
When two locations are better than one. Perception &
psychophysics, 65(2), 318.
Stelmach, L. B., & Herdman, C. M. (1991). Directed
attention and perception of temporal order. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 17(2), 539-550.
Tiao, Y., & Blakemore, C. (1976). Functional organization
in the visual cortex of the golden hamster. The Journal of
comparative neurology, 168(4), 459.
Timney, B., & Muir, D. (1976). Orientation anisotropy:
incidence and magnitude in Caucasian and Chinese
subjects. Science, 193(4254), 699.

1917

