UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Revisiting the Relationship between Allocentric-Heading Recall and Self-Reported Sense of
Direction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8dc6k7km

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Burte, Heather
Hegarty, Mary

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Revisiting the Relationship between Allocentric-Heading Recall
and Self-Reported Sense of Direction
Heather Burte (Burte@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCSB
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Mary Hegarty (Hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCSB
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

scale was created around the idea that one’s SOD is multifaceted.
Recently, Sholl, Kenny, and DellaPorta (2006) proposed
that SOD is single-faceted, and relates to the performance of
a head-direction system in humans, similar to that found in
animals. The head-direction system in rats was first
discovered by Ranck (1984), who identified brain cells that
fire when an animal’s head is facing a specific direction.
The directions that these cells respond to are not directions
based on the axis of the body (also called egocentric
headings). They respond to the angles between the forward
axis of the body and a reference direction that is grounded in
the environment (i.e. the animal’s allocentric heading). An
example of one allocentric reference system is the cardinal
directions, but head-direction cells use the environment’s
intrinsic structure, not cardinal directions.
Sholl, et al.’s (2006) goal was to discover if humans have
an allocentric-heading system that is functionally similar to
the head-direction system of animals and to elucidate the
functional architecture of this system, including its inputs,
outputs, organization, representations, and computations. To
accomplish that goal, they developed an allocentric-heading
recall task in which students were shown a picture of a
familiar landmark on their campus, and had to indicate the
direction (with respect to the global environment) from
which the photo was taken. They found that a person’s
current facing direction influences their accuracy and
decision latency in recalling allocentric headings: when a
person’s facing direction matches the allocentric direction to
be recalled, there is a facilitation effect; and, when the
facing direction is 180º from the allocentric direction to be
recalled, there is a detrimental effect. According to the
author’s, one’s current body-direction signals interfere with
retrieval of allocentric-headings being remembered from
other locations, at which one’s body-direction signals were
different. These results would be predicted if the human
allocentric-heading system works similarly to the animal
head-direction system. Sholl et al. also found strong
correlations between performance on the heading recall task
and both Kozlowski & Bryant’s (1977) single-item question
(K&B) and the SBSOD. They proposed that SOD measures
a single-faceted ability, which reflects the operation of a
human head-direction system.
To expand upon Sholl et al.’s (2006) findings, the goal of

Abstract
Sense-of-direction (SOD) has been described as a system that
tracks the body’s facing direction relative to an environmental
reference frame (allocentric heading). To study this system,
Sholl, Kenny, and DellaPorta (2006) developed a headingrecall task and found that task accuracy correlated highly with
self-reported SOD measures. This study attempts to replicate
and extend their findings, by increasing task accuracy, and
testing alternative hypotheses about factors that could affect
task performance. In a heading-recall task, participants
estimated allocentric heading from pictures of familiar
locations on a college campus. Previous results were
replicated, but a weaker relationship between SOD and
performance, and a novel relationship between location
familiarity and performance were found. These results
provide support for a human allocentric heading system but
suggest that self-reported SOD potentially measures a range
of abilities and not solely the operation of this system.
Keywords: allocentric heading; sense of direction; spatial
orientation; spatial memory; head-direction cells; headingrecall.

Introduction
In everyday situations, people describe their ability to
accurately navigate through cities or neighborhoods using
phrases like ‘I have a great sense-of-direction’ or ‘I lack a
sense-of-direction’. Kozlowski and Bryant (1977)
transformed these colloquial assessments into a 7-point
scale which assessed sense-of-direction (SOD). They found
that these assessments were related pointing ability to
familiar landmarks and updating one’s location while
traveling in an underground maze. Kozlowski and Bryant
used a single item scale: “How good is your sense-ofdirection?” Other researchers have measured SOD in a
multi-faceted way. For example, the Santa Barbara Sense of
Direction scale (SBSOD) is a 15-item scale that asks people
about a variety of environmental tasks, such as giving
directions and estimating distances, as well as their “senseof-direction”(Hegarty, Richardson, Montello, Lovelace, &
Subbiah, 2002). Hegarty et al. found that this measure of
self-assessed SOD is related to several different
environmental-scale tasks, including learning the layout of a
new place, blindfolded updating, and pointing to familiar
landmarks. These environmental-scale tasks require
locomotion and integration from multiple viewpoints to
acquire and access spatial knowledge. As such, the SBSOD

162

Another concern is that some of Sholl et al.’s, (2006)
participants performed very poorly on the heading-recall
task, with only 18/40 participants in Experiment 1 and 10/19
participants in Experiment 2 surpassing a 50% accuracy
rate. Low accuracy could reflect failure to understand the
task, because the heading-recall task is abstract, unlike
everyday directional tasks. In fact, Sholl et al. reported
instructional difficulties. Thus, the high correlations with
SOD measures may reflect the fact that those with poor
SOD were unable to understand the task.
The goals of this study are (1) to replicate the results of
the heading task in a new context, (2) to maximize accuracy,
(3) to reassess the relationship between self-assessed SOD
and allocentric-heading recall, and (4) to test two alternative
hypotheses. First, this study serves to replicate the methods
used by Sholl et al. (2006) and confirm that their
experimental effects are robust with differing campus
locations, target pictures and participants. Second, we
attempt to maximize accuracy in the heading-recall task by
offering more practice trials and feedback to participants in
the instruction phase, to ensure that participants understood
the task. Third, this study reassesses the relationship
between SOD and heading-recall when measures of SOD
are taken before the heading-recall task rather than after.
Fourth, two alternative hypotheses were tested. The first
alternative hypothesis was that performance on the heading
task would be correlated with familiarity. Sholl et al. (2006)
found no correlations of performance on the heading recall
task with familiarity of the landmarks or distance to target.
They used landmarks that had been rated as highly familiar
by other students, but did not assess familiarity in the
context of their experiment. With regards to familiarity, if
one must recognize the target before the allocentric-heading
can be retrieved from memory, then familiarity might be
related to performance on the heading-recall task. Other
studies have found that familiarity predicted directional
accuracy on a mental wayfinding task (Prestopnik &
Roskos-Ewoldsen, 2000). Therefore, our experimental
participants completed a familiarity rating task, to test the
hypothesis that familiarity is related to accuracy and
decision latency.
The second alternative hypothesis concerns unfamiliar
targets or targets for which participants cannot retrieve an
allocentric-heading straight from memory. In these cases,
people might perform the heading task by imagining
walking a route from the experiment location to the target
location. In this case, target distance should be correlated
with decision latency. This prediction is based on the
assumption that mental route taking is an analog process
similar to mental rotation (Shepard & Metzler, 1971). Just
as participants take longer to mentally rotate with larger
angles, so might participants take longer to calculate
allocentric-heading with larger distances, if they use a
mental walk strategy. Just and Carpenter (1985) found that
participants with poor spatial abilities rotated at a slower
rate than those with good spatial ability, so the relationship
between distance and decision latency might be particularly

this paper is to replicate Sholl et al.’s findings in a different
location, test new hypotheses, and to provide further
evidence on the single- or multi-faceted nature of what is
measured by self-reported SOD measures.

Allocentric-Heading Recall and SOD
The heading-recall task used by Sholl et al. (2006) was a
four-alternative, forced-choice task, using campus pictures
as stimuli. The pictures were taken from magnetic north,
east, south or west. Magnetic compass directions were used
because the intrinsic structure of the Boston College campus
is aligned as such (and will also be used in the following
experiment as the UCSB campus is similarly aligned).
However, while cardinal directions will be used for
simplicity in writing this article, it should be noted that
cardinal directions were never used in written or verbal
instructions, as the task can be completed without using
cardinal directions.
First, we will define key terminology used: picture
heading is the photographer’s orientation when taking the
picture; default heading is the orientation of participant
before each trial; response heading is the participant’s
response orientation that s/he moved to, decision latency is
the participant’s time to decide on a response heading and
rotation time is the time taken to rotate from the default to
the response heading.
In the heading-recall task, participants were asked to
indicate picture heading by rotating in a chair. According to
Sholl et al. (2006), when viewing a building, the allocentricheading of that view is stored in memory and is linked to
signals of body-direction. Upon seeing a picture of that
building, a person recognizes the building, and then recalls
the allocentric-heading from spatial memory. Therefore,
participants can rotate in a chair to replicate the picture
heading because they can compare their current bodydirection to the body-direction signals from their memory
and move to face the picture heading. The two main
measures of this task were accuracy and decision latency.
Participants responded more accurately and faster when the
picture heading was consistent with their default heading;
therefore, accuracy increased and decision latency decreased
with increasing angular deviation between the default and
picture heading.
Sholl et al. (2006) found that self-reported SOD was
related to accuracy in the heading-recall task, especially at
the extremes of the SOD scale, and concluded that SOD
measures reflect people’s awareness of their own
allocentric-heading abilities. In their first experiment,
accuracy in heading-recall was correlated .74 with the
SBSOD and .68 with the K&B scale. However, the SOD
scales were administered at the end of the study and so
participants’ self-assessed SOD ratings could have reflected
an assessment of their performance on this task, rather than
a more general assessment of their abilities (cf. Heth,
Cornell, & Flood, 2002). Thus, the correlations might be
inflated. In our study, participants completed the SOD
scales before the heading-recall task.

163

south, and the participant’s default heading was facing
north, the participant should turn 180º to face south. In
addition to accuracy in completing this task, latency (time to
complete the task) was recorded. Latency was recorded by
computer and by the experimenter using a stop-watch, so
that decision latency and rotation latency could be
separately calculated. Both the computer and experimenter
started timing when the picture was shown to the
participant. The computer stopped timing when the
participant indicated via a button press that s/he was about
to turn (decision latency). Then the participant turned and
indicated to the experimenter when s/he had finished
rotating (total latency). The rotation latency was acquired by
subtracting decision latency from the total latency.
Participants were asked to rotate using the shortest angle.

strong for poor SOD participants. Sholl et al. (2006) failed
to find correlations between objective distance and decision
latency, but increasing the task understanding of poor SOD
participants might reveal these participants’ use of the
“mental walk” strategy. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis
that participants’ estimated distances for each landmark
would be related to decision latency on the heading-recall
task.

Method
Pretesting of Stimuli Twenty students (8 males and 12
females) rated 124 photographs of the University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) campus for familiarity
and confidence in knowing the location from which the
photograph was taken. The photographs were taken from
four different headings (facing north, south, east and west).
On the basis of this pretesting, 40 photographs (10 from
each heading) were selected for the main study. The
selected photographs did not differ in familiarity or rated
confidence of location across headings. The ratings of
familiarity were similar to those reported by Sholl et al.,
(2006) with the grand mean for the forty photographs being
1.6 on a scale from 1 to 7 with 1 being “Very familiar” and
7 being “Very unfamiliar”.

Design. The methodology of the study was both
experimental and correlational. The experimental factors
were picture heading (within subjects) and default heading
(between subjects). Participants were randomly assigned to
one of the four default headings and completed forty trials,
ten for each picture heading. Accuracy and latency were
correlated with self-assessed SOD, average familiarity and
accuracy of distance estimates.
Procedure Participants were introduced to the experiment,
completed a demographics questionnaire, and completed the
K&B and SBSOD rating scales. Next, participants were
asked to orient to the layout of campus while looking out
the window. The experimenter pointed to major points-ofreference (ocean and mountains) and then asked the
participant to point towards four major campus buildings, to
ensure that s/he was oriented to the global layout of the
campus. The experimenter provided feedback, if needed, but
most participants oriented and pointed correctly.
Participants were then introduced to the heading-recall
task and presented with twelve practice trials in a fixed
order. Participants were given feedback, and told the correct
answer for any incorrectly answered trials. Next, the forty
experimental trials were completed without feedback.
Afterwards, participants completed a distance estimation
task, in which they estimated straight-line distances from
their current location to the forty photograph locations,
using a visually-presented standard unit (20 meters in
length). Participants were given two practice distance
estimation trials with correct answers provided as feedback.
Then the task was completed for all forty photographs
without feedback. Finally, participants rated their familiarity
with each photograph location on a 7-point Likert scale.
The major procedural differences from Sholl et al. (2006)
were that (1) more detailed instructions were provided, (2)
more practice heading-recall trials were given, (3) the SOD
scales were answered before the heading-recall task rather
than after, and (4) distance estimation and familiarity tasks
were used to test alternative hypotheses.

Participants Sixty-one students (29 males and 32 females)
participated in the main experiment to fulfill a research
participation requirement. Participants were required to have
spent at least two full quarters on campus. Each participant
was assigned to one of the default headings (N, S, E, or W).
Materials The experiment took place in a room on campus
that was aligned with the main axes of the campus (and the
cardinal directions). The experimental room had one westfacing window that was open during the experiment. The
view directly out that window was of a courtyard and
another large (three storey) adjacent building. However, if
one stood next to the window, one could see the mountains
and ocean (major orientation markers for the campus), and a
few major buildings. Therefore, the window afforded
excellent views for initial orientation to the campus (when
standing by the window), but only basic information while
participants were seated at a desk when completing the
experimental tasks.
Markers on the floor denoted four cardinal directions
(which were also the default and response headings).
Experimenters arranged a swivel chair and desk towards the
assigned default heading before the participant arrived.
Assigned default headings are used to determine if a
participant’s actual heading differentially affected the
retrieval of picture headings.
A trial started with viewing a photograph of campus on a
computer. Participants determined the direction (with
respect to the campus environment) in which the
photographer stood when taking the photograph (i.e., picture
heading) and turned in the chair to reproduce that
orientation. For example, if the photograph was taken facing

164

(N = 58%) with the lowest accuracy. The mean proportion
correct by picture and default heading is shown in Figure 2.
This main effect was qualified by an interaction of picture
heading with default heading, F (9,159) = 3.44, MSE = .08,
p = .001. Accuracy was highest when picture and default
headings were aligned and lowest when the default and
picture headings were misaligned by 180º. Supporting the
previous analysis, these findings confirm our main finding
that your current heading affects the accuracy with which
you can recall allocentric-heading. Aligned headings are
easier to recall and 180º unaligned heading are harder to
recall. There were no other main effects or interactions.

Results
Pretest and experimental photograph familiarity The
familiarity ratings for pictures from the pretest and from the
main experiment correlated significantly, r (38) = .63, p <
.001. The mean familiarity in the main experiment was 2.3,
which ranged from 1.1 to 3.9 across participants and from
1.1 to 5.3 across pictures. Even though there was a strong
correlation between the two familiarity measures,
participants in the main experiment rated some pictures as
unfamiliar. Four pictures (three east facing and one north
facing) had familiarity ratings that exceeded 2.5 SD above
the mean familiarity and were removed from analyses.
Accuracy To aggregate across default-heading conditions, a
new variable called heading disparity was created to denote
the angle disparity between the default heading and the
picture heading for the four different default headings. For
example, if the picture heading is aligned with the default
heading, then these responses would be labeled as 0º
heading disparity. A 2 (Gender) X 4 repeated measures
(Heading disparity: 0º, 90º, 180º, 270º) ANOVA comparing
mean accuracy indicated a main effect of heading disparity,
F (3,177) = 7.73, MSE = .22, p < .001. The mean correct
proportions by heading disparity are shown in Figure 1. Post
hoc tests revealed that the 180º condition was the least
accurate, the 90º condition was less accurate than the 0º
condition and the 270º condition was midway between 0º
and 90º. This can be interpreted as an inhibitory effect of
having one’s body positioned 180º away from the response
of one’s head-direction system, and is predicted if the
human head-direction system operates similarly to that of
animals. There were no other main effects or interactions.

Figure 2: Mean accuracy rate as a function of picture
heading (PH) and default heading (DH). Error bars are the
standard errors of the mean.
However, there were some qualifications to this result, (1)
with north picture headings there was no difference between
default headings, and (2) west picture headings were highly
accurate for north and south default headings. These finding
might have been particular to the campus used as there are
large global orientation cues, such as the local mountains
when facing North and Isla Vista (an undergraduate housing
area) when facing West. In debriefing, some participants
reported using heuristics such as determining if the picture
heading faced the mountains or Isla Vista.
Rotation time A one-way, repeated measures ANOVA
investigated the effects of turn magnitude on rotation times.
There was a significant linear trend, F(1,59) =145.23, MSE
= 19.42, p < .001, with rotation times of 1.56, 2.10, and 2.36
seconds for rotations 0º, 90º and 180º, respectively. The
magnitude of the turn accounted for 71.1% of the variability
in turn time, indicating that decision latency was
successfully separated from the time to physically turn.

Figure 1: Mean accuracy rate as a function of heading
disparity. Error bars are the standard errors of the mean.
To further examine the conditions that lead to the
previous analysis, a 2 (Gender: male, female) X 4 (Default
heading: N, E, S, W) X 4 repeated measures (Picture
heading: N, E, S, W) ANOVA compared mean accuracy. A
main effect of picture heading was found, F (3,159) = 20.62,
MSE = .45, p < .001, with north-facing pictures (N = 78%)
and west-facing pictures (N = 74%) having the highest
accuracy, south (N = 66%) with moderate accuracy and east

Decision latency Outliers greater than 2.5 SD above each
participant’s mean correct decision latency (3.3% of trials)
were recoded to the mean and participants with less than
50% accuracy on the direction task were removed from all
decision latency analyses. This was done, as there would be
too few decision times to provide a meaningful measure for
these participants. Fifty of the 61 participants (82%, 26

165

p < .05, indicating that participants with good SOD rate
their familiarity closer to 1 for ‘Very familiar’. Furthermore,
if one controls for mean landmark familiarity, correlations
between accuracy and the SOD measures drop, to rK&B (59)
= .19, p = .14 and rSBSOD (59) = .29, p < .05. In sum, the
only significant correlation after controlling for familiarity
is between accuracy and SBSOD. Therefore, the strong
correlation between accuracy and SOD is partially due to
high SOD participants being more familiar with the
buildings shown in the pictures. In contrast with Sholl et
al.’s conclusion that SOD reflects only ability to recall the
allocentric heading of the picture, we have found that SOD
is related to familiarity. Thus failure to recognize the
locations from the pictures may be a source of error in this
task.

male, 24 female) had more than 50% accuracy in the present
experiment, in contrast with only 18 of 32 (56%)
participants in Sholl et al.’s first experiment. Thus,
performance was generally more accurate in the current
study.
A 2 (Gender) X 4 repeated measures (Heading disparity:
0º, 90º, 180º, 270º) ANOVA indicated a marginal main
effect of heading disparity, F (3,144) = 2.45, MSE = 7.71, p
= .07. Post hoc tests revealed the 180º and 90º headingdisparity conditions had longer decision latencies than the 0º
condition. While suggestive, this pattern is not exactly what
is predicted by the animal model and it is only marginally
significant, but interestingly, a similar pattern was observed
by Sholl et al. It might be due to the specific environments
used in both experiments. The mean decision latency as a
function of heading disparity is shown in Figure 3.

Table 1: Mean Accuracy and Correct Decision Latency
Correlations with Sense of Direction Ratings.
Accuracy

Familiarity

a

a

Decision
Latency b
K&B
.30*
-.13
SBSOD
.37**
-.22
Accuracy
--.03
Familiarity -.02
* p-value < 0.05; ** p-value < 0.01;
a
N = 61; b N = 50

-.34**
-.27*
-.40**
--

Table 2: Correlations of Familiarity with Accuracy and
Correct Decision Latency, with Participants and Pictures as
the Unit of Analysis

Figure 3: Mean decision latency as a function of heading
disparity. Error bars are the standard errors of the mean.

Accuracy a

Decision
Latency b
Across participants
-.40**
.01
Across pictures
-.54**
.33*
* p-value < 0.05; ** p-value < 0.01; a N = 61; b N
= 50 across participants; N = 34 across pictures

Correlations with Self-Reported Sense of Direction The
correlation between the two self-reported sense of direction
measures was r (59) =.60, p < .001. Mean accuracy and
mean correct decision latency were correlated with
participants’ SOD measures, as shown in Table 1. Both of
the SOD measures were positively correlated with mean
accuracy and negatively correlated with mean correct
decision latency, as expected. However, the correlations
were substantially lower than those found by Sholl et al.
(2006), and were significant only for accuracy.

Distance Estimation To test our mental walk hypothesis,
we correlated mean correct decision latency per picture
(averaged across individuals) with participants’ estimates of
the distance to each picture location. The correlation was
not significant, r (34) = .23, p = .17, providing no evidence
for the mental walk hypothesis.

Photograph familiarity Significant correlations between
participants’ mean familiarity rating (averaged across the 36
pictures) and their mean accuracy on heading-recall were
found, r (59) = -.40, p < .001, supporting our familiarity
hypothesis. Therefore, as familiarity approaches 1 for ‘very
familiar’, accuracy increases, however, there was no
significant correlation between participants’ familiarity and
decision latency. Correlating mean familiarity per picture
(averaged across individuals) with mean accuracy and
decision latency per picture resulted in significant
correlations (Table 2).
As seen in Table 1, SOD measures were negatively
correlated with participants’ mean ratings of familiarity of
the landmarks, rK&B (59) = -.34, p < .01, rSBSOD (59) = -.27,

Discussion
Using a heading-recall task, we replicated Sholl et al.’s
(2006) finding that individuals can recall allocentricdirectional information from pictures and that their
performance is related to SOD. We replicated their finding
that the least accurate directional estimates come from
heading disparities of 180º and that the longest decisions
latencies come from heading disparities of 180º and 90º.
These results provide support for the theory that humans
have an allocentric-heading system similar to those found in
animals. We also replicated a significant correlation

166

target location. This, and the fact that global orienting cues
(like the mountains) seem to have affected performance,
suggests that there may be several strategies employed in
this task.
In conclusion, this study has replicated the result that
ability to judge the heading from which a picture was taken
is related to one’s current heading, and provides motivation
for further studying the possibility of a human allocentric
orientation (or head-direction) system. On the other hand,
our results do not support the view that self-reported SOD
measures simply reflect the operation of a human headdirection system. Previous studies have found that SOD
measures are related to multiple spatial skills, including
learning spatial layout and updating, and the correlations we
observed between SOD and the heading recall task are
similar in size (in the moderate range) to the correlations
typically found with these other tasks. Thus it is likely that
self-report SOD measures reflect a range of navigation
abilities, not just the operation of a head-direction system,
and future studies of this system should rely on objective
measures of performance, such as the heading-recall task,
rather than relying on self-reports as a measure of a human
allocentric heading (or head-direction) system.

between SOD measures and heading-recall measures.
However, while our correlations reached significance, they
were noticeably lower than those observed by Sholl et al. In
addition, we found significant correlations between
performance measures and familiarity that Sholl et al. did
not find. But we failed to find support for our hypothesis
that decision latency would be correlated with estimated
distance.
We successfully replicated Sholl et al.’s experimental
findings and were also successful in increasing the general
accuracy level on the heading-recall task. Thus, people can
be quite accurate in providing allocentric-heading for
pictures, when adequate training and feedback are provided.
Our results demonstrate that the effects replicate across
campuses. However, our results also indicate that specific
aspects of the local environment, such as the nearby
mountain range, may also have affected the accessibility of
the views. This study and Sholl et al.’s study were
conducted on campuses with structures intrinsically aligned
with magnetic compass directions. Using campuses with a
less regular structure, or different allocentric reference
systems for the pictures, would allow for further testing of
the generality of these results.
Our study also attempted to replicate Sholl et al.’s high
correlations between SOD measures and heading-recall
performance. In contrast we found moderate significant
correlations. There are two potential causes for the reduced
correlations: administration of SOD measures before the
heading-recall task and the increase in accuracy resulting
from better instructions and additional practice trials.
With regards to our alternative hypotheses, the hypothesis
that heading-recall performance measures would be
correlated with familiarity found support. Since recognition
is the likely first step in recalling an allocentric-heading,
recognizing the view of the location is likely a first step in
completing the task. It is possible that poor SOD individuals
require more experience with locations than good SOD
individuals to attain similar levels of recognition
performance. Although Sholl et al. (2006) did not find
effects of familiarity, they did not measure familiarity of
their experimental participants and we found that the
familiarity ratings from our pretest were not perfectly
correlated with the familiarity ratings from our experimental
participants. In summary, we found that significant
correlations between accuracy and SOD are partially due to
familiarity. In contrast to Sholl et al.’s conclusion that SOD
reflects solely the ability to recall the allocentric heading of
the picture, we found that SOD, familiarity and allocentricheading accuracy are all related.
Our hypothesis that decision latency would be related to
distance estimates was not supported. This suggests that
people do not accomplish this task by imagining a mental
walk to the locations in the pictures, or at least that this
mental walk process is not an analog process. On the other
hand, in debriefing interviews, many participants mentioned
imagining how they would travel past the target location or
extrapolating allocentric-heading from the direction of the

References
Bryant, J. K. (1982). Personality correlates of sense of
direction and geographic orientation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 1318-1324.
Hegarty, M., Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., Lovelace,
K., & Subbiah, I. (2002). Development of a self-report
measure of environmental spatial ability. Intelligence, 30,
425-447.
Heth, C. D., Cornell, E. H., & Flood, T. L. (2002). Selfratings of sense of direction and route reversal
performance. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16, 309-324.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1985). Cognitive coordinate
systems: Accounts of mental rotation and individual
differences in spatial ability. Psychological Review, 92(2),
137-172.
Kozlowski, L. T. & Bryant, K. J. (1977). Sense of direction,
spatial orientation, and cognitive maps. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 3, 590-598.
Prestopnik, J. L., & Roskos-Ewoldsen, B. (2000). The
relations among wayfinding strategy use, sense of
direction, sex, familiarity, and wayfinding ability. Journal
of Environmental Psychology, 20(2), 177-191.
Ranck, J. B., Jr. (1984). Head-direction cells in the deep cell
layers of dorsal presubiculum in freely moving rats.
Society of Neuroscience Abstracts, 10, 599.
Shepard, R. N., & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.
Sholl, M. J., Kenny, R. J., & DellaPorta, K. A. (2006).
Allocentric-heading recall and its relation to self-reported
sense-of-direction. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(3), 516-533.

167

