UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Role of Kolmogorov Complexity on Interest in Moral Dilemma Stories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4c614587

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Saillenfest, Antoine
Dessalles, Jean-Louis

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Role of Kolmogorov Complexity on Interest in Moral Dilemma Stories
Antoine Saillenfest, Jean-Louis Dessalles
({antoine.saillenfest, jean-louis.dessalles}@telecom-paristech.fr)
Telecom ParisTech, INFRES, 46 Rue Barrault, 75013, Paris
Abstract

that moral judgment is more a matter of emotion and affective
intuition than of deliberate reasoning (Haidt & Hersh, 2001).
Emotion now plays a central role in moral psychology research (Haidt, 2007). Evidence that emotions guide moral
judgments comes from brain imagery (Moll et al., 2002;
Greene et al., 2004; Moll & Oliveira-Souza, 2007; Koenigs et
al., 2007; Decety, Michalska & Kinzler, 2011) , philosophy
(Roeser, 2006), and psychology (Wheatley & Haidt, 2005;
Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2006; Schnall et al., 2008).
Recently, new findings from several areas of cognitive neuroscience have suggested that emotions and reasoning both
matter, but that automatic emotional processes tend to dominate (Greene & Haidt, 2002; Greene et al., 2004).
Various elements of particular importance to our study,
such as social consensus, proximity (the feeling of nearness),
the magnitude of consequences or the probability of effect
have been shown to affect our judgment in moral dilemma
(Jones, 1991). It has also been shown that people judge permissible to harm people as a side effect but not as a means
(Cushman, Young & Hauser, 2006).

Several studies have highlighted the combined role of emotions and reasoning in the determination of judgments about
morality. Here we explore the influence of Kolmogorov complexity in the determination, not only of moral judgment, but
also of the associated narrative interest. We designed an experiment to test the predictions of our complexity-based model
when applied to moral dilemmas. It confirms that judgments
about interest and morality may be explained in part by discrepancies in complexity. This preliminary study suggests that
cognitive computations are involved in decision-making about
emotional outcomes.
Keywords: Kolmogorov complexity; moral dilemma; moral
judgment; narrative interest; emotion.

Introduction
Humans devote a considerable amount of time to producing
narratives. Spontaneous conversational narratives constitute a
large amount of our conversational time (Norrick, 2000) and
fictional narratives constitute a large part of human productions (e.g. novels, movies, video games). Modeling narrative
interest and emotional impact in narratives, especially in fictional narratives, is of major importance, both scientifically
and economically, as there are a variety of potential applications (e.g. serious games, film industry, video games). The
selection of events that people consider relevant to tell is a
not yet fully understood process. Only a small proportion of
our experiences passes the selection. Moral dilemma belong
to the situations that make good stories.
Previous studies have pointed out that emotional intensity
and complexity drop have a decisive influence on narrative
interest. The aim of this article is to explore the role of complexity change in the determination of morality and interest
in moral dilemma.

Interest in narratives
Both reasoning and emotions seem to control the intensity
of narrative interest. It has been observed that human cognition is sensitive to complexity, in the sense of Kolmogorov
(i.e. the length of the minimal determination of a situation)
(Chater, 1999; Chater & Vitányi, 2003). Simplicity Theory
(Dessalles, 2008a; see also www.simplicitytheory.org) highlighted the role of unexpectedness in the selection of interesting events: a situation is unexpected if it is more complex
to produce than to determine. This means that the generation complexity Cw of an unexpected event is higher than the
complexity Cd of its determination.
Cw measures the minimum quantity of information that
must be given for the ”world” (as the observer knows it) to
make the situation happen. It evaluates the size of the minimal explication of the situation. Cd measures the quantity of
information needed by the observer to describe the situation
unambiguously. It evaluates the size of the minimum description of the situation.
Unexpectedness U is the difference between the generation
complexity and the determination complexity (U = Cw −Cd ).
The study of unexpectedness makes good predictions
about which parameters control narrative interest in situations such as fortuitous encounters, atypical events, coincidences or rare events (Dessalles, 2008b; see also
www.simplicitytheory.org).
Interest is also a matter of emotions. Emotional intensity
plays a crucial role in the selection of narrated events (Rimé,

Morality judgments in dilemma
The number of studies on morality and emotion grew steadily
in the 1980s and 1990s, and even more during the last
decade. Various disciplines now investigate human morality
and the interplay of emotion and reason in moral judgment
and decision-making.
Moral psychology initially focused on reasoning. During
the 1950s and 1960s, mental models and information processing were the preferred framework in psychology. Kohlberg
(1958) proposed a six-stage developmental model of moral
reasoning which, he thought, drives moral judgment. In the
1980s, however, the idea that moral emotions also play a role
has been highlighted. New findings in evolutionary psychology and in primatology pointed to the crucial role of a specific
set of emotions. This ”affective revolution” has been reinforced during the two last decades. Recent evidence suggests

947

2005). In what follows, we will present a model in which
emotional intensity results from the combination of the emotional category of the event (whether it is about ten deaths or
merely about a ten-Euro loss) with unexpectedness. Then we
will present an experiment designed to test the model. Finally, we will discuss the validity and the generality of this
approach based on complexity.

A complexity-based model of narrative interest and
of moral judgment
The model proposed in this article intends to show that variations of Kolmogorov complexity may contribute to explain
both moral judgment and interest in moral dilemma stories.
Any outcome i comes with an hypothetical emotional intensity Ehi (> 0) attached to it. This value does not take the
valence (positive or negative) of the emotion into account,
but only the standard magnitude of the corresponding class
of events (sometimes considered to result from social consensus) (e.g. the death of child is supposed to be emotionally
more intense than the death of an adult person, all things being equal) (Jones, 1991; Bleske-Rechek et al. 2010).
According to Simplicity Theory, the emotional intensity attached to an event is the sum of the hypothetical emotional
intensity and of unexpectedness: E = Eh + U. Since U depends on the complexity of the persons involved in the event
(with a minus sign), the definition of E reflects the fact that
one is more affected if the victim of an accident is a close acquaintance or a celebrity (as close acquaintances or celebrities require less information to be determined).
When considering the narrative value of an event s which
is the outcome of an action a, the computation of E is performed ex post: E is derived from Eh and U. In ex post calculus, Cw (s) = Cw (s|a) +Cw (a) in which Cw (s|a) measures the
amount of information the world needs to produce s from a
(see Figure 1). To judge the moral value of a, the computation is ex ante: s is evaluated from its emotional intensity E,
from the causal unexpectedness U(s|a) = Cw (s|a) − Cd (s|a)
and from the unexpectedness of action a. Cd (s|a) measures
what is still to be determined about s once a is known. Then
the moral evaluation Eha of a is Eha (s) = E(s)−U(s|a)−U(a).
We introduce the notion of responsibility: Ra (s) = Cw (s) −
Cw (s|a). The more a makes s easy (resp. hard) to produce,
the more Ra (s) increases (resp. decreases) and the more (resp.
less) the actor is judged responsible for s. We also introduce
the notion of targetting: T a (s) = Cd (s)−Cd (s|a) which evaluates the contribution of a in the description of s. Ta (s) = Cd (s)
means that s is fully described by a, the outcome s is targeted
by the actor that does a. Lastly, we introduce the notion of
inadvertence F a = U(a) which measures how unexpected the
action is. If F a is large, then a has been done inadvertently.
Eventually, Eha = Ra − T a − F a .
In this paper, we only consider premeditated actions
(F a = 0) that do fully describe the outcomes (Cd (s|a) = 0).
Therefore:
Eha (s) = E(s) −Cw (s|a)

We define the emotional gain ∆Ea of a moral dilemma
as the difference between emotional intensities for the desired consequences and undesired consequences (see Figure
1). ∆Ea estimates how satisfying the consequences of an action appear (note that ∆Ea can be negative or positive). The
model leads us to the following predictions:
1. The narrative interest I of a situation increases with its unexpectedness U of its hypothetical emotional intensity Eh .
I = Eh +U
2. The moral judgment MJ, in the case of an action, increases
with the emotional gain ∆Ea .
MJ = ∆Ea

Figure 1: Complexity and Emotional intensity in a cause-toconsequence schema
The model leads to the following particular expectations:
1. A character’s actions that have negative outcomes will be
less morally approved if they are more direct, because their
causal complexity is smaller.
2. The complexification of a causal chain will increase the
narrative interest of an event, because it increases the generation complexity of the consequences, which thus appear
more unexpected.
3. An action will appear more interesting, but will be less approved, if its negative consequences are simpler. In particular, an action that provokes the death of relatives or family
members raises more interest (after the fact) but will be less
approved.
4. Unexpected events that alter the normal course of a causal
chain will have a positive influence on narrative interest.

Experiment
Participants were asked to take the perspective of a reader and
to evaluate how alternative endings of a moral dilemma story
would be globally perceived by other readers on two aspects:
narrative interest and moral approval of the character’s action.
Participants therefore were not supposed to engage their own
judgment.
Participants had to read the following story (original in
French):

948

We omitted the zero from this scale to force participants
to choose between approval or disapproval (resp. interesting or not interesting). The answering times (with standard
deviation) for the 4 phases were 3’32”(1’12”), 3’12”(1’36”),
1’36”(1’17”) and 2’17”(1’31”). We manually checked the
answer files for individuals who provided random or uncomplete results.
The different phases of the test successively explore the
role that Kolmogorov complexity plays both on interest and
on moral judgment.

Phase 1
Former studies have shown that harming actions are more
likely to be judged moral if their consequences are more indirect (Cushman, Young, & Hauser, 2006). In phase 1 of the
test, we tried to reproduce this result and explore how causal
complexity also affects narrative interest. We also investigated the role of the complexity of the action.

Figure 2: Illustration for the flooded mine dilemma
Tom is a miner who left Scotland, his native country, to go
to work in a mine in Argentina. Here is what happened to
him two years ago, while he was watching the mining site upstream. The river flooded suddenly. It was flooding one of the
two tunnels of the mine. Tom knew that there were five people
in this tunnel (tunnel A). In the other tunnel (tunnel B), there
was only one person. The water level was rising fast, and the
current in the tunnel A was increasing. The trapped persons
were going to drown. Tom knew that by interrupting the current in one tunnel, one would flood the other one and provoke
the death of people in it. The current cannot be interrupted
in both tunnels at the same time. Tom was the only one who
could act. He stood at the entrance of the two tunnels, near a
crane and a heavy and voluminous box.

Alternative endings of phase 1
1. Tom pushed the box in front of the entrance of the tunnel
A in order to interrupt the current in this tunnel.
2. Tom got in the crane, grabbed the box with the crane’s
hook, brought the box above the entrance of the tunnel A
and dropped it in the middle of the current to stop the current in the tunnel.
3. Tom broke the dam of tunnel B to flood this tunnel immediately.
It interrupted the current in the tunnel A, the tunnel B was
flooded.
Five persons were saved, one person died by drowning

This flooded mine dilemma (Figure 2) is largely inspired
from the classical trolley problem (Thomson, 1985). The
context has been augmented to allow a larger variety of alternative endings.

Results There is a main effect of intention (F-test:
F(1, 190) = 60.87, p < 0.0001) on morality but no significant
effect on interest (F(1, 190) = 0.0045, p = 0.95). A pairwise
comparison of the two alternatives involving the box revealed
no effect of the way the box is carried in the middle of the
current on morality (p = 1) and interest (p = 1) (see Figure
3). In this phase, we could replicate a classical result of the
trolley problem, in which people approve actions that lead to
harming a victim as a side-effect but not as a means.
The main result of this first phase is that situations which
are less approved by participants are not necessarily more interesting. Elements such as harming someone as a side effect
or as a means only affect moral judgment. In this test, the
emotional intensity of consequences is not manipulated. In
alternatives 1 and 2, the causal chain between Tom’s action
and its harming consequence is more complex than in alternative 3; our model predicts that alternative 3 will be less approved than alternatives 1 and 2. Since all consequences are
equally (un)expected, our model predicts no effect on interest.
More generally, our model predicts that actions are more
likely to be approved if their positive effects are more direct
and if their negative effects are more indirect.

Method, Participants and Materials
A total of 64 individuals (aged from 19 to 65 y.o., mean 26.11
(std. dev. 7.72), 26 females) participated to the test. The
study was conducted online. Participants, mainly engineering
students, were recruited via social networks and billposting.
They were asked to read the flooded mine story carefully.
For each of the 4 phases of the test, several alternative endings were proposed, in which actions, causal links and consequences were varied. Alternatives were presented in the same
order to all participants. Using the numbering defined later in
this paper, the original orders for phases 1 to 4 were 1-2-3,
3-1-4-2, 2-4-1-3 and 1-4-2-3.
For each alternative, participants were asked to answer the
two following questions on a 10-point scale:
1. ”According to you, will the readers of the story approve
Tom’s actions?” (-5: ”Disapprove”, 5: ”Approve”)
2. ”According to you, will the readers of the story find the
alternative interesting?” (-5: ”Not Interesting”, 5: ”Interesting”)

949

Figure 4: Results of phase 2: mean approval (left panel) and
interest (right panel) ratings for four alternatives in which
the proposed causal chain of events vary in their length
(L1 < L2 < L3 < L4). Error bars indicate the 95% confidence
interval.

Figure 3: Results of phase 1: mean approval (left panel) and
interest (right panel) ratings for three alternatives in which
the proposed harmful actions vary in their intentional status
(more or less direct action on the victim). Error bars indicate
the 95% confidence interval.

many cases, the length of the chain of events is what is relevant, even if it is deterministic. The notion of unexpectedness
correctly captures this phenomenon.

Phase 2
Phase 2 explores how the length of the causal chain of events
between a causal action and its consequences affects moral
judgments and narrative interest.

Phase 3
Previous studies on morality (Bleske-Rechek et al., 2010)
have shown that the identity of victims may affect our moral
judgment. This phase explores how the identity of the single victim in tunnel B influences both moral judgment and
narrative interest.

Alternative endings of phase 2
Tom pulled the box in front of tunnel A.
1. As he expected, it stayed across the current because of its
weight.
2. It was carried by the current and, as Tom expected, it was
stopped by the struts in the tunnel.
3. It was carried by the current, hit the struts in the tunnel
and, as Tom expected, some struts got broken and part of
the ceiling at the entrance of the tunnel collapsed.
4. It was carried by the current and hit the struts in the tunnel;
beams fell down from the ceiling; they were also carried
by the current and were stopped by other struts. As Tom
expected, it formed a new dam.
It interrupted the current in tunnel A. The five persons were
saved, but the tunnel B got flooded and one person died by
drowning

Alternative endings of phase 3
Tom knew that [#1] was in tunnel B. Tom pushed the
box in front of the entrance of tunnel A. It interrupted the
current in tunnel A, tunnel B was flooded. Five persons
were saved, [#2] died.

1.
2.
3.
4.

[#1]/[#2] were :
someone / one person
one of his friends / Tom’s friend
his own cousin / Tom’s cousin
a 10-years old child / the child

Results There is a main effect of the identity of the victim (undefined person, cousin, friend and 10-year old child)
on morality (F(3, 252) = 11.79, p < 0.05) and interest
(F(3, 252) = 14.26, p < 0.05) ratings. A series of pairwised
contrasts clarifies the nature of this interaction. The presence
of an undefined person elicited significantly higher moral approval ratings (undefined person vs. friend, cousin, child, respectively: F(1, 126) = 11.32, 14.07 and 38.25; p = 0.001,
0.0003 and < 0.0001) and significantly lower interest ratings (undefined person vs. friend, cousin, child, respectively:
F(1, 126) = 34.37, 18.32 and 24.87; p < 0.0001, < 0.0001
and < 0.0001) (see Figure 5).
Alternatives in which victims are less complex to describe
(Tom’s cousin and Tom’s friend) are more interesting than the
ones involving some undefined victim. As suggested by our

Results There is a main effect of the length of the causal
chain of events on both morality (F(3, 252) = 3.01, p = 0.03)
and interest (F(3, 252) = 3.29, p = 0.02) (see Figure 4)
In this phase, only causal generation complexity is manipulated. Since unexpectedness U in I is an increasing function
of this complexity, longer deterministic chain of events make
the outcomes more unexpected. ∆Ea is a decreasing function of generation complexity for desired consequences. Our
model correctly predicts that the outcomes will appear more
interesting and that the actions will be less approved.
Jones (1991) used the expression probability of effect to
refer to the probability that a harming event will occur. We
suggest that the term of probability is not adapted, because in

950

ings (non unexpectedness vs. unexpectedness, respectively
: F(1, 252) = 14.66 and 9.30; p = 0.0002 and 0.003). As in
the phase 1, the action of Tom has significant effect on approval ratings (push the box vs. break the dam, F(1, 252) =
16.03, p < 0.0001) but no significant effect on interest ratings
(F(1, 252) = 1.83, p = 0.18) (see Figure 6).

Figure 5: Results of phase 3: mean approval (left panel) and
interest (right panel) ratings for four alternatives in which the
victims vary in their identity. Error bars indicate the 95%
confidence interval.
model, the unexpectedness increases and the emotional gain
decreases when undesired consequences are simpler. The
model correctly predicts that alternatives 2 and 3 will be less
approved and appear more interesting than alternative 1.
The fact that the victim is a child increases the hypothetic
emotional intensity. Our model correctly predicts that harming a child will be less approved but more interesting.
Our model agrees with results of Bleske-Rechek et al.
(2010) and with some aspects of Jones’ ”components of
moral intensity” such as proximity (defined as the feeling of
nearness the moral agent has for the victim) and the social
consensus (defined as a degree of social agreement that a proposed act is evil) (Jones, 1991).

Figure 6: Results of phase 4: mean approval (left panel) and
interest (right panel) ratings for four alternatives in which in
which the proposed harmful actions vary in their intentional
status and the courses of events vary in the presence or non
presence of unexpectedness. Error bars indicate the 95% confidence interval.
These results are consistent with the observations of the
previous phases. They show that variations of Tom’s action
only affect moral judgment. They also show that a combined
increase of unexpectedness and of hypothetical emotional intensity positively influences interest but negatively affects our
moral judgment about Tom’s action.
This test does not only confirm previous results. It also
confirms the prediction that the combination breaking the
dam + unexpected outcome will be the least approved alternative (and the most interesting one), whereas the combination
pushing the box + deterministic result will be the most approved alternative (and the least interesting one). However,
the model is not accurate enough to predict which one among
the alternatives 2 and 3 will be more approved or more interesting. Such ranking would require precise estimates of
complexity values, which depend on observers’ knowledge
and personal history.

Phase 4
Two elements are manipulated in phase 4: the more or less
direct action of Tom and the presence or absence of unexpectedness in the course of events.
Alternatives
1. Tom broke the dam of tunnel B to flood this tunnel immediately. What happened was not expected. The fragments
of the dam formed a new dam at the entrance of tunnel
B. It was not enough to stop the current in tunnel A. Five
persons died, one person was saved.
2. Tom broke the dam of tunnel B to flood this tunnel immediately. It interrupted the current in tunnel A, the tunnel B
was flooded. Five persons were saved, one person died.
3. Tom pushed the box in front of the entrance of the tunnel
A in order to interrupt the current in this tunnel. What happened was not expected: the box was not big enough to
stop the current in tunnel A. Five persons died, one person
was saved.
4. Tom pushed the box in front of the entrance of tunnel A in
order to interrupt the current in this tunnel. It interrupted
the current in tunnel A. Tunnel B was flooded. Five persons
were saved, one person died.

Discussion
The aim of this study was to present and test a complexitybased model for narrative interest and moral judgment in
moral dilemma stories. The point was to explore the role
played by Kolmogorov complexity. The model, based on
Simplicity Theory, intends to offer a purely cognitive account of some judgements about morality and interest in
moral dilemma stories, without using ad hoc hypothesis about
moral or immoral classes of actions. This preliminary and exploratory study has shown that the model makes correct predictions and may explain classical results about moral judgments in terms of complexity. It intends to point out the dif-

Results There is a main effect of unexpectedness in the
course of events for both morality ratings and interest rat-

951

ferent but complementary roles of complexity and emotional
intensity in moral judgment and narrative interest.
Our moral judgments depend on the estimated emotional
gain of the dilemma, which depends not only on the emotion attached to outcomes, but also on the complexity of the
causal links that lead to them. A positive gain, for example an
action which saves five but kills one, may be less morally approved if it appears that this positive consequences are more
complex to produce than negative ones. The gain would also
be considered as uncertain or unexpected. This contributes to
explain why humans are highly sensitive to actions that would
jeopardize the lives of relatives, friends, or family members.
Emotional intensity also plays an important role. This may
be related to Haidt’s work (Haidt & Hersh, 2001) that point
out the role of automatic emotional processes. Due to cultural
or societal consensus, some situations appears more emotionally intense than others.
Our model makes good qualitative predictions. In future
work, we will explore how quantitative parameters that influence complexity (e.g. distance in space or time) affect the
emotional intensity attached to outcomes. The identification
and control of these quantitative parameters open the way to
a variety of potential applications, for example in the domain
of decision-making. Several factors that are spontaneously attributed to the emotional component of decision-making may
be reinterpreted as complexity-based computations. Such an
account, if valid, would not only be relevant from a scientific perspective. It would also be potentially useful to help
decision-makers evaluate or anticipate certain decisions in
which emotions are supposed to play a major role.

Dessalles, J.-L. (2008b). La pertinence et ses origines cognitives : nouvelles théories. Hermes-Science Publications.
Greene, J. D., & Haidt, J. (2002). How (and where) does
moral judgment work ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
6(12), 517–523.
Greene, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Engell, A. D., Darley, J. M., &
Cohen, J. D. (2004). The neural bases of cognitive conflict
and control in moral judgment. Neuron, 44(2), 389–400.
Haidt, J. (2007). The new synthesis in moral psychology.
Science, 316, 998–1002.
Haidt, J., & Hersh, M. A. (2001). Sexual morality: The cultures and emotions of conservatives and liberals. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 31(1), 191–221.
Jones, T. M. (1991). Ethical decision making by individuals
in organizations: An issue-contingent model. The Academy
of Management Review, 16(2), 366–395.
Koenigs, M., Young, L., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Cushman,
F., Hauser, M., et al. (2007). Damage to the prefrontal
cortex increases utilitarian moral judgements. Nature, 446,
908–911.
Kohlberg, L. (1958). The development of modes of moral
thinking and choice in the years 10 to 16. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago. (Unpublished)
Moll, J., & Oliveira-Souza, R. de. (2007). Moral judgments,
emotions and the utilitarian brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(8), 319–321.
Moll, J., Oliveira-Souza, R. de, Eslinger, P. J., Bramati, I. E.,
Mourão-Miranda, J., Andreiuolo, P. A., et al. (2002). The
neural correlates of moral sensitivity: A functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of basic and moral
emotions. The Journal of Neuroscience, 22(7), 2730–
2736.
Norrick, N. R. (2000). Conversational narrative: Storytelling
in everyday talk. John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Rimé, B. (2005). Le partage social des émotions. Presses
Universitaires de France.
Roeser, S. (2006). The role of emotions in judging the moral
acceptability of risks. Safety Science, 44(8), 689–700.
Schnall, S., Haidt, J., Clore, G. L., & Jordan, A. H. (2008).
Disgust as embodied moral judgment. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(8), 1096–1109.
Thomson, J. J. (1985). The trolley problem. The Yale Law
Journal, 94(6), 1395–1415.
Valdesolo, P., & DeSteno, D. (2006). Manipulations of emotional context shape moral judgment. Psychological Science, 17(6), 476–477.
Wheatley, T., & Haidt, J. (2005). Hypnotic disgust makes
moral judgments more severe. Psychological Science,
16(10), 780–784.

References
Bleske-Rechek, A., Nelson, L., Baker, J., Remiker, M., &
Brandt, S. (2010). Evolution and the trolley problem : people save five over one unless the one is young, genetically
related, or a romantic partner. Journal of Social, Evolutionary, and Cultural Psychology, 4(3), 115–127.
Chater, N. (1999). The search for simplicity: A fundamental
cognitive principle ? The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52A(2), 273–302.
Chater, N., & Vitányi, P. (2003). Simplicity : a unifying principle in cognitive science ? TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences,
7(1), 19–22.
Cushman, F., Young, L., & Hauser, M. (2006). The role of
conscious reasoning and intuition in moral judgment. Psychological Science, 17(12), 1082–1089.
Decety, J., Michalska, K. J., & Kinzler, K. D. (2011). The
developmental neuroscience of moral sensitivity. Emotion
Review, 3(3), 305–307.
Dessalles, J.-L. (2008a). Coincidences and the encounter
problem: A formal account. In B. C. Love, K. McRae,
& V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th annual
conference of the cognitive science society (cogsci 2008)
(pp. 2134–2139).

952

