UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Roles of Adult’s Gestures and Eye Gaze in Whole or Object Part Presenting

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1gd684cw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Yasuda, Tetsuya
Kobayashi, Harumi

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Roles of Adults’ Gestures and Eye Gaze in Whole or Object Part Presenting
Tetsuya Yasuda (cs.yasuda@me.com)
Saitama Prefectural University, Center for University-wide Education, 820 San-Nomiya, Koshigaya
Saitama, 343-8540, JAPAN

Harumi Kobayashi (h-koba@mail.dendai.ac.jp)
Tokyo Denki University, Division of Information System Design, Ishizaka Hatoyama-machi
Saitama, 350-0394, JAPAN
Abstract
We investigated the use of a caregiver’s actions and eye-gaze
in teaching whole or part names. The experimental material
consisted of two everyday objects, a toothbrush (the whole
name was “haburashi”, the part name was “ke”) and a ballpoint pen. We coded 4 action type categories and 2 eye gaze
type categories based on the video data of 19 4-year-old
child-mother dyads using frame-by-frame method. Results of
actions showed that when the caregiver uttered a whole object
name such as toothbrush (“haburashi”), the caregiver tended
to present the object to the child by showing it. When she
uttered a part name to teach the part name such as brush
(“ke”), she pointed at the object part. Results of eye gaze
analysis showed whereas the caregiver tended to look at the
child’s face in teaching whole names, she tended to look at
the object in teaching part names. We found that caregivers
use different gestures and eye gaze directions to teach whole
or object part names. The study suggests that caregivers help
young children’s word learning using appropriate gestures
and gaze directions.
Keywords: gesture; showing; eye gaze; teaching part names.

Introduction
It is claimed that children acquire language with the
ability of specifying adults’ referential intentions. This study
focuses on adults’ referential actions when they were asked
to teach about whole objects or object parts to examine
whether they provide useful information for young
children’s guessing adult referential intentions.
It is necessary for young children to accurately understand
adults’ intentional actions and associate accurately referred
objects and words (Zukow, 1990). Adamson, Bakeman, and
Deckner (2004) presented a study that a caregiver looked at
a young child's eyes using mutual gaze when she taught an
object name for the child. It is also important for young
children to know an adults gaze direction (Doherty &
Anderson, 1999). Doherty, Anderson, and Howieson (2009)
showed 3-year-old children understood adults’ subtle gaze
direction.
Children are sensitive to the referential intentions
conveyed by pointing and looking and they use information
they obtained for word learning (Tomasello, Carpenter, &
Lizskowski, 2007; Kobayashi, 1998, 1999). Tomasello &
Farrar (1986) contended that mothers’ object references that
follow into children's attentional focus may facilitate their
lexical acquisition. However an adult may not always offer
information that is unambiguous and right. Baldwin (1991,

1993) investigated how children know adults’ referential
intentions using a discrepant labeling situation. In the
discrepant labeling situation, an adult’s attention at objects
does not agree with a child’s attention at objects. The study
showed that 18 months or older children checked an adult’s
eye gaze to know the object which the adult labeled. In the
everyday life, maternal naming and labeling for children
often includes discrepant labeling situations (Collis, 1977;
Harris, Jones, & Grant, 1983). Children must be equipped
with ability to know correct referential intentions of adults
using eye gaze and other information even in discrepant
labeling situations.
Caregivers seem to use specific ways to convey
referential intentions to young children. Masur (1997)
examined caregivers’ natural interaction with their infants
using novel, comprehended, and familiar toy animals. The
results were that mothers virtually always named whole
objects first. More importantly, in the first mention of novel
object, they named it and designated it with physical contact
such as pointing, holding, or manipulating, but such naming
and actions did not occur on the first mention of
comprehended or familiar toy animals.
Although these studies provided precious evidence on
adults’ referential actions, these studies all focus on
caregivers’ teaching about whole object labels. An object is
composed of various parts, so in part name learning,
children should find a specific object part in a whole object
and associate the part with the part name. It is not known
whether caregivers use any specific referential actions or
eye gaze to teach children part names.
In the literature of word learning, learning part names has
been more discussed in the use of linguistic cues rather than
nonlinguistic cues (Markman & Wachtel, 1988; Saylor,
Baldwin, & Sabbagh, 2002). Markman and Wachtel (1988)
showed that children learned part names when they could
use knowledge about a whole object name and by applying
whole object assumption and mutual exclusivity. Saylor,
Baldwin, & Sabbagh (2002) demonstrated that if an object
is presented and its whole-name and one of its part names
are juxtaposed, children could learn the part name of the
object. However, on whether children can learn part names
using nonlinguistic cues, the results are mixed. Examined
nonlinguistic cues were general direction of pointing
(Mervis, Golinkoff, & Bertrand, 1994), facial expression
(Moll, Koring, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2006), tracing the
contour of an object part (Hansen & Markman, 2009), and

2576

functional actions (Kobayashi, 1998). Some cues have been
demonstrated to help young children, but whether children
use gestures such as pointing in learning part names is not
well known.
Kobayashi (1998, 2002, 2012) showed that in the task to
associate novel labels with object parts, 2- and 4-year-olds
accurately interpreted adults’ referential actions such as
moving object parts or simply touch-pointing object parts to
know word meanings. Yasuda and Kobayashi (2010)
reported effects of eye gaze direction in learning part names.
Children learned part names accurately when the adult
pointed and looked at the object part and named the object
part. However, if the adult looked at child’s face doing the
same actions, children DID NOT associate the object part
with the part name. The study suggested that children learn
part names accurately when adult focused on the object part
by looking at the object part in addition to pointing at the
object part. We speculated that caregivers may actually use
referential actions and referential gaze so that young
children understand whether the whole object or the object
part is named.
In this study, we examined caregivers’ referential actions
in teaching part names to their 4-year-old children. We
examined 4-year-olds’ mothers because our previous
research (Yasuda & Kobayashi, 2010) showed that 4-yearolds’ mothers used referential actions such as pointing in
teaching object part names. In addition, our recent research
(2012) shows that 4-year-old children are sensitive to
adults’ pointing with touching the part. We decided to
examine mothers’ teaching gestures in two conditions,
whole object name teaching and object part name teaching.
In Analysis 1, we asked a caregiver to teach either a
whole object name or object part name and analyzed the
caregiver’s referential actions when she uttered either a
whole label or a part label. In Analysis 2, we compared the
caregiver’s eye gaze when she uttered labels in each
situation. If the caregiver used different referential actions
when she uttered a whole and a part label, and if they use
different eye gaze simultaneously with labeling whole or
part labels, it can be said that they actually provide different
nonlinguistic information for young children to help they
learn whole and part labels.

These objects in each set had distinctive shapes, and had the
same color and texture as the other parts of the material
object.

Procedure
The child and the caregiver sat at a table corner face-to-face
(Figure 1). The experimenter recorded the experiment by
two digital video cameras (Sony, SR-60, 29.97frame/sec).
One of the video cameras focused on the caregiver’s face
and hand, and the child’s face. The other video camera took
the whole view to the experimental situation. These two
video cameras were appropriately synchronized.
Each pair of participants was randomly assigned to one of
two conditions, whole object teaching: the caregiver teaches
something about the whole object (e.g. whole object name:
toothbrush or “haburashi”) and object part teaching: the
caregiver teaches something about the object part (e.g.
object part name: brush or “ke”). In the whole object
teaching condition in the brush session, the experimenter
gave the toothbrush to the caregiver and said to the
caregiver in Japanese: “Please teach about the toothbrush as
you like.” ("Jiyu ni haburashi ni tsuite oshiete kudasai.").
When the caregiver finished the brush session, she return
the toothbrush and received the ball-point pen and taught
about the ball-point pen. In the part teaching condition, the
procedure was identical with the whole object teaching
condition except that the caregiver was asked to teach the
object part instead of the whole object. The experimenter
asked the caregiver in Japanese:”Please teach about this
brush part of this object.” (“Jiyu ni kono ke no bubunn ni
tsuite oshiete kudasai.").

Method
Nineteen pair of 4-year-olds (Mean=56.25 SD= 3.455
Range= 52-63 months) and their caregivers participated in
the experiment in the Greater Tokyo Area, Japan. This
experiment was conducted in conformity with a privacy
ethical code of Tokyo Denki University.

Material
The experimental material consisted of toothbrush and ballpoint pen as familiar objects. We prepared the toothbrush
(“haburashi” in Japanese) as the whole object and a brush
(Ke in Japanese) as the object part. We prepared a ball-point
pen (“bohrupen” in Japanese) as the whole object and a
knock bottom (“nokka” in Japanese) as the object part.

Figure 1. The experimental setting

2577

Analysis 1
We examined whether the caregiver looked at the object or
the child’s face when the caregiver taught the whole object
or the object part name. We categorized the caregiver’s
actions into four types (pointing, stroking, demonstration,
and showing) based on video data (30 frame/sec) using
frame-by-frame method. We coded the caregiver’s actions
when she uttered the first sound of either whole object name
or object part name. We coded “pointing” when the
caregiver pointed at the object. We coded “stroking” when
the caregiver stroked the object contour. We coded
“demonstration” when the caregiver demonstrated the
function of the whole object or object part to present the
child. We coded “showing” when the caregiver showed the
object to the child. All caregivers’ actions were categorized
into one of these four categories. There were no caregivers
who did not do any action when she uttered the first sound
of whole object name or object part name.
We first calculated the frequency of each action type in
each caregiver. Figure 2 shows the ratio of action type in
each caregiver.

These results indicate that 1) When the caregiver uttered
the whole label, she tended to present the object by showing.
2) When the caregiver uttered the part label, she tended to
point at the object.
The caregiver seemed to use appropriate gestures to
convey her referential intention on the object. Caregivers
pointed at the part when she uttered a part label. Here, she
specified the object part and taught part names. The
caregiver DID NOT point at the object when she uttered a
whole name.

Analysis 2
In Analysis 1, we examined whether a caregiver looked at
the object or the child’s face when caregiver uttered the
whole object name or object part name. We categorized the
caregiver’s eye gaze into two types (object and child’s face)
based on video data (30 frame/sec) using frame-by-frame
method. We categorized a gaze an object gaze if the
caregiver looked at the object when she uttered an object
name. We categorized a gaze a child’s face gaze if the
caregiver looked at the child’s face or hand when she
uttered an object name. We coded these gaze at the first
sound of either whole or part names. No caregiver looked at
the digital camera or others when she uttered whole or part
labels.
We first calculated the frequency of each eye gaze type in
each caregiver. Figure 3 shows the ratio of action type in
each caregiver.

Figure 2. The ratio of action type in each caregiver.

Results of Actions
In order to analyze each caregiver’s most representative
referential action, we also calculated the propotion of each
caregiver’s action type based on the caregiver’s most
frequently occurred referential action observed in each
teaching conditioon.
To test whether caregivers’ actions varied across teaching
types, a 2 (Teaching: whole label naming and part label
naming) × 2 (Action: pointing, stroking, demonstration,
showing) chi-square test was conducted. There was a
significant effect of teaching type, χ2(3)=9.6, p<.05.
To explore the significant effect, we conducted residual
analysis by computing adjusted residual. When the
caregiver pointed at the object, the caregiver uttered more
part names (r= 3.098, p<.05) than whole names (r= - 2.309,
p<.05). When the caregiver presented the object using
showing, the caregiver uttered more whole names (r= 2.498,
p<.01) than part names (r= - 3.098, p<.01).

Figure 3. The ratio of gaze type in each caregiver

Results of Eye-Gaze
In order to analyze each caregiver’s most representative eye
gaze, we also calculated the propotion of each caregiver’s
eye gaze type based on the caregiver’s most frequently
occurred referential gaze observed in each teaching
condition.
To test whether caregivers’ eye gaze varied across
teaching types, a 2 (Teaching: whole label naming and part
label naming) × 2 (Gaze: Object, Child’s face) chi-square
test was conducted. There was a significant effect of
teaching type, χ2(1)=12.40, p<.01.

2578

References

To explore the significant effect, we conducted residual
analysis by computing adjusted residual. When the
caregiver looked at the object, the caregiver uttered more
part names (r= 3.528, p<.01) than whole names (r= - 3.528,
p<.01). When the caregiver looked at the child’s face, the
caregiver uttered more whole names (r= 3.528, p<.01) than
part names (r= - 3.528, p<.01).
These results indicate that 1) When the caregiver taught
the whole label, she looked at the child’s face or hand. 2)
When the caregiver taught the part label, she looked at the
object. The caregiver looked at the object when she
presented the object with a showing gesture. She rarely
looked at the object when she taught the whole name with a
showing gesture

Discussion
We investigated the relationship between a caregiver’s
actions and eye gaze in teaching whole or part object names.
The experimental material consisted of two everyday
objects, toothbrush (whole name is “haburashi”, part name
is “ke”) and ball-point pen (whole name is “boru pen”, part
name is “knocker”). We coded 4 action type categories and
2 eye gaze type categories based on the video data using
frame-by-frame method.
Results of action data showed that the caregiver presented
the object by showing it when she uttered a whole object
name such as toothbrush. However, the caregiver pointed at
the object when she uttered a part name to teach the part
name such as brush. Thus the caregiver taught part names
using pointing at the object part. Caregivers may know
their children can learn part names by observing adult
pointing actions. Pointing at object part can appropriately
attract the child’s attention to the object part. That may be
one reason why caregivers choose to use showing rather
than pointing in whole object naming so that the child can
appropriately focus on the whole object rather than any
specific part of the object.
Results of eye gaze data showed that whereas caregivers
tend to look at a child’s face in teaching whole names, they
tend to look at an object itself in teaching part names.
Caregivers seem to know looking at the object part in
addition to pointing the object part is important to teach
children object part names.
It is suggested that the caregiver conveys referential
intentions to teach whole or object part names using
appropriate gestures and gaze direction. The results of this
study accord with social-pragmatic approach to word
learning (Clark, 2009; Tomasello, 2003). Children learn
word meanings by guessing adult intentions provided by
adult utterances. This study provided evidence that adult
certainly provide nonlinguistic information through gestures
and eye gaze to help children’s understanding of adult
referential intentions.

Acknowledgments
This work was partly supported by KAKENHI (20500241)
and (24530793) on Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C).

Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., & Deckner, D. F. (2004).
The development of symbol-infused joint engagement.
Child Development, 75, 1171-1187.
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants' contribution to the
achievement of joint reference. Child Development, 62(5),
875-890.
Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Infants’ ability to consult the
speaker for clues to word reference, Journal of Child
Language, 20, 394–419.
Clark, E. (2009). First language acquisition (2nd ed.).
Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Collis, G. (1977). Visual co-orientation and maternal speech.
In H. R. Schaffer (Ed.). Studies in mother-infant
interaction, (pp. 355-375). London: Academic Press.
Doherty, M.J., & Anderson, J.R. (2001). People don’t keep
their heads still when looking to one side, and other
people can tell. Perception, 30, 765 - 767.
Doherty, M.J., Anderson, J.R., & Howieson, L. (2009). The
rapid development of explicit gaze judgment ability at 3
years. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 104,
296-312.
Harris, M., Jones, D., & Grant, J. (1983). The nonverbal
context of mothers' speech to infants. First Language, 4,
21 -30.
Kobayashi, H. (1998). How 2-year-old children learn novel
part names of unfamiliar objects. Cognition 68, B41-51.
Kobayashi, H. (1999). The influence of adults' actions on
children's inferences about word meanings. Japanese
Psychological Research, 41(1), 35-49.
Kobayashi, H. (2002). Learning the novel part names with
observation of adults' gestures. Studies in Language
Sciences, 2, 149-156.
Kobayashi, H. (2012). Meaning of touch-pointing in part
name learning. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Masur, E. (1997). Maternal labelling of novel and familiar
objects: implications for children's development of lexical
constraints. Journal of Child Language, 24, 427-439.
Markman, E. M. & Wachtel, G. A. (1988). Children's use of
mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 120-157.
Mervis, C. B., Golinkoff, R. M., & Bertrand, J. (1994).
Two-year-olds readily learn multiple labels for the same
basic level category. Child Development, 65, 971–991.
Moll, H., Koring, C., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M.
(2006). Infants determine others’ focus of attention by
pragmatics and exclusion. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 7(3), 411-430.
Tomasello, M. (1997). The pragmatics of word learning.
Japanese Journal of Cognitive Science,4, 59-74.
Tomasello, M. (2001). The Cultural Origins of Human
Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language: A UsageBased Theory of Language Acquisition. Harvard
University Press.
Tomasello, M. and Farrar, M. (1986). Joint Attention and
Early Language. Child. Development, 57, 1454-1463.

2579

Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., & Lizskowski, U. (2007). A
new look at infant pointing. Child Development, 78, 70522.
Saylor, M. M., Sabbagh, M. A., & Baldwin, D. A. (2002).
Children use whole-part juxtaposition as a pragmatic cue
to word meaning. Developmental Psychology, 38, 9931003.
Saylor, M. M., & Sabbagh, M. A. (2004). Different kinds of
information affect word learning in the preschool years:
The case of part-term learning. Child Development, 75,
395-408.
Yasuda, T., & Kobayashi, H. (2010). The role of adults' eye
gaze direction in children's learning part names,
Handbook on the 12th Annual International Conference
of the Japanese Society for Language Sciences (JSLS
2010), pp53-36.
Zukow, P.G. (1990). Socio-perceptual bases for the
emergence of language: an alternative to innatist
approaches. Developmental Psychobiology, 23. 705-726.

2580

