UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Running it through the body

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4th3q0tm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Kirsh, David

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Running it through the body
David Kirsh (kirsh@ucsd.edu)
Dept of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego
Abstract
Video data from three large captures of choreographic dance
making was analyzed to determine if there is a difference
between participant knowledge – the knowledge an agent
acquires by being the cause of an action – and observer
knowledge – the knowledge an observer acquires through close
attention to someone else’s performance. The idea that there
might be no difference has been challenged by recent findings
about the action observation network and tacitly challenged by
certain tenets in enactive perception. We explored why a
choreographer ‘riff’s’ when appropriating and evaluating the
movements of his dancers. By recruiting his body to help him
cognize he is able to understand the possibilities of movement
better than observation. He acquires participant knowledge.
Keywords: embodied cognition; thinking; choreography.

There is a tacit assumption in situated cognition that
performing an action yields a type of knowledge –
participant knowledge – that is irreducible to knowledge
acquired by observing someone else performing the same
action – observer knowledge. A violinist acquires more
knowledge by playing a piece than by listening to someone
else. He is embedded more profoundly in the situation. A
dancer is able to understand something qualitatively different
about a dance phrase by dancing it. Just watching leaves
something out.
I present data, from a major study on dance creation that
supports this intuitive claim: in dance, using one’s body to
explore a dance idea is a better way to understand the idea
than watching someone else explore it. This may seem so
obvious as to need no justification. But, there is extensive
neurophysiological evidence of a close link between action
observation and action execution [Viviani, 02; Wilson &
Knoblich, 05]. Whenever we observe another person’s goal
directed actions we re-enact or mimic that actor’s movements
by covertly behaving as if we are performing the action
ourselves. [Sebanz, N., & Shiffrar, 07]. Activating the motor
resonance system may be comparable to actual performance
[Rizzolati & Sinigaglia, 07; Agnew et al, 07; Aglioti et al.].
The idea of a covert action was introduced by Jeannerod
[94] to describe the subliminal activation of the motor system
by “[intended] actions that will eventually be executed, [and]
also [by] imagining actions, recognizing tools, learning by
observation, or even understanding the behavior of other
people”. [Jeannerod 01, emphasis added] Covert action
involves motor planning, just as overt action does; and
perhaps it involves some level of motor preparation, though
probably less than overt action. The real difference is that
covert action does not activate muscular control. Yet, the
activity in the covert system is nonetheless so strong that

even just watching an action can be as powerful a learning
experience as performing the action oneself. [Cross et al., 09]
If it is true that the motor system is activated through
observation as powerfully as suggested it is worth asking
whether actual execution is required for action understanding
and deep processing of action. Maybe observation is indeed
enough. What extra does one get by adding overt movement
over and beyond what one gets from mentally simulating the
same movement covertly?
Exploring this ‘extra’, at least in the dance context, is the
topic of this essay. I begin by clarifying what is meant by
participant knowledge. I then explain the methodology we
used for studying participant knowledge. That section is
followed by a presentation of empirical results – observed
regularities about when and how a choreographer runs dance
phrases through his body in order to understand a phrase
better – to deep process it. The paper closes with a discussion
of the central ideas of bodily mediation, and enactive
thinking. Jointly these last two ideas form the basis for an
explanation of why authoring an action can lead to a more
profound understanding than observing it.

What is participant knowledge?
If there is something special about participant knowledge,
then on those occasions when a violinist – say, Yitzhak
Perlman – physically plays a musical piece, he will connect
with the piece in a way that is special because he is the one
playing. The same holds true for dancers: they will connect
in a special way when they take to the floor and perform.
As intuitive as this is it runs contrary to a theory even more
general than motor resonance: the theory of internalization.
According to Vygotsky [78], whenever Perlman is listening,
his internalization of what it is like to play mediates his
listening. He will engage violin music as if playing it
because, as a result of constant practice, he has internalized
the performance mode of interacting with music so deeply
that he doesn’t need a physical instrument to participate in
music making. He has an inner violin and plays it when
hearing others play.
An analogy is private talk. It starts as real talk outside, it is
shaped socially by norms and practice, it is internalized and
then it is available inside [Vygotsky 86]. After that, we can
keep our mouth shut and think entirely in our heads.
In this sense, acquiring mastery of an instrument leads to
the internalization of a principle of organization – a way of
perceiving the world that comes from having mastered
externally a highly structured form of interaction. It is
artifact-mediated cognition, but without the artifact. If you
play enough, you eventually can simulate playing without an
1

593

instrument in your hands. Thus, Perlman understands the
meaning structure of a musical piece because of acquired
knowledge of music, because he has internalized the way a
violinist would approach the music, and because, while
listening or watching, his resonant system simulates playing
it. [Cisek & Kalaska 04] His vast experience and prior
practice grounds his perception sufficiently for him to realize
the musical possibilities at each moment.
Despite the allure of motor neuron theories, and despite the
importance of recognizing that humans internalize principles
of organization I think intuition is against Vygotsky and
motor resonance here. Neither dancer nor violinist can
mediate their encounter of dance and music to quite the same
depth with and without their instrument. Physical
performance matters. Whatever Perlman may know about a
piece through watching and listening, and it is considerable,
he cannot know all that he would feel or register were he
playing the piece personally. The difference – the remainder
– lies in what it means to be situated and to be an agent; it
depends on being the prime cause.
Part of the ‘extra’ that using a physical instrument provides
an agent is a consequence of how working with a physical
instrument causally shapes what a performing agent
understands about the possibilities of a situation. This extra
includes a phenomenological sense of freedom and
responsibility. By being the person who is creating the
music, a violinist has a responsibility to succeed, and during
his performance he or she has access to a set of performance
specific concepts and experiences unavailable to an observer,
even a violinist observer. These concepts are ad hoc
[Barsalou 10], situated [Greeno 89, Kirsh 09] and embodied
[Barsalou 08], and they permit the agent to project a future
that is conceptually and experientially richer than the future
projected by an observer. They provide the performer with a
framing of decisions at each point: how long to hold a note,
how to attack it, its mood and emotionality.
These
differences are not reducible to the specifics of what it is like
to play the violin – to move the bow on a string, to hold the
violin under the chin. Those are practical elements that
might bear on the moment-by-moment musical decisions that
must be made, but many of these mechanical aspects of
working with a violin are irrelevant to the performer’s
conception of the musicality of the piece. The extra elements
of knowledge conferred by participation concern the music
itself. Agency is a special mode of making contact with that.
The result is that in probing music with his violin, Perlman is
able to discover something about the music he himself would
miss were he just to listen. He needs the violinistic encounter
with the musical composition to activate some of those
concepts and sensory experiences. At least that’s the story.
This is a complicated and remarkably strong thesis, one
that I believe lurks at the soul of the frameworks of situated
and embodied cognition. To my knowledge it has not been
closely considered.

Method
The data for this research comes from two extensive case
studies in which we captured the making of new
choreographic work created by the celebrated choreographer
Wayne McGregor and his contemporary dance company
Random Dance. In the course of three periods – the first two
occurring in two three-week periods (winter and fall of
2009), the third in a six-week period (fall of 2010) – all the
face-to-face encounters between choreographer and dancers,
(about 5 hrs/day) as well as all practice sessions involving the
dancers and the associate choreographer Odette Hughes,
were recorded by six high definition video-cameras. Over
thirty 60-90 minute interviews were recorded between the
choreographer and author and also with the dancers
individually or in small groups. All notebooks, brain
storming stimuli and real time notes were collected. Several
experiments on marking, mental simulation, imagery ability
and movement memory were carried out. Each case study
yielded about 20TB of video. All videos had to be
transcoded, collated and organized – altogether a massive
process that required the help of several teams of students too
numerous to thank individually. [Kirsh 10]
Once all materials were organized, work sessions were
identified and cursorily annotated. Specific phenomena were
then identified for intensive examination. We discuss here
our observations and analyses of a process we call ‘riffing’ –
an activity the choreographer regularly performs in which he
tries out ideas by dancing them himself.
The detailed coding of riffing was performed by three
college seniors long involved in this project. Each coder
worked on separate days in the corpus and intercoder
reliability was measured on 10% of the material done in
common yielding .77 using Krippendorf’s alpha measure.
Riffing off-of-others, the phenomenon studied. When the
dancers we studied are working on an assigned
choreographic task, or when working on a duet, trio or
quartet, we regularly observed that the choreographer, WM,
would observe them closely, and then, if the dancers were to
do something interesting or untoward, he would try out their
movement himself. He would physically sketch the
movement, appropriate what he likes, and then work on the
phrase himself, substantially modifying it before sharing it.
We call this activity riffing off-of-others. Superficially, it is
the equivalent of playing a musical piece himself.
When asked in interview why he riffs off-of-others WM
said he does it “to feel the moves”, and also “to redo them
with [his] own signature”, “to ensure that they are authentic”
or to test if they are “consistent with [his] artistic style and
the integrity of the piece as a whole”. Executing the
movement also lets him see its possibilities, its ability to
“support invention”, its potential fertility. We cannot
confirm these views on the basis of videographic observation
because much of the interest of a movement for WM, he
reports, lies precisely in its physical or dynamic novelty,
something he recognizes in the movement that is quite
different from previous movements he has worked on, owing
2

594

perhaps to weight, balance, force, resistance or other
attributes that are kinesthetically meaningful but almost
impossible to discern visually. This is a key point.

Empirical Results
Because we have no access to our subject’s motor
encoding through imaging or otherwise, our empirical study
(the non-interview part) involved reviewing nearly a
thousand episodes of riffing and measuring about 15% of
them. Our goal was to observe when the choreographer riffs,
how faithful his riffs are to the target movement he is
sketching, how he modifies the movements, and then what he
does with these modified movements.
We found that riffing off-of-others follows a common
pattern: 1) the choreographer watches a dancer or small
group develop a movement idea; 2) he personally sketches or
‘marks’ their movement, though he also adds or subtracts
from their idea by prepending, appending or deleting
components in the first pass; 3) he runs through (i.e. he riffs)
several more times, each occasion adding, subtracting, or
altering more of the phrase as he initially sketched and
modified it; 4) he then works with the dancers to share the
new idea. The process is very collaborative, though not quite
a dialogue, for the dancers do not attend to what WM is
doing when he is riffing – they are busy dancing themselves
– and WM himself does not seem much concerned to get the
dancers’ movement exactly right. He does not stop, look
again, practice. Instead, he watches, physically sketches and
remakes his own versions, all in relatively high speed.
This kind of physical sketching and riffing seems a way for
him to pick up ideas he did not originate, and then play with
them. He runs someone else’s movement through his own
body because it is not enough for him to see what others are
doing; he needs to appropriate the full structure of the
movement to explore how it might be developed, continued.
In short, riffing is a way he thinks with his body. He wants
‘agentive’ knowledge.
Before we look at the data supporting this view, it is worth
commenting on how this practice departs from the case
where a violinist plays a piece to understand it rather than
listening to another violinist playing it. In the musical case,
both soloist and listener share a common musical
specification: the score.
Playing is a better way of
appropriating the score. In dance, and most especially in
creative dance, there is no prior score and no real-time
capture used to ‘freeze’ a movement. WM never uses a score
(or video, though the dancers sometimes do later in the
process); and the company makes no effort to transcribe their
movements in a dance notation, such as Laban.
Understanding must happen on the dance floor and in real
time. More importantly, the kind of understanding the
choreographer is after is dynamic. He needs to deep process
the movement to see its potential. But this does not always
mean recreating it exactly. In interviews the choreographer
says he wants to appropriate the movements his dancers
make. The curious thing is why he does not feel compelled
to duplicate their movements more precisely.

Data. The data shown in Table 1 are derived from studying
the first Make session of the first day of creating a dance
made in 2009. Ten sequences of riffing off-of-others were
found in this one session. By studying them frame-by-frame
we were able to measure the time in seconds of the mean
duration of the referent movements – the dancer movements
– that WM chose to riff off of, and the timing of his
subsequent activity.
Riffing Off-of-Others

(measurements in seconds)

Referent Move
Gap 1 Riff 1 Gap 2 Riff 2 Gap 3 Riff 3
by dancer
Mean Sketch
Duration
Mean gap
Mean
Fidelity
Mean
WM- added
content
Total

2.7 secs

2.8s
0.7s

100%

1.7s
20.2s

2.4s
28.1s

50%

29%

25%

4.1s

3.1s

2.8s

6.9s

4.8s

5.2s

Table 1. Riffing off-of-others
Looking at the columns, Gap 1 measures the time between
the moment when a dancer performs a movement and the
moment WM sketches it. Gaps 2 and 3 measure the time
between subsequent riffs. WM-added content is the material
he adds that is not found in the referent movement or in his
sketch of that movement. It was surprisingly easy to
recognize the referent material even though WM’s sketch
was not perfectly similar to the referent. Our interest was to
determine how much of WM’s movement was derivative,
based directly on a referent, and how much of WM’s
movement was his own authored content.
In a typical riff, WM observes a referent move he likes and
watches it a few times before sketching it in real time,
immediately after the next time he sees it. As can be seen in
table 1 this delay between seeing the referent and sketching it
(after having seen it at least once before) is less than a
second. After his first riff he then waits about twenty
seconds, either watching other dancers or just standing
pensively off stage. He then riffs again, which we call Riff 2;
there is a gap again, on average 28 seconds, and then he
makes a final riff, Riff 3.
Looking at the values in table 1 we see that on average his
first riff is only 50% faithful to the referent. To determine
fidelity we graded the quality of a riff along the dimensions
of technicality, memory, timing and dynamics, the same
dimensions we used in our marking experiment. (See this
issue [Kirsh et al] and Kirsh [forthcoming]). Each dimension
has four ordinal values: A, B, C, D. Overall fidelity was
defined as the averaged score on all three dimensions. To
calculate the mean and then return a letter grade for fidelity
we converted letters to a percentage in a linear fashion
(A=100% faithful, B=75%, …).
Given his skill at real-time sketching WM’s low fidelity
suggests that his first riff is more selective than realistic
sketching. It may mean that he is interested in appropriating
only certain aspects of what another dancer is doing. In this
3

595

first riff, we found, further, that on average he adds more
than twice as much of his own content to the material he
appropriates. After a gap of 20 secs he seems to tighten up
the movement by reducing the duration of both derived and
WM-made content. Following another delay of 28 secs he
increases the duration of the movement. He now has a
phrase that contains only 25% of the original 2.7 secs
movement he took, making that sketching look less like
appropriation and more like inspiration; his own contribution
is about the same length. It is this new movement, totaling
on average 5.2 secs, that he eventually shows to the dancers
in this or a later session.
What does this tell us? First, Table 1 shows that we were
wrong in a conjecture we had made. We had assumed that
riffs would unfold as a quick sequence of increasingly
faithful sketches. WM would fully appropriate the referent
phrase before his modifications and divergent sketching.
This is typical of the way dancers sketch, when mastering the
phrases of others. But it was not the case for WM. On
average, WM will riff once, with only moderate fidelity to
the referent, and then begin to truncate, add or modify the
phrase. Even in his first riff he usually adds more of his own
content than the phrase he appropriates.
Second, it suggests that his concern is with only certain
aspects of a movement. The obvious analogy is with
sketching on paper. An artist inspired by Soutine may sketch
one of Soutine’s paintings or drawings, hoping for ideas. But
the sketch, much like WM’s, is rarely faithful to the original
and the creativity seems to lie in how the artist departs from
the original.
Let us look at the process of choreographic sketching more
closely to see if it may illuminate the nature of how physical
movement acts as a mediating structure for thought.
Sketching in Dance is the process of copying in real-time
the movements of another dancer – the referent. The referent
dances, produces a target phrase, and the sketcher does her
best to duplicate the target phrase herself. Inevitably there
are stylistic differences, and most of all, differences owing to
variances in dancers’ height, weight, body form, strength,
and gender. Sketching in this sense is an early shot at
mastering a movement the way the referent does it. It is not
to be confused with an artist’s sketching, or a musician’s
sketching where often there is no referent – no touchstone of
correctness.
If the sketching process in dance follows a normal pattern
of structural approximation then the first sketch will be
coarse, capturing essential elements of the referent such as
emotion, general shape, gross dynamics, key positions, and
occasionally sporadic details that they notice or like. What
then follows is a trajectory of practice, a sequence of
improvements and modifications to the original sketch to
improve verisimilitude. The process is remarkably fast for
professionals and a phenomenon worthy of study in its own
right. After a minute or two, a talented dancer will stop
watching the referent and practice on her own.
The majority of sketching we observed among the Random
Dancers was real-time sketching. Each time the

choreographer makes a new phrase on one person (or a small
group) the rest of the company is expected to learn the
movements too. This is expeditious because when crafting
phrases for duets and trios it is easiest to ‘make’ on a referent
duo or trio on the assumption that the others, who typically
were already doubled or tripled up (usually at WM’S explicit
direction) would learn the phrase in their own duo or trio. In
this dance company, moreover, the choreographer would
sometimes swap dancers, putting a different dancer in the
target role in the final piece, so dancers were expected to
learn virtually all phrases.
Sketching in dance is a topic of interest because of what it
can teach us about how the body is used to manage attention.
In my view, a major function of a mediating artifact is to
regulate attention and activate priming. A hammer helps us
drive nails into wood. It is a purely physical, non-cognitive
artifact. [Norman, 91] But when it is in our hand it also
coordinates a complex pattern of movement and attention
shifts – sensori-motor adaptations and interactions. Some of
these are below conscious threshold and involuntary (e.g.
grip in mid-swing). Others are fully conscious, but often
they too are almost involuntary. For instance, when a
hammer glances off a nail imagine how little control we have
in seeing where it lands. Our eyes are drawn to it. It is this
pattern of action and attention that is hard to duplicate
without a physical thing driving it. The physical artifact
mediates our knowledge of hammering. It plays an essential
role in organizing our hammer’ish interaction with things.
To return to our violinist, we would expect that Perlman
can partially simulate his pattern of attention to a musical
piece when not physically playing his Stradivarius. He has
his inner violin, with all its interaction-organizing principles.
Numerous behavioral and imaging studies suggest that when
humans mentally rehearse a familiar action they execute
some of the same neural operations used during overt motor
performance. [Jeannerod 01] When listening, Perlman would
have no problem imagining himself playing. And he would
engage similar neural and cognitive operations. [Munzart
2009]. But there will be many involuntary, fast paced
adjustments to playing for real that would demand his
attention physically that simply do not arise during simulated
playing, where there can be no direct sensory feedback from
the environment. In short, his simulation of playing is at a
lower resolution than actual playing.
The special role that a sketch, as mediating structure, may
play in dance cognition can be appreciated by analogy with
sketching in paleoarchaeology, where Lithic sketching is
used to solve a hard problem: distinguishing human made
from natural stones in lithic eras.
In figure 1 there is a picture of three stones, any one of
them may be from the Paleolithic era, and below them are
some drawings made by an expert sketcher following the
principles of lithic illustration. According to Addington [86]
and Lopes [06] the best method to tell whether a given
Paleolithic stone is a cutting tool is to sketch the stone. Not
just any form of sketching will do. There is an expert mode
of sketching for Paleolithic objects codified in a set of
4

596

principles of ‘lithic illustration’.
Good archaeological
illustrators will draw a lithic stone to reveal the physical
‘problematic’ the tool cutter faced. They will show the
“scale; the pattern, sequence, direction, and force of blows to
the stone; the bulb and platform of percussion; areas of
retouch, snapping, and truncation; areas of grinding,
battering, or abrasion; fractures caused by heating; the effects
of materials; and pitting and sickle sheen.” [ibid] Potentially

Figure 1. Lithic sketches are drawings of stones
made according to the strict principles of lithic
illustration. The stones in the top picture are either
human made – artifactual – or they are nature made
and not shaped by humans.
confusing features of the stone such as embedded fossils,
variegated coloration, patina, seams, banding, and
crystallization are left out of the drawing.
The implication is that expert illustrators, when practicing
their craft, are forced to scrutinize stones in a special way.
They coordinate hand and eye to interactively probe the stone
to reveal knapping related features. The need to draw certain
lines drives perceptual inquiry. Attention must be managed,
and arguably, without the need to sketch, without the
presence of an external structure that the illustrator is
creating, attention would not be managed adequately. Of
course, this is an exaggeration. Illustrators have professional
vision [Goodwin 93] and so can see elements of what they
would draw without actually drawing. But in drawing, the
process of making lines and ensuring they are spaced
revealingly, is itself a process that simulates knapping. Using
a pencil to draw a curve is physically related to using a
knapping stone to flake a chip off a stone. It physically
simulates knapping. So, the drawing process can help the
illustrator walk through the history of the axehead’s making.
The drawing is an external representation, but the process of
making this representation is a powerful method for
structuring attention. It helps the illustrator figure out what
an artifact is by studying ‘the details of its making’ (ibid).
The analogy to riffing should be clear. By riffing, the
choreographer is forced to direct his attention to the central
aspects of a movement. By running the phrase through his
own body WM gets to feel its dynamics, balance, gravity,
internal shape. Not as seen in a mirror, but as felt through

movement – he experiences ‘the details of its making’
including the many body decisions the dancer made.
We turn now to what riffing teaches us about the power of
using the body to help think about dance; how being the
agent of movement offers privileged knowledge of dance.

Discussion
It is no surprise that dancers physically sketch, explore or
probe movement ideas by using their bodies. The question at
issue is why, when our choreographer sees an interesting
movement performed by one of his dancers, he bothers to
mimic it? Given his capacity as a super-expert he ought to be
able to attend to enough aspects of the movement by
observation alone, or perhaps by inner simulation, making
external movement unnecessary. One would suppose that he
can think through the possibilities of a movement well
enough in his imagination. Observation of the movement
ought to give him an adequately precise ‘perceptual
blueprint’ [Hodges et al, 07] that he can then imaginatively
work with.
Support for the idea of imaginative simulation being
sufficient can be found in the idea of enactive perception.
[Noe 05] On an enactive account of visual perception, an
observer should see the counterfactual futures in the present.
He should phenomenologically experience possible ways a
phrase may be continued. In this case that would mean
anticipating a dancer’s possible movements just before they
were made, then saccading, moving the eyes, head, trunk and
attending closely to see which of the movements that might
have been made do in fact occur, and then revising perceptual
expectations appropriately. The enactive process happens
during perception, but it grounds an understanding of the
movement process that encompasses more than what was
literally seen and supports imaginative replay and
exploration. [Thomas 99]. It supports projection [Kirsh, 12].
A second reason overt action might be superfluous is that
humans have the capacity to improve motor performance by
observation alone, without concurrent physical practice,
[Torriero et al 08, ibid]. The fact that there are older
choreographers (notably Merce Cunningham) who continued
making noteworthy pieces after drastically reducing their
physical exploration [Nolan, 12] offers further support that
physical practice is not necessary for grasping the
choreographic potential of a movement; observation and
mental simulation may be enough.
For our forty-year old choreographer that is not what we
found. He regularly runs possible steps and phrases through
his own body, and he seems to rely on that process as part of
his choreographic practice.
I suggest we view Riffing as a type of enactive thinking. It
is not just a way of better activating what vision can supply.
It constitutes a more interactive probing. Interaction requires
more than simply changing one’s eye, head, trunk and body
position to observe; it involves changing the object of
inquiry. It is an intervention.
Thus in reply to the question how can thought be partly
constituted by bodily movement I have a few answers.
5

597

First, since bodily movement is by definition part of the
action-perception system it can be harnessed reliably as part
of a simulation process as well as ‘mental’ simulation inside
cortex. If internal simulation is good enough to ground
thought, then why not regard the act of materializing the
target process an even better source of grounded thought?
Moreover, if nature plays a role in simulation the progression
of states will be more detailed and reliable than mentally
projecting, imagining, or simulating the next state, which is
more error prone. So dancing a phrase ought to be a better
way of grasping the possibilities of a phrase than simulating
it. And perceiving possibilities is a lot of what understanding
is. This leads to the second reply.
Badets et al., [06], showed that physical practice is better
than mere observation for learning new movements. This
may not always be the case with simple and even moderately
complex movements [Cross et al, 09]. Presumably in those
cases where physical practice surpasses prolonged action
observation something extra is getting in. What is it? In
Badets [op cit] the extra is detailed behavioral expertise and
its neural basis. But with respect to thought, and not just
skilled movement, the extra that comes from overt bodily
involvement is an enhanced conceptualization of what the
phrase is, a better grasp of what makes a performance true to
the phrase. In simple dance phrases there is little to grasp or
deeply conceptualize. But for complex, choreographically
rich phrases this can be a real issue. It means being able to
judge when two dancers with different genders, backgrounds
and bodies have mastered the phrase ‘correctly’.
Riffing falls into this enhanced conceptualization category
because when WM executes a phrase he is making decisions
at each moment; he is ‘thinking’ about it. He reports looking
for possible lines of development, for novelty, for
discovering a point in movement space that is uncharted. In
lithic illustration you also feel the decisions: why here, and
not there? In dance, part of conceptualizing possibilities
means understanding key dynamics like the effect of gravity,
balance, force, and bodily tension. These arise through
physical interaction and are highly sensitive to momentary
physical factors. Observation alone cannot expose these
elements. Without agency, intervention and physical
engagement, human knowledge is different. Angels can
never understand dance as humans can.
Acknowledgements: Richard Caballero, David Mazur, Gina
Bello, Dafne Muntanyola, Cogs 160 class, WM | Random
Dance. Funding from NSF: IIS-1002736 gratefully
acknowledged.

References
Addington, L. R. (1986) Lithic Illustration: Drawing Flaked Stone
Artifacts for Publication. Univ of Chicago Press
Aglioti et al. Aglioti, S. M., Cesari, P., Romani, M., & Urgesi, C.
(2008). Action anticipation and motor resonance in elite
basketball players. Nature Neuroscience, 11(9), 1109–1116.
Agnew, ZK and Bhakoo, KK and Puri, BK (2007). The human
mirror system: A theory of mind reading. Brain Research
Reviews , 54 (2) 286 - 293
Badets, A., Blandin Y., Shea C.H. (2006) Intention in motor

learning through observation. Q J Exp Psychol. 59:377-386.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of
Psychology, 59, 617–64
Barsalou, LW. Ad hoc categories. (2010). In P.C. Hogan (Ed.), The
Cambridge encyclopedia of the language sciences (pp. 8788). New York: Cambridge Univ Press.
Cisek P, Kalaska J F. (2004). Neural correlates of mental rehearsal
in dorsal premotor cortex. Nature. 431:993--99
Cross, Emily, et al. (2009) Sensitivity of the Action Observation
Network to Physical and Observational Learning, Cerebral
Cortex;19:315—326.
Goodwin, Charles (1994) `Professional Vision', American
Anthropologist 96(3): 606-33
Greeno, J. G. (1989). "A perspective on thinking". American
Psychologist 44: 134–141
Hodges, N.J., Williams, A.M., Hayes, S.J., Breslin, G. (2007) What
is modelled during observational learning? J Sports Sci 25:531545.
Jeannerod, M. Neural simulation of action: a unifying mechanism
for motor cognition. Neuroimage 14: 103−109
Kirsh, D., (2010). Thinking with the Body, in (eds) S. Ohlsson R.
Catrambone,.Proc of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society. Pp 2864-2869.
Kirsh, D. (2009). Problem Solving and Situated Cognition. In Philip
Robbins & M. Aydede (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of
Situated Cognition. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Kirsh D., (2012). When doing the Wrong Thing is Right. This issue.
Lopes D: Drawing in the Social Sciences: Lithic Illustration.
http://www.interdisciplines.org/artcognition/papers/7
Munzert J, Lorey B, Zentgraf K (2009) Cognitive motor processes:
the role of motor imagery in the study of motor
representations. Brain Res Rev 60:306–326.
Noë, A. (2005), Action in Perception. MIT Press.
Nolan, C. (2012) Leonardo Electronic Almanac, vol:17, 2
Norman, Donald A. (1991): Cognitive artifacts. In: Carroll, John M.
(ed.). "Designing Interaction: Psychology at the HumanComputer Interface". Cambridge Univ Press pp.17-38
Rizzolati G., Sinigaglia, C., (2007). Mirrors In The Brain: How Our
Minds Share Actions And Emotions. Oxford Univ. Press
Rizzolatti G, Craighero L. (2004). The mirror-neuron system. Annu
Rev Neurosci. 27:169-192
Sebanz, N., & Shiffrar, M. (2007). Bodily bonds: Effects of Social
Context on Ideomotor Movements. In Haggard, P. Rosetti, Y. &
Kawato M. (eds), Sensorimotor Foundations of Higher
Cognition. Attention and Performance, XXII. Oxford Univ Press.
Thomas, N.J.T. (1999). Are Theories of Imagery Theories of
Imagination? An Active Perception Approach to Conscious
Mental Content. Cognitive Science 23. 207–245
Torriero S, Oliveri M, Koch G, Caltagirone C, Petrosini L. (2007).
The what and how of observational learning. J Cogn Neurosci.
19: 1656--1663
Viviani, P. (2002) Motor competence in the perception of dynamic
events: a tutorial. In Prinz,W. and Hommel, B. (eds), Common
Mechanisms in Perception and Action. Attention and
Performance XIX, pp. 406–442. OUP, New York.
Vygotsky, L. (1930/1978) Mind in Society, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language (A. Kozulin, Trans.).
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press
Wilson, M. and Knoblich, G. (2005) The case for motor
involvement in perceiving conspecifics. Psychological Bulletin,
131, 460–473

6

598

