UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Seeing who sees: Contrastive access helps children reason about other minds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wr6x2dz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Pham, Kathie
Bonawitz, Elizabeth
Gopnik, Alison

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Seeing who sees: Contrastive access helps children reason about other minds
Kathie Pham, Elizabeth Bonawitz, & Alison Gopnik
{kathiepham, liz_b, gopnik}@berkely.edu
University of California, Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
Does contrastive access help preschoolers succeed on
traditional false-belief tasks? Three- and four-year-olds were
presented with a modified version of the change-of-location
story in which two characters are the focus of interest. In the
contrastive access condition preschoolers’ observe that one
character leaves the room while the other stays and witnesses
the moving event; in the non-contrastive condition both
characters leave the room and fail to observe the moving
event. Despite having to track two different characters and
their different knowledge states about the location of the toy,
preschoolers were more likely to succeed on the task when
the characters had contrasting access to the moving event.
This result supports a previously unexplored qualitative
prediction of the Goodman et al (2006) computational model
of the false-belief task and also provides tentative support for
the theory theory view of the false-belief transition.
Keywords: Cognitive development; theory of mind; Falsebelief task; Contrastive learning.

Theory theory of mind
The ability to reason about other people’s mental states,
such as their beliefs and desires, their fears and aspirations,
is often referred to as theory of mind. Having a theory of
mind allows us to construct others as mental beings: entities
much grander than their physical attributes or their
observable actions. One result of this understanding is that
as adults, we are able to not only consider our own beliefs,
but the beliefs of countless others—diverging beliefs about
a single reality, beliefs that may be mistaken.
Decades of research have suggested that three-year-olds
tend to struggle with false-belief reasoning in a very specific
way. Studies have shown that three-year-olds misinterpret
minds systematically—when an agent’s beliefs and reality
diverge, they predict actions of that agent to be consistent
with the reality, rather than the false-belief (Wimmer &
Pemer, 1983; Perner et al., 1987). One classic example that
tests a child’s false-belief understanding is the change-oflocation task (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). A child is read a
story about a character (e.g.) Sally, who stores her toy and
then leaves the room. While she is away, a mischievous
character moves the toy. Sally then returns to look for her
toy and the child is asked, “Where will Sally first go look
for her toy?” Three-year-olds often say that Sally will look
where the toy actually is, consistent with the true state of the
world, rather than the location consistent with the agent’s
false-belief. In contrast, older four-year-olds more often
correctly answer that Sally will look in the place that the toy
was initially left, successfully considering an agent’s beliefs

(e.g. Baron-Cohen et al., 1985; Perner, Leekam, & Wimmer,
1987; Wimmer & Perner, 1983).
Despite decades of research replicating this finding, there
is much debate about how and when knowledge about
other’s mental states develops, and in particular when
children develop an understanding of false-belief. Some
studies suggest that children go through a conceptual change
around ages three to five—from systematically failing falsebelief tasks to performing above chance (Wellman, Cross, &
Watson, 2001). However, there have been compelling
arguments for earlier developing theory of mind competence
suggesting that as early as 10 to 15 months infants already
have an awareness that actors act on the basis of their beliefs
and false-beliefs (e.g., see Baillargeon, Scott, and He, 2010
for a review).
It is not yet clear how to best interpret these infant “falsebelief” findings nor how to reconcile or integrate them with
the preschool ones. Regardless, something definite and
important is happening in children’s theory-of-mind
understandings in the preschool years, beyond earlier
developments in infancy. There are likely to be contrasts
between implicit predictive and explicit causal-explanatory
knowledge. Furthermore, differences in false-belief
understanding as measured in the preschool years predict
several key childhood competences, such as how and how
much children talk about people in everyday conversation,
their engagement in pretense, their social interactional skills
and consequently their interactions with and popularity with
peers (Astington & Jenkins 1995; Lalonde & Chandler
1995; Watson et al. 1999). Furthermore, variability in
preschool performance on theory of mind tasks overlaps
with but is distinctively different from executive function
and IQ (e.g., Carlson & Moses 2001). These findings are
important for confirming theory of mind’s significance and
relevance during the preschool years as indexed by
preschool theory of mind tasks (especially as researched
thus far for false-belief tasks).
Though it is unclear what factors support success on
looking-time measures in young infants, the research that
will be presented here assumes a theory-like competence
that, in particular, supports explanation (e.g. Gopnik &
Wellman, 1992; Wellman & Liu, 2007). We take the idea
that theory of mind is analogous to scientific theories,
resulting in children’s distinctive patterns of predictions and
interpretations of evidence, which is often referred to as the
theory theory account of theory of mind development (e.g.
Gopnik, 1993; Gopnik & Wellman, 1992; Perner, 1991).
What a theory-like understanding of mind permits is
conceptual change—theory revision in the face of new

2180

evidence, and beliefs that support verbal predictions,
explanations, and counterfactual reasoning.
The explanatory value of the theory theory is limited in
that current accounts do not define the specific mechanisms
for change. However, advances in computational accounts
of theory change and probabilistic models in particular
naturally integrate with qualitative predictions of the theory
theory (e.g. Schulz, Bonawitz, & Griffiths, 2007). In what
follows we will briefly describe one such account of the
false-belief transition and discuss a prediction about the role
of contrast that falls out of this model. We then present a
new empirical study designed to test this prediction. We
conclude with a discussion of how these findings support a
theory theory account of false-belief.

Rational account of the false-belief transition
There have been a few computational accounts of falsebelief transition (Berthiaume, Schultz, & Onishi, in review;
Goodman et al, 2006; O’Loughlin & Thagard, 2000; Triona,
Masnick, & Morris, 2002; Van Overwalle, 2010).
Consistent with the idea that children’s changing
proficiency on false-belief tasks are guided only by changes
in executive function, O’Loughlin and Thagard (2000) have
produced a connectionist model where the false-belief
transition is driven by an increase in inhibition of the true
belief location. We consider a different proposal consistent
with the theory theory (Goodman et al. 2006, Figure 1). The
model makes explicit the variables (concepts) that children
before and after false-belief transition represent and
provides an account of why the explanatory variables
appealed to by passers and failers are different. Specifically,
the model proposes that children incorporate a visual access
variable (seeing the final location of the toy) into their
theory of mind models. This is a critical variable in the
change-of-location story; passers seem to understand that
visual access influences an agent’s belief states and her
subsequent actions: because Sally did not see the toy
moved, she does not know that it is in the new location.
In support of the claim that an understanding of visual
access is changing in a young false-belief reasoner,
children’s explanations also reflect a shift in understanding
the causal relation between an agent’s access and beliefs. In
the failer’s model of theory of mind, explanatory power is
reduced because of fewer variables available in the model.
Goodman et al. (2006) found that children who successfully
predicted an agent’s action in a false-belief task generate
more belief and access explanations, whereas failers of the
task appeal more to desires. For example, a passer of the
task may explain why an agent went to a surprising location
(where the toy is not): “Because she did not see it moved”
(appealing to access), whereas a failer may explain why an
agent went to a surprising location: “Because she wanted to
go there” (appealing to desire). This is consistent with the
proposed models in figure one—only in the passers’ model
do children have access as a causally connected variable. In
contrast, the failers’ model only has alternate desire
available as an explanation of surprising behavior.

In this paper we explore one previously untested
implication of the Goodman et al. (2006) model. If access is
made more salient to children at the cusp of false-belief
understanding, then success (correct predictions and
explanations that appeal to “belief”) on the false-belief task
should increase. Critically, our modification of the classic
false-belief task makes the task more complicated for
children to follow; if children’s success on these tasks is
only dependent on development of executive function, then
such a modification should decrease success. If instead
children have a theory-like representation of mental states as
sketched by the Goodman et al. (2006) model, then we
should observe an increase in correct predictions (where
Sally and Billy will look for their toy) and an increase in
explanations that appeal to belief state.

Learning by contrast
How might we make the access variable more salient to our
young learners? One factor that might facilitate learning is
contrast (for review, see Gentner, 2010). Comparisons help
learners identify differences and similarities between
concepts, making salient the relevant variables and causal
connections between them (Gentner, Loewenstein, & Hung,
2007; Ming, 2009). For example, learning by contrast has
helped adults discriminate between mathematical problem
types, identify the deep underlying structure of the problem
as well as the critical structural features required to solve it
(Ming, 2009), and it has helped children learn quickly from
small amounts of data (Gentner et al., 2009).
Contrastive learning has been largely unexplored in the
theory of mind domain. To our knowledge, no task has
looked at children’s understanding of false-belief and
whether contrast can help children reason about other minds
(though see Gershon & Woodward, 2012 for an example of
how comparisons help children learn goals of tool use
actions). If contrastive learning is robust, theory of mind
understanding may be facilitated by presenting a situation in
which agents have contrasting access (one agent sees the
object moved, whereas one agent does not see the object
moved). This may help children identify visual access as a
critical variable mediating beliefs, and may tip the scales in
favor of the passers’ model, thus increasing predictions
characteristic of that theory1. Favoring the passers’ model
will also lead to an increase in explanations that appeal to
belief and access, rather than simply desire (as seen in
Goodman et al., 2006 when comparing failers’ explanations
to passers’ explanations).

Extension to the “false-belief” task
While false-belief understanding is a hallmark of theory of
mind, as it seems to indicate a critical appreciation of the
distinction between mind and world, it may over-simplify
1
The potential “boost” from contrast in recognizing the
importance of visual access may only help children at the cusp of
theory of mind understanding, who may already be (implicitly)
weighing between both theories.

2181

(and thus obscure) developmental change. Wellman and Liu
(2004) designed a more nuanced conceptual scale that
captures preschooler’s developmental progression of theory
of mind understanding. Thus, besides using age as a general
marker, one way to gauge where a child lies on the spectrum
of theory of mind understanding is to adopt Wellman and
Liu’s (2004) false-belief battery, and see where each
participant scores on the developmental progression.
We adopt the full battery and use an element of the
battery that tests false-belief understanding, the change-ofcontents task, to control for false-belief ability when
assigning participants to our experimental conditions and so
we do not give children training on the change-of-location
task used as our test. According to the Wellman, Cross, and
Watson’s (2001) meta-analysis, children who lack a
coherent theory of mind have just as much trouble reasoning
about their own false-beliefs as they do reasoning about
others’ false-beliefs. In the “self” change-of-contents tasks,
a child is shown (e.g.) a band-aid box and then asked what
they think is inside. Most children reply band-aids, as that is
what it appears to contain. The box is then opened,
revealing (e.g.) a key, rather than band-aids inside. The box
is closed, and the child is asked “What did you think was
inside the box before we opened it?” Three-year-olds often
say key, rather than their true initial guess (band-aids),
unsuccessfully ascribing false-beliefs to themselves. In the
“others” version of this task, they also incorrectly ascribe
the correct belief about the box contents to a new individual
that should be naïve of the contents. This false-belief task,
according to Wellman, Cross, and Watson’s (2001) metaanalysis, is comparable to the change-of-location task—
children who succeed in one will succeed in the other. The
change-of-contents false-belief task (self and others) will
provide an initial measure, independent of our modified test
books, that we can use to classify children’s starting falsebelief understanding.

Contrasting access in false-belief experiment
In this experiment, children at the cusp of the false-belief
transition (three-and-a-half- to –five-year-olds) are first
given a diagnostic assessment using Wellman and Liu’s
(2004) false-belief tasks, sans the change-of-location task.
We then present children with one of two modified falsebelief stories. In one version of the story, there are two
characters (Sally and Billy) that together put their toy in a
basket; one character leaves the room while the other stays
and observes the toy being moved by a third character
(Alex). The question posed to the children is where will
Sally and Billy each look for the toy. After generating a
prediction, children see that Sally goes to the original
location and Billy goes to the new location and children are
asked why each character looked there. The control task is
nearly identical except both Sally and Billy leave the room
and do not observe Alex moving the toy, and after the
prediction phase both characters go to the original location
and children are asked why Sally and Billy went there.

Figure 1: Goodman et al. (2006) model of (a) failers and (b)
passers. Belief (B) & desire (D) determine action, but
only in (b) is belief influenced by visual access (V). The
parameter γ represents all the reasons, outside of the
story, that an agent might change her mind.
If the models proposed by Goodman et al. (2006)
accurately capture a relevant change (the addition of access
in the passers’ model) in children’s theory of mind, then the
contrasting access in the first book may make this variable
more salient to children and may improve their performance
on the task. Another possibility is that children’s shifting
ability in false-belief tasks is best explained by changes in
executive functioning. If so, then increasing the task
demands as with the contrasting access book (children have
to track the multiple and different knowledge states of two
characters) should make the task more difficult and lead to
more incorrect predictions and explanations.

Methods
Participants
62 children (mean: 50 months, range: 38 to 65 months) were
recruited from preschools and museums in the Berkeley
area. Children were assigned to a Contrast or Noncontrastive Control condition based on their performance on
the change-of-contents tasks, such that there were equal
numbers of passers, failers, and children who answered 1 of
2 parts of the task correctly, assigned to each test condition.
Procedure
Children were first given the diagnostic tests and then
assigned to one of the two test conditions.
Diagnostic tests. We adapted the Wellman and Liu
(2004) scaling of theory of mind tasks to include the
following six tasks (in the order listed): Diverse Desires (i.e.
can George like this even if you don’t); Diverse Beliefs (i.e.
if Linda thinks it is there but you think it’s here, where will
Linda look?); Knowledge Access (i.e. given this opaque box
that Molly can’t see inside, will she know what’s inside?);
change-of-contents self (i.e. what did you think was in the
Band-Aid box when you first saw it?); change-of-contents
other (i.e. what will this new person think is inside the
Band-Aid box?); Belief-Emotion (i.e. will Sam be
disappointed when he looks in the box?). Children were
then assigned to one of the test conditions based on their
performance on the change-of-contents self and change-ofcontents other task such that equal numbers of passing and
failing children were assigned to each condition.
Test books. The test books were the modified change-oflocation story previously described. In the story, Billy and
Sally have a stuffed bear. They hide their stuffed bear

2182

underneath the lid of a basket. In the Contrast condition
Sally has to leave the room. When Sally leaves the room,
and Billy is in the room, a new character – Alex – is
introduced. The experimenter says to the child, “Uh, oh.
Here comes Alex. Alex is a troublemaker. Look, while Sally
is away, Alex moves their toy from the basket to the box,
and Billy sees Alex move their toy. See! When Alex moves
the toy, Sally is not in the room, but Billy is in the room and
sees!” There is a memory check: “Where is the toy now?”
(box). Then the child is asked to predict where Sally will
first go to look for her toy (if she went to look before Billy),
and where Billy will first go to look for his toy (if he went
to look before Sally); the order of questions was
counterbalanced. Children were prompted to provide an
answer or point to the location. The child is then shown
where Sally and Billy actually go: in the Contrast condition
Sally goes to the basket and Billy goes to the box, and then
the child is asked to explain freely why Billy and Sally went
to their respective locations, despite the true location of the
toy. Once the child explains why Sally and Billy acted in the
way that they did, the child must pass the final memory
check in order to be included in the study: “Can you point to
who was in the room, if anyone, when Alex moved the
toy?” No child was excluded.
In the Non-contrast condition, Sally and Billy both leave
the room. The experimenter then says, “Oh, oh. Here comes
Alex. Alex is a troublemaker. Look, while Sally and Billy
are away, Alex moves their toy from the basket to the box,
and Billy and Sally don’t see Alex move their toy. See?
When Alex moves the toy, Sally is not in the room, and
Billy is not in the room, and they both do not see!2” Like the
Contrast condition, there is a memory check, and then the
child is asked to predict where Sally and Billy will first go
to look for their toy. However, in the Non-contrast
condition, the child is shown that both Sally and Billy go to
the basket and then asked to explain freely why “they both
went there.” In both conditions, if the child only provided an
explanation for one character, he or she was asked to
explain the behavior, in isolation, of the other character.

Results
Children were divided into conditions such that there were
31 children in the Contrast condition (M = 50 months, SD =
7.52 months) and 31 children in the Non-contrast condition
(M = 51 months, SD =8.15 months) with no significant
difference in ages between conditions t(61) = -0.34, p =
0.73. Children were divided into a condition in order to
control for false-belief ability: in each condition, there were
three groups of children based on their change-of-contents
performance—12 children who passed (passers) by
correctly ascribing a false-belief to themselves and to
another agent, 13 children who failed (failers) who were
unable to ascribe a false-belief to either themselves or
2
In both conditions, the Change-of-location story was modified
to explicitly mention visual access (seeing) two times in order to
emphasize who sees and who does not see the character move the
toy.

another agent, and 6 children who we deem “liminal”
because they were able to ascribe a false-belief in one case,
but not in another case.
Predictions by change-of-contents performance
In order to pass the predictions portion of the task, the
child needed to correctly predict both where Sally will go to
look for her toy and where Billy will go to look for his toy.
Any other kind of prediction (e.g. correctly predicting where
Billy goes, but incorrectly predicting where Sally goes) was
scored as failing the task.
The children in the Contrast condition did significantly
better in predicting both Sally and Billy’s actions than in the
Non-contrast condition, Fisher exact p = .04, (see Figure
2a). In the Non-contrast contrast condition: 13% incorrectly
predicted where both Sally and Billy will go, 39% correctly
predicted where both Sally and Billy will go, and 48% made
one correct prediction about Sally or Billy (7 of 15 correctly
predicting Sally). In the Contrast condition: 16% incorrectly
predicted where both Sally and Billy will go, 65% correctly
predicted where both Sally and Billy will go, and 19% made
one correct prediction about Sally or Billy (half correctly
predicting Sally).
Predictions by complete diagnostic score
Participant responses were also analyzed as a factor of the
number of tasks children initially passed on the six-task,
diagnostic battery. In the Contrast condition, participant
scores ranged from one to six, and in the Non-contrast
condition participant scores ranged from two to six.
Children in the Non-contrast condition had a marginally
significant higher diagnostic score than the children in the
Contrast condition, (t(60) = -2.61, p = .11), but this works
against our hypothesis since children with higher scores on
other theory of mind tasks should have higher false-belief
performance.
There was an overall interaction between diagnostic
score, condition, and passing, G2(13) = 25.28, p < .05, (see
Figure 2b). Consistent with the predictions by change-ofcontents performance, there was an interaction between
condition and whether or not the child passed the
predictions such that children in the Contrast condition were
significantly more likely to correctly predict the agents’
actions, G2 (1) = 4.58 , p < .05 (see Figure 3), even when the
influence of the diagnostic score was removed G2(5) =
15.58, p < .05. There was also an effect of diagnostic score
and passing; not surprisingly, children with higher
diagnostic scores were significantly more likely to correctly
predict where the agents would go in the false-belief tasks
G2 (4) = 8.72, p = .07.
Explanations
Explanations were collapsed into three categories: “Belief,
Access, Knowledge explanations” (which contained any
explanation that appealed belief, access, or knowledge),
“Desire explanations” (any explanation that appealed to
desires), and “Other” (all non-mental explanations: an

2183

Figure 2. Preschoolers’ performance by condition based on (a) change-of-contents task (% predicting correctly), (b) diagnostic score
(% predicting correctly), and (c) types of explanations generated by children based on change-of-contents task. So as not to conflate
within group proportions, the percentages reported in (a) and (c) are the product of the percent responding in a particular group (e.g. 4/6
liminal Contrast children passed) weighted by the number of children in that group (e.g. 6/31).

explanation that appealed to the initial world, the final
world, external information, or was unclassifiable). The first
author coded all explanations and a research assistant
reliability coded 82% of explanations. Coding was
compared using a maximally conservative approach (using
the 8 classification subdivisions) and both coders were blind
to condition; reliability was high (kappa = 0.79). Analysis
revealed an overall interaction between condition,
explanation type, and initial false-belief performance,
G2(12) = 38.6, p < .001. Consistent with Goodman et al.’s
(2006) results, we also saw an interaction between
explanation type and false-belief performance such that the
better children performed on the diagnostic tasks, the more
likely they were to appeal to belief, access, and knowledge
in their explanations G2(4) = 29.5, p < .0001. Follow-up
comparisons revealed that participants in the Contrast
condition significantly more often appealed to beliefs,
access, and knowledge than participants in the Non-contrast
condition, Fisher exact p = .02. Furthermore, participants in
the Non-contrast condition were more likely to appeal to
“other” non-mental explanations, Fisher exact p =.05, (see
Figure 2c).

Discussion
Consistent with our predictions, results suggest that children
are better able to predict and explain human behavior when
observing agents who have contrastive visual access. Our
modified false-belief tasks were more difficult in that they
involved more characters, predictions, and explanations as
compared to original change-of-location tasks. The Contrast
condition was in a sense more complex than the Noncontrast condition because the child had to entertain two
different perspectives, make two distinct predictions based
on those perspectives, and then generate an explanation that
accounts for these different perspectives and resulting
behaviors; the Non-contrast control condition effectively
required something much simpler: reason about Billy in the
same way you reasoned about Sally. Nonetheless, predictive
success in the Contrast condition was significantly higher
than in the Non-contrast condition.

Explanatory success (where success in explanation
requires appealing to higher level mental states such as
beliefs and access) was also higher in the Contrast
condition. These findings further support the claim that
highlighting the access variable by contrast facilitates the
child’s ability to incorporate it into his or her model of other
minds, and in turn, use it to explain behavior.
There are numerous alternative accounts for three-yearolds failures to pass false-belief tasks. Executive functioning
involves planning, response inhibition, and cognitive
flexibility (Zelazo, Carter, Reznik, & Frye, 1997). Thus, the
ways in which executive functioning may potentially
interact or interfere with theory of mind performance is vast
(e.g. premature inhibitory control see Carlson, Moses, and
Hix, 1998; for theory of mind Mechanism/Selection
Processing see Scholl and Leslie, 2001). This kind of
account is inconsistent with our findings. Because age and
initial false-belief performance are controlled, executive
functioning (such as inhibitory selection abilities) in the
children should also be comparable between conditions.
There is no reason to assume that the children in the
Contrast condition developed greater inhibitory control than
their Non-contrast counterparts. The Non-contrast condition
did require the child inhibit the real world contents twice in
order to pass the task – they must ascribe a false-belief to
both Billy and Sally in the story. However, according to
Wellman, Cross, and Watson’s (2004) meta-analysis
children given consecutive and equivalent false-belief tasks,
which varied only in character and object, responded in
highly consistent ways, giving identical responses 84% of
the time. This finding suggests that asking a child to ascribe
a false-belief twice, given equivalent situations, but
differing in character, does not encourage switching
answers. A child who is able to inhibit the real world
contents once should be able to inhibit the real world
contents a second time.
The study illustrates the helpfulness of presenting
multiple and contrasting perspectives to a young learner
with a developing theory of mind. Contrast has been shown
to facilitate learning. However, until now, it has not been
applied to the social domain. How contrast is helping may
be, as Gentner (2010) proposes, a matter of highlighting a

2184

variable and making it available for learning. Children
appear to be incorporating the access variable into their
working theory of mind, and contrast may be a means to
facilitate this understanding. More generally, the results are
consistent with a theory theory account of theory of mind:
children seem to theorize others’ inner workings, others’
ambiguous actions and other’s intangible beliefs, adjusting
their theories in light of more information. The results
support the theory that understanding other minds is learned
just as any other theory is learned, and contrast can be
applied to help interpret the ambiguous actions of others in
the complex context of reality.

References
Atington J, Jenkins J. (1995). Theory of mind development
and social understanding. Cognition and Emotion.9:151–
165.
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R.M, He, Z. (2010) False-belief
understanding in infants. Trends in Cognitive Science,
14(3), 110-118.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does
the autistic child have a ‘theory of mind’? Cognition, 21,
37–46.
Berthiaume, V., Shultz, T., & Onishi, K. (in review) A
constructivist connectionist model of developmental
transitions on false-belief tasks.
Carlson, S. M. and Moses, L. J. (2001). Individual
differences in inhibitory control and children's theory of
mind. Child Development, 72, 1032–1053.
Carlson, S. M., Moses L. J., & Hix, H. R. (1998). The role
of inhibitory processes in young children’s difficulties
with deception and false-belief. Child Development, 69,
672-691.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Hung, B. (2007).
Comparison facilitates children’s learning of names for
parts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8, 285–307.
Gentner, D., Levine, S., Dhillon, S., & Poltermann, A.
(2009). Using structural alignment to facilitate learning of
spatial concepts in an informal setting. In B. Kokinor, K.
Holyoak, & D. Gentner (Eds.), Proceedings of the second
analogy conference (pp. 175–182). Sofia, Bulgaria: NBU
Press.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the Mind: Analogical
Processes and Symbol Systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5),
752-775.
Gershon, S. & Woodward, A. (2012). A claw is like my
hand: Comparison supports goal analysis in infants.
Cognition, 122, 181-192.
Goodman, N.D., Baker, C.L., Bonawitz, E.B., Mansinghka,
V.K., Gopnik, A., Wellman, H., Schulz, L., &
Tenenbaum, J.B. (2006). Intuitive theories of mind: a
rational approach to false-belief. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Eighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gopnik, A. (1993). How we know our minds: The illusion
of first-person knowledge of intentionality. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 16, 1-14.

Gopnik, A. & Wellman, H. M. (1992). Why the Child's
theory of mind Really Is a Theory. Mind & Language, 7:
145–171.
Lalonde, C.E., & Chandler, M.J. (1995). False-belief
understanding in school. On the social-emotional
consequence of coming early or late to a first theory of
mind. Cognition and Emotion, 2, 167 – 185.
Ming, N. (2009). Analogies vs. contrasts: A comparison of
their learning benefits. In B. Kokinov, K. Holyoak, & D.
Gentner (Eds.), Proceedings of the second international
conference on analogy. (pp. 338–347). Sofia, Bulgaria:
NBU Press.
O’Loughlin, C., & Thagard, P. (2000). Autism and
coherence: A computational model. Mind & Language,
15(4), 375-392.
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Perner, J., Leekham, S., & Wimmer, H. (1987). Three-yearolds' difficulty with false-belief: The case for a conceptual
deficit. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 5,
125-137.
Scholl, B.J., & Leslie A.M. (2001). Minds, Modules, and
Meta-Analysis. Child Development, 72(3), 696-701.
Schulz, L., Bonawitz, E.B., & Griffiths, T. (2007) Can being
scared give you a tummy ache? Naïve theories,
ambiguous evidence, and preschoolers’ causal inferences.
Developmental Psychology, 43(5), 1124-1139.
Triona, L. M., Masnick, A. M., & Morris, B. J. (2002).
What does it take to pass the false-belief task? An ACT-R
model. Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (p. 1045). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Van Overwalle, F. (2010). Infants’ teleological and belief
inference: A recurrent connectionist approach to their
minimal representational and computational requirements.
NeuroImage, 52(3), 1095-1108.
Watson, A. C., Linkie Nixon, C., Wilson, A., & Capage, L.
(1999). Social interaction skills and theory of mind in
young children. Developmental Psychology, 35, 386-391.
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of theory of
mind tasks. Child Development, 75, 523–541.
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2007). Causal reasoning as
informed by the early development of explanations. In A.
Gopnik & L.Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning: Psychology,
philosophy, and computation (pp. 261–279). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D. and Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of Theory-of-Mind development: The truth about
false-belief. Child Development, 72, 655–684.
Wimmer, H. and Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children's understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13, 103–128.
Zelazo, P. D., Carter, A., Reznick, J. S., & Frye, D. (1997).
Early development of executive function: A problemsolving framework. Review of General Psychology, 1,
198–226.

2185

