UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shared Book Reading between Mother and Infant Facilitates The Frequency of Joint
Attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5d45w93f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Sato, Ayumi
Uchiyama, Ichiro

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Shared Book Reading between Mother and Infant Facilitates
The Frequency of Joint Attention
Ayumi Sato (ayusatotenjin@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Letters
Doshisha University, Japan

Ichiro Uchiyama (iuchiyam@mail.doshisha.ac.jp)
Faculty of Psychology, Doshisha University, Japan

Abstract
This study examines the effect of shared book reading on
mother-infant joint attention interactions in infancy. In
experiment 1, pairs composed of 9-month-old infants and
their mothers (N = 10) were observed in three conditions: the
shared-book, toy-play, and no-material condition. The results
indicate a frequency of passive joint and coordinated joint
attention in the shared book context than in others.
Experiment 2 longitudinally investigated the effect of
increasing the time of shared book reading on the frequency
of passive and coordinated joint attention. Twenty-eight pairs
of 9-month-old infants and their mothers were randomly
assigned to one of two groups; the first was a shared book
reading condition (N = 11), in which mothers were asked to
share books every day and were given picture books regularly
from the first observation (at 9 months) until the second
observation (at 12 months). In the control group (N = 11),
mothers were given no instruction. The results show that
increasing shared book reading increases the frequency of
passive joint attention. Therefore, it is suggested that shared
book reading increases joint attention episodes and that
repeated shared book reading increases it in other contexts.
Keywords: shared book reading; joint attention; motherinfant interaction; infancy; longitudinal study

Introduction
Shared book reading at home has been advocated as a
method of enhancing children’s language abilities. In 1992,
Bookstart was started by Booktrust in Birmingham, U.K.
This program distributes picture books and booklets for
shared book reading to infants and their mothers. One of its
goals is promoting pre-school child literacy; thus, follow-up
surveys on literacy changes in children whose mothers
received Bookstart packs were conducted to evaluate the
project. For example, the timing of start of the shared book
reading was reported as the strongest predictor variable in
the literacy of two-year-olds (DeBaryshe, 1993). It was
suggested that the earlier mothers and children started
sharing picture books, the better the children were at
comprehension and speaking (Payne, Whitehurst, & Angell,
1994). Wade & Moore (1998) reported that children whose
mothers received Bookstart packs were better at not only
reading and writing skills but also mathematics than were
children whose mothers had not. Many studies agree that
shared book reading promotes children’s language skills.
The mechanism of shared book reading’s enhancements
has not been clear, but one factor is thought to be joint

attention. Tomasello (1995) argues that joint attention is
characterized by the coordination of attention among the
self, the other, and some external object or event. Shared
book reading is thought to be an exceptional opportunity for
the occurrence of joint attention (e.g., Karrass, VanDeventer,
& Braungard-Rieker, 2003). It is known that joint attention
plays an important role in children’s language acquisition
(e.g., Tomasello & Farrar, 1986). Repeated joint attention
between mothers and infants makes mother-infant
interactions predictable for infants and renders mapping
words on the world easier (Bruner, 1985). As shared book
reading provides more episodes of joint attention, it is
thought to promote child literacy.
However, whether joint attention episodes occur more
often during shared book reading than in other contexts has
not been clear. Although many studies have used the shared
book context to observe joint attention (e.g., Fletcher, Perez,
Hooper, & Claussen, 2005) and have used both picture
books and toys at once (e.g., Bakeman & Adamson, 1984;
Mundy & Gomes, 1998), few studies have discussed shared
book reading separately or compared its joint attention
effects with those in other contexts (e.g., toy play).
The few extant studies involve infants older than one year.
For example, Yont, Snow, & Vernon-Feagans (2003)
compared mothers’ utterances to their 12-month-old infants
during shared book events with those during toy play and
found that the number of utterances about objects made
during the mothers’ shared attention with their infants was
higher in the shared book context than in the toy play one.
Another study found that mothers and their 18-month-olds
pointed more often in the shared book context than in the
wooden block play one (Sugai, Akita, Yokoyama, &
Nozawa, 2010). Therefore, shared book reading increased
mother-infant joint attention interactions when the infants
were older than 12 months.
However, whether shared book reading promotes the
number of joint attention episodes in infancy hasn’t been
confirmed. It is in infancy, especially at around 9 months,
that a child’s joint attention capacity develops most rapidly
(Dunham & Moore, 1995). It is thus necessary that the
frequency of joint attention in infancy be compared to
shared book reading and other play contexts. Furthermore,
an important question is whether continued shared book
reading changes the joint attention in mother-infant
interaction. If shared book reading facilitated children’s

2282

joint attention abilities, joint attention frequency would
increase in the other contexts (e.g., a toy-play context)
through repeated shared book reading. To investigate this
possibility, we need to increase the shared book reading
time and examine its effect on joint attention frequency in
the other contexts.
Therefore, this study investigates the effect of shared
book reading on joint attention frequency by comparing
shared book reading and other contexts in experiment 1.
Next, we intervene in the shared-book condition group by
increasing its shared book reading time; then, we
longitudinally compare its joint attention frequency in a toy
play situation with that of the control group.

Experiment 1
To investigate whether shared book reading increases joint
attention episodes more than other play contexts, we
compared the number of joint attention episodes during the
shared book reading, toy play, and no material contexts, all
common for 9-month-old infants and their mothers. To
measure mother-infant joint attention frequency in these free
play situations, we used indexes defined by Bakeman &
Adamson (1984). Bakeman & Adamson (1984) performed
longitudinal observations and indexed descriptions of the
joint attention of infants from 6 to 18 months and their
mothers in free play situations at home (using picture books
and toys) and found that mothers’ behavior is important for
the occurrence of joint attention in infancy. Bakeman &
Adamson (1984) divided joint attention episodes into two
components; passive joint and coordinated joint. Passive
joint occurs when mothers actively draw the infants’
attention to an object, and coordinated joint occurs when
infants voluntarily become involved in play and coordinate
their attention to both mothers and objects. In passive joint,
mothers need actively to lead the infants’ attention; once
coordinated joint begins, the mother must follow the
infant’s attention. Bakeman & Adamson (1984) suggest that
mothers’ coordinated behavior promotes children’s joint
attention development.
As Yont et al. (2003) and Sugai et al. (2010) show,
mothers seem to draw their infants’ attention to an object
more frequently in the shared book context than in other
contexts, and passive joint appears to occur in that context
more frequently than in others. On the other hand,
coordinated joint behavior may decrease in the shared book
context because it does not need mothers’ active behavior
but rather coordinated and relatively passive behavior.

Method
Participants Ten 9-month-old infants and their mothers
participated in this study. The mothers were recruited from
an official health center when bringing their children in for
checkup.
Procedure Each mother and infant pair individually visited
a university laboratory. First, they played freely in a play
room for a few minutes and were told that we would
videotape their interactions. When they seemed to relax and

play actively, they moved into the next room for the
recording sessions.
Conditions All mothers and infants participated in three
conditions: (a) in the shared-book condition, the infant and
mother were observed while playing on the floor with a set
of picture books we provided. We used the word “play”
rather than “read” when we instructed them to prevent
mothers from feeling they had to read the materials
consecutively; (b) in the toy-play condition, the infant and
mother played with a set of toys we provided; (c) in the nomaterial condition, the infant and mother played without
using any materials.
Before each session, the mother was instructed to play
freely, as if at home. After the instructions, an experimenter
moved into a curtained area and sat calmly out of sight of
the pair.
Each condition session lasted for about ten minutes and
was conducted on different days. The second condition
session wasn’t conducted until at least three days after the
first one, and the third didn’t begin until at least three days
after the second. The order of the conditions was
counterbalanced.
Materials In two conditions, the mother and child used the
materials we provided: (a) in each shared-book condition
session, a set of picture books was used, consisting of ten
books (Harapeko-Aomushi [The Very Hungry Caterpillar],
Jya-Jya Biri-Biri, Kingyo-ga Nigeta, Otsukisama-Konbanha,
Kutsu-Kutsu-Aruke, Gatan-Goton Gatan-Goton, Nenai-ko
Dareda, Wanwan-Nakunoha-Dare, Kuttuita), all in
Japanese. They were ranked in the top 10, by a bookstore
near the university when surveyed on the bestselling picture
books for 9-month-olds; (b) in each toy-play condition
session, a set of ten toys was used: a ball containing a bell
and a small doll, a handkerchief that makes paper sounds, a
rattle, a toy telephone, a cloth bar that makes a funny sound,
a toy trumpet, a roly-poly, a pacifier, a toy car containing a
bell, and a toy tambourine. These had also been ranked in
the top 10 by a toy store near the university when surveyed
on the bestselling toys for 9-month-olds.
Coding After the above sessions, the videotaped motherinfant interaction was coded for ten minutes by an
experimenter sitting out of sight of the pair. Six categories
of engagement, as defined by Bakeman & Adamson (1984),
were used to code the interactions: (a) unengagement, in
which the infant appears uninvolved with the mother, object,
or activity, although he or she might be scanning the
environment; (b) onlooking, in which the infant is observing
the mother’s activity, often quite intently, but not taking part
in the activity; (c) persons, in which the infant is engaged
with just the mother (typically involving face-to-face or
individual play, as, for example, when infants giggle and
coo when their mothers place their face close to theirs and
tickle them); (d) objects, in which the infant is involved in
playing with objects alone, attending only to the books, toys,
or whatever is at hand; (e) passive joint, in which the infant
and mother are actively involved in the same object but the
infant evidences little awareness of the mother’s

2283

involvement or even presence (mothers often attempt to
induce this state by manipulating objects in ways that seem
designed to capture their infants’ attention and make the
objects “come alive” for them); and (f) coordinated joint, in
which the infant is actively involved in and coordinates his
or her attention to both mother and the object the mother is
involved with (as, for example, when the infant pushes a toy
car the mother has been pushing and then looks back and
forth between the mother’s face and the toy car). If the
infant gazes the object only by mother’s attention drawing
behavior and gazes mother’s face only by mother’s voice
but doesn’t keep gazing just one of them and doesn’t
voluntarily shift attention between them, the episode was
coded into passive joint. On the other hand, if the infant
alternately shift attention between them on his or her own
initiative, the episode was coded into coordinated joint.
Fifty percent of the sessions were coded independently by
two experimenters. The degree of agreement was gauged
using Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient (r).
The rs ranged from .91 to.98.

Results
The average durations of the six engagements
(unengagement, onlooking, persons, objects, passive joint,
and coordinated joint) during each condition (shared-book,
toy-play, and no-material) are presented in Table 1. These
durations were analyzed with the conditions using a
repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), run
separately for each engagement category. The results of
ANOVA indicated significant differences in unengagement,
persons, objects, passive joint, and coordinated joint (F
(2,18) = 22.76, p < .01, ŋp2 = .72; F (2,18) = 53.07, p < .01,
ŋp2 = .92; F (2,18) = 20.47, p < .01, ŋp2 = .69; F (2,18) =
29.04, p < .01, ŋp2 = .76; F (2,18) = 13.02, p < .01, ŋp2 = .59,
respectively) and no significant difference in onlooking.
Multiple comparison tests (Bonferroni, p < .05) were
conducted in the former five categories.
In unengagement and persons, the mean duration in the
no-material condition was significantly longer than in the
shared-book and toy-play conditions. There was no
significant difference between the shared-book and toy-play
conditions. In objects, the mean duration in the shared-book
condition was significantly longer than in the no-material

and that in the toy-play was significantly longer than in the
shared-book. In passive joint and coordinated joint, the
mean duration in the toy-play condition was significantly
longer than in the no-material, and that in the shared-book
was significantly longer than in the toy-play.

Discussion
Passive joint occurred more often in the shared book context
than in other contexts, as we had predicted. These results
indicate that mothers’ efforts to draw infants’ attention to an
object seem stronger in the shared book context than in
other contexts. Therefore, not only infants older than 12
months but also younger infants follow the passive joint
pattern with their mothers more often in the shared book
context.
One reason for this is that shared book reading requires
adults. Picture books consistent with the codes (like pictures
and letters) require adults to scaffold the children’s
understanding, as they can’t read letters (Karpov, 2005).
Therefore, mothers spontaneously increase active drawing
attention behavior more in shared book reading context.
On the other hand, coordinated joint also increased more
in the shared book reading context than in other contexts.
This result shows that although the mothers actively draw
their child’s attention, once the coordinated joint event
begins through the infant in the shared-book reading context,
the mother follows the infant’s attention, which coordinates
their behavior and attention.
One of the reasons for this is the difference in
attractiveness between picture books and toys. Many of the
toys used in this study were common among 9-month-old
infants and made sounds. Nine-month-olds prefer objects
that make sounds and toys are more attractive than picture
books. The duration results in the object category show that
duration was significantly longer in the toy-play than in the
shared-book context. It is known that mothers are appeased
more readily when their children maintain their focus on an
object (Harman, Rothbart, & Posner, 1997). When faced
with unattractive objects, infants are put into bad moods,
and mothers must then struggle to produce a good mood.
Therefore, mothers may become sensitive about their child’s
attention or intent.

Table 1: The durations of the engagement states in the shared-book, toy-play, and no-material contexts.
Shared-Book Context

Toy-Play Context

State of engagement
M
SD
Unengaged
141.15
63.19
Onlooking
53.90
53.92
Persons
30.30
25.72
Objects
168.85
83.40
Passive Joint
182.35
83.38
Coordinated Joint
23.60
22.23
Note: the numerical values are presented in seconds. N = 10.

2284

M
84.30
50.30
14.40
341.60
98.75
10.95

SD
19.35
52.85
10.12
59.38
70.68
18.91

No-Material Context
M
292.00
13.35
226.90
45.45
18.30
4.00

SD
111.80
15.61
122.84
47.81
29.77
10.36

Experiment 2
In experiment 1, passive joint and coordinated joint increase
more in the shared book reading context than in other
contexts. As previously indicated, if shared book reading
facilitates child literacy by enhancing joint attention ability,
increasing the shared book reading time may promote joint
attention frequency not only in the shared book reading
context but also in the others. To explore this possibility, we
investigated the effect of increased shared book reading
time on joint attention frequency by creating a shared-book
condition group and the control condition group.
A child’s joint attention ability develops rapidly at around
9 months of age (Dunham & Moore, 1995). Visual joint
attention (Butterworth, 1991), the act of following the
direction of another’s gaze (like passive joint) develops
quickly between 10 and 12 months (Corkum & Moore,
1995). Moreover, active joint attention, drawing someone’s
attention to an object (like coordinated joint) develops at
around 12 months, later than passive joint (Lempers, 1979;
Leung & Rheingold, 1981). Therefore, timing our
intervention (i.e., increasing the shared book reading) at
between 9 and 12 months seems appropriate.
As Bakeman & Adamson (1984) suggest, coordinating
the mother’s behavior to her infant’s is important in
producing and developing the child’s joint attention ability.
Experiment 1 revealed how, in the shared book context,
passive and coordinated joint occurred more often than in
the other contexts, and the mothers’ coordinate behavior
occurred more frequently. Therefore, conducting shared
book reading seems to facilitate the frequency of both
passive and coordinated joint.

Method
Participants Twenty-two 9-month-old infants and their
mothers participated in this study. Recruiting occurred as in
experiment 1. They were divided into two condition groups
of 11 pairs each, based on the infant’s age, in the first of two
recorded free play sessions (for children of 9 and 12
months). One of the groups (with 6 boys and 5 girls) was
the shared-book condition. The other (with 7 boys and 4
girls) was the control condition.
Conditions (a) In the shared-book condition, after the first
recorded free play session for the 9-month-olds, each
mother was instructed to share picture books with her infant
at least once a day (unless something prevented it) and to
visit the laboratory again when the infant was 12 months of
age. The experimenter sent each mother two picture books
every four weeks when the infant was between 9 and 12
months of age. The mothers received six picture books in
total, chosen by her from the eight books we provided after
the first recorded free play session. The aim was to motivate
the mother to share books with her infant; thus sending
books the mothers had already used was avoided. The eight
books we provided were suggested by Bookstart Japan
(2006): Jya-Jya Biri-Biri, Otsukisama-Konbanha, Kingyoga Nigeta, Kudamono, Tamago-no-Akachan, Pyo-nn,
Shirokumachan-no-Hotcake, Rhythm. (b) In the control

condition, the mother was given no instructions beyond
being asked to visit the laboratory again when the infant was
12 months.
Procedure Each mother and infant pair visited a university
laboratory. First, they played freely in a play room for a few
minutes and were told that we would be videotaping their
interactions. When they seemed to relax and play actively,
they moved into the next room for the recording sessions.
After the sessions, the mother was asked to fill out a
questionnaire asking her the amount of time she had spent
sharing books and toys respectively with her infant in the
week prior to coming for the session for both the first and
second laboratory visits.
The recorded free play session All mothers and infants
participated in the session when the infants were 9 and 12
months. They were observed while they played on the floor
with a set of toys we provided. The set of toys comprised a
plastic boat, a stuffed monkey, a puzzle, a set of wooden
blocks, a set of shape sorting cubes, and a drawing board, as
was used by Stipek, Recchia, & McClintic (1992).
Before beginning the session, the mother was instructed
to play freely, as at home. After the instructions, the
experimenter moved into a curtained area and sat calmly out
of sight of the pair. The session lasted for about ten minutes.
Coding After the above sessions, the videotaped motherinfant interaction in the recorded free play session was
blindly coded for just ten minutes by the experimenter
sitting out of sight of the pair. In experiment 2, two of the
six categories (Bakeman & Adamson, 1984), passive joint
and coordinated joint, were used to code the mother-infant
interactions.
Twenty-five percent of the sessions were coded
independently by two experimenters. The degree of
agreement was gauged with Pearson’s product-moment
correlation coefficient (r). The rs of passive joint and
coordinated joint were .81 and .87, respectively.

Results
1 Analysis of the time spent on shared book reading and
interaction between mother and infant Three data sets
were missed because the mothers had no time to fill out the
questionnaire after the free play session. The average
amount of time spent in shared book reading and interaction
between mothers and infants in each group with infants of 9
and 12 months is shown in Table 2. The time of interaction
means the total time during which mother shared books or
toys with her infant. Data on the mean amount of time were
analyzed in a 2 (age: 9 and 12 months of age) × 2 (group:
the shared-book and the control group) mixed analysis of
variance (ANOVA), in which age was a within-subject and
group a between-subject variable, after a logarithmic
transformation. In shared book reading time, the result of
ANOVA yielded a significant age × group interaction (F (1,
17) = 5.79, p < .05, ŋp2 = .25). The results of subordinate
tests indicated a significant simple main effect of age in the
shared-book condition group (F (1, 34) = 5.30, p < .05),
meaning that mothers shared books with their infants more

2285

Table 2: The Amount of Time of Shared Book Reading and
Interaction in The Shared-Book and Control Groups.
9 months of age
Group
M
SD
Shared-Book (N = 11)
Shared book
reading
Interaction

12 months of age
M
SD

60.32

100.02

97.82

73.77

1312.14

1005.88

1141.00

769.66

the infants were 12 months than when they were 9 months,
and a significant simple main effect of group when infants
were 12 months (F (1, 40) = 5.67, p < .05), meaning that the
frequency in the shared-book condition was higher than in
the control condition when infants were 12 months. The
results of ANOVA also yielded a significant main effect of
age (F (1, 20) = 3.80, p < .10, ŋp2 = .16), meaning that the
frequency of passive joint significantly increased from when
infants were 9 months to when they were 12 months.
In coordinated joint, the results of ANOVA indicated a
significant main effect of age (F (1, 20) = 13.56, p < .01, ŋp2
= .40), meaning that the coordinated joint frequency
significantly increased from when infants were 9 months to
when they were 12 months.
The frequency of coordinated joint
(time)

often when their infants were 12 months of age than when
they were 9 months, and a significant simple main effect of
group when infants were 12 months of age (F (1,17) = 5.02,
p < .05), meaning that mothers in the shared-book condition
shared books with their infants when they were 12 months
of age more often than in the control condition.
In interaction time, the result of ANOVA revealed no
significant difference anywhere.

Control (N = 8)
Shared book
reading
Interaction

60.63

68.94

35.00

35.04

1976.88

1013.97

1302.50

501.02

Note. There numerical values are presented in minutes per a
week

3.5

3
2.5
2

1.5
1
Shared-Book Group （N = 12)

0.5

Control Group （N = 12)

0
9 months of age

The frequency of passive joint (time)

2 Analysis of the number of times of joint attention
episode The average number of times of passive joint and
coordinated joint in each group when infants were 9 and 12
months of age are presented in Figure 1 and Figure 2,
respectively. The mean numbers of times data were
analyzed in a 2 (age: 9 and 12 months of age) × 2 (group:
the shared-book and the control group) mixed analysis of
variance (ANOVA) where age was within-subject and group
was between-subject variables.
6

5
4
3
2
1

Shared-Book Group （N = 12）
Control Group （N = 12)

0

9 months of age

12 months of age

Figure 1 The Frequency of Passive Joint in Both Groups.

In passive joint, the results of ANOVA indicated a
significant age × group interaction (F (1, 20) = 4.59, p < .05,
ŋp2 = .19). The results of the subordinate tests indicated a
significant simple main effect of age in the shared-book
condition group (F (1, 20) = 8.37, p < .01), meaning that, in
that group, the frequency of passive joint was higher when

12 months of age

Figure 2 The Frequency of Coordinated Joint in Both Groups.

Discussion
The results in Table 2 show that, in the shared-book group,
the amount of time spent in shared book reading
significantly increased and that this time was greater for the
12-month-olds in the shared-book group than in the control
group. The results in Table 2 also show that the amount of
time of whole interaction was no different between groups.
Therefore, our intervention through increasing the shared
book reading time seems to have been successful, but it
doesn’t mean just increased interaction time.
As Figure 1 indicates, passive joint frequency
significantly increased in the shared-book group for the 12month-olds, and the shared-book group’s frequency was
higher than the control group’s. Therefore, it was suggested
that increasing the shared-book reading time increases the
passive joint dimension.
One reason for this is that the child’s joint attention ability
was promoted by the shared book reading. The occurrence
of passive joint allows the child to find and follow his or her
mother’s gaze. As indicated in Experiment 1, passive joint
occurred more often in the shared book context than in other
contexts. The children in shared book reading group had
more opportunities to have passive joint experience and to
be aware of the existence of his or her mother’s gaze or
attention than those in control group, which is foundation of
the ability of joint attention. A child’s ability to follow the
direction of people’s gazes (as in passive joint) develops

2286

rapidly from 10 to 12 months (Corkum & Moore, 1995).
The children in shared book reading group were promoted
to be aware the existence of others’ attention through their
shared book reading activities at home, and it promoted the
development of passive joint and the success of passive
joint was higher at 12 months old.
The results in Figure 2 show that the pairs in both groups
increased in coordinated joint but that there was no
difference between groups. The reason involves the
maturation factor in a child’s coordinated joint attention
ability. As mentioned, passive joint attention ability
develops remarkably between 10 and 12 months (Corkum &
Moore, 1995), but coordinated joint attention ability
develops at around 12 months (Lempers, 1979; Leung &
Rheingold, 1981). Therefore, infants in both groups
developed their abilities dramatically before reaching 12
months, and the study masked the effect of shared book
reading on coordinated joint. In future, we must measure
coordinated joint at younger and older ages than 12 months
to eliminate the influence of the maturation factor.

Conclusion
The results of experiment 1 show that, in the shared book
context, passive and coordinated joint occurred more often
than in the other contexts. This indicates that, in that context,
mothers actively draw their child’s attention to objects but
coordinately follow their child’s gaze and behavior. The
results of experiment 2 suggest that repeated shared book
reading increased the frequency of passive joint attention
not in the shared book context but in the other context. This
indicates that the shared book reading experiment facilitated
the child’s joint attention ability and/or promoted the
mother’s skill at drawing the child’s attention.

References
Bakeman, R., & Adamson, L. B. (1984). Coordinating
attention to people and objects in mother-infant and peerinfant interaction. Child Development, 55, 1278-1289.
Bookstart Japan (2006). The recommended picture books.
<http://www.bookstart.net/fr_news.html>
(25th
of
December, 2006)
Bruner, J. S. (1985). The role of interaction formats in
language acquisition. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Language and
social situations. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Butterworth, G. (1991). The ontogeny and phylogeny of
joint attention. In A. Whiten (Ed.), Natural theories of
mind: Evolution, development, and simulation of
everyday mindreading. Oxford, England: Blackwell. pp.
223-232.
Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1995). Development of joint
visual attention in infants. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham
(Eds.), Joint attention―Its origins and Role in
Development. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
pp. 15-28.
DeBaryshe, B. D. (1993). Joint picture-book reading
correlates of early oral language skill. Journal of Child
Language, 20, 455-461.

Dunham, P. J. & Moore, C. (1995). Current themes in recent
research on joint attention. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham
(Eds.), Joint attention―Its origins and Role in
Development. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
pp. 15-28.
Fletcher, K. L., Perez, A., Hooper, C., & Claussen, A. H.
(2005). Responsiveness and attention during picture-book
reading in 18-month-ols to 24-month-old toddlers at risk.
Early Child Development and Care, 175, 63-83.
Harman, C., Rothbart, M. K., & Posner, M. I. (1997).
Distress and attention interactions in early infancy.
Motivation and Emotion, 21, 27-43.
Karpov, V. Y. (2005). The neo-Vygotskian approach to
child development. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Karrass, J., VanDeventer, C. M., & Braungart-Rieker, M. J.
(2003). Predicting shared parent-child book reading in
infancy. Journal of Family Psychology, 17, 134-146.
Lempers, J. D. (1979). Young children’s production and
comprehension of nonverbal deictic behaviors. The
Journal of Genetic Psychology, 135, 93-102.
Leung, E. H. L., & Rheingold, H. L. (1981). Development
of pointing as a social gesture. Developmental
Psychology, 17, 215-220.
Mundy, P., & Gomes, A. (1998). Individual differences in
joint attention skill development in the second year.
Infant Behavior & Development, 21, 469-482.
Payne, A. C., Whitehurst, G. J., & Angell, A. L. (1994). The
role of home literacy environment in the development of
language ability in preschool children from low-income
families. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 9, 427440.
Stipek, D., Recchia, S., & McClintic, S. (1992). Selfevaluation in young children. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 57.
Sugai, Y., Akita, K., Yokoyama, M., & Nozawa, S. (2010).
A developmental study of pointing during joint picture
book reading: A longitudinal study comparing picture
book reading and building block construction settings.
The Japanese Journal of Developmental Psychology, 21,
46-57.
Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention as social cognition. In
C. Moore & P. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins
and role in development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. pp. 103130.
Tomasello, M., & Farrar, M. J. (1986). Joint attention and
early language. Child Development, 57, 1454-1463.
Wade, B., & Moore, M. (1998). An early start with books:
Literacy and mathematical evidence from a longitudinal
study. Educational Review, 50, 135-145.
Yont, K. M., Snow, C. E., & Vernon-Feagans, L. (2003).
The role of context in mother-child interactions: an
analysis of communicative intents expressed during toy
play and book reading with 12-month-olds. Journal of
Pragmatics, 35, 435-454.

2287

