UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social Networks are Encoded in Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3d88c1j1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Hutchinson, Sterling
Datla, Vivek
Louwerse, Max

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Networks are Encoded in Language
Sterling Hutchinson (schtchns@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Vivek Datla (vvdatla@memphis.edu)
Department of Computer Science / Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Max M. Louwerse (mlouwerse@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Abstract

and exchanges. The formal, sentimental, and interactive
nature of the social relationship can be determined by
assessing a number of factors. For example, relationships
can be predicted in part by the kinship of the individuals. In
families, siblings tend to be close friends. Gender especially
impacts the nature of relationships such that if a member of
the dyad is a female, the relationship is more likely to be
successful (Kim, McHale, & Osgood, 2006; Wright &
Scanlon, 1991). Environment tends to weigh heavily in
terms of whether or not two individuals are likely to build a
relationship together. Proximity has also long been
established as a strong predictor for relationships of all
varieties, with increased proximity leading to increased
likelihood of interpersonal relationships (Ebbesen, Kjos,
Konecni, 1976). In addition, ties between locations (e.g.,
commonly trekked routes) also impact social interaction
(Takhteyev, Gruzd, & Wellman, 2011). Similarly,
familiarity fosters attraction between individuals (Reis,
Manianci, Caprariello, Eastwick, & Finkel, 2011; Zajonc,
1968; 2001). Further, those who share interests, attitudes,
and characteristics are more likely to develop friendships. In
fact, any similarity between two individuals promotes the
formation of a relationship between them (Bryne, 1971),
with important matters (e.g., religious views, political
attitudes) given more weight (Touhey, 1972). Emotions
also impact relationships. When two individuals first
encounter one another, a future friendship becomes more
likely if the interaction is positive, whereas a friendship is
not apt to blossom if the interaction is negative (Farina,
Wheeler, & Mehta, 1991). Even physical features, like smell
or appearance influence the relationships we form (Li,
Moallem, Paller, & Gottfried, 2007).
After social relations are formed, different factors help
these relations to solidify. For instance, Berscheid, Snyder,
and Omoto (1989) found that closeness was significantly
related to satisfaction of established romantic relationships,
as was self-disclosure (Sprecher & Henrick, 2004). Feeney
and Noller (1992) argued that individual differences like
attachment styles impact the duration of social relationships,
as does equity (Hatfield, Traupmann, & Walster, 1978). In
addition, when it comes to group relationships, predicting

Knowledge regarding social information is thought to be
derived from many different sources, such as interviews and
formal relationships. Social networks can likewise be
generated from such external information. Recent work has
demonstrated that statistical linguistic data can explain
findings thought to be explained by external factors alone,
such as perceptual relations. The current study explored
whether language implicitly comprises information that
allows for extracting social networks, by testing the
hypothesis that individuals who are socially related together
are linguistically talked about together, as well as the
hypothesis that individuals who are socially related more are
talked about more. In the first analysis using first-order cooccurrences of names of characters in the Harry Potter novels
we found that an MDS solution correlated with the actual
social network of characters as rated by humans. In a second
study using higher-order co-occurrences, a latent semantic
analysis (LSA) space was trained on all seven Harry Potter
novels. LSA cosine values for all character pairs were
obtained, marking their semantic similarity. Again, an MDS
analysis comparing the LSA data with the actual social
relationships yielded a significant bidimensional regression.
These results demonstrate that linguistic information indeed
encodes social relationship information and show that implicit
information within language can generate social networks.
Keywords: social relations; social networks; social cognition;
statistical linguistic frequencies

Introduction
What is the nature of social relations and how can such
relations be estimated? Social media, such as Facebook,
LinkedIn, and Twitter allow us to answer this question,
based on individuals choosing their friends. However, when
such deliberate decisions are not readily available, how can
social relations be measured and social networks be plotted
otherwise?
Social relations can be interpreted in three non-mutually
exclusive ways (Fischer, 1982). First, they can be formal in
socially recognized roles, such as teacher/student,
employer/employee, or father/son. Second, they can be
sentimental, as when individuals feel close to others.
Finally, a relation can be defined in terms of interactions

491

outcomes becomes more complicated, with members
constantly joining and leaving the group. In fact, Kariam,
Wang, and Leskovec (2012) found that diffusion growth
(i.e., the addition of a new members to a group due to
current relationships with group members) limits group size.
Such findings indicate that the structure of groups is
impacted by various factors.
When these social relationships are formed, how do we
plot these relationships as social networks? Social scientists
typically rely on interviews. For instance, Fischer (1982)
asked respondents who they would share personal
information with, who they worked with, and who visited
their house, etc. in order to plot personal networks in the
San Francisco area. But how could such networks be
represented when participants cannot be interviewed as in
Fischer’s study, or when participants otherwise do not
voluntarily release personal information as in social media?
One answer to this question might lie in language. Perhaps
social networks can also be acquired from and represented
implicitly through linguistic sources.
In several studies we have demonstrated that perceptual
information that is readily available from the world around
us is encoded in language. For instance, Louwerse, Cai, Hu,
Ventura, and Jeuniaux (2006) and Louwerse and Zwaan
(2009) tested whether language encodes geographical
information by correlating statistical linguistic frequencies
between cities with the actual physical distances between
those cities. Louwerse and Zwaan (2009) further tested the
hypothesis by correlating computationally generated
semantic relationship cosine values with the longitude and
latitude of cities in the US. Recently, Louwerse,
Hutchinson, and Cai (in press) found evidence for this
hypothesis with Chinese texts predicting locations in China
and Arabic texts predicting locations in the Middle East.
Louwerse and Benesh (in press) have further extended these
findings by demonstrating that the longitude and latitude of
cities in the fictional Middle Earth can be predicted using
the text of the Lord of the Rings trilogy. The semantic
associations between cities in a corpus accurately estimated
the physical distance between cities, supporting the claim
that language encodes geographical information. A similar
reasoning can perhaps be applied to social relationships. If
the physical distance between individuals is small, their
semantic association might be high.
In a number of studies we have shown that perceptual and
embodied relations are encoded in language (Louwerse,
2011). Perhaps social relations are also encoded in
language, such that computational algorithms can extract
such relations from text. In the current paper we tested two
hypotheses. First, if individuals are socially related together,
they are talked about together. That is, if individuals are in
social proximity, they are likely to be found in textual
proximity. Second, if individuals are socially related more,
they are talked about more.
To test these hypotheses we used the seven fantasy fiction
Harry Potter novels and extracted the semantic relationships

between the characters and compared them with the actual
social relationships between the characters.

The Social Network of Harry Potter
Social networks are structures that map relationships
between individuals. They are complex systems that can be
used to examine, predict, and measure various features
embedded within a network (see Newman, 2003 for an
overview). Nodes represent specific individuals with edges
connecting those individuals and representing relational
information.
There are several ways social networks are produced.
Social networks are often generated manually whereby
individuals are linked to others if they are friends,
colleagues, family members, etc. Individuals are able to
generate their own egocentric social networks representing
those other individuals with whom they share a relationship.
Of course, the individual generating the network will do so
based on the existence and strength of relationships that
were generated by and subject to the factors enumerated
above (Scott, 1988). This is the technique employed by
Muckety LLC (2012). Muckety is a news corporation that
manually generates maps of relationship influence between
relevant individuals in a network. They manually specify
networks of influence where each node is related to
numerous other nodes via specific types of relationships
(e.g., friend, enemy, relative). These relationships are
manually researched using a variety of sources, such as
government agencies and organizations, news publications,
books, organization web sites, and interviews, and are
expectedly costly to produce. Although Muckety generally
generates networks representing current political, financial,
and educational communities they have also constructed a
social network representing each of the relationships
between characters and organizations from all Harry Potter
novels (Rowling, 1998; 1999a; 1999b; 2000; 2003; 2005;
2007).
Although Muckety provided a manually generated
relationship network, edge weights between nodes were not
provided. We thus computed edge weights as follows.
Considering that between any two individuals there exists
approximately four friendship links (Backstrom, Boldi,
Rosa, Uander, & Vigna, 2012), we calculated a value
representing higher-order relationships four degrees away.
First order relationships were assigned a value of 1,
relationships separated by one friendship link (or degree of
separation) were assigned a value of .5, relationships
separated by two friendship links were assigned a value of
.25, relationships separated by three friendship links were
assigned a value of .125, and relationships separated by four
friendship links were assigned a value of .0625. To
illustrate, Harry Potter – Ron Weasley received +1 because
they are directly related as friends. Harry Potter – Percy
Weasley received + .5 because they both share a relationship
with Ron Weasley. Harry Potter – Igor Karkaroff would
receive + .25 because Harry shares a relationship with
someone (e.g., Dumbledore) who shares a relationship with

492

another person (e.g. Snape) who directly shares a
relationship with Igor Karkaroff. This process was repeated
until four friendship links were reached.

were entered in an MDS analysis, using the same
parameters as for the linguistic data. The MDS converged in
25 iterations, with stress = .13.
To do justice to the 2D structure of the Muckety data,
we conducted a bidimensional regression to determine the
relationship between the human data and the statistical
linguistic frequency data. Tobler (1964) and Friedman &
Kohler (2003) introduced bidimensional regressions in order
to compute the mapping of any two planes under
consideration. Whereas in a unidimensional regression each
data point is shifted by intercept and slope, each actual and
predicted value of the dependent variable are presented by a
point in space, whereby vectors represent intercept and
slope.
The bidimensional regression for Muckety and cooccurrence values yielded a moderate correlation, r =.43, p
< .001, n = 56. The moderate correlation can most likely be
attributed to the relatively small size of the corpus, as this
impacts first order co-occurrences most (Louwerse, 2011).
To account for this sparsity problem, it is often recommend
to not so much rely on first-order co-occurrences, but on
higher-order co-occurrences.

Computational Study
The current study investigated whether statistical linguistic
information encodes social relationships by testing the
hypotheses a) if individuals are socially related together,
they talked about together, b) if individuals are socially
related more, they are talked about more. Two
computational algorithms were used to test these
hypotheses. First, we relied on first-order co-occurrence
frequencies of character names. Although first-order
frequencies are easy to compute, they also come at a price.
Due to sparsity problems, they can sometimes give a biased
result (Louwerse, 2011). We therefore also used a higherorder co-occurrence algorithm, latent semantic analysis
(LSA; Landauer, McNamara, Dennis & Kintsch, 2007).
The seven Harry Potter books were converted to one
electronic document used for the research purposes
described in this study only. The document consisted of a
total of 1,277,991, words. The electronic document was then
filtered and all stop words (grammatical items) and
punctuation marks were removed, resulting in a final file
with 517,501 words and 21,423 paragraphs.

Higher-order co-occurrences
To compute the higher-order computational relationship
strength values we employed Latent semantic analysis
(LSA). Latent Semantic Analysis captures semantic
relations by mapping initially meaningless words into a
continuous high dimensional semantic space (Landauer,
McNamara, Dennis & Kintsch, 2007). More specifically, a
first-order process associates stimuli (words) and the
contexts they occur in (paragraphs). Stimuli are paired based
on their contiguity or co-occurrence. These local
associations are next transformed by means of Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD) into a small number of
dimensions (typically 300) yielding more unified knowledge
representations by removing noise.
In the current study the input was the electronic version of
the Harry Potter novels, segmented into paragraphs, from
which a large term-document was created. For example, if
there are m terms in n paragraphs, a matrix of A =
(fijxG(j)xL(i,j))mxn is obtained. The value of fij is a function
of the integer that represents the number of times term i
appears in document j, L(i; j) is a local weighting of term i
in document j, and G(j) is the global weighting for term j.
Such a weighting function is used to differentially treat
terms and documents to reflect knowledge that is beyond the
collection of the documents. The large matrix of A has,
however, much redundant information, for instance because
not every word occurs in every paragraph. Singular Value
Decomposition reduces this noise by decomposing the
matrix A into three matrices A =UΣV’; where U is an m by
m square matrix and V is an n by n square matrix, with Σ
being an m by n diagonal matrix with singular values on the
diagonal. By removing dimensions corresponding to smaller
singular values, the representation of each word is reduced
as a smaller vector with each word now becomes a weighted

First-order co-occurrences
In order to determine the first-order co-occurrences of
character names, we computed the co-occurrence of all
combinations of 56 character names in the Harry Potter
novels with name pair in a five-word window. To avoid any
biases with single word and two-word names (Harry versus
Harry Potter), we selected the names by which each
character was most frequently called while keeping the least
ambiguous (e.g., Ron Weasley and Arthur Weasley are both
referred to as Weasley, we therefore selected the names Ron
and Arthur).
Although Muckety included 263 nodes (including
characters, organizations, and locations), we were only
interested in character relationships. We selected 56
characters for the analysis to keep the analysis from
becoming too computationally expensive, as each character
was paired with every other character. Characters were
included on the basis of their prominence in the Harry Potter
series, i.e., obscure characters were excluded from the
analysis as they shared relationships with the fewest other
characters.
These 56 x 56 frequency combinations were entered in an
MDS analysis using the SMACOF algorithm. The
SMACOF algorithm minimizes the sum of squares of the
error by optimizing the fit to the distances (as opposed to
the squared distances) and is thus preferred to ALSCAL
(Young, 1985). We used default criteria for SMACOF, with
the maximum iterations = 100, stress convergence = .0001
and the minimum stress value = .0001. Co-occurrence
frequencies converged in 10 iterations with stress = .16.
Similarly, the Muckety scores for all 56 x 56 relations

493

Figure 1: MDS loadings of Muckety scores (x-axis) and LSA higher-order values (y-axis) for the first dimension (Figure 1A)
and second dimension (Figure 1B)
vector on 300 dimensions, with only the most important
dimensions that correspond to larger singular values being
kept (Landauer et al., 2007). The semantic relationship
between characters can then be estimated by taking the
cosine between two vectors.
As before, the 56 x 56 cosine matrix was submitted to
MDS, which converged in 11 iterations with stress = .15.
When we compared the two-dimensional loadings of the
Muckety scores and the LSA scores in a bidimensional
regression, we found, somewhat surprisingly, a weak
correlation, r =.23, p = .08, n = 56. Yet when LSA values
were allowed to populate a three dimensional configuration
(stress = .07, convergence in 20 iterations), the bidimensional regression between Muckety scores and the
second and third dimension of the LSA MDS yielded a
more moderate (and significant) correlation, r = .30, p =
.02, n = 56.
Upon visual inspection of the MDS plot, the first
dimension did not explain social relations, but identified an
outlier in the data. The character Ginny Weasley had more
direct relationships than any of the other characters (except
Harry Potter), yet the frequency with which Ginny occurred
in the text was quite low. To illustrate, the word Harry
occurred 21,781 times in the text whereas the word Ginny
only occurred 762 times. After the removal of this outlier
we again ran an MDS with two dimensions for both LSA
(stress = .13, convergence in 12 iterations) and Muckety
values (stress = .09, convergence in 33 iterations) (see
Figure 1). The bidimensional regression now yielded a
strong correlation between LSA values and Muckety values,
r = .76, p < .001, n =55.
The Muckety standard and the LSA estimates are
illustrated in Figures 1A and 1B. As both figures show, the
correlation between Muckety and LSA loadings are
relatively strong. The correlation between Muckety and
LSA values for the first dimension is represented in Figure

1A, r = .56, and the correlation between Muckety and LSA
values for the second dimension is represented in Figure 1B,
r = .76.
Both the first-order and the higher-order co-occurrence
results demonstrate that it is possible to extract a social
network from language using statistical linguistic
frequencies of names of individuals.

Number of Relationships
In this study we also test the hypothesis that characters who
were socially related more are talked about more. We
therefore computed the frequency of the 56 character used
in the previous study. Next, we calculated how many
relationships each character had in the Muckety network.
For instance, Harry Potter shared direct relationships with
37 other characters whereas Luna Lovegood only shared
direct relationships with 9 other characters (see Table 1).
Name frequency and number of relationships correlated
strongly, r = .72, p < .001, n = 56, suggesting that
individuals who have a large social network appear more in
the text.

Discussion
The current study aimed to determine if language encodes
social relationship information. The reported results suggest
computationally derived character pair values can explain
human relationship strength ratings. If linguistic
representations did not encode relationship structures we
would have expected our computationally derived
relationship strength values not to predict the human scores.
They do, however, significantly predict the human Muckety
relationship network scores, suggesting that social
information is encoded in language, supporting the
hypotheses that individuals who are socially related together
are talked about together, and those who are socially related
more are talked about more.

494

Table 1: Number of Relationships (Rel) and Frequency (Freq) of Character Names
Character Name
Aberforth Dumbledore
Alastor Moody
Albus Dumbledore
Amos Diggory
Argus Filch
Arthur Weasley
Augusta Longbottom
Bellatrix Lestrange
Bill Weasley
Buckbeak
Cedric Diggory
Charlie Weasley
Cho Chang
Cornelius Fudge
Dobby
Dolores Umbridge
Draco Malfoy
Dudley Dursley
Fleur Delacour

Rel
6
6
16
4
3
15
3
16
13
3
9
12
9
2
6
5
16
4
6

Freq
78
874
3981
54
335
171
2
250
365
131
813
165
261
651
613
663
1719
477
424

Character Name
Fred Weasley
George Weasley
Ginny Weasley
Goyle
Harry Potter
Hermione Granger
Igor Karkaroff
James Potter
Kingsley Shacklebolt
Kreacher
Lavender Brown
Lily Potter
Lucius Malfoy
Luna Lovegood
Madam Hooch
Madame Maxime
Mcgonagall
Molly Weasley
Mrs Norris

We found evidence supporting both hypotheses. For the
first hypothesis we used first-order co-occurrences which
yielded an acceptable bidimensional regression coefficient.
A higher-order co-occurrence like LSA yielded a high
bidimensional regression coefficient, likely because its
reduced sensitivity to sparsity problems of the linguistic
data.
Even though narrative fictions offers a simulation of the
social world around us (Mar & Oatley, 2008), the main
conclusion of this study can of course be extended to the
non-fictional world. We have already demonstrated this for
geographical estimates for cities in the United States using
newspapers (Louwerse & Zwaan, 2009), and geographical
estimates for cities in the fictional Middle Earth using Lord
of the Rings (Louwerse & Benesh, in press). We therefore
expect that the method for the fictional Harry Potter novels
can be extended to non-fictional texts. For instance, by
using newspaper articles social relations among political
leaders can be determined. By using blogs and tweets social
networks of individuals in these texts can be estimated.
In addition to this application of the conclusion in this
study, another important conclusion for the cognitive
sciences is that language implicitly encodes information. In
other work we have established this for geographical
information (Louwerse & Benesh, in press; Louwerse,
Hutchinson, & Cai, in press; Louwerse & Zwaan, 2009),
bodily information (Tillman, Datla, Hutchinson, &
Louwerse, in press) and other perceptual information
(Louwerse, 2008; Louwerse & Connell, 2011). The current
study shows that this can be extended to social information.
Language has evolved such that statistical linguistic
frequencies can capture the social relationships in the world

Rel
16
16
19
3
37
13
3
10
4
3
5
10
10
9
3
3
5
15
2

Freq
1075
898
792
278
21781
6132
321
186
119
305
286
119
148
401
52
201
818
83
64

Character Name
Narcissa Malfoy
Neville Longbottom
Nymphadora Tonks
Padma Patil
Parvati Patil
Percy Weasley
Peter Pettigrew
Petunia Dursley
Remus Lupin
Ron Weasley
Rubeus Hagrid
Severus Snape
Sirius Black
Slughorn
Trelawney
Vernon Dursley
Viktor Krum
Vincent Crabbe

Rel
8
10
9
5
5
7
8
5
12
17
12
15
15
5
5
4
6
7

Freq
75
928
243
35
168
512
163
671
841
9144
2342
2172
2314
425
284
927
561
268

around us, in the fictional world, and even in the wizarding
world.

References
Backstrom, L., Boldi, P., Rosa., Ugander., & Vigna, S.
(2012). Four degrees of separation. Retrieved January 31,
2012, from the arXiv database.
Berscheid, E., Snyder, M., & Omoto, A. M. (1989). The
relationship closeness inventory: Assessing the closeness
of interpersonal realtionships. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 57, 792-807.
Byrne, D. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Ebbesen, E. B., Kjos, G. L., & Konecni, V. J. (1976).
Spatial ecology: Its effects on the choice of friends and
enemies. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 12,
505–518.
Farina, A., Wheeler, D. S., & Mehta, S. (1991). The impact
of an unpleasant and demeaning social interaction.
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 10, 351–371.
Feeney, J. A., & Noller, P. (2011). Attachment style and
romantic love: Relationship dissolution. Australian
Journal of Psychology, 44, 69–74.
Fischer, C. S. (1982). To dwell among friends: Personal
networks in town and city. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Friedman, A., & Kohler, B. (2003). Bidimensional
regression: A method for assessing the configural
similarity of cognitive maps and other two-dimensional
data. Psychological Methods, 8, 468–491.
Hatfield, E., Traupmann, J., & Walster, G. W.
(1978). Equity and extramarital sexuality. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 7, 127-141. Reprinted in M. Cook & G.
Wilson (Eds.). (1979). Love and attraction: An

495

international
conference.
(pp.309323). Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Kariam, S., Wang, D., & Leskovec, J. (2012). The life and
death of online groups: Predicting group growth and
longevity. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining.
Kim, J., McHale, S., Osgood, D., & Crouter, A. (2006).
Longitudinal course and family correlates of sibling
relationships from childhood through adolescence. Child
Development, 77, 1746-1761.
Landauer, T., McNamara, D. S., Dennis, S., & Kintsch, W.
(Eds.) (2007). Handbook of latent semantic analysis.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Li, W., Mollallem, I., Paller, K. A., & Gottfried, J. A.
(2007). Subliminal smells can guide social preferences.
Psychological Science, 18, 1044-1049.
Louwerse, M. M. (2008). Embodied representations are
encoded in language. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
15, 838–844.
Louwerse, M. M. (2011). Symbol interdependency in
symbolic and embodied cognition. TopiCS in Cognitive
Science, 3, 273-302.
Louwerse, M.M. & Benesh, N. (in press). Representing
spatial structure through maps and language: Lord of the
Rings encodes the spatial structure of Middle Earth.
Cognitive Science.
Louwerse, M. M., Cai, Z., Hu, X., Ventura, M., & Jeuniaux,
P. (2006). Cognitively inspired natural-language based
knowledge representations: Further explorations of latent
semantic analysis. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Tools, 15, 1021–1039
Louwerse, M. M., & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
Linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science, 35, 381-398.
Louwerse, M. M., Hutchinson, S., & Cai, Z. (in press). The
Chinese route argument: Predicting the longitude and
latitude of cities in China and the Middle East using
statistical linguistic frequencies. Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Louwerse, M. M. & Zwaan, R.A. (2009). Language encodes
geographical information. Cognitive Science, 33, 51-73.
Mar, R. A. & Oatley, K. (2008). The function of fiction is
the
abstraction
and
simulation
of
social
experience. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3,
173–192.
Muckety LLC. (2012), Harry Potter Series [Graphical
Interactive Relationship Influence Map]. Retrieved from
http://www.muckety.com/Harry-Potter-series/5017817.m
uckety
Newman, M. E. J. (2003). The structure and function of
complex networks. SIAM review, 45, 167–256.
Reis, H. T., Maniaci, M. R., Caprariello, P. A., Eastwick, P.
W., & Finkel, E. J. (2011). Familiarity does indeed

promote attraction in live interaction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 557–570.
Rowling, J. K. (1998). Harry Potter and the sorcerer’s
stone. New York, NY: Scholastic Books.
Rowling, J. K. (1999a). Harry Potter and the chamber of
secrets. New York, NY: Scholastic Books.
Rowling, J. K. (1999b). Harry Potter and the prisoner of
Azkaban. New York, NY: Scholastic Books.
Rowling, J. K. (2000). Harry Potter and the goblet of fire.
New York, NY: Scholastic Books.
Rowling, J. K. (2003). Harry Potter and the order of the
phoenix. New York, NY: Scholastic Books.
Rowling, J. K. (2005). Harry Potter and the half blood
Prince. New York, NY: Scholastic Books.
Rowling, J. K. (2007). Harry Potter and the deathly
hallows. New York, NY: Scholastic Books.
Scott, J. (1988). Social network analysis. Sociology, 22,
109–127.
Sprecher, S., & Hendrick, S.S. (2004). Self-disclosure in
intimate relationships: Associations with individual and
relationship characteristics over time. Journal of Social &
Clinical Psychology, 23, 857-877
Takhteyev, Y., Gruzd, A., & Wellman, B. (2011).
Geography of twitter networks. Social Networks.
Tillman, R., Datla, V., Hutchinson, S., & Louwerse, M. M.
(in press). From head to toe: Embodiment through
statistical linguistic frequencies. Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Tobler, W. R. (1964). Bidimensional regression.
Geographical Analysis, 26, 187–212.
Touhey. J . C. (1972) Comparison of two dimensions of
attitude similarity on heterosexual attraction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 23, 8-10.
Wright, P. H., & Scanlon, M. B. (1991). Gender role
orientations and friendship: Some attenuation, but gender
differences abound. Sex Roles, 24, 551-566.
Young, F.W. (1985) Multidimensional scaling. In S. Kotz,
& N. L. Johnson (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Statistical
Sciences, (Vol. 5, pp. 649-659). New York, NY: Wiley.
Zajonc, R.B. (2001). Mere exposure: A gateway to the
subliminal. Current
Directions
in
Psychological
Science, 10, 224-228.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 9, 1-27.

496

