UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Speech Act Recognition in Conversation: Experimental Evidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/94n80472

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Gisladottir, Rosa
Chwila, Dorothee
Schriefers, Herbert
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Speech Act Recognition in Conversation: Experimental Evidence
Rosa S. Gisladottir (rosa.gisladottir@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Dorothee J. Chwilla (d.chwilla@donders.ru.nl)
Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Herbert Schriefers (h.schriefers@donders.ru.nl)
Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Stephen C. Levinson (stephen.levinson@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Abstract
Recognizing the speech acts in our interlocutors’ utterances is
a crucial prerequisite for conversation. However, it is not a
trivial task given that the form and content of utterances is
frequently underspecified for this level of meaning. In the
present study we investigate participants’ competence in
categorizing speech acts in such action-underspecific
sentences and explore the time-course of speech act
inferencing using a self-paced reading paradigm. The results
demonstrate that participants are able to categorize the speech
acts with very high accuracy, based on limited context and
without any prosodic information. Furthermore, the results
show that the exact same sentence is processed differently
depending on the speech act it performs, with reading times
starting to differ already at the first word. These results
indicate that participants are very good at “getting” the speech
acts, opening up a new arena for experimental research on
action recognition in conversation.
Keywords: Action; Speech acts; Implicature; Pre-Offers;
Conversation Analysis; Self-paced reading.

Introduction
Knowing a language doesn’t just require syntax or
semantics, but the ability to extract speech acts from our
interlocutors’ utterances. This is crucial in conversation,
since all actions – be they non-verbal or verbal – have
implications for how we should respond (Schegloff, 2007):
A greeting calls for another greeting, an offer is followed by
an acceptance or declination. Scholars in Conversation
Analysis were the first to reveal the systematicity of courses
of action in turn-taking (e.g. Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson,
1974; Schegloff, 2007), moving away from the single act as
the fundamental unit of analysis – the perspective of Speech
Act theory (Austin, 1976; Searle, 1969) – to the role of
sequential context. One of the main observations from this
literature is that turns tend to come in pairs of actions and in
such adjacency pairs the first (pair) part sets up powerful
constraints on what type of action can follow (Schegloff,
2007). Moreover, not all actions have equal status.
Reflecting an orientation towards preference structure,
dispreferred actions, such as rejections to invitations, tend to

be delivered with inter-turn gaps, turn-initial delay, hedges
or other discourse markers (uhm, well) (Schegloff, 2007),
while preferred actions (e.g. acceptances) do not. This
suggests that conversationalists not only monitor speech for
actions but also orient to sequential constraints.
Given that action is the sine qua non of conversation, how
do we map speech acts onto our interlocutors‘ utterances,
bridging the gap between sentence meaning and action? In
some cases this is a simple matter. In the utterance Please
close the door, for instance, the imperative mood and the
adverb please function as “special markers” or
“illocutionary force indicating devices” (Levinson, 1983;
Clark, 1979; Schegloff, 2007) that clearly indicate this is a
request. In most utterances, however, the absence of such
dedicated vocabulary leaves the propositional content
underspecified for the speech act level of meaning. As an
example, an assertion like I have a credit card can deliver
different speech acts, depending on context. When
responding to a question from our interlocutor (e.g. How are
you going to pay for the ticket?), I have a credit card
functions as an information-giving answer. If it follows an
offer of payment (e.g. I can lend you money for the ticket), it
is used to indirectly decline it. In this case it could be
characterized as an indirect speech act, in which “one
illocutionary act is performed indirectly by way of
performing another” (Searle, 1975). In yet another
interchange, if our interlocutor has expressed the need or
desire for some means of payment (e.g. I don’t have any
money to pay for the ticket), the same statement of
ownership can function as a prelude to an offer, called a
Pre-Offer in Conversation Analysis (Schegloff, 1988;
Schegloff, 2007). In all three cases, the form and semantic
content is underspecified for the action such that the full
import of the utterance I have a credit card can only be
ascertained relative to the context, in this case the prior
speech act in the conversation.
There is some psychological evidence that people do
extract speech act information online. Using a recognition
probe task and lexical decision task, Holtgraves (2008a)
addressed whether the comprehension of a sentence like

1596

Don’t forget to go to your dentist (an “implicit speech act”)
entails automatic activation of the speech act performed
(reminding). He found that the recognition of such speech
acts is automatic, both in written and spoken utterances. A
further study (Holtgraves, 2008b) suggests that people
recognize and retain in long-term memory the actions that
people perform with their utterances. In line with Speech
Act Theory and Conversation Analysis, Holtgraves (2008a)
argues that “in conversation there is an action dimension, a
dimension that does not exist for isolated sentences or texts.
Speakers are usually constructing utterances with the
intention to perform certain actions, and with the intention
of having the recipient recognize those actions” (p. 640).
Clearly, action recognition crosscuts research on topics
such as communicative intention and implicature in
Pragmatics (Grice, 1975; Levinson, 1983; Sperber &
Wilson, 2004), the study of indirect speech acts (e.g. Gibbs,
1979; Clark, 1979; Clark, 1996; Coulson & Lovett, 2010)
and discourse processing (e.g. Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso,
1994) in Psycholinguistics, as well as a more general
discussion of action and theory of mind in the cognitive
sciences. There is limited experimental research, however,
on speech act recognition in spoken dialogue. The
experimental approach used in Holtgraves (2008a, 2008b)
involves artificial tasks (lexical decision and recognition
probe) and does not unravel the time-course of action
recognition. The puzzle remains: how is it that we can
extract speech acts from utterances so efficiently, as
evidenced by extraordinarily fast turn transitions (Sacks et
al., 1974; Stivers et al., 2009; Levinson, in press)? To
address this we are currently planning an Event-Related
Potential (ERP) study on action recognition in auditorily
presented dialogues to track the time course of action
comprehension in real time. The experiment presented in
this paper was designed to assess the feasibility of such a
study.

The Experiment
The aim of the present experiment was to investigate
participants’ competence in identifying speech acts in
action-underspecific sentences and explore the time-course
of speech act inferencing. To do this we presented target
sentences using the self-paced reading paradigm and asked
participants to categorize the speech acts and rate how sure
they were in the categorization. In the domain of
Pragmatics, self-paced reading has been used to investigate
the processing of phenomena such as scalar implicatures
(Breheny, Katsos, & Williams, 2006), with longer reading
times (in comparison to a control) interpreted as indicating
the generation of an inference. The self-paced reading
paradigm allows us to obtain information on the word-byword processing of action-underspecific utterances, thereby
exploring the time-course of speech act inferencing.
The stimuli in our study consist of a context sentence
which is presented auditorily, followed by a target sentence
designed to be interpreted as an Answer, Pre-Offer or
Declination depending on the context (see Table 1). These

actions are commonly found in conversation and their form
and function has been described in the conversation analytic
literature.
Table 1: Examples of stimuli in Dutch and translations.
Condition

Context

Target Sentence

Answer

Hoe ga je voor het
ticket betalen?
How are you going
to pay for the ticket?
Ik kan je wat geld
lenen voor het ticket.
I can lend you
money for the ticket.
Ik heb geen geld om
het ticket te betalen.
I don’t have any
money to pay for the
ticket.

Ik heb een
creditcard.
I have a credit
card.
Ik heb een
creditcard.
I have a credit
card.
Ik heb een
creditcard.
I have a credit
card.

Declination

Pre-Offer

The Answers in our study complete an adjacency pair by
responding to a wh-question in the first turn. This condition
serves as a benchmark for inferencing in the reading time
analysis since the gap between literal (sentence) meaning
and the action intended is the smallest. Moreover, since the
other actions in the study can superficially be viewed as
Answers, because they respond to the prior turn, this
condition provides a check on whether participants go
beyond a simple characterization of the sentences and
identify the correct speech act.
The Declinations satisfy an adjacency pair by responding
to a proposal (an offer or invitation) in the first turn, but
require a somewhat complex inference to infer the action.
Conversation analysts have noted that, at least in English,
such indirect responses “need not be polite, nor unclear or
obfuscatory. For certain activities, in specific sequential
locations, responding indirectly may be the most efficient
form of communication,” (Walker, Drew, & Local, 2011, p.
17).
The third action is the Pre-Offer, which is a type of presequence. Pre-sequences are preliminary to, or project, the
main course of action - in this case an offer (Schegloff,
2007; Schegloff, 1988), demonstrated in the following
example:
Bookstore, 2.1: 107 (modified from Schegloff, 2007, p. 35)
1 A:
I’m gonna buy a thermometer though
because I
2 B:
but
3 A:
think she’s got a temperature.
4 C: Pre-Offer we have a thermometer.
5 A: Go-ahead yih do?
6 C: Offer
wanta use it?
7 A: Acceptance yeah.

1597

Only if the response to the Pre-Offer is positive (line 5) is
the offer put forward (line 6). This strategy allows
conversationalists to check whether an offer would be
welcome or not, preventing them from embarrassment that
would arise if an offer were to be rejected.
Crucially, the Pre-Offers differ from the Answers and
Declinations in that they do not complete an adjacency pair
but rather open up or project a continuation of the sequence
(with the response and possibly a subsequent offer). By
including Pre-Offers in our study we can not only
investigate the impact of sequential context on processing,
but also explore whether the distinction between projection
(Pre-Offers) and a backward directed inference
(Declinations) is borne out in reading times.
Given that the same utterance can be used as an Answer,
Declination or Pre-offer depending on the sequential
context, in this study we investigate: 1) Can participants
reliably categorize action-underspecific speech acts? 2)
Does the time-course of speech act inferencing differ for
these actions as reflected in self-paced reading times? Due
to the exploratory nature of the study and lack of research in
this area – in particular on Pre-Offers – we do not make
specific predictions regarding reading times. However, we
speculate that the reading time pattern of Pre-Offers and
Declinations may differ relative to Answers, based on the
structural properties described above.

Methods
Participants 39 native speakers of Dutch were recruited
from the student population in Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Participants were paid 8 euros for participating.
Materials and Design The stimulus materials were 126
target sentences, presented visually one word at a time (selfpaced reading), which were preceded by 378 auditory
context-setting utterances that biased the interpretation of
the target as an Answer, Pre-offer or Declination. To
maintain a balance of variety and control in the stimulus
materials, half of the target sentences started with the
pronoun “I” (Dutch ik) and the verb “have” (heb), e.g. “I
have a credit card”. The other half was more varied
(including simple utterances like “I am going to the market”
and “My brother is a mechanic”). We varied word-length to
make the stimuli as natural as possible, but constructed the
target sentences such that the final word is critical for
understanding the propositional content of the utterance
(irrespective of speech act level meaning). In line with
reported characteristics of indirect replies (Walker et al.,
2011), the target sentences do not involve ellipsis or
pronominalization.
To maintain consistency in the way the Declinations and
Pre-offers are connected to their contexts, we ensured that
there is at least one clear implicated premise and an
implicated conclusion for each sentence-pair: when
presented with an utterance that is indirect, the hearer needs
to access an implicated premise and combine it with the

proposition expressed to derive the implicated conclusion
(Blakemore, 1992). 1
In order to get a measure of the semantic relatedness
between context and target sentence in each condition,
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) values (Landauer, Foltz, &
Laham, 1998) were computed for the English translation of
each sentence pair using document-to-document mode with
“General reading up to 1st year of college” as the semantic
space. The average LSA values for each condition were:
Answers 0.13, Declinations 0.32, and Pre-Offers 0.42 (the
higher the value, the more semantic similarity).
The stimuli were translated from English into Dutch and
checked by two native speakers of Dutch. The sentences
were recorded by four native speakers. The recordings of
the target sentences were not used in this experiment, since
they are presented visually in self-paced reading.
The stimuli were pseudo-randomized and balanced across
three lists, such that participants saw each target sentence
only once, in one context. After each trial (sentence pair),
participants were given a comprehension and rating task.
They were first asked to indicate what the second speaker
was doing with his response and were given the options of
Answering, Offering and Declining (D. antwoorden,
aanbieden, weigeren). Since Pre-Offer is not a colloquial
term, the broader term of offering was chosen. Participants
were then asked to rate how sure they were in their
categorization decision on a rating scale from 1 (very
uncertain) to 7 (very certain). The purpose of the rating task
was to assess the feasibility of using the items in future
studies.
Procedure Participants were given instructions that
included one example of each action. They were instructed
to imagine that they were listening to a conversation
between friends or colleagues, and to read the sentences as
quickly as possible, but not too quickly as they would have
to “judge the underlying meaning” of the sentences. They
were then seated in a chair in front of a monitor in a
soundproof experimental booth. On each trial the context
sentence was played while a small picture of a loudspeaker
was presented at the middle of the screen. 500 msec after
the end of the spoken sentence participants were presented
with the target sentence in a moving window self-paced
reading format (Just, Carpenter, & Woolley, 1982). A series
of lines appeared on the screen representing each word in
the target sentence. When participants clicked on the mouse
the first word appeared and upon subsequent button presses
a new word was shown, while the previous word was again
replaced by a line. When participants clicked the mouse
after the last word had been shown, they were presented
with the action categorization question, immediately
followed by the certainty rating. There were 126
experimental trials, preceded by a brief practice session.
1
In the dialogue (A): I can lend you money for the ticket. – (B):
I have a credit card, the implicated premise is that a credit card can
pay for things, including tickets. The implicated conclusion is that
speaker B does not need A’s help with paying for the ticket.

1598

Table 3: Mean reading times in msec.

Results
Accuracy Overall accuracy (number of correct responses in
the action categorization question divided by the total
number of responses) was very high, 95.8 percent. Accuracy
percentages (summarized in Table 2) were very similar
across conditions. A repeated measures ANOVA revealed
that accuracy was not affected by action [F(2, 76) = .07, p =
.93].

First
Word
Verb

Final
Word

Table 2: Accuracy and mean certainty ratings.
Accuracy
Answer
Declination
Pre-Offer

96.0%
96.0%
95.6%

Certainty Ratings
Mean
SD
6.60
0.36
6.50
0.39
6.35
0.51

Word 2

Entire
Sentence

Ratings Participants rated how certain they were in
answering the action categorization question on a scale from
1 (very uncertain) to 7 (very certain). The overall mean
certainty rating was 6.48. Mean certainty ratings for each
condition are summarized in Table 2. We conducted a
repeated-measures ANOVA on the mean ratings and found
an effect of action [F(1.42, 53.99) = 11.20, p < .01
(Greenhouse-Geisser)]. Pairwise comparisons using Sidak
adjustment for multiple comparisons revealed that PreOffers (M=6.35, SD=.51) had lower ratings than Answers
(M=6.60, SD=.36), [p < .01], and Pre-Offers were also rated
lower than Declinations (M=6.50, SD=.39), [p < .01]. The
comparison between Answers and Declinations was not
significant, [p = .15].
Reading Times The time between button presses was
recorded as the reading time for each word. Extreme values
below 100 msec were excluded, as well as values above
1200 msec for non-final words and above 7000 msec for
final words (in total 12 outliers). Since online speech
comprehension and the subsequent off-line categorization
task tap different types of information, error trials were not
excluded from the reading time analysis.
Mean reading times for the first word, the verb and the
final word of the target sentences were used for the analysis,
in addition to the mean reading time of the entire sentence
and mean reading time per word (sentence reading time
divided by number of words). A repeated-measures
ANOVA was carried out to examine the effect of action
(Answer, Pre-Offer, Declination) on reading times and posthoc comparisons were performed using the Sidak
adjustment. The conditions started to differ already at the
first word, with mean reading time being affected by the
action manipulation [F(1.69, 64.26) = 5.24, p = .01
(Greenhouse-Geisser)]. Post-hoc comparisons revealed that
first word reading times in Pre-Offers (M=259, SD=65)
were longer than in Answers (M=251, SD=56), [p = .03],
and Pre-Offers tended to be longer than Declinations
(M=252, SD=57), [p = .06]. The comparison between
Answers and Declinations was not significant [p =.98].

Mean
RT
SD
Mean
RT
SD
Mean
RT
SD
Mean
RT
SD
Mean
RT
SD

Answer
251

Declination
252

Pre-Offer
259

56
260

57
267

65
265

60
564

69
622

70
593

384
339

447
354

412
352

135
1459

146
1528

147
1501

584

652

603

At the verb, there was also an effect of action on mean
reading time [F(2, 76) = 3.41, p = .04]. Pairwise
comparisons revealed that verb RTs in Declinations
(M=267, SD=69) were longer than in Answers (M=260,
SD=60), [p = .048]. The comparison between Pre-Offers
and Answers [p = .25] was not significant, nor between PreOffers and Declinations [p = .80].
At the final word, mean reading times also differed
between actions, [F(1.63, 61.83) = 4.28, p = .03
(Greenhouse-Geisser)]. Pairwise comparisons on the final
RTs revealed that Declinations (M=622, SD=447) were
marginally significantly longer than Answers (M=564,
SD=384) [p = .052], while there were no differences
between Answers and Pre-Offers [p = .17], nor Pre-Offers
and Declinations [p = .41].
An ANOVA on mean RTs per word revealed an effect of
action [F(2, 76) = 5.73, p = .01]. Declinations (M=354,
SD=146) took longer than Answers (M=339, SD=135) [p =
.02], and Pre-Offers (M=352, SD=147) took longer than
Answers (M=339, SD=135), [p = .04]. There was no
difference between Pre-Offers and Declinations [p = .95].
Finally, although the RTs for the entire sentence differed
descriptively, these differences were not reliable [F(2, 76) =
2.73, p = .09].

Discussion
The present experiment demonstrates that participants
categorize the speech acts of sentences whose form and
semantic content is underspecified for action with very high
accuracy (95.8%). They are able to do so based on limited
context (the prior speech act) and without any prosodic
information in the target sentence. Importantly, the accuracy
was the same for all three actions (Answer, Declination,
Pre-Offer). If participants had processed the target sentences
superficially, ignoring the speech act content, they could
have categorized Declinations and Pre-Offers as Answers.

1599

2

RT of the entire sentence divided by number of words.

This is the case since the Dutch term for answering
(antwoorden) also means to respond and all three speech
acts can superficially be seen as responses. This should have
resulted in lower accuracy for Pre-Offers and Declinations
vis-à-vis Answers. The high accuracy rate across actions
shows that participants go beyond a simple characterization
of the target sentences as responses and “get” the correct
action. Participants were also very confident in categorizing
all actions and rated the certainty of their categorizations on
average 6.48 (out of 7). These results provide further
support that participants orient to the action content of
sentences. 3
The reading time results demonstrate that the exact same
sentence is processed differently depending on the speech
act it performs. In all conditions the reading time increased
throughout the sentence, but Declinations and Pre-Offers
had different trajectories relative to Answers, which had
shortest RTs on all measures. Reading times differed
already at the first word, with first word RTs in Pre-Offers
being longer than in both Answers and Declinations. It
should be pointed out that descriptively the difference
between the means is small and standard deviation large.
Event-related brain potentials might be a more sensitive
measure to reveal processing differences at early positions
in the sentence. At the verb and the final word however,
RTs were longest in the Declination condition.
What could explain the different reading times across
conditions? One possible source of difference is the amount
of inferencing required. In text processing, reading times are
predicted to be the longest for words in the text that generate
“many online inferences” (Graesser, Swamer, & Baggett,
1996). The fact that Declinations have the longest RTs at the
final word may be because more inferences (e.g. Gricean
implicatures) are needed to relate the sentence to the prior
context.
Another source for differences may be the kind of
inferencing required. Given the exploratory nature of this
study we did not make predictions regarding reading time
results. However, based on differences in sequence
organization, we speculated that Declinations and PreOffers would exhibit different reading time patterns relative
to Answers. While recognizing the speech act in a
Declination requires computation of how the utterance can
be understood as the second pair part to the prior proposal,
identifying a Pre-Offer involves knowing that an offer will
follow in the sequence. Because Declinations close an
adjacency pair, they do not heavily constrain the relevant
next action. Pre-Offers, on the other hand, call for either go3
Note that the certainty ratings were lower for Pre-offers (6.35)
than Answers (6.60) and Declinations (6.50). Since “pre-offer” is
not a colloquial term, participants were instructed to categorize
Pre-offers as “offering”. The ratings may reflect participants’
awareness that the speech acts they were instructed to label as
“offering” are preparatory to, or project, offers and in most cases
do not constitute offers in themselves. However, for the purpose of
this study it was sufficient that participants could identify speech
acts as belonging to one of the defined categories.

ahead (e.g. you do?) and a subsequent offer, or a blocking
response (that’s ok). Pre-Offers, therefore, invite stronger
predictive inferences about the next speech act. The
distinction between an inference based on a backward
bridge to the prior turn in an adjacency pair and an inference
based on forward projection of a sequence is akin to the
difference between causal antecedent and causal
consequence inferences in text processing (e.g. Magliano,
Baggett, Johnson, & Graesser, 1993). The reading time
differences between Pre-Offers and Declinations provide
some indication that the distinction between forward
projection and a backward directed inference plays a role in
the online processing of speech acts. Why the projective
nature of Pre-Offers would call for more processing at the
first word, however, is less clear. More research is needed to
investigate whether this finding holds for spoken language
processing as well.
Considering that action comprehension is crucial for
everyday conversation, it seems likely that people can
predict upcoming speech acts, making the fast transitions
between turns (Sacks et al., 1974; Stivers et al., 2009;
Levinson, in press) possible. Neuroimaging studies suggest
that people use their knowledge of the wider discourse
context to predict specific upcoming words and that
prediction is not the result of relatively low-level, wordbased priming mechanisms, “but involves a more
sophisticated message-level mechanism that can take into
account the actual nuances of the preceding discourse,”
(Otten & Van Berkum, 2008). Whether and how sequential
context and the implicit knowledge of the organization of
actions guides the interpretation of utterances is a topic for
further investigation. We will explore this in future research
using event-related brain potentials.
An alternative explanation for the reading time results is
that the experimental manipulation does not address speech
act recognition per se, but some other confounding variable
such as semantic priming from the context. Latent Semantic
Analysis can be used to determine semantic relatedness of
two texts and LSA similarity relations have been found to
correspond well with the pattern of results in priming
studies (Landauer et al., 1998). If semantic priming from the
context is the main factor governing the reading times one
would expect the condition with the lowest LSA values
(least amount of priming) to have the longest mean reading
times. The opposite is true: Answers had the lowest average
LSA value but the shortest reading times on all measures.
This suggests that the differences in reading times across
conditions in our study were not due to lexico-semantic
relationships between the content words of the context and
the target sentences.

Conclusion
In this study on speech act comprehension we investigated
the processing of sentences that perform different speech
acts depending on prior context. In each case an assertion is
used as a vehicle for some other action, and it is “part of
competent membership in the society/culture and being a

1600

competent interactant to analyze assertions of this sort for
what (else) they may be doing at this moment, at this
juncture of the interaction, in this specific sequential
context” (Schegloff, 2007, p. 35). Our study tapped into this
competence by addressing two primary questions: how
reliably participants can categorize action-underspecific
speech acts, and whether the time-course of speech act
inferencing differs for the actions as reflected in self-paced
reading times.
Participants in our study categorized the speech acts of
action-underspecified utterances with very high accuracy,
based on limited context and without any prosodic
information. Furthermore, the exact same sentence was
processed differently depending on the speech act it
performed, with reading times starting to differ already at
the first word. These findings open up a new arena for
experimental research on speech act recognition in
conversation.
As a crucial component of social behavior,
communication involves actions. Being a competent
member of society must require a cognitive architecture that
is oriented to speech acts. However, given that the form and
content of utterances is frequently underspecified for this
level of meaning, assigning speech acts to our interlocutors
is not a trivial matter. Having demonstrated that participants
orient to the action content of sentences and can categorize
speech acts with high accuracy, the next experimental step
is to shed light on this ability in spoken dialogues – the
foundation of doing things with words.

References
Austin, J. L. (1976). How to do things with words. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Blakemore, D. (1992). Understanding utterances: An
introduction to pragmatics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (2006). Are
generalised scalar implicatures generated by default? An
on-line investigation into the role of context in generating
pragmatic inferences. Cognition, 100(3), 434–463.
Clark, H. H. (1979). Responding to indirect speech acts.
Cognitive Psychology, 11(4), 430–477.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Coulson, S., & Lovett, C. (2010). Comprehension of
nonconventional indirect requests: An event-related brain
potential study. Italian Journal of Linguistics, 22(1), 107124.
Gibbs, R. W. (1979). Contextual effects in understanding
indirect requests. Discourse Processes, 2(1), 1–10.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101(3), 371-395.
Graesser, A. C., Swamer, S. S., & Baggett, W. B. (1996).
New models of deep comprehension. In B. Britton & A.
C. Graesser (Eds.), Models of understanding text.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.

Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics, 3: Speech Acts.
New York: Academic Press.
Holtgraves, T. (2008a). Automatic intention recognition in
conversation processing. Journal of Memory and
Language, 58(3), 627–645.
Holtgraves, T. (2008b). Conversation, speech acts, and
memory. Memory & Cognition, 36(2), 361-374.
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Woolley, J. D. (1982).
Paradigms and processes in reading comprehension.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 111(2),
228-238.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). An
introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25(2-3), 259-284.
Levinson, S. C. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Levinson, S. C. (in press). Action formation and ascription.
In T. Stivers & J. Sidnell (Eds.), Handbook of
conversation analysis. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Magliano, J. P., Baggett, W. B., Johnson, B. K., & Graesser,
A. C. (1993). The time course of generating causal
antecedent and causal consequence inferences. Discourse
Processes, 16(1-2), 35–53.
Otten, M., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2008). Discourse-based
word anticipation during language processing: Prediction
or priming? Discourse Processes, 45(6), 464–496.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A
simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking
for conversation. Language, 50(4), 696–735.
Schegloff, E. A. (1988). Presequences and indirection:
Applying speech act theory to ordinary conversation.
Journal of Pragmatics, 12(1), 55–62.
Schegloff, E. A. (2007). Sequence organization in
interaction: A primer in conversation analysis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy
of language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1975). Indirect speech acts. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics, 3: Speech Acts.
New York: Academic Press.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (2004). Relevance theory. In G.
Ward & L. Horn (Eds.), Handbook of pragmatics.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Stivers, T., Enfield, N. J., Brown, P., Englert, C., Hayashi,
M., Heinemann, T., Hoymann, G., Rossano, F., De
Ruiter, J. P., Yoon, K.-E., & Levinson, S. C. (2009).
Universals and cultural variation in turn-taking in
conversation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 106(26), 1058710592.
Walker, T., Drew, P., & Local, J. (2011). Responding
indirectly. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(9), 2434-2451.

1601

