UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spontaneous body movements in spatial cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/94v623c7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Popescu, Sergiu Tcaci
Wexler, Mark

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spontaneous body movements in spatial cognition
Sergiu TCACI POPESCU (sergiusergiu@gmail.com) and Mark WEXLER (mark.wexler@gmail.com)
CNRS & Université Paris Descartes
Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception
45, rue des Saints-Pères
75006, Paris, France
Abstract
People often perform spontaneous body movements during
spatial tasks. How are these spontaneous gestures related to
spatial problem-solving? We measured spontaneous
movements during a perspective-taking task inspired by map
reading. Analyzing the motion data to isolate its rotation and
translation components in specific geometric relation to the
task, we found out that most participants executed
spontaneous miniature rotations of the head that were
significantly related to the main task parameter. These head
rotations were as if participants were trying to align
themselves with the orientation on the map, but with tiny
amplitudes, typically below 1% of the actual movements.
Our results are consistent with a model of sensorimotor
prediction driving spatial reasoning. The efference copy of
planned movements triggers this prediction mechanism. The
movements themselves may then be mostly inhibited; the
spontaneous gestures that we measure are the visible traces
of these planned but inhibited actions.
Keywords: spatial cognition; motor action; sensorimotor
prediction; embodied cognition; mental simulation

Introduction
Motor activity in spatial tasks
People often perform spontaneous body movements
during spatial tasks such as giving complex directions
or orienting themselves on maps. Spontaneous gestures
in spatial tasks have been studied by Chu & Kita
(2011), who showed that their participants
spontaneously produced hand gestures while
performing a mental rotation task. Motor activity can
also trigger mechanisms that simulate the outcome of an
action (see Wolpert & Flanagan, 2001, for a review of
sensorimotor prediction) and thus infer otherwise
unavailable information. For instance, Wexler, Kosslyn,
& Berthoz (1998) and Wohlschläger & Wohlschläger
(1998) showed that unseen manual rotations improved
performance in mental rotation tasks when the mental
and manual rotations were in the same direction, and
interfered with mental rotation when the two were in
opposite directions. The execution of at least some of
the visuo-spatial tasks mentioned above includes a
motor component that can either improve task
performance or interfere with it. This conclusion is
supported by the findings of neuroimaging studies
(Kosslyn, Ganis, & Thompson, 2001).

Spatial perspective-taking (SPT)
Spatial perspective-taking occurs when one adopts a
viewpoint different from one's physical viewpoint. SPT
is more difficult when the imagined perspective differs

from the actual (physical) one by a rotation than by a
translation (Rieser, 1989). Performance after an
imagined rotation depends on the absolute magnitude of
the rotation angle between the actual and the imagined
perspective and shows the typical and robust angular
disparity effect: the bigger the angle of rotation to the
imagined perspective, the lower the performance. More
importantly, when people are allowed to move to the
location of their imagined or novel perspective, even in
absence of visual and auditory cues, performance after
perspective rotations is greatly facilitated and may even
attain the baseline level.
Spatial updating seems simple and automatic if a
person were to perform the full rotations that he or she
imagines. The updating is therefore driven by a
sensorimotor prediction mechanism, and this
mechanism is activated by motor plans or efference
copies of the motor command (Wolpert & Flanagan,
2001). The planned action itself could be wholly or
partly inhibited further downstream in the motor
system. If spontaneous movements are a visible
reflection of such simulated but inhibited actions, they
should be correlated in some geometrically specific way
with the mental task being performed. To determine if
this is so was the major goal of our study.

Methods
24 unpaid participants took part in the experiment.
The motion tracking data of 5 participants did not attain
our inclusion criterion (see below) and were discarded.
We therefore performed all analyses on the data of the
remaining 19 participants (8 women, mean age 33.8,
standard deviation (SD) 7.1 years).
The participants were told to watch on a computer
display a simple map depicting the crossing of two
streets. (see Fig. 1). The participants’ task was to
answer as quickly and accurately as possible if, at the
intersection, they needed to turn left or right in order to
reach the (red) dot.
The stimuli were parametrized by two variables: the
deviation angle (see Fig. 1), and the corner angle (not
shown in Fig. 1). We take the upward orientation as our
“zero” because pilot results showed that it is easiest to
perform the task when one’s initial imagined orientation
is upwards. Deviation angles are taken as positive
counterclockwise and negative clockwise. The second
independent variable, the corner angle, is the angle
between the two streets on the map. It was used to mask
the similarity between the trials with the same value of
the deviation angle.

1042

Figure 1: Two examples of stimuli (the dashed lines, the
angle arrow and text were not part of the stimuli). Every
stimulus represents the crossing of two streets.
Participants imagined being on the darker (green) street,
at the position of the triangle, and facing the
intersection. We call this orientation the imagined
orientation. The task was to decide if at the intersection
one should turn left or right in order to reach the (red)
dot on the other street. We call the angle between the 6
o’clock (or upwards-facing) direction and the imagined
orientation the deviation angle. (A) An example
stimulus with deviation angle of −90 deg. (B) An
example stimulus with deviation angle of +135 deg.
Participants were seated at about 60 cm from a
computer display on which the stimulus was displayed.
They used the left and right shift keys on a keyboard to
answer respectively “left” and “right” with the
corresponding hand. Each trial began with the display
of a central fixation red cross. After 0.5 seconds, the
stimulus was displayed until participant’s answer. We
recorded both the response and the response time (RT).
The experimental session lasted for about 40 minutes
and included 10 practice trials and 500 experimental
trials. Every one hundred trials were followed by a
pause; its duration did not exceed 5 minutes.
Participants’ head and shoulder movements were
recorded using a CODA cx1 scan unit of a Codamotion
optical motion tracking system (Charnwood Dynamics
Ltd., UK); we used three sensors for each body part.
The system recorded the spatial coordinates of each of
the six sensors at a sampling rate of 200 Hz.
We used a within-participant factorial design. The
main independent variable, the deviation angle, had 8
levels (0˚, ±45˚, ±90˚, ±135˚, 180˚). The second
independent variable, the corner angle, had 10 levels
(±30˚, ±60˚, ±90˚, ±120˚, ±150˚). Five repetitions were
set for each condition except for deviation angle angles
of 0˚ and 180˚, for which 10 repetitions were set. Trials
were presented in random order.
A trial was considered valid if all sensor values were
available for at least half of its duration and only
subjects with at least 50% of valid trials were included
in the motion analysis. Only data from correctly
answered valid trials with a RT that did not exceed the
mean RT plus 3 SD were included in the analyses. A
rectangular moving average filter of 20 samples (0.1 s)
was applied in order to smooth the motion data. The

trials with a deviation angle of 180 deg were excluded
from the analysis of the geometrical properties of
rotations and translations as the sign of the angle cannot
be used to discriminate the direction of rotations or
translations.
We used the distance travelled by a body part (by
summing the absolute Euclidean distances between all
successive samples of a sensor) as a first measure of
motion. If participants did not move more for higher
values of deviation angles, our hypothesis would be
invalidated from the start. We selected the maximum
path length among the three sensors for each body part
as the representative value of its motion extent. Since
the path length is always positive, we posited a simple
regression model of the path length on the absolute
values of deviation angle: Pi = a + | θi | b, where Pi is
the maximum path length of the three motion sensors on
trial i (expressed in mm), θi the deviation angle on that
trial, b a regression coefficient, and a a constant term. If
the slope is found to be positive, we can proceed to a
more specific analysis, which consists in decomposing
the motion in its translational and rotational components
and analyzing their geometrical specificity in relation to
the signed values of deviation angles.
For the sake of the detailed motion analysis, we
assume that both the head and shoulders undergo rigid
motion in space—a combination of rotation and
translation. We extracted the rotation and translation,
using an optimization algorithm. We first calculated the
relative vectors between the three sensors, which
isolates the rotation component of the rigid motion. Our
algorithm then searched through the (three-dimensional)
space of rotations, finding the rotation that most closely
matched the final relative vectors. We calculated the
translation separately by performing vector subtraction
between centers of mass of the three sensors for the
head and shoulders.
For each sample of sensor positions provided by the
motion tracker, we computed participants’ head and
shoulder rotations (axes and angles) and translations
with respect to their initial orientation and position,
respectively. We then selected the maximum values of
rotation and translation reached during the trial. We
could not predict the axis about which the spontaneous
rotations take place. We therefore posited the following
simple linear regression model, in terms of axis-angle
rotation vectors (indicated in boldface) for the relation
between spontaneous movements and task variables: Ri
= θi r, where Ri is the maximum rotation—of either the
head or the shoulders—on trial i (expressed in the axisangle vector representation), θi the deviation angle on
that trial, and r a triplet of regression coefficients. Thus,
the vector r represents the rotation (again, as a vector in
axis-angle space) that the participant would perform for
deviation angle θ equal to 1 deg. We decomposed this
vector into its axis-angle components: r = z â, where its
length or norm, z, is a regression coefficient that we will
call the spontaneous rotation coefficient, and its
direction, â, the unit vector that corresponds to the axis
of rotation. Our regression therefore yields both the

1043

spontaneous rotation coefficient and the axis of
spontaneous rotation.
We posited a similar model for translations: Ti = θi w
û, where Ti is the maximum translation vector of the
head or shoulders, and û is a unit vector indicating the
direction of translation, and w the spontaneous
translation coefficient.
To calculate statistical confidence intervals of these
spontaneous motion coefficients, we performed a
bootstrap. For each bootstrap resample j, we calculated
the rotation vector r(j) [or the translation w(j) t(j)]. We
then calculated a 95% confidence ellipsoid for these
points. If the origin fell outside this ellipsoid, then the
regression was said to yield a coefficient statistically
different from zero. We used the geometric mean of the
ellipsoid semi-axes as a measure of standard error of the
spontaneous motion coefficients.

Results
Response times and error rates
Overall, the mean RT on raw unfiltered data was 1.17
± 0.38 s (± between-subject SD). Increasing the
deviation angle lowers performance, increasing the RT,
as shown in Fig. 2.

of the sign of corner angle (F1,18 = 16.9, p < 0.001), a
significant main effect of the absolute value of corner
angle (F3.4,60.6 = 8.3, p < 0.001) and a significant thirdorder interaction between the sign of deviation angle,
the sign of the corner angle and the absolute value of
corner angle (F2.8,50.9 = 4.3, p < 0.01). The main effect of
the sign of the deviation angle was not statistically
significant nor were the other interactions.
To quantify the relation between the deviation angle
and the RT, we calculated the slopes of the linear
regression of the RT on the absolute values of the
deviation angle for every participant. (Since the sign of
the deviation angle had no effect on the response times,
we collapsed data for positive and negative deviation
angles.) All individual slopes were positive and
statistically significant (bootstrap with 104 resamples, p
< 0.05); the mean slope was 3.09 ± 2.30 ms/deg (±
between-subject SD). In other words, mean RT
increased by 3.09 ms for every additional degree of
deviation angle. The plot of RT versus deviation angle
(Fig. 2) has a noticeably curvilinear shape, with the RT
slope seemingly higher for deviation angles above 90
deg. The mean slope for deviation angles between 0
and 90 deg was 1.20 ± 0.89 ms/deg, whereas between
90 and 180 degrees it was 5.05 ± 3.82 ms/deg. This
difference between slopes for small and large deviation
angles was statistically significant (paired t18 = 5.41, p <
0.0001) and showed that RTs increased faster (more
than 4 times faster, according to the means) as a
function of deviation angle above 90 deg.
The median error rate was 1.2 ± 0.6% (± betweensubject median absolute deviations). Overall, the error
rate was very low: the task was seemingly well
understood by our participants and easy to perform. The
analyses of the relation between error rates and
deviation angles lead to similar findings as the ones of
the RT and are not provided here.

Spontaneous body
relation to the task

Figure 2: RT as a function of the deviation angle. Gray
dots represent individual participants’ data, the black
curve the mean, and error bars between-subject standard
errors. The data for deviation angles ±180˚ is shown
twice. Several outlying datapoints are not shown.
The mean reaction time was submitted to a repeatedmeasures ANOVA with the factors: sign of deviation
angle (2 levels), absolute value of deviation angle (6
levels, excluding 0 and 180 deg), sign of corner angle (2
levels) and absolute value of corner angle (5 levels).
The analysis revealed a significant main effect of
absolute value of the deviation angle (F2,36 = 29.1, p <
0.001, Huynh-Feldt corrected), a significant main effect

movements

and

their

Analysis of Path Length As a first analysis of the
relation between task performance and body
movements, we wanted to see if there was a relationship
between the extent of spontaneous motion and the
deviation angle. As a measure of motion extent, we
used the length of the path traveled in space. Fig. 3
shows the mean path lengths as a function of the
absolute deviation angle.
The mean path length across participants and
deviation angles is 13.1 ± 10.2 mm (± between-subject
SD) for the head and 10.3 ± 6.9 mm for the shoulders.
The slope of the linear regression (including a constant
term, see Methods) of path lengths on the absolute
deviation angles provides an indication on the relation
between the movements and the deviation angle: if
positive, it would indicate that the participants move
more in trials with higher deviation angles. For head
movements, 17/19 (89%) regression slopes were
positive and 13/19 (68%) were significantly so
(bootstrap with 104 resamples, p < 0.05); the mean slope

1044

was 0.038 ± 0.058 mm/deg (± between-subject SD). For
the shoulders, 17/19 (89%) regression slopes were
positive and 12/19 (63%) were significantly so
(bootstrap with 104 resamples, p < 0.05); the mean slope
was 0.026 ± 0.041 mm/deg.

Figure 3: Mean path length traveled by the head and
shoulders as a function of deviation angle. Gray dots
represent individual participants’ data, the black curve
the mean, and error bars between-subject standard
errors. Several outlying datapoints are not shown.
This analysis of path lengths shows that for most
participants there was a relationship between the
absolute extent of spontaneous movements and the
absolute value of the principal task parameter, the
deviation angle. Because the movements of the head
and shoulders were nearly rigid, for further analysis we
decomposed them into the two components of rigid
motion, rotations and translations.
Analysis of Absolute Amplitude of Rotations As
stated in the Methods, for each trial we calculated the
maximal rotation of the head and shoulders with respect
to their initial orientations at the start of the trial. We
represented these rotations as 3D vectors using the axisangle representation, in which the length of the vector is
the angle of rotation and its direction the axis.
To begin with, we analyzed only the angles of the
maximal rotations. As in the preceding analysis, we
wished to test whether this measure of absolute
magnitude of rotation was correlated with task
difficulty, i.e., the absolute value of deviation angle.
Fig. 4 shows the mean maximal rotation magnitude as a
function of the absolute deviation angle.
The overall mean rotation amplitude is 1.57 ± 0.5 deg
(± between-subject SD) for the head and 0.78 ± 0.17
deg for the shoulders. Some of the spontaneous
rotations were not specifically related to the main task
parameter, as shown by the presence of rotations even
when deviation angle is zero.

Figure 4: Absolute rotation amplitude, for the head and
shoulders, as a function of the absolute deviation angle.
Gray dots represent individual participants’ data, the
black curve the mean, and error bars between-subject
standard errors. Several outlying datapoints are not
shown.
We performed a linear regression (including a
constant term) of the rotation amplitude versus absolute
deviation angles to quantify the relation between the
rotations and the deviation angles. We found out that
17/19 (89%) regression slopes were positive for both
head and shoulder rotations and 10/19 (53%) for the
head and 7/19 (37%) for the shoulders were
significantly so (bootstrap with 104 resamples, p <
0.05); the mean slope was 0.006 ± 0.013 (± betweensubject standard deviations) for the head and 0.002 ±
0.005 for the shoulders.
The analysis of absolute rotation angles shows that
there was a relationship between the absolute
amplitudes of spontaneous rotations and the deviation
angle. It doesn’t tell us, however, if this relationship
was
geometrically
specific.
Did
participants
spontaneously move in one direction for the positive
deviation angles and in the opposite direction for the
negative ones?
Directional Analysis of Rotations To answer the
question above, we performed a linear regression of the
full axis-angle rotation vectors (i.e., including the
direction of rotations in addition to their amplitudes) on
the deviation angle—rather than just its absolute
value—of the corresponding trial. We call the slopes of
these linear regressions the spontaneous rotation
coefficients (see Methods for details).
For head rotations, the mean spontaneous rotation
coefficient is 0.007 ± 0.018 (± between-subject SD); the
median coefficient is 0.001 ± 0.0009 (± between-subject
median absolute deviations). For the shoulders, the
mean coefficient is 0.001 ± 0.002; the median
coefficient is 0.0005 ± 0.0002. The interpretation of
these parameters, for example for head spontaneous

1045

rotations, is as follows: on the average, participants
rotated their head by 0.7% (or 0.1%, if we use the
medians) of the deviation angle. Contrary to the
preceding analyses, we have extracted the directionallyspecific component of the spontaneous rotations:
rotations that are in opposite directions for clockwise
and counterclockwise deviation angles. The axis of
these rotations varies from one participant to the next;
we will return to the question of axes below.
To test whether these correlations were statistically
significant, we stepped back to our original regression
model, Ri = θi r (recall that the spontaneous rotation
coefficients are the lengths of the regression vectors r),
and used the regression vectors r for significance
analysis. We performed a bootstrap resampling (105
resamples) of the vectors r and calculated the 95%
confidence ellipsoid of these vectors (see Methods).
First of all, an omnibus regression analysis, including
all data sets of all participants at once, shows a
statistically significant spontaneous rotation coefficient
of 0.0068 for the head and of 0.0006 for the shoulders.
Second, although the individual spontaneous rotation
coefficients were small (all but two were smaller than
1%), in case of head rotations 15/19 (79%) participants
had a statistically significant linear relationship between
maximum rotation and deviation angle. In case of
shoulder rotations, on the other hand, only 4/19 (21%)
participants had significant fits to the model. Given that
only a few participants executed significant shoulder
rotations, we carried out the rest of rotation analyses
only for head movements.
Analysis of Rotation Axes Along with the spontaneous
rotation coefficients, our analysis also yielded an axis of
rotation for each subject, separately for the head and the
shoulders. Fig. 5 shows these axes, as unit vectors (the
vector â in our regression model), for the head rotations
of the 15 participants whose regression analyses yielded
significant results. The meaning of each of these vectors
is as follows: it is the axis that maximizes the
correlation between a participant’s rotations and the
corresponding values of the deviation angle.
Fig. 5 also shows the mean head rotation axis over all
of these participants, equal to (+0.13, −0.65, +0.75).
The axes of the fifteen participants are rather tightly
clustered around this mean; the mean difference
between the individual axes and the mean axis is only
24 deg. The largest contributions to this mean rotation
axis come from the Z and Y axes. The signs of the
components in this vector mean that for positive values
of the deviation angle, participants tended to carry out
rotations about the positive Z axis (head turned to the
left, as seen from above, see Fig. 6 B) and the negative
Y axis (head inclined to the left, as seen from behind,
see Fig. 6 D); for trials in which the deviation angle was
negative, on the other hand, the rotations tended to be in
the opposite direction. We will return to the significance
of these axes of rotation in the Discussion.

Figure 5: Individual head rotation axes represented in
the space of rotations, shown in gray, as well as their
mean, shown in red. The individual axes are shown in
shades of gray that correspond to the value of the
spontaneous rotation coefficient (the darker the arrow,
the higher the corresponding coefficient). The three
euclidean coordinates represent the mean axis. Given
our regression model, the axes change to opposite
directions for negative deviation angles.
Analysis of Translations The statistical analysis here is
the same as for rotations. The mean spontaneous
translation coefficients for the head and shoulders are
respectively 0.012 ± 0.017 (± between-subject SD) and
0.008 ± 0.016. The translations of 7 (37%) and 6 (32%)
out of 19 participants, for respectively the head and
shoulders, were significantly correlated to deviation
angle (bootstrap with 104 resampled datasets, p < 0.05).

Discussion
When asked for directions some people execute
spontaneous incipient body movements. If a
geometrical relation were found between represented
spatial self-displacements and co-occurring incipient
spontaneous body movements, it would be indicative of
the implication of motor processes (motor plans or
efference copies) in our spatial task and consistent with
the activation of a sensorimotor prediction mechanism
in solving spatial updating problems. Based on findings
of the studies on spatial perspective-taking, we focused
on the study of the imagined rotations and the angular
disparity effect.
We devised a spatial updating task (see Methods and
Fig. 1). In addition to behavioral data, we measured the
spontaneous movements of our participants. To our
knowledge, spontaneous movements have not been
quantified so far in a spatial updating task.
Our behavioral results replicate the studied angular
disparity effect on task performance (see Introduction).
We found that 15 out of 19 (79%) participants
executed spontaneous head rotations related to the task
parameters (if we include translations, 17 out of 19
participants (89%) executed a statistically significant
motion)—in spite of the ease of the task, as shown by
low error rates. These rotations were very small in

1046

amplitude (typically below 2 deg). In most of the
participants, the movements were too small to be seen,
but could nevertheless be measured with the motion
tracker, and their relationship to the task parameters
shown using our analysis. Indeed, these miniature head
rotations were reliably correlated to the deviation angle,
but much smaller (typically less than 1% of the
deviation angle).
The geometrically specific correlation between
spontaneous head rotations and the deviation angle has
two aspects. First, larger deviation
angles
(corresponding to more difficult trials) led to larger
rotations. Second, opposite deviation angles led to head
rotations in opposite directions about a specific rotation
axis, that we calculated using our linear model in
rotation space.
The mean axis of rotation, averaged across
participants, has a main vertical Z-axis component (i.e.
a head turn, see Fig. 6 A, B) and a strong but lesser
front-back Y-axis component (Fig. 6 C, D): the resulting
head movement is thus a horizontal rotation of the head
with an important tilt component. These head rotations
are as if participants were trying to align themselves
with the imagined orientation on the map. In the case of
the front-back Y-axis, this alignment is in the image
plane; in the case of the vertical Z-axis, it is as if the
participants back-projected the vertical image onto the
ground plane, and then tried to align themselves with
the imagined orientation in this projection.

hypothesis as the characteristics of the spontaneous
movements are geometrically consistent with those of
actual rotations in the ground plane or image plane that
would be required to bring the participant into
alignment with the required initial orientation. We may
speculate on several types of contribution. The
premotor cortex could prepare an actual movement,
which would lead to two separate processes: an
anticipation process that predicts the outcome of the
action (i.e., the map with the you-are-here street aligned
with the participant’s vertical axis) from an efference
copy of the motor command, and the execution of the
overt motor action, which would be inhibited at early
stages (earlier for some participants than for others).
Alternatively, the implication of the motor system
may be epiphenomenal, related to concurrent cognitive
processes but not causally so.
We cannot at this stage answer the question of
causality of the spontaneous movements. To settle this
argument, we need a new experimental setting
contrasting a condition in which movement is allowed
or facilitated with another one where movement is
restrained. It will allow us to measure the impact of
each condition on the task performance and shed more
light on the causality of the motor processes in mental
spatial updating tasks.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Thales Group for support of part of
this research.

References

Fig. 6: The main component axes of average
spontaneous head rotations. (A, B) Head turn about
vertical Z axis. (C, D) Head tilt about naso-occipital Y
axis.
Our findings on spontaneous head rotations are
consistent with a motor contribution to spatial-updating
task performance and with our action inhibition

Chu, M., & Kita, S. (2011). The nature of gestures’
beneficial role in spatial problem solving. Journal
of experimental psychology: General, 140(1),
102-16.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (1999). The role of gesture in
communication and thinking. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 3(11), 419-429.
Kosslyn, S M, Ganis, G., & Thompson, W. L. (2001).
Neural foundations of imagery. Nature Reviews.
Neuroscience, 2(9), 635-642.
Wang, R. F., Crowell, J. a, Simons, D. J., Irwin, D. E.,
Kramer, A. F., Ambinder, M. S., Thomas, L. E.,
et al. (2006). Spatial updating relies on an
egocentric representation of space: effects of the
number of objects. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 13(2), 281-286.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S. M., & Berthoz, A. (1998).
Motor processes in mental rotation. Cognition,
68(1), 77-94.
Wohlschläger, Andreas, & Wohlschläger, Astrid.
(1998). Mental and manual rotation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 24(2), 397-412.
Wolpert, D. M., & Flanagan, J. R. (2001). Motor
prediction. Current Biology, 11(18), 729-732.

1047

