UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Systemic Expertise: Instructing Non-Artists on Depicting Human Figures in 3-D

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jf8959x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Flor, Nick

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Systemic Expertise: Instructing Non-Artists on Depicting Human Figures in 3-D
Nick V. Flor
Virtual World Research Lab
Anderson School of Management
University of New Mexico
nickflor@unm.edu
like to develop applications that take advantage of these 3-D
capabilities, but lack the skills in figure modeling. Certainly
one could always hire an artist, but knowing how to model
figures in 3-D and to model objects generally, allows one to
more quickly explore the spaces of virtual world prototypes
and possible 3-D representations. Artists can still be
utilized later in the process to add finishing aesthetics.

Abstract
I use the theoretical framework of distributed cognition to
develop a repeatable procedure that non-artists can follow to
model 3-D human figures—manikins—on a computer, which
are sufficient for prototyping. The approach was not to train
artists to be expert human figure modelers, but rather to
derive a distribution of abilities across person and computer
such that the system of person-in-interaction-with-technology
exhibited expertise. These abilities were discovered though
an analysis of two equivalent functional systems: figure
modeling on a computer and figure drawing on paper. I
report a test of the procedure on a group of non-artists, which
yielded a high success rate. This research contributes to our
understanding of applying distributed cognition to the design
of instructional procedures, and to our understanding of the
sciences of the artificial.
Keywords: distributed cognition; science of the artificial; 3D human figure modeling; virtual worlds.

Introduction
Drawing the human figure on paper is a difficult task, as
anyone who has picked up a pencil and tried to draw a
figure can attest. Modeling the human figure on a computer
is also a difficult task, since it either starts with a drawing of
a human figure (Oliverio, 2007; Patnode, 2008; Russo,
2006), or it requires detailed knowledge of surface anatomy
(de la Flor & Mongeon, 2010; Ratner, 2009; Spencer,
2010). Moreover, one must learn how to operate a complex
3-D software package.
The general problem is that of representing an imagined
human figure in some medium, which requires a complex
skillset typically acquired through years of practice. For
this reason when there is a task that requires either human or
human-like figures, such as an animated movie or a video
game, one hires artists who are experts in figure modeling.
The specific research question explored in this paper is as
follows: is it possible to design a replicable procedure that
non-artists can learn in a short amount of time for modeling
human figures on a computer? This research contributes to
our understanding of distributed cognition (Hutchins, 1995),
and the sciences of the artificial (Simon, 1996).
The answer to this question has practical implications as
well. We live in a highly networked, digital ecosystem
where almost every mobile device, notebook, or desktop
computer has a graphics processor capable of displaying 3-d
models. There is significant opportunity for designing
scientific and educational applications that make use of this
capability such as virtual worlds (Bainbridge, 2007; see
Figure 1). There are also many individuals that have
business and information systems backgrounds that would

Figure 1. Virtual UNM Campus Developed by the Author on a
Mobile Device—Human Figure in the Center

Hutchins (1995, p. 155), provided a guiding framework
for answering this research question when he wrote:
“…a good deal of the expertise in the system is in the artifacts, (both
the external implements and the internal strategies)—not in the sense
that the artifacts are themselves intelligent or external agents, or
because the act of getting into coordination with the artifacts
constitutes an expert performance by the person; rather, the system of
person-in-interaction-with-technology exhibits expertise. These tools
permit the people using them to do the tasks that need to be done
while doing the kinds of things the people are good at: recognizing
patterns; modeling simple dynamics of the world, and manipulating
objects in the environment” (p. 155).

In the context of this framework the research question
becomes not can we make a non-artist into an expert figure
modeler, but rather can we design a system of external
implements and internal strategies, such that the system of
person-in-interaction-with-technology exhibits expert figure
modeling skills?

The Processes of Human Figure Modeling and
Human Figure Drawing
The task of modeling a human figure on a computer consists
of a person (the modeler) and the computer running the 3-D
modeling software.
The challenge is to discover a
distribution of abilities across person and computer, which
allow a non-artist to model a human figure in a short amount
of time.

1542

A comprehensive cognitive ethnography of the process of
modeling and drawing the human figure is beyond the scope
of this paper. Instead, I describe the general processes and
key representations that occur during modeling, based on
my experience building 3-D virtual worlds, as well as
working with and observing professional Hollywood
modelers, animators, and visual FX personnel, as a faculty
member and director of the University of New Mexico’s
interdisciplinary film & digital media program.

The Process of Human Figure Modeling
The process most commonly used in industry to model
human figures is commonly referred to as character
modeling with reference pictures, although I use the term
“3-D tracing” because it is analogous to the technique of
placing see-through paper over a photograph and creating a
drawing by tracing. The method can be seen in a variety of
books including, Guindon (2007, pp. 15-83), Ingrassia
(2009, pp. 269-288), Oliverio (2007, pp. 47-323), Patnode
(2008, pp. 133-207), and Russo, (2006, pp. 83-152). The
general process is as follows (see Figure 2 for depictions of
the steps):
1. The modeler first obtains reference pictures. In the
movie and videogaming industries, these reference
pictures are typically drawn by a concept artist in the art
department. The concept artist either draws the pictures
on paper then scans them into an electronic format, or
uses a paint program to draws them directly into an
electronic format. The reference pictures depict front
and side views of the character to be modeled, with
features lined up in both photos including the top of the
head, the waistline, and the bottom of the feet.
2. The reference pictures are then imported into a
modeling program. The pictures are placed at right
angles to one another, and centered.
3. The modeler adds a simple box to the workspace so that
it overlaps the torso in both the front and the side
reference-picture views.
4. Finally, the modeler molds the box to the reference
drawings—extruding limbs, adding edge loops, and
moving vertices so that the edges of the model line up
with the edges in the reference pictures. Figure 3
details the molding process.

1. Obtain front and
2. Import
3. Add a 4. Mold the
side reference reference pictures
box
box to
pictures
covering
pictures
the torso.
Figure 2. Figure Modeling with Reference Pictures, viz., 3-D
Tracing. A modeler (1) obtains front and side pictures of a human
figure; (2) imports them into a 3-D modeling program; (3) adds a
basic box that covers the torso; (4) molds the box to the pictures.

Figure 3. Molding to Reference Images—a time-intensive activity
where an artist molds a box or a plane to images, by aligning
vertices to landmarks on front and side pictures. In this example, a
plane is molded to a face, but the same actions apply to molding a
box to a body. The pictures are scaffolds that are removed after
modeling is completed.

Abilities and Issues for Non-Artists. For a non-artist to
successfully perform the figure modeling process, the main
abilities he or she must acquire are to draw the human figure
in front and side views (step 1), and to align vertices to
landmarks in front and side views (step 4). As mentioned,
figure drawing is a difficult skill to learn. Moreover, the
alignment process is time consuming. For this reason,
figure modeling with reference pictures is not a suitable
method for the non-artist.
There is no research that analyzes these abilities and
sheds light on developing a new figure modeling process for
non-artists. However, an analysis of the figure drawing
process reveals abilities that are helpful for developing a
new figure modeling process via a redistribution of those
abilities across person and computer.

The Process of Human Figure Drawing
The output of figure drawing is both an input to the figure
modeling process (step 1 in Figure 2), and is also an
equivalent functional system to figure modeling. It is
equivalent because both figure drawing and figure modeling
result in a representation of the human figure. The
difference is the medium—paper in the case of figure
drawing, and a computer in the case of figure modeling.
Observations of artists reveal that the drawing of a human
figure on paper results from at least three distinct kinds of
representations layered on top of one another (refer to
Figure 4).
These observations are corroborated by
information in drawing instructional books (Hampton, 2009,
pp. 54-55; Lee & Buscema, 1978, pp. 70-71; Loomis, 1943,
pp. 43-45; Reed, 1984, p. 38).
1. The first representation the artist creates is a rough
sketch of the figure that depicts broadly the action of
the body and limbs. Examples of rough figure sketches
include stick figures, which use lines to represent the
body and limbs; and gestures, which are drawings that
are completed quickly, in several minutes or less, that
are sufficient for a viewer to understand the meaning of
the action depicted.

1543

2. The artist then layers a representations consisting of
geometric primitives based on spheres, cubes, and
cylinders over the rough sketch in order to give the
figure both mass and depth (Hampton, 2009, p. 54;
Hogarth, 1996, p. 8; Lee & Buscema, 1978, p. 21;
Ozawa, 1999; Reed, 1984, pp. 22,24,26). These
primitives serve an important function which is known
in the psychological literature as scaffolding (Wood,
Bruner, & Ross, 1976). As one artist put it: “Square
boxes … are necessary for proper depiction of the
human form as well. Picture the 3-dimensional human
body and think of it in terms of boxes… Once you
become accustomed to drawing, there will be no need
to draw the boxes, but you should always keep them in
mind to make certain you think in three dimensions.”
(Ozawa, 2005, p. 15)
3. Finally the artist layers representations of muscles,
clothing, and shadows over the geometric primitives in
order to add realistic detail to the figure. It should be
noted that this last representation varied among artists,
with some listing it as one representation and others
breaking it into as many as three separate
representations. Moreover, these are not the only
representations that an artist can layer next. For
example, if the publisher allows colors, the artist layers
color over the detailed figure drawing. However, I list
this as one representation—detail—because the general
consensus was to layer various kinds of detail over the
second representation of the figure-as-geometric
primitives.

the artist to draw in perspective than actual body parts.
Once the figure with mass and depth is completed, the basic
geometric shapes serve as a framework for the piecemeal
placement of muscles, clothing, and lighting details. In this
manner the use of intermediate representations changes the
task from a detailed thinking then drawing task, into an
easier and incremental looking and drawing task.
Abilities for Non-Artists. The observable representations
are produced by specific abilities, which in the case of
figure drawing on paper are located mainly in the head of
the artist and that take many years of practice to develop.
According to Loomis (1943), the fundamental abilities
required for human figure drawing include “proportion,
anatomy, perspective, value, color, and knowledge of
mediums and materials.” Briefly, an artist uses proportion
ability to draw body parts in the proper, aesthetically
pleasing, sizes relative to one another (Repr. 1). Ability in
anatomy is used to detail the surface of the body as
influenced by the underlying skeletal and muscular
structures (Repr. 3). Perspective ability allows the artist to
draw the body parts from different observation points and
with foreshortening (Repr. 2), where body parts that are
closer to an observer appear bigger than those parts that are
further away. It is important to note that foreshortening is
the single most difficult ability for drawing figures
(Hogarth, 1996, p. back cover). Value skill is used to apply
the appearance of light and shading to the figure (see last
image in Repr. 3). Impact is the ability to draw figures in
poses that are visually interesting (Repr. 1; Lee & Buscema,
1978, p. 60). Finally, knowledge of mediums and materials
is an operational skill—the ability to use paper and pencil or
other media and instruments for drawing. Figure 5 depicts
the abilities needed for figure drawing on paper.

Representation Repr. 2: Repr. 3: Detail, which can include
1: Rough
Mass via
muscles, clothing and shading
action sketch
shapes
Figure 4. Figure Drawing as a Sequence of Layering Three
Representations (figures adapted from Lee & Buscema, 1978)

The artist’s use of these intermediate representations is a
good example of the principle of cognitive effort
conservation in a distributed cognitive system. Without
using these intermediate representations an artist would
have to imagine a fully-detailed figure mentally and then
draw it. This kind of imagining is a computationallyintensive process for skills like perspective. Instead, when
using intermediate representations, an artist can work on
different aspects of the figure in smaller more manageable
steps, which then serves as a kind of guiding framework for
adding more complexity in subsequent representations. In
particular, the rough sketch allows the artist to focus on
depicting the meaning of the pose. Once complete, this
rough sketch serves as a framework for the piecemeal
addition of body masses with depth using simple boxes,
cylinders, and other geometric shapes, which are easier for

Figure 5. A Visual Depiction of the Abilities for Figure Drawing.

Redistributing Abilities,Manikins & Satisficing
All the abilities for drawing a human figure on paper, with
the exception of proportion, are difficult or time-intensive
for an individual to learn.
However, when modeling a human figure on a computer
one can have the computer perform most of the difficult
abilities, including rendering the figure with the proper
perspective, with the proper shading (value), and with color.
The problem of learning anatomy remains, but one can
satisfice and remove anatomical detail as a goal, yet still

1544

produce human-like figures that are useful for virtual world
prototyping. This is not without precedence in figure
drawing or animation. Both artists (Loomis, 1943) and
animators (Williams, 2001) emphasize the use of manikins
(similar to Figure 6), devoid of anatomical detail, for
prototyping poses or movements. Detail is added only after
the poses and movements have been worked out.
When anatomical ability is removed as a requirement, a
non-artist need only learn proportion and impact to model
human-like figures on a computer. Like in drawing and
animation, detail can always be added later to a manikin.
Figure 6 depicts a distribution of abilities suitable for a
novice to model 3-D figures on a computer, and where the
computer does the more difficult representational abilities.

Part 1. Creating the Body
To create a body (Figure 7): (1) Create a cube that is
1x2.5x1 units with 2x5x2 faces; (2) Wedge the top back
face 45 degrees, yielding an arm face; (3) Move the outerbottommost edges .1 units in the x direction yielding a leg
face; (4) Extrude the arm face 2.5 units, tapered by .1 units;
(5) Extrude the leg face 2 units yielding a thigh; (6) Move
the thigh face’s inner-bottommost edge +.1 units in the xdirection; (7) Extrude the thigh face 2 units, tapered by .1
units, yielding a calf; (8) Move the middle back vertices to a
z-value of zero and merge the overlapping vertices, yielding
a back wedge; (9) Mirror to see what the completed body
will look like; (10) Save file.

1

2-3

4

5-7

8

9

Figure 7. Modeling the Body (see text for explanation)

Part 2. Creating the Hand

Figure 6. A visual depiction of the distribution of abilities needed
to model figures for prototyping purposes. Abilities in parentheses
are added abilities that are not part of the figure drawing skill set
(not covered in this paper)

A Procedure for 3-D Figure Modeling
The redistribution of abilities as depicted in Figure 6,
changes the task of modeling a human figure, from drawing
and molding boxes to reference pictures (see Figure 2), to
the easier task of creating body parts in proportion. The
values for the following procedure were derived from the
body proportions specified by (Hamm, 1963).
3-D modeling is an activity where an individual creates
representations of real or imagined things—that appear to
have width, height, and depth—using a special kind of
computer program known as modeling software. Popular
examples of modeling software include Maya and 3ds Max,
both by Autodesk Corporation. The representations are
known as models, and the person that creates them is
referred to as a modeler.
There are two basic ways to model, using polygons or
using curves. This instruction covers polygon modeling—
the most popular kind of modeling for games and virtual
worlds. Using polygon modeling, the modeler starts with a
basic object — e.g., a cube, sphere, or pyramid with a
certain width x height x depth and with a certain number of
faces — much like a sculptor starts with a lump of clay.
The modeler then molds this source object into a target
object using the operations of moving, cutting, extruding,
wedging, merging, deleting, and mirroring, which are
applied to the object’s vertices, edges, and faces.

To create a hand (refer to Figure 8): (1) Create a cube
.5x.125x.5 with 2x1x4 faces; (2) Wedge the thumb face 30
degrees; (3) Inset the stubs .01; (4) Extrude the fingers .5
with 3 divisions; (5) Extrude the thumb .25, then .125; (6)
Move back the pointer and ring finger .0625 and move the
pinky back 0.125; (7) Move the pinky joint edges back .0625 and the middle finger joint edges up .0625; (8)
Remove the back edges and vertices; (9) Move in the wrist
edges inwards by .1; (10) Save file.

1

2

3

4-5

6

7

8

9

Figure 8. Modeling the Hand (see text for explanation)

Part 3. Creating the Feet
To create a foot (Figure 9): (1) Create a cube that is
.5x.25x1, with 1x2x2 faces; (2) Merge the toe vertices
down; (3) Move the ankle sides in by .1, and the front ankle
by .2; (4) Extend the toes by 1.25; (5) Save file.

1545

1

2

3

4

Figure 9. Modeling the Foot (see text for explanation)

Part 4. Creating the Head

Procedure

To create a head (refer to Figure 10), simply create a cube
that is .7x1x1 with 2x3x3 faces, then save the file. The head
can be shaped after it is attached to the body in part 5.

Students were given a lecture on how to model 3D figures
based on the procedure described previously. They were
then given an assignment where they had a week both to
create a personalized robot avatar and to animate a walk
cycle for the robot avatar (see Figure 12 for the written
instructions). Note: I used the term “robot” instead of
manikin since students were more familiar with the former.
Based on the Professor's Robot as taught in class:
1. Model a robot body in Maya (filename: body.mb).
2. Model a robot head in Maya (filename: head.mb).
3. Model a robot hand in Maya (filename: hand.mb).
4. Model a robot foot in Maya (filename: foot.mb).
5. Personalize your robot body parts.
6. Merge all the body parts to yield a robot avatar.
7. Animate a walk cycle for your robot avatar (filename: robot.mb).
8. Export your walking robot avatar as an fbx file (filename: robot.fbx).

Figure 10. Modeling the Head (see text for explanation)

Part 5. Combining the Pieces
The final step is to merge all the pieces into one (refer to
Figure 11). After saving all the separate body parts: (1)
Import the half-body; (2) Import the foot; (3) Snap foot to
leg; (4) Merge objects & vertices; (5) Import hand; (6) Snap
hand to upper limb; (7) Merge objects and vertices; (8)
Mirror to get the right side of the body; (9) Attach the head;
(10) Smooth figure if desired; (11) Save.

1-7

8

9

10

(reverse view) Shaped,
Textured

Figure 11. Attaching the Body Parts (see text for explanation)

The resulting manikin is suitable for inserting into a game
for prototyping purposes, or one can take the time to further
shape and texture the manikin to look more realistic (see
Figure 11, last image).

Method for Testing the Procedure
Participants

Figure 12. Written Instructions Given to Students

Students received the lecture through YouTube videos
that were embedded in the University’s online instructional
delivery system, WebCT. The total time for the video
lectures was approximately one hour. MGMT 330 was a
purely online course with no face-to-face component.

Results
There were 43 students in MGMT330. Of these 43
students, 33 turned in a robot, while 10 students did not turn
in a robot. Of the 10 students that did not turn in a robot, 7
did not turn in any assignments at all during the semester.
Of the 33 students that turned in a robot, 3 did not save their
files properly and only turned in an animated skeleton.
However, when their work was checked in person, they
indeed modeled a robot correctly. If you removed, the 7
students that did not show up to class, then 91.6% of the
students successfully followed the procedure for modeling a
robot. Figure 13 depicts the robots created by the students.

Forty-three students participated in this study. The students
came from MGMT 330—Fundamentals of Virtual Business
Programming, and none of them had any experience with
figure drawing or 3D modeling prior to taking the course,
which was a required course for junior and senior level
students majoring in management of information systems.

Apparatus
For hardware, students used their personal laptops or
desktop computers to run the 3-D modeling software. The
software used was Maya 2010, which the students
downloaded for free from the Autodesk.com website as part
of Autodesk’s free software program for students and
faculty. All 43 students reported successfully loading Maya
onto their personal computers. The University’s online
instructional system, WebCT, held a link to YouTube
tutorial videos made by the instructor on the topic of
modeling 3D characters and this video was made available
to all students.

Figure 13. Figures Created by the Management Students

1546

Discussion and Conclusion
The research in this paper presents a repeatable procedure I
developed for modeling human figures in 3-D based on a
distributed cognition analysis, which can be used to create
characters for prototype virtual worlds in academia and
industry. Unlike teaching someone how to draw human
figures on paper, teaching a person how to model human
figures on a computer can be done reliably and in a
relatively short amount of time—at least for sophomorelevel college students and beyond.
While both drawing and modeling are instances of the
general activity of representing human figures in some
medium, the specific tools & media change the distribution
of abilities needed by the artist. When the tool is a
computer running the modeling software, many of the
abilities that are difficult and time-consuming for a person
to master such as drawing objects in the proper perspective
on paper, get distributed to the computer.
While a procedure for quickly modeling character for
virtual worlds and games is valuable, equally important is
the approach used to design this instructional procedure.
Having to design instruction outside of one’s expertise is
not limited to instructors in academia, but is an activity that
both managers and employees may have to engage in
especially in a project with new employees using new tools.
While instructional procedures are not always written down,
they are important to create nonetheless. In situations,
where one must design instruction outside of one’s
expertise, the distributed cognition theoretical framework
suggests that it is possible to:
1. Find a reference system of activity that is equivalent in
terms of its output to the target system. In the current study,
figure drawing on paper was equivalent to figure modeling
on a computer. Both activities are known as functional
systems in the distributed cognition framework.
2. Analyze observable representations in the reference
system, to determine the fundamentals abilities needed to
produce the result in the reference system. In this study, the
fundamental abilities included proportion, impact,
perspective, value, and anatomy.
3. Decide on a new distribution of abilities based on: (a)
the goal of the larger system that the target system is part
of—or the intended use of the output of the target system;
(b) the capabilities of the technology in the target system;
and guided by (c) the principle of effort conservation. For
figure modeling, abilities like proportion and impact were
kept with the person, whereas abilities like perspective and
value were distributed to the computer.
What are the limitations of this procedure? Consider that
there were two fortunate consequences of my analysis: (1)
the abilities that remained after I applied the procedure, i.e.,
proportion and impact, were easy for a non-expert to master;
and (2) the abilities distributed to the computer, such as
perspective, foreshortening, and shading (value)—abilities
that are difficult for an artist to master when drawing figures
on paper—were already implemented by the software.

If after ability distribution, the difficult abilities are not
already implemented in the software, someone will have to
implement their functionality. And if the remaining abilities
are difficult for people to master, then designing an
instructional procedure may not be an option.
However, instructors at least have another option to
consider in designing their pedagogy. Furthermore, this
procedure gives instructors the potential to create novel and
possibly innovative forms of instructional material, which
provide students the ability to create artifacts that were
previously only possible by experts.

References
Bainbridge, W. (2007). Scientific Research Potential of
Virtual Worlds. Science, 317, 472-476.
de la Flor, M., & Mongeon, B. (2010). Digital Sculpting
with Mudbox. Burlington, MA: Focal Press.
Guindon, M. A. (2007). Learning Autodesk Maya 2008: San
Rafael, CA: Autodesk.
Hamm, J. (1963). Drawing the Head and Figure. New
York: Berkley Publishing Group.
Hampton, M. (2009). Figure Drawing: Design and
Invention. M. Hampton Publishing.
Hogarth, B. (1996). Dynamic Figure Drawing. New York:
Watson-Guptill Publications.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Ingrassia, M. (2009). Maya for Games. Burlington: Elsevier.
Lee, S., & Buscema, J. (1978). How to Draw Comics The
Marvel Way. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Loomis, A. (1943). Figure Drawing for All It's Worth. New
York: Viking Press.
Oliverio, G. (2007). Maya 8: Character Modeling. Plano:
Wordware Publishing.
Ozawa, T. (2005). Let's Draw Manga: Bodies and
Emotions. Gardena: Digital Manga Publishing.
Patnode, J. (2008). Character Modeling with Maya and
ZBrush. Burlington, MA: Focal Press.
Ratner, P. (2009). 3-D Human Modeling and Animation.
Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley & Sons.
Reed, W. (1984). The Figure: The Classic Approach to
Drawing & Construction. Cincinnati: North Light Books.
Russo, M. (2006). Polygon Modeling: Basic and Advanced
Techniques. Plano: Wordware Publishing.
Simon, H. (1996). The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Spencer, S. (2010). ZBrush Digital Sculpting: Human
Anatomy. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing.
Williams, R. (2001). The Animator’s Survival Kit. New
York: Faber and Faber.
Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The Role of
Tutoring in Problem Solving. Journal of Child Psychiatry
and Psychology, 17, 89-100.

1547

