UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
That's what she (could have) said: How alternative utterances affect language use

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5f03m09d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Bergen, Leon
Goodman, Noah
Levy, Roger

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

That’s what she (could have) said: How alternative utterances affect language use
Leon Bergen (bergen@mit.edu)1 , Noah D. Goodman (ngoodman@stanford.edu)2 , Roger Levy (rlevy@ucsd.edu)3
1 Department

of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge MA 02139,
of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305,
3 Department of Linguistics, UC San Diego, La Jolla CA 92093

2 Department

Abstract

language. The alternative is that such explanations merely
provide a succinct way of summarizing pragmatic phenomena, and that pragmatic meanings are learned as part of the
grammar, i.e. conventionalized as part of the language. Researchers have argued that some types of pragmatic meanings are computed from the grammar, and not from cooperative social reasoning (Chierchia, 2004). Intuitively, however,
some pragmatic inferences generalize to settings in which
they could not have been previously learned. Consider the
salad/lobster inference described above. This inference is
highly context-dependent, and must require a reasoning process that extends beyond what has been learned in the grammar. But then where is the boundary between conventionalized and socially-derived implicatures?
Here we investigate these questions using experiments and
computational modeling. Despite the apparent simplicity of
explanations in terms of the Q and R-principles, it has been
notoriously difficult to develop a formal framework that captures these principles (or the maxims of conversation). In
addition, there has been little empirical work investigating
whether pragmatic inferences rely on conventionalized meanings. We will be looking at the minimal ways for contrasts
between alternative utterances to drive pragmatic interpretation. Specifically, we will be looking at cases in which there
are no linguistic conventions whatsoever. If people’s pragmatic interpretations show the same sensitivity to contrast in
these settings, it will provide evidence that social reasoning
explains more, rather than less, of their pragmatic abilities.
We focus on two traditional examples of counterfactual
reasoning in pragmatics. The first, scalar implicatures, arise
because of the contrast between words that fall on an increasing scale of informativeness. The less informative meaning is
typically strengthened to the complement of the more informative meaning, as in the case of “some” vs. “all” above. Because the term “scalar implicature” is sometimes reserved to
refer to cases where lexical items fall on a canonical scale of
informativeness, we will use the term specificity implicatures
to describe the strengthening of less informative meanings
even in the absence of such a canonical scale. The second,
which we will call Horn implicatures, guides the interpretation of utterances that differ in their complexity (Horn, 1984).
Typically, more complex constructions receive marked (or
less probable) interpretations. The car case above is an example of a Horn implicature, assuming (as is plausible) that
the two expressions have the same literal content.
These two kinds of implicatures will allow us to explore
pragmatic contrast effects along two distinct dimensions: informativeness and cost. While we will model both of these ef-

We investigate the effects of alternative utterances on pragmatic interpretation of language. We focus on two specific
cases: specificity implicatures (less specific utterances imply the negation of more specific utterances) and Horn implicatures (more complex utterances are assigned to less likely
meanings). We present models of these phenomena in terms
of recursive social reasoning. Our most sophisticated model is
not only able to handle specificity implicature but is also the
first formal account of Horn implicatures that correctly predicts human behavior in signaling games with no prior conventions, without appeal to specialized equilibrium selection criteria. Two experiments provide evidence that these implicatures
are generated in the absence of prior linguistic conventions or
language evolution. Taken together, our modeling and experimental results suggest that the pragmatic effects of alternative
utterances can be driven by cooperative social reasoning.
Keywords: Pragmatics; Communication; Bayesian modeling

Introduction
A central observation in the field of pragmatics is that alternative utterances affect our interpretation of language. If the
teacher says, “Some of the students passed the test”, then this
means that not all of them passed, because the teacher would
have said so if they did. If someone is asked what they ate at
the restaurant, and they say “salad”, then this means that they
did not also get the lobster; otherwise they would have said
so. If someone says, “I got the car to turn on,” then this means
that turning on the car involved something more unusual than
just turning the key. If it hadn’t, they could have just said, “I
turned on the car.” Many other cases like this were described
in Grice’s (1975) classic.
Horn (1984) proposed a unified account of these disparate
cases in terms of his Q and R-Principles. These principles describe how conversational partners are expected to communicate with each other. The Q-Principle states: Say as much as
you can. The R-Principle states: Say no more than you must.
These principles explain how counterfactual utterances like
the ones above have their effect on meaning. If the speaker
behaves according to the Q-Principle, then when she says that
some of the students passed the test, this must mean that she
said all that she could. In particular, she must not have been
in a position to say that all of the students passed. Similarly,
if the speaker is following the R-Principle, then when she reports that she got the car to turn on, this means that a simpler
utterance would not have sufficed to convey her meaning. In
particular, simply saying that she turned on the car would not
have conveyed her meaning.
A basic question about these principles (or Grice’s related
maxims of conversation) is the extent to which they capture
people’s online reasoning when they pragmatically interpret

120

fects as recursive social reasoning, it will emerge that the simplest model of such reasoning that can account for specificity
implicatures is insufficient to explain Horn implicatures. We
begin with the simpler version of the model and later enhance
the model to account for both kinds of effects.

This is intended to capture both the Q and R-Principles. The
speaker’s choice of utterance is determined by a softmax decision rule that describes an approximately optimal Bayesian
decision-maker (Sutton & Barto, 1998). The listener Ln interprets an utterance by using Bayesian inference to integrate his
prior expectations over meanings, given by P, with his model
of Sn−1 , which determines how likely the speaker would have
been to use that utterance given each possible meaning.
This recursive model is defined as follows. The speaker’s
conditional distribution over utterances given interpretations
is defined as
Sn (u|m) ∝ eλUn (u|m) ,
(2)

Specificity Implicatures
The Gricean tradition views pragmatics as a special domain
of social cognition. Pragmatics, on this approach, is the study
of social agents who want to cooperate with each other to
exchange information. Pragmatic phenomena arise as a result
of these goals and the agents’ reasoning about each other.
Here we develop a model of ideal discourse between two
rational agents, a speaker and listener, each with distinct social goals. The speaker wants to communicate a specific
meaning to the listener, requiring her to reason about how the
listener will interpret her possible utterances. The listener,
in turn, wants to determine what meaning the speaker intended to convey, requiring him to reason about which meaning would have led the speaker to send her utterance. The
speaker and listener are modeling each other; crucially, the
listener takes into account the speaker modeling him, and the
speaker takes this into account, and so on. In other words, the
speaker and listener have common knowledge of each others’
communicative goals (Lewis, 1969; Clark, 1996).
This recursive social reasoning bottoms out when the listener stops reasoning about the speaker’s intentions. In this
base case, the listener uses his knowledge of the language’s
semantics or contextual iconicity to interpret the utterance.
We now turn to the formal specification of the model. The
literal content of the utterances is specified by a lexicon L ,
which maps each utterance to a truth function on meanings. If
an utterance has no conventional or iconic meaning, then it is
given the all-true function (i.e. it is a tautology). The listener
has a prior distribution P over meanings; in the base case, the
listener uses Bayesian inference to update her belief about the
intended meaning given the utterance’s literal meaning. More
precisely, the listener conditions the prior distribution on the
utterance being true, essentially filtering P through the literal
meaning, leading to a new distribution L0 with support only
on meanings that are consistent with the utterance. That is:
L0 (m|u, L ) ∝ Lu (m)P(m),

where λ > 0 is the gain on the speaker’s softmax decision
rule. Un (u|m) is the speaker’s expected utility from uttering u
to convey m, defined as
Un (u|m) = log(Ln−1 (m|u)) − c(u).

(3)

Here c(u) is the cost of uttering u (in, e.g., time and effort);
the other term measures the communicative benefit of u as
the number of bits of information remaining between the listener’s posterior distribution Ln−1 (m|u) and the true meaning
m (Frank, Goodman, Lai, & Tenenbaum, 2009). Substituting
equation 3 into equation 2, we see that
Sn (u|m) ∝ (Ln−1 (m|u)ec(u) )λ .

(4)

Hence the speaker prefers low-cost utterances and also
prefers to choose an utterance more as the listener is more
likely to pick the correct meaning given the utterance. The
listener’s higher-order interpretations are simply defined as
Ln (m|u) ∝ P(m)Sn−1 (u|m).

(5)

The model defined here is very similar to the iterated best
response model of (Jäger & Ebert, 2009).
In situations where the speaker has a choice between utterances one of whose literal meanings is a subset of the other,
this model induces an inference that the utterance with the
broader meaning should be interpreted as indicating that the
narrower meaning does not hold—which we term a specificity implicature. To see why, suppose that there are two possible meanings, pyramid and cube, and two utterances, “pyramid” and “shape”, both of which have equal cost. The literal
listener interprets “pyramid” as meaning pyramid with probability 1, due to the truth-conditional component of literal interpretation, and interprets “shape” as meaning either pyramid or cube with probabilities based on the prior, P(pyramid)
and P(cube) respectively. For the speaker S1 reasoning about
the literal listener, conveying pyramid with “pyramid” has
higher utility than conveying it with “shape”, since the former term ensures the proper interpretation. S1 is thus more
likely to say “pyramid” than “shape” when she means to convey pyramid; and she will obligatorily say “shape” when she
means to convey cube. The more sophisticated listener L2
uses S1 ’s distributions rather than literal meaning, and thus
prefers to interpret “shape” as cube rather than pyramid, since

(1)

where m is a meaning, u is the utterance sent by the speaker,
Lu is a function from meanings to {0,1}, with Lu (m) = 1
if m is in the denotation of u, and P is the listener’s prior
distribution over meanings.
Social reasoning enters the model through a pair of recursive formulas that describe how the speaker and listener reason about each other. The formulas describe Bayesian agents
Sn and Ln of increasing sophistication. The least sophisticated speaker S1 reasons about the base, “literal” listener L0 ;
a slightly more sophisticated listener L2 reasons about this
speaker; and so on. The speaker Sn has a utility function Un
that simultaneously accounts for how informative an utterance is for listener Ln−1 as well as for its complexity or cost.

121

the likelihood of “shape” is greater when cube is to be conveyed than when pyramid is. As the speaker and listener
reach higher levels of recursive reasoning, these tendencies to
say “pyramid” for pyramid and to interpret “shape” as cube
continue to strengthen, both ultimately asymptoting at probability 1 (Figure 2, pink bars; the asymptotes do not depend
on λ or P, so long as λ > 1 and P(m) > 0 for all m).

goal was to successfully play a communication game with a
partner, given these objects and two messages that they could
send, a triangle and an alien symbol. Participants received 10
rounds of practice as the speaker in order to familiarize with
the interface; however, they did not play these rounds with a
partner or receive any feedback.
The communication game consisted of five rounds. In each
round, participants were randomly assigned a partner and a
role as either the speaker or listener. Between rounds, participants were told that they were being randomly matched with a
partner. Participants were never identified to each other. The
speaker was shown a randomly chosen object that needed to
be communicated, and given the choice of the two messages
to send. Once the speaker clicked on a message, it was sent to
the listener, who was asked to determine what meaning was
intended. The listener was given the choice of the two objects; once the listener clicked on one of these objects, the
speaker and listener were informed whether their communication was successful. If they were successful, they each received a small bonus payment of $0.06 for that round.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 investigated whether people will draw specificity implicatures in a novel communicative setting. We investigated this by looking at the simplest setting in which
specificity implicatures are possible, a language with only
two messages and two meanings. By varying the (nonconventional) semantic content of the messages, we can determine whether competing messages influence interpretations here as they do in richer, conventionalized settings.
We presented people with a simple communication game,
which they played with a partner. In the game, one player
was the “speaker”, who had a specific meaning to communicate, and one player was the “listener”, who had to infer
this meaning based on the message sent by the speaker. The
meaning for the speaker to communicate was randomly chosen to be either a pyramid or a cube. The speaker had the
choice between two messages to send the listener: a shape
with an iconic relationship with one of the meanings (a triangle for the pyramid), or an “alien” symbol with no obvious
connection to either meaning (see Figure 1). If people’s reasoning about semantic competition extends to novel settings,
then the alien symbol will get a strengthened interpretation:
it should be interpreted as the cube, which is the meaning that
the speaker could not directly pick out. Likewise, the speaker
will recognize that choosing the alien symbol is more likely to
communicate the meaning for which there is no iconic symbol available. We thus predict that the speaker will use the
alien symbol to communicate this meaning.

Results and Discussion
There were two questions of interest in this experiment. The
first was whether listeners would interpret the alien symbol
as the unnamed object (i.e. the object without an iconic message), i.e. the cube. On every trial, the listener interpreted the
alien symbol as the unnamed object and the iconic symbol as
the corresponding object. The second question was whether
the speaker would choose the alien symbol to convey the unnamed object. Participants selected the alien symbol on every
trial on which they needed to communicate the unnamed object; and they selected the name on all but two trials on which
they needed to communicate the named object. These results
are shown in Figure 2. (The displayed model predictions were
not sensitive to the value of the model parameters.)
These results provide evidence that participants were sensitive to the semantic contrast between available utterances.
Listeners inferred that the speaker would have only used the
alien symbol if she needed to communicate the unnamed object. Speakers similarly inferred that the listener would interpret the alien symbol as the unnamed object, and only chose
the alien symbol in order to communicate this object.

Horn’s Principle
H ORN ’ S PRINCIPLE describes the effects of lexical competition when utterances differ in cost instead of semantic content. The principle states that phrases that are “costlier”—
e.g., longer, or involving less-frequent subexpressions—are
associated with less probable meanings. For example, I
turned on the car and I got the car to turn on have approximately identical literal meaning; but most speakers would
use the shorter sentence to refer to the typical turning of a
car key and the longer sentence to some less typical manner
of turning on the car. This is the efficient mapping between
form and meaning; Horn (1984) and others have documented
many instances of such efficient mappings in language.

Figure 1: Experiment 1 game interface for speaker.

Methods:
We recruited 40 participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk.
They were paid a small amount of money for participation, in
addition to performance-based bonuses, as described below.
Participants were told that they had arrived on an alien
planet that contained two objects, a pyramid and a cube. Their

122

Speaker response

Named object

Name

Symbol

1.0

1.0
Basic Model

Basic Model

LU Model

LU Model

Experimental results

Experimental results
0.8

0.8

0.6

Proportion

0.6

Proportion

Figure 2: Experiment 1 results and model predictions. (a)
Speaker responses given the goal
of communicating the named object (left) or the unnamed object
(right). The y-axis is the proportion of trials on which the
speaker chose each utterance.
Error bars are 95% confidence
intervals. (b) Listener responses
when the speaker chose either
the name (left) or the alien symbol (right). The y-axis is the proportion of trials on which the
listener chose each object.

Listener response

Unnamed object

0.4

0.4

0.2
0.2

0.0
0.0

Unnamed
object

Named
object

Unnamed
object

Named
object

Symbol

Name

Symbol

Name

Utterance used

Object picked

(a)

(b)

Perhaps surprisingly, however, the model of intuitive cooperative communication we have introduced fails to predict
Horn’s principle. Consider the problem of a one-shot speakerlistener signaling game with two utterances, “expensive” and
“cheap” (the costs of these utterances reflect their names),
and two meanings, likely and unlikely; nothing distinguishes
the utterances other than their cost, and each has the all-true
meaning. The literal listener L0 interprets both utterances
identically, matching the prior probabilities of the meanings.
L0 ’s interpretation thus provide no information with which
the speaker S1 can distinguish among the utterances; the only
thing distinguishing the utterances’ utility is their cost. This
leads to an across-the-board dispreference on the part of S1
for “expensive”, but gives no starting point for more sophisticated listeners or speakers to break the symmetry.

allowing the lexicon to assign non-trivial semantic content to
utterances. Second, we allow for lexical uncertainty, where
the speaker and listener can reason about distributions over
multiple lexica. In the signaling game described above, for
example, lexicon L 1 might assign the meaning likely to “expensive” and the all-true meaning to “cheap”, whereas lexicon L 2 might assign the meaning unlikely to “expensive”
and the same all-true meaning to “cheap”. The absence of
prior conventions then means that the marginal interpretation,
across lexica, is the same for all utterances.
Including lexical uncertainty generalizes the previous
model; the base listener L0 remains unchanged from equation
1, but the more sophisticated speaker and listener are defined
by:
Sn (u|m, L ) ∝ eλUn (u|m,L )
(6)

In fact, Horn’s principle has been extraordinarily difficult
to derive within other formal frameworks as well. The problem we posed is equivalent to the multiple equilibrium problem for signaling games in economics, which has been investigated for the last 30 years (Cho & Kreps, 1987; Chen,
Kartik, & Sobel, 2008). The fundamental difficulty involves
ruling out inefficient equilibria, e.g. those in which “expensive” is associated with likely and “cheap” with unlikely, in
the absence of prior conventions or ad-hoc rules for choosing
among equilibria. Some recent work by linguists (van Rooij,
2004, 2008; Franke, 2009) has attempted to derive Horn’s
principle by using evolutionary game theory or hybrid gametheoretic models, but none has found a derivation for one-shot
signaling games, without use of equilibrium refinement criteria specifically designed to pick out the desired equilibria.

Ln (m|u) ∝ ∑ P(m)P(L )Sn−1 (u|m, L )

(7)

L

where

Un (u|m, L ) =

log(L0 (m|u, L )) − c(u)
log(Ln−1 (m|u)) − c(u)

if n = 1
if n > 1.

(8)

We take P(L ) to be the uniform distribution over all seven
logically possible lexica in which every utterance assigns
“true” to at least one meaning and every meaning is assigned
“true” by at least one utterance.
Because this new lexical-uncertainty model reduces to the
base model when conventions for literal meanings are already established and there is only a single lexicon L , the
new model continues to properly handle specificity implicature (Figure 2, green bars). Furthermore, the new model derives Horn’s principle. Consider the case we proposed above
with two lexica, L 1 interpreting “expensive” as likely and L 2
interpreting “expensive” as unlikely (and both giving a trivial
interpretation to “cheap”). Due to the role of the prior P(m),
the base listener L0 associates “cheap” with likely for both
lexica. Now consider two speakers who can use the expensive
utterance to precisely communicate their meaning: speaker
S1 (·|likely, L 1 ) who wants to communicate likely and is using

Here we propose exactly such a derivation, by revisiting
the assumption in our base model regarding the nature of literal meaning in the absence of prior conventions. Earlier in
this section we assumed that the absence of prior convention
should be represented as a single lexicon L in which all utterances have the all-true (tautological) meaning. We revise that
assumption in two respects. First, for any given utterance we
allow Lu to assume either truth value {0, 1} for each meaning,

123

Speaker response

Most frequent object

Intermediate object

Listener response

Least frequent object

Cheap utterance

Intermediate utterance

Basic Model

Basic Model

LU Model

LU Model
0.8

Experimental results

0.8

Experimental results

0.6

Proportion

0.6

Proportion

Expensive utterance

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

(b)

Infrequent

(a)

Intermediate

Object picked

Frequent

Infrequent

Intermediate

Frequent

Infrequent

Intermediate

Frequent

Expensive

Intermediate

Cheap

Expensive

Intermediate

Cheap

Expensive

Intermediate

Cheap

Utterance used

Figure 3: Experiment 2 results and model predictions. (a) Speaker’s message choice given that she needed to convey the
most frequent (left), intermediate (center), or least frequent object (right). The y-axis is the proportion of trials on which each
message was chosen. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals. (b) Listener’s object choice after receiving the cheapest (left),
intermediate (center), or most expensive message (right). The y-axis is the proportion of trials on which each object was chosen.
lexicon L 1 and speaker S1 (·|unlikely, L 2 ) who wants to communicate unlikely and is using lexicon L 2 . For the speaker
S1 (·|likely, L 1 ), the extra precision of “expensive” is not valuable, because the base listener L0 will also interpret “cheap”
as likely. However, for the speaker S1 (·|unlikely, L 2 ), the extra precision of “expensive” is valuable, because it overrides
the base listener’s prior bias against unlikely. This breaks the
symmetry and leads L2 to start to prefer the efficient mapping,
a preference that gets magnified by S3 ’s reasoning and continues to get magnified at higher levels of recursive inference.
The lexical uncertainty model can predict correct Horn
equilibria beyond the case with two meanings and utterances;
predictions (approximated by averaging over a finely gridded
approximation to the parameter space) for the case with three
meanings and utterances are shown in Figure 3.

same reasoning that gives rise to Horn’s principle extends to
this novel setting, then we expect the speaker and listener to
coordinate on the efficient mapping of meanings to messages.

Methods:
We recruited 140 participants from Amazon Mechanical
Turk, who were paid for participation in addition to bonus
payments described below.
The interface and instructions for the experiment were very
similar to Experiment 1. Participants were told that they
landed on an alien planet containing three kinds of objects
and three messages that could be used to communicate these
objects. They were told that these objects occurred with different frequencies on the planet; one occurred 60% of the
time, one occurred 30%, and the last occurred 10%. Of the
three messages, one was free, one cost $0.01, and the last cost
$0.02. The object frequencies and message costs were randomized between subjects. Participants received 10 practice
rounds without a partner to familiarize them with the interface, object frequencies, and message costs, but received no
feedback during these rounds.
Each participant played 5 rounds of the game with a partner
randomly assigned each round. The game was the same as in
Experiment 1, with two changes. The object that the speaker
needed to communicate was randomly sampled according to
the frequency of the objects on the alien planet (so, e.g., the
most frequent object was sampled 60% of the time). Second,
the speaker was charged the cost of the message sent.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we investigated whether people can coordinate on Horn’s principle in the absence of prior linguistic conventions. This experiment was designed to be a minimal test
of this question: people were placed in the simplest setting
in which Horn’s principle is possible. People played a communication game with a partner as in Experiment 1. There
were three possible meanings for the speaker to communicate, which differed in how frequently they appeared in the
game. The speaker was able to communicate the intended
meaning by sending one of three messages, which differed
only in their cost to the speaker—none was iconic. If the

124

Table 1: Experiment 2 analyses
Role

Response

Frequent
Listener object
Intermediate
object
Unlikely
object
Cheap utterance
Speaker Intermediate
utterance
Expensive
utterance

Comparison
Cheap utterance > intermediate, expensive
Intermediate utterance
> cheap, expensive
Expensive utterance >
cheap, intermediate
Frequent object > intermediate, unlikely
Intermediate object >
frequent, unlikely
Unlikely object > frequent, intermediate

Discussion
tvalue

pvalue

6.07

0.001

5.31

0.001

5.55

0.001

8.27

0.001

6.21

0.001

5.55

0.001

Results and Discussion
Human speaker and listener choices are shown in figure 3,
alongside the predictions of our base model (pink bars),
which does not predict the Horn equilibrium, and our lexicaluncertainty model (green bars), which does. We first analyzed whether listeners interpreted messages according to the
efficient mapping, by carrying out three mixed logit regressions with random intercepts for participants. We analyzed
whether, e.g., listeners responded with the frequent object
more often when they received the cheap utterance than the
other utterances. These comparisons are shown in Table 1.
They show that the listener’s responses were consistent with
the efficient mapping. We next analyzed whether speakers
chose messages efficiently. We addressed this question in a
similar manner to the previous one, carrying out three mixed
logit regressions with random intercepts for participants. The
comparisons in table 1 show that the speaker was more likely
to use the cheap utterance given the frequent object than given
the other objects, and similarly for the other utterances.
By design, each participant only played five rounds of
the game. This was done to ensure that observed efficiency
effects were due to cooperative reasoning, and not due to
language evolution. To validate this design, we analyzed
whether participants played differently on the first round
than on future rounds. To do this, we performed by-subject
ANOVAs on the speaker and listener responses to determine
whether there were main effects or interactions from the first
round. For five of the six speaker and listener response types,
there was no main effect of the first round or interaction with
the object to communicate or message received (p>0.05). For
the intermediate-cost message, there was a small but significant interaction between the first round and the object to communicate (p<0.05). These analyses provide evidence that
learning or language evolution are not driving our results.
These results provide evidence that people can construct
efficient strategies for communication on-line, in the absence
of prior linguistic conventions. This suggests that Horn’s
principle, as it applies to ordinary language use, may arise
from cooperative reasoning between people trying to communicate with each other, rather than from language evolution.

We have investigated two kinds of pragmatic contrast effects.
First, we looked at the effect of varying the specificity, or informativeness, of the utterances available to the speaker. A
simple model of social cognition was able to account for the
strengthening of a non-specific utterance’s interpretation. We
found in Experiment 1 that listeners inferred this strengthened interpretation, and that speakers anticipated this, in the
absence of any prior linguistic conventions.
We next turned to Horn’s principle and the effect of varying the relative cost or complexity of utterances. We first
found that the simple model of social cognition cannot explain Horn’s principle, because it does not have the resources
to exploit the asymmetry between more and less costly utterances. However, once the model included uncertainty about
the underlying lexicon, it was able to predict Horn’s principle,
and explain this asymmetry: under the model, only someone
who wanted to communicate an unlikely meaning would have
an incentive to use an expensive utterance. Notably, this is the
first proposed model of Horn’s principle which does not rely
on specialized equilibrium selection criteria. In Experiment
2, we found evidence that people expect costlier utterances to
correspond to less frequent meanings, as predicted by Horn’s
principle.
Our results suggest that in two important cases, people’s
pragmatic knowledge extends beyond learned grammatical
knowledge to novel, non-linguistic communicative scenarios.
While we have not settled the question of how people arrive
at ordinary pragmatic inferences, our experimental and modeling results do provide evidence that linguistic conventions
are not necessary for them—social cognition will suffice.

References
Chen, Y., Kartik, N., & Sobel, J. (2008). Selecting cheap-talk equilibria. Econometrica, 76(1), 117–136.
Chierchia, G. (2004). Scalar implicatures, polarity phenomena, and
the syntax/pragmatics interface. Structures and beyond, 3, 39–
103.
Cho, I., & Kreps, D. (1987). Signaling games and stable equilibria.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(2).
Clark, H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge University Press
(Cambridge England and New York).
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., Lai, P., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009).
Informative communication in word production and word learning. In Proc. cog. sci. soc.
Franke, M. (2009). Interpretation of optimal signals. New perspectives on games and interaction, 297–310.
Grice, H. (1975). Logic and conversation. 1975, 41–58.
Horn, L. R. (1984). Toward a new taxonomy for pragmatic inference: Q-based and R-based implicature. In D. Schiffrin (Ed.),
Meaning, form, and use in context: Linguistic applications (pp.
11–42).
Jäger, G., & Ebert, C. (2009). Pragmatic rationalizability. In Proceedings of sinn und bedeutung (Vol. 13, pp. 1–15).
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention: a philosophical study. Harvard
University Press.
Sutton, R., & Barto, A. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An introduction (Vol. 28). Cambridge Univ Press.
van Rooij, R. (2004). Signalling games select horn strategies. Linguistics and Philosophy, 27(4), 493–527.
van Rooij, R. (2008). Games and quantity implicatures. Journal of
Economic Methodology, 15(3), 261–274.

125

