UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Representation and Processing of Tense, Aspect &amp; Voice across Verbal Elements in
English

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2xh4w0ff

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Ball, Jerry

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Representation and Processing of Tense, Aspect & Voice across
Verbal Elements in English
Jerry T. Ball (Jerry.Ball@wpafb.af.mil)

711th Human Performance Wing, Air Force Research Laboratory,
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH 45431

Abstract
We consider the representation and processing of the English
verb features tense, aspect and voice, within a computational
cognitive model of human language processing. We assume
that a collection of features is associated with each verbal
element and that these features may project to the clauses in
which they occur. When multiple verbal elements occur, it is
possible for the features to conflict, necessitating mechanisms
of feature blocking and overriding to determine feature
projection. The alternative of having multiple entries in the
mental lexicon for each verbal element with different feature
sets is avoided due to the ambiguity that would be introduced,
and the weak grammatical motivation for doing so. However,
we do assume an ambiguity in the case of most v-ed and vbase verb forms, with the past tense v-ed form being distinct
from the past participle v-ed form and the present tense v-base
form being distinct from the non-finite v-base form. We
assume that every finite clause expresses a tense and voice
feature and many finite clauses express an aspect feature as
well. We consider the case of transitive and intransitive verbs
in combination with the auxiliary verbs ―be‖ and ―have‖ in
finite clauses. For intransitive verbs, we introduce an
active/inactive voice feature distinction which aligns with the
transitive distinction between active and passive voice.
Keywords: grammatical feature, tense, aspect, voice

Introduction
We consider the representation and processing of the
English verb features tense, aspect and voice, within the
context of a pseudo-deterministic model of human language
processing (Ball, 2011a) implemented in the ACT-R
cognitive architecture (Anderson, 2007). The pseudodeterministic model reflects the integration of a highly
parallel, probabilistic, and context dependent, activation and
selection mechanism and non-monotonic context
accommodation mechanism (with limited parallelism) with
what is otherwise an incremental processor which pursues
the best analysis. The overall effect is a human language
processor (HLP) which presents the appearance and
efficiency of deterministic processing, despite the rampant
ambiguity which makes truly deterministic processing
impossible. Our non-monotonic context accommodation
mechanism replaces the monotonic look-ahead mechanism
of Marcus’s deterministic parser (Marcus, 1980) and is
argued to be more cognitively plausible (Ball, 2011a).
We assume that a collection of verb features is associated
with each verbal element (cf. Gazdar et al., 1985) and that

these features may project to the clauses in which they
occur. We consider the composition of verb features across
verbal elements within a clause. When multiple verbal
elements occur, it is possible for the verb features to conflict.
The context accommodation mechanism, which has been
independently motivated (Ball, 2010a), is crucial for
handling conflicts. In particular, we propose specialized
mechanisms of feature blocking (i.e. a feature of a preceding
verbal element precludes projection of a conflicting feature
of a subsequent verbal element) and feature overriding (i.e. a
feature of a subsequent verbal element overrides a
conflicting feature of a preceding verbal element) to handle
conflicts. Feature overriding is non-monotonic in that it
changes the incrementally evolving representation.
Our non-monotonic approach can be contrasted with
approaches which rely on monotonic unification of nonconflicting features (Gazdar et al., 1985; Sag et al., 1986;
Sag, Wasow & Bender, 2003). To avoid feature conflicts,
such approaches tend to posit alternative entries in the
mental lexicon which are structurally ambiguous, often
linguistically unmotivated and sometimes grammatically
inadequate. For example, ―a few books‖ is grammatical in
English despite the fact that ―a‖ is singular and ―few‖ and
―books‖ are plural. In a monotonic unification-based
approach, the number feature of ―a‖ must somehow unify
with the number feature of ―few‖ and ―books‖. To handle
this, one could posit a plural or number lacking version of
―a‖. But this introduces ambiguity and lacks linguistic
motivation. In our non-monotonic approach, the plural
feature of ―few‖ and ―books‖ is allowed to override the
singular feature of ―a‖ (Ball, 2010b). Feature blocking and
overriding are concerned with the composition of features
across lexical items within constructions and differ from
non-monotonic default constraint inheritance (cf. Sag,
Wasow & Bender, 2003, 229ff.) which is concerned with
defeasible inheritance of features within individual lexical
items—which we also use (Ball, 2011b).
English has a highly restricted number of distinct verb
forms which include the following:

1308







V–base (or V–plain) form (e.g. ―give‖, ―go‖)
V–s form (e.g. ―gives‖, ―goes‖)
V–ed form (e.g. ―gave‖, ―went‖, ―kicked‖)
V–en form (e.g. ―given‖, ―gone‖)
V–ing form (e.g. ―giving‖, ―going‖)

―Goes‖ is a slightly irregular v–s form, ―gave‖ and ―went‖
are irregular v–ed forms, and ―gone‖ is an irregular v–en
form. We also treat the combination of the infinitive marker
―to‖ and the base verb form as a distinct verb form,
abbreviated as to+v–base (e.g., ―to give‖). Having a distinct
infinitive form allows the model to unambiguously
recognize infinitives as multi-word units and reduces overall
ambiguity. In total, we claim the existence of six distinct
verb forms. By comparison, Quirk et al. (1985, p. 96) claim
only five regular verb forms






Base form (v–base)
-s form (v–s)
-ing participle (v–ing)
Past form (v–ed)
-ed participle (v–ed or v–en)

not recognizing to+v–base as a distinct form, treating v–en
as an irregular -ed participle, and calling v–ed the past form
(distinct from the -ed participle). Huddleston & Pullum
(2002, p. 74) recognize six verb forms, three primary forms
and three secondary forms:
 Primary
o preterite (v–ed)
o 3rd singular present tense (v–s)
o plain present tense (v–base)
 Secondary
o plain form (v–base)
o gerund-participle (v–ing)
o past participle (v–ed or v–en)
We follow Quirk et al. and Huddleston & Pullum in
allowing the v–ed form to map to two distinct tenses: past
tense and non-finite or untensed. We follow Huddleston &
Pullum in allowing the v–base form to map to two different
tenses: present tense and non-finite. Quirk et al. and
Huddleston & Pullum treat the v–ed (non-finite) and v–en
forms as alternative forms of the past participle. We keep
them distinct since the v–en form is unambiguous.
Huddleston & Pullum, like Quirk et al., do not recognize
to+v–base as a distinct form.
In terms of the mapping from different verb forms to the
tense feature, we propose the following ontology:

There are eight tense differentiated verb categories
corresponding to the six different verb forms. The v–base
(present tense and non-finite) and v–ed (past tense and nonfinite) forms are ambiguous with respect to tense.
For aspect, we propose the following ontology:

We categorize perfect as a type of aspect in agreement with
Quirk et al. (1985), but contrary to Huddleston & Pullum
(2002) who treat perfect as a type of tense. Grammatically,
there is a clear contrast in form between progressive and
perfect aspect in English with the v–ing verb form
corresponding to the progressive and the v–en or v–ed (nonfinite) verb form corresponding to the perfect. Perfect aspect
encodes the completion of an action in contrast to
progressive aspect which encodes its continuation. However,
perfect aspect is also closely associated with past tense since
completed actions typically occur in the past, although the
completion may be co-intensive with the present.
For voice, we propose the following ontology:

We assume that voice is a grammatical feature of
intransitive as well as transitive verbs. Active voice indicates
that the subject is actively involved in the action of the verb.
Passive voice indicates that the subject of the transitive verb
corresponds to one of the affected objects (object, indirect
object) of the active equivalent. Inactive voice indicates that
the subject is an inactive participant of an intransitive verb.
Combining features across the six forms and
distinguishing transitive and intransitive verbs, the following
feature combinations exist:







V–base (fin): present tense, active voice
V–s (fin): present tense, active voice
V–ed (fin): past tense, active voice
V–base (non-fin): non-finite, active voice
To+v-base (non-fin): non-finite, active voice
V–ed (non-fin, trans-verb): non-finite, perfect aspect,
passive voice
 V–ed (non-fin, intrans-verb): non-finite, perfect
aspect, inactive voice

1309

 V–en (non-fin, trans-verb): non-finite, perfect aspect,
passive voice
 V–en (non-fin, intrans-verb): non-finite, perfect
aspect, inactive voice
 V–ing (non-fin): non-finite, progressive aspect,
active voice

the main verb. First, we consider clauses with a single main
verb, starting with present and past tense ―give‖.
1. He gives (pres+act) me the ball
2. He gave (past+act) me the ball

Any verbal entry in the mental lexicon will contain the
features associated with one of these combinations. All
forms of the auxiliary verb ―be‖ encode inactive voice. All
forms of the auxiliary verb ―have‖ encode active voice.
When used as a transitive verb, ―have‖ follows the transitive
verb pattern. Modal auxiliaries (e.g. ―He can go‖) encode a
modal feature in addition to present tense and active voice.
V-base (present tense, active voice) is the combination
associated with imperative (e.g. ―give me it‖) and
subjunctive uses (e.g. ―I desire that he give me it‖).
We consider the combining of tense, aspect and voice
across the verbal elements in a clause, restricting the
discussion to main verbs and the auxiliary verbs ―be‖ and
―have‖ in finite clauses. A key assumption is that the
features of verbal elements may conflict, necessitating
mechanisms for feature blocking and overriding, and
prohibiting unification as the primary integration mechanism
(i.e., conflicting features cannot unify).
With respect to feature blocking, we assume that the
grammatical features of the first of two immediately
adjacent verbal elements normally suppress expression of
conflicting grammatical features of the second. A preceding
verbal element expressing active voice is incompatible with
an immediately following verbal element expressing passive
or inactive voice. For example, in ―he has kicked the ball‖
expression of active voice by ―has‖ suppresses expression of
passive voice by ―kicked‖ (i.e. ―he‖ is actively involved in
kicking), and in ―he has gone‖ expression of active voice by
―has‖ suppresses expression of inactive voice by ―gone‖ (i.e.
―he‖ is actively involved in going). However, the
combination of ―have‖ with ―been‖ is special in that the
inactive voice of ―been‖ overrides the active voice of
―have‖. In addition, the inactive voice of ―been‖ is
compatible with either the inactive voice of a main
intransitive verb or the passive voice of a main transitive
verb. For example, in ―the ball has been kicked‖, the passive
voice of ―kicked‖ can project to the clause since the inactive
voice of ―been‖ overrides the active voice of ―has‖, and the
passive voice of ―kicked‖ is compatible with the inactive
voice of ―been‖. Likewise in ―he has been gone‖, the
inactive voice of ―gone‖ can project to the clause (i.e. ―he‖ is
not actively involved in going). Feature blocking and
overriding are the most distinctive elements of the approach
presented in this paper. Both are incompatible with
monotonic unification of features.

Feature Projection for Transitive Verbs
We start by considering the encoding and projection of
features in clauses containing the transitive verb ―give‖ as

In 1, ―gives‖ encodes and projects the present tense and the
active voice features. In 2, ―gave‖ encodes and projects the
past tense and active voice features.
If we add the auxiliary verb ―be‖ to ―give‖, things start to
get more interesting:
3. He is (pres+inact) giving (prog+act) me the ball
4. He was (past+inact) giving (prog+act) me the ball
In 3, ―is‖ encodes and projects present tense and inactive
voice and ―giving‖ encodes and projects active voice—
overriding the inactive voice of ―is‖—and progressive
aspect. The overriding of the inactive voice of ―is‖ by the
active voice of ―giving‖ is an exception to the rule that the
competing features of the preceding verbal element block
projection of the features of the following verbal element
(specific to ―be‖+verb). Example 4 only differs in that ―was‖
encodes and projects past tense.
5. He is (pres+inact) given (perf+pass) the ball
6. He was (past+inact) given (perf+pass) the ball
In 5, ―is‖ encodes and projects present tense and inactive
voice, allowing ―given‖ to project passive voice to the
clause. Allowing ―be‖ to encode inactive voice which can
be overridden by an immediately following verbal element,
allows ―giving‖ to project active voice and ―given‖ to
project passive voice. In addition to projecting passive voice,
―given‖ also encodes and projects perfect aspect. There is a
clear sense in which ―He is given the ball‖ implies
completion of the act of giving, which comes from the
perfect aspect of ―given‖. Example 6 only differs in that
―was‖ encodes and projects past tense. One might think that
completion of the act of giving comes from ―was‖ and not
―given‖ in this example. However, note that ―he was giving
me the ball‖ does not imply completion even though ―was‖
is past tense.
7. He is (pres+inact) to give (nonfin+act) me the ball
8. He was (past+inact) to give (nonfin+act) me the
ball
In 7, ―is‖ encodes and projects present tense and inactive
voice and ―to give‖ encodes non-finite tense (i.e. the absence
of tense) and active voice, but only projects active voice
since present tense is projected by ―is‖ and blocks the nonfinite feature of ―to give‖. The overall effect is that the
clause is present tense and active voice similar to ―he gives
me the ball‖. However, ―He is to give me the ball‖ also
implies a modal obligation which is not captured by the
current analysis. Example 8 only differs in that ―was‖ is past
tense.
Adding the auxiliary verb ―have‖ to ―give‖ also has
interesting effects.

1310

9. He has (pres+act) given (perf+pass) me the ball
10. He had (past+act) given (perf+pass) me the ball
In 9, ―has‖ encodes and projects present tense and active
voice. Projection of active voice by ―has‖ blocks the
possibility of ―given‖ projecting passive voice. This leaves
only perfect aspect to project from ―given‖. In contrast with
the more usual treatment in which ―have‖ combines with a
v–en or v–ed (non-finite) form verb to project perfect aspect,
we propose that ―have‖ instead has the effect of suppressing
projection of passive voice from the immediately following
v–en or v–ed (non-finite) verb form, by projecting active
voice. Example 10 only differs in that ―had‖ projects past
tense. If there were separate entries for the passive and
perfect variants of ―given‖, then ―have‖ could bias selection
of the perfect entry, whereas ―be‖ could bias selection of the
passive entry and this ambiguity is manageable. However,
with separate entries, it would not be possible to project both
perfect aspect and passive voice from a single verbal
element. Under our current approach, ―have‖ suppresses
passive voice, but allows perfect aspect to project, whereas
―be‖ allows both passive voice and perfect aspect to project.

However, besides the combining of present tense and perfect
aspect—which represent different dimensions of meaning
that do not conflict—surprisingly, perfect aspect and
progressive aspect can also be combined across verbal
elements.
15. He has (pres+act) been (perf+inact) giving
(prog+act) me the ball
In this example, ―has‖ expresses present tense and active
voice, ―been‖ expresses perfect aspect, with inactive voice
overriding the active voice of ―has‖, and ―giving‖ expresses
progressive aspect and active voice which overrides the
inactive voice of ―been‖. It may be that the combination
results in an iterative interpretation that is at once
progressive in iterating and perfect in the completion of each
iteration (e.g. ―He has been giving me the ball over and
over‖). It is an open research question how to represent the
projection of two aspectual features (i.e. perfect and
progressive) in a single clause. The computational model
currently supports projection of a single aspectual feature.
Progressive aspect can be combined with passive voice
across verbal elements.

11. He has (pres+act) to give (nonfin+act ) me the ball
In 11, ―has‖ encodes and projects present tense and active
voice. ―To give‖ also encodes and can express active voice,
but this is redundant (but not incompatible) with ―has‖. Like
―be‖, ―have‖ combines with an infinitive to express a modal
obligation to complete the act. In both cases, this effect
appears to derive from the construction (e.g. ―is‖ + ―to give‖,
―have‖ + ―to give‖) rather than the individual lexical items.
Constructional effects can become encoded in complex
lexical items and it is likely that ―have to‖ is encoded in the
mental lexicon as a multi-word unit (in spoken language as
the reduced form ―hafta‖) and expresses an obligation as part
of its idiomatic meaning as shown in example 12.
12. He has to (pres+act+must) give (nonfin+act) me it
13. He had to (past+act+must) give (nonfin+act) me it
Example 13 with past tense ―had‖ expresses a past
obligation rather than a present obligation.
The combination of perfect aspect and passive voice may
also be realized across verbal elements. Consider
14. He has (pres+act) been (perf+inact) given
(perf+pass) the ball

16. He is (pres+inact) being (prog+inact) given
(perf+pass) the ball
In 16, ―is‖ projects present tense, ―being‖ projects
progressive aspect, and ―given‖ projects passive voice. It is
unclear if ―given‖ projects perfect aspect in this example—it
appears not to (the gray font for perf indicates this).
Perfect aspect can combine with progressive aspect and
passive voice across verbal elements.
17. He has (pres+act) been (perf+inact) being
(prog+inact) given (perf+pass) the ball
In 17, ―has‖ projects present tense and active voice, but
active voice is subsequently overridden by the inactive voice
of ―been‖. ―Been‖ projects perfect aspect, ―being‖ projects
progressive aspect (perhaps overriding the perfect aspect of
―been‖), and ―given‖ projects passive voice, with perfect
aspect questionable. This clause expresses a complex
collection of tense, aspect and voice features across four
verbal elements.

Feature Projection for Intransitive Verbs

As an exception, the inactive voice of ―been‖ overrides the
active voice of ―has‖ allowing the passive voice of ―given‖
to project. Note that both ―been‖ and ―given‖ encode and
may express perfect aspect. At the clausal level, we have
perfect aspect whether it comes from one or more verbal
elements.
As the preceding example shows, it is possible to combine
verb features across verbal elements in ways that are not
allowed within a single verb (e.g. present perfect), although
one would like to assume that conflicting features cannot be
simultaneously expressed, even across verbal elements.

When we consider intransitive verbs like ―go‖, the
introduction of the inactive voice feature becomes especially
important. The intransitive v–en form is particularly
revealing. Consider the verb ―gone‖.
18. He has (pres+act) gone (perf+inact)
Like typical v–en forms of transitive verbs, ―gone‖ expresses
perfect aspect when preceded by ―has‖. But why do we need
inactive voice for intransitive verbs? Because intransitive
verbs can occur with ―be‖ just like transitive verbs:

1311

19. He is (pres+inact) gone (perf+inact)

There is clearly an expression of completion in this example,
reflected in the projection of perfect aspect from ―gone‖, but
the active involvement of the referent of ―he‖ is deemphasized. This de-emphasis is the intransitive verb
equivalent of passivization in transitive verbs. In the
intransitive verb case, there is no object available to be
promoted to the subject function. Instead, the subject of the
intransitive verb is demoted from active participant to
inactive participant, but remains the subject.
Now consider a set of even more revealing examples:
20. He has (pres+act) tired (perf+inact)
21. He is (pres+inact) tired (perf+inact)
22. He is (pres+inact) very tired (perf+inact)
In ―he has tired‖, ―tired‖ is the v–ed (non-finite) verb form.
Since ―has‖ projects active voice, the inactive voice of
―tired‖ is blocked, but perfect aspect projects. In ―he is tired
(all of a sudden)‖, it is unclear if perfect aspect projects. If it
doesn’t, then the clause is present tense and inactive voice.
Since ―tired‖ is an intransitive verb, inactive voice demotes
the subject making it an inactive participant. We are left with
an expression that has essentially the same force as an
adjectival expression—a single subject argument that is an
inactive participant, and an auxiliary + verb combination that
lacks any aspectual feature. If we view stative force as the
lack of any aspect (either perfect or progressive), then the
expression is effectively stative. Many researchers, including
Huddleston & Pullum (2002) and Quirk et al. (1985) treat
―tired‖ in 21 and 22 as an adjective. Huddleston & Pullum
(2002, p. 1436) claim that the ability of a word like ―tired‖
to combine with the adverb ―very‖ is a definitive test for an
adjective. Quirk et al. (1985, p. 167) make a similar claim.
However, it is hard to see how this test is definitive given
that ―tired‖ has the form of a v–ed verb. The assumption that
―tired‖ is an adjective when combined with ―be‖ and a verb
when combined with ―have‖ necessitates two entries in the
mental lexicon to represent ―tired‖. The approach advocated
here requires a single verb entry, but allows the context to
control the projection of grammatical features such that an
intransitive verb can function very much like an adjective.
As a challenge to the claim that ―very‖ definitively identifies
an adjective, consider
23. He is (pres+inact) very worn out (perf+inact)
It is atypical of adjectives, and typical of verbs to combine
with prepositions to form verb-particle constructions. ―Worn
out‖ appears to be a typical verb-particle construction,
except that it can be occur with ―very‖. There is also a sense
in which ―worn out‖ implies completion of the process of
wearing out as encoded by perfect aspect.
In general, we argue against the dual treatment of
inflected verbs, including stative verbs, as adjectives since
this introduces an ambiguity that does not facilitate
processing. However, this does not mean that there is never
an ambiguity between verbs and adjectives. Consider
24. The door is (pres+inact) open

―Open‖ appears to be a genuine adjective in that is does not
have any verb inflection and it occurs after ―is‖ where vbase verb forms do not occur. (Note that ―*He is tire‖ is not
grammatical.) If ―open‖ is genuinely ambiguous, how does
the incremental, pseudo-deterministic processor deal with it?
If we restrict ―is‖ to setting a bias for non-finite inflected
verb forms (e.g. v–ing, v–en or v–ed (non-finite)), adjectives
and prepositions, then ―open‖ will be biased to the adjective,
rather than the v–base verb form, in the context of ―is‖. Note
that this bias will not be sufficient if ―gone‖ is both a v–en
verb form and adjective, or ―tired‖ is both a v–ed (nonfinite) verb form and adjective.
Huddleston & Pullum (2002, p. 1436) note that
expressions like ―they were married‖ are ambiguous
between an adjectival and a verbal interpretation. In ―they
were married last week‖ the verbal interpretation dominates,
and in ―they were married for ten years‖ the adjectival
interpretation dominates. Is it possible to handle this
ambiguity without positing distinct entries in the mental
lexicon?
25. They were (past+inact) married (perf+pass)
26. They were (past+inact) married (perf+pass)
If the verbal interpretation corresponds to the projection of
perfect aspect and passive voice, and the adjectival
interpretation corresponds to suppression of perfect aspect
and passive voice, then we can represent the distinction
without positing separate entries in the mental lexicon. One
immediate advantage of this approach is an ability to handle
post verbal modification via feature overriding:
27. They were (past+inact) married (perf+pass) last
week
28. They were (past+inact) married (perf+ pass) for
ten years
In the first example, the relatively punctual nature of ―last
week‖ encourages the expression of perfect aspect, whereas
in the second example, the durative nature of ―for ten years‖
discourages and perhaps overrides the expression of perfect
aspect—although there still appears to be an implication that
they are no longer married. The ―adjectival‖ use also lacks
passive voice. In the case of transitive verbs like ―marry‖,
passive voice applies to the event reading in which the agent
of the event (e.g. the priest) is demoted from subject to
optional oblique argument. In the case of ―they were married
for ten years‖, we have a durative event that is stative-like
and lacking an agent. Note that at the processing of the word
―married‖ we do not know what affect post verbal modifiers
will have or even if there will be any. In an approach which
has separate verb and adjective entries for ―married‖, an
incremental, pseudo-deterministic processor will run into
problems. It is not possible to decide at ―married‖ which
entry is needed. Either both entries will need to be carried
forward in parallel, or the processor must have some
mechanism for backing up and trying the alternative. From
an incremental processing perspective, neither of these is

1312

attractive. The human language processor does not have
sufficient resources to carry forward multiple options in
parallel—at least not across multiple choice points where
additional parallelism might be required. Backtracking is
equally problematic. Resources are needed to store the
alternatives to be considered on backtracking, and knowing
when to backtrack is indeterminate. Our pseudodeterministic processor eschews backtracking and constrains
parallel propagation of alternatives, relying instead primarily
on non-monotonic adjustment of the evolving representation
via feature overriding and feature blocking to deal with
many forms of ambiguity without positing multiple entries
in the mental lexicon.
As a final example with ―married‖, consider
29. They are (pres+inact) being (prog+inact) married
(perf+pass) by a priest
In this example, ―are‖ expresses present tense and ―being‖
expresses progressive aspect. Since ―are‖ and ―being‖ are
forms of ―be‖, they express inactive voice. This allows
―married‖ to express passive voice, but the perfect aspect of
―married‖ is blocked by the progressive aspect of ―being‖.
The result is a clause that is present progressive and passive.
There is an ambiguity here: are they in the act of being
married by a priest or is the event just planned for the
future? Since the present tense ranges over future events in
English, this ambiguity may not be resolvable in terms of
feature projection or suppression.
There is a related ambiguity in the meaning of expressions
with progressive verb forms. According to Huddleston &
Pullum (2002, p. 80)
30. Her parents are entertaining
is ambiguous between ―entertaining‖ as a progressive verb
form and ―entertaining‖ as a stative adjective. If we allow
the active voice feature of ―entertaining‖ to be suppressed
then these two uses can result from a single verb entry:
31. Her parents are (pres+inact) entertaining (prog+ act)
32. Her parents are (pres+inact) entertaining (prog+ act)

In 31, the parents are actively involved in entertaining,
whereas, in 32, the parents are not actively involved. It does
not seem necessary to suppress progressive aspect in this
example since progressive aspect is already stative-like
compared to perfect aspect. Note that this allows us to
handle ―her parents are entertaining tomorrow‖ and ―her
parents are entertaining to be around‖ via feature projection
or suppression without multiple entries in the lexicon.

Summary
We described the representation and processing of the
inflectional verb features tense, aspect and voice within the
context of an incremental, pseudo-deterministic human
language processor (Ball, 2011a). Diagrammatic trees
generated during the execution of the processor which show

verb feature projection on a broad range of different inputs
are available at http://www.doublertheory.com/compgrammer/comp-grammar.htm.
Verbs, including auxiliary and modal verbs, are encoded
with tense, aspect and voice features in the mental lexicon
and these features can project to, or be expressed by, the
clauses in which they occur. When the verb group contains
multiple elements, the grammatical features of the verbal
elements must be reconciled. Monotonic unification of
grammatical features is not possible when the grammatical
features conflict. Mechanisms of feature blocking and
overriding are needed to handle the reconciling of
incompatible features and to minimize the amount of
ambiguity in the mental lexicon—at least when localist
representations (cf. Sag, Boas & Kay 2012) in which all
verbal features compete for expression at the clausal level
are assumed. A non-localist alternative of using
hierarchically organized features (as suggested by a
reviewer) such that in ―He has been kicked‖, ―has‖ takes
―been‖ as a complement with ―has‖ expressing present tense
and ―been‖ expressing perfect aspect on a second level, and
―been‖ takes ―kicked‖ as a complement which expresses
perfect aspect on a third level, may handle the case of
feature blocking, but doesn’t explain how the overall
expression is passive, which requires overriding the higher
level active feature of ―have‖ at the clausal level—if verbs
express a voice feature as is assumed.

References
Anderson, J. (2007). How Can the Human Mind Occur in the
Physical Universe? NY: Oxford University Press.
Ball, J. (2010a). Context Accommodation in Human Language
Processing. Proceedings of the NLPCS Workshop. INSTICC.
Ball, J. (2010b). Projecting Grammatical Features in Nominals.
Proceedings of the 19th BRIMS Conference.
Ball, J. (2011a). A Pseudo-Deterministic Model of HLP.
Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Conference.
Ball, J. (2011b). Explorations in ACT-R Based Cognitive
Modeling: Chunks, Inheritance, Production Matching and
Memory in Language Analysis. Proceedings of the AAAI Fall
Symposium: Advances in Cognitive Systems.
Gazdar, G., Klein, E., Pullum, G. & Sag, I. (1985). Generalized
Phrase Structure Grammar. Cambridge: Harvard.
Huddleston, R. & Pullum, G. (2002). The Cambridge Grammar of
the English Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ Press.
Marcus, M. 1980. A Theory of Syntactic Recognition for Natural
Language. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. & Svartvik, J. (1985). A
Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. Essex, UK:
Pearson Education Limited.
Sag, I., Boas, H & Kay, P. (2012). Introduction to Sign-Based
Construction Grammar. In Signed-Based Construction
Grammar, edited by H. Boas & I. Sag. Stanford: CSLI.
Sag, I., Kaplan, R., Kartunnen, L. Kay, M., Pollard, C., Shieber, S.
& Zaenen, A. (1986). Unification in Grammatical Theory.
Proceedings of the 5 th WECOL.228-254. Stanford: CSLI.
Sag, I., Wasow, T. & Bender, E. (2003). Syntactic Theory, a
Formal Introduction. Stanford: CSLI.

1313

