UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Development of Joint Belief-Desire Inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9cm479fv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Richardson, Hilary
Baker, Chris
Tenenbaum, Joshua
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Development of Joint Belief-Desire Inferences
Hilary L. Richardson1 (hlrich@mit.edu), Chris L. Baker1 (clbaker@mit.edu),
Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 (jbt@mit.edu), and Rebecca R. Saxe1,2 (saxe@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences1 and McGovern Institute for Brain Research2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract

work studying the development of representational ToM has
used versions of the False-Belief task to ask children to
predict an agent’s behavior, given the agent’s previously
established beliefs and desires. In contrast, there has been
less work studying how children solve the inverse problem:
inferring beliefs and preferences from an observed behavior.
Given the girl’s extensive search for a fruit in the kitchen,
how do we simultaneously infer her beliefs and preferences?
Both kinds of judgments—predicting actions given beliefs
and desires, and inferring beliefs and desires given
actions—tap similar ToM reasoning abilities. This paper
aims to test whether the development of the ability to make
ToM inferences parallels the transition to understanding
false beliefs, and to provide evidence for a formal account
of the knowledge supporting both ToM abilities.
The ability to solve this inverse problem is analogous to
solving one equation with two unknowns; our natural ability
to consider context, weigh in with priors, and make rational
inferences enables us to come up with a good guess on
questions we would otherwise not be able to answer.
Studying this ability in the social domain illustrates the
power of ToM to go “beyond the data” and infer multiple
implicit mental states from just one observed action. Prior
work by Baker et al. (2011) presented adult participants
with an inverse mental-state-inference task and showed that
adult mental state inferences are well-explained within a
rational probabilistic inference framework. Here, we use an
analogous paradigm to measure spontaneous mental state
inferences made by children 3-6 years of age and assess
which observed behaviors prompt mental state inference. By
doing so, we are measuring children’s expectation that all
parts of an action should have a sufficient explanation in
terms of mental states.
If this inferential ability develops in parallel with the
ability to predict behavior given a mental state, we would
expect a similar shift in performance between the ages of
three to five on inverse problems that require mental state
inference. On the other hand, it is possible that the ability to
infer mental states from sparse information develops later in
life. This process not only requires the ability to take the
perspective of another and maintain multiple representations
of the world, but it also requires that the viewer
spontaneously seeks to understand observed actions in terms
of underlying beliefs and desires.
In our experiment, children watched a short 3D animation
of a hungry bunny navigating a world to find and eat one of
three different fruits. The bunny can take one of three paths:
(1) pass the nearest, visible fruit to check around a wall to
choose the fruit there (2) take a direct path to the nearest,

Human beings infer complex mental states given very little
information—a facial expression, a sarcastic tone, or even a
simple behavior. Previous work suggests that adults make
joint belief and desire inferences based on an actor’s path, and
that these inferences are well-explained by a Bayesian
framework (Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum, 2011). We
investigate the development of this ability by assessing
mental state inferences made by children ages 3-6 after
watching a short movie. Our results suggest that young
children spontaneously make inductive inferences about
desires or preferences, and that the ability to infer belief from
behavior develops between ages 3-6, and possibly throughout
later childhood. We formulate three computational models
that capture the developmental shift between nonrepresentational and representational theory of mind, and
show that these models capture qualitative patterns in the
children’s data.
Keywords: theory of mind, false-belief task, Bayesian
inference, cognitive development

Introduction
As we move about the world, our actions are the observable
manifestation of unobservable intentions: we act to fulfill
our hopes and desires in accordance with our beliefs. Adults
understand this intuitively. When a girl exclaims “I’m
starving—I’m craving a piece of fruit!” and begins to search
extensively for an apple in the kitchen even though a pear is
in plain sight, adults can infer that the girl wants to eat a
fruit, that she has a preference for apples over pears, and
that she has a reasonable degree of belief that there is an
apple in the kitchen. Our explanation of the girl’s action in
terms of inferred beliefs and desires relies on a Theory of
Mind (ToM): we understand that agents have a working
representation of the world that may or may not reflect
reality, that this representation is influenced by perceptual
access and priors, and that this representation is the basis for
subsequent behavior (Gopnik & Wellman, 1992).
If the girl believes that apples are in the fruit basket, we
confidently predict she will look for one there, even if we
know that the apples are actually in the cupboard. This
ability is assessed by the famous “False-Belief task 1 ”
(Wimmer & Perner, 1983), on which children typically
transition from failure to success between the ages of three
and five (Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001). Most prior

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

“Explicit” vs. “implicit”: Surprisingly, infants succeed in
looking-time paradigms tapping analogous notions of perceptual
access and false belief representation (Onishi & Baillargeon,
2005).

923

visible fruit (3) take the longest path, passing the nearest
fruit to check around the wall (in sight of the farther fruit),
and then turning back to choose the near fruit. These three
paths suggest different orders and degrees of preference for
the three fruits, according to both our intuition and three
computational models. In particular, the third path can only
be fully interpreted as rational if children infer that the
bunny was “looking for” the missing fruit. We analyze how
many children inferred the bunny’s fruit preference, as a
function of age and condition (i.e., the bunny’s path). In
doing so, we believe we are assessing a sophisticated aspect
of ToM reasoning: the ability to make rich inverse
inferences from limited data.

This introduction was created to allow viewers to
understand the bunny’s initial belief state about the world.
Before he embarks on one of three paths to find a fruit,
participants are provided with evidence that the bunny
knows that the three fruit exist, and knows that they rolled
away. They are also prompted to understand that the bunny
is hungry and has a preference for one fruit over the others.
Finally, participants know that the bunny has initial
perceptual access to Fruit 3, and some degree of belief that
the other fruits might be on the other side of the wall. These
priors were similarly built into our computational models.
Between the two movie viewings, participants saw a
black screen with the words “Let’s watch one more time!”
for 3 seconds. The experimenter read this text out loud to
child participants at this time.

Methods
Participants

Paths The bunny’s paths were designed to evoke inferences
about the bunny’s preferences and beliefs. Below we
describe each path, and note in italics the inferences that
each path elicits. While we believe these inferences are
intuitive, we also characterize them through three formal
computational models (see Computational Models section).

143 children were recruited from a local children’s museum
to participate in the study. Out of these, 103 were included
in the final sample (70 females, 3-4yo group: M=4.02,
SD=0.62; 5-6yo group: M=5.79, SD=0.56). 40 participants
were excluded; 28 for answering at least one of four
memory and control questions incorrectly, 5 for parent or
sibling interference, 4 for not answering all of the questions,
and 3 for experimenter error.
55 adults were recruited from an MIT human subjects
listserv. Out of these, 54 were included in the final sample
(30 females, M=25.95, SD=6.14). 1 participant was
excluded for not following task instructions.

Check Stay (CS) The bunny passes Fruit 3, walks to the
other side of the wall, and chooses Fruit 2 (see Fig. 1).
Predicted Inferences: all age groups will infer that Fruit
2 is the bunny’s favorite fruit. Passing Fruit 3 is the
strongest evidence from which to infer that Fruit 3 is the
least favorite fruit. Fruit 1 is underspecified.

Stimuli and Design
3D animated movies were created using Alice 2.2
programming software (http://www.alice.org). Stimuli are
available at: http://saxelab.mit.edu/bunny/. Each participant
watched one movie two times followed by a short ending.
Movie Introduction Each movie begins with a bunny
standing on a green platform. A brown wall divides the
platform—this wall reaches above the bunny’s eye level,
obstructing his view of the other side. There is a tree with
three different fruit on the bunny’s side of the wall. The fruit
varied in shape and color (yellow, red, and orange), and
position of the fruit was counterbalanced across children. At
the beginning of the movie, the bunny waves and says
“Hello!” He then turns to the tree, points at the three fruits
(ambiguously), and says, “I’m hungry, I want that one!” He
attempts to reach the fruit, and eventually succeeds in
knocking all three fruits off the tree simultaneously. While
the bunny is still facing the tree, the three fruit fall down and
roll away—one lands in plain sight of the bunny (Fruit 3),
but the other two roll to the other side of the wall. One of
these fruits stays on the other side of the wall (Fruit 2), and
the other (Fruit 1) falls off of the platform. In the movies
viewed by children, Fruit 1 rolled out of sight. The bunny
turns to get his fruit, sees Fruit 3, and takes one of three
paths: Check Stay (CS), No Check (NC), or Check Turn
(CT) (see below for detailed description).

Figure 1: Final frame of Check Stay Condition (red arrow shows
path).

No Check (NC) The bunny walks directly to Fruit 3 (see
Fig. 2). Predicted Inferences: all age groups will infer
that Fruit 3 is the favorite fruit. There is no distinguishing
evidence for preference order between Fruit 1 and Fruit
2, so the bunny’s least favorite fruit remains ambiguous.

924

Adult participants were asked to rank how much the
bunny liked each of the fruits on a Likert scale from 1-7
(Not Much-Very Much). They were also asked to explain
their rankings (“How do you know?”). All responses were
recorded by the participant using pencil and paper.
Child participants were asked two control questions, four
test questions, and two memory check questions after
watching the movie. The first control question asked the
child to identify each fruit by pointing to it on the laminated
picture; the order of fruits was counterbalanced across
children. The second control question asked, “At the
beginning of the movie, how many fruit did the bunny see in
the tree?” Children were then asked “Which fruit do you
think is the bunny’s favorite?” and “How do you know?”
Next, children were asked “Which fruit do you think is the
bunny’s least favorite—which one does he not like?” and
“How do you know?” Finally, children were asked “During
the movie, which fruit fell off and rolled away?” and
“During the movie, which fruit did the bunny pick?” The
control questions provided reasonable exclusion criteria and
enabled us to confidently report that children were engaged
by the movie and remembered its content, while the test
questions provided us with sufficient information regarding
preference understanding (which fruit was favorite, neutral,
and least favorite). Most children responded to the favorite
and least favorite questions by pointing to the laminated
picture (rather than responding verbally). Child testing
sessions were recorded using a video camera. Parents were
usually in the testing room with the child participants, but
were asked to remain quiet during the experiment.

Figure 2: Final frame of No Check Condition (red arrow shows
path).

Check Turn (CT) The bunny passes Fruit 3, walks to the
other side of the wall, sees Fruit 2, and goes back to Fruit
3 (see Fig. 3). Predicted Inferences: Participants who
attribute initial uncertainty about the locations of the
occluded fruits to the bunny will infer the correct
preference order: the bunny’s favorite fruit is Fruit 1, and
his least favorite fruit is Fruit 2. Participants who do not
consider the bunny’s beliefs will infer that the bunny’s
favorite fruit is Fruit 3 and his least favorite fruit is Fruit
2.

Computational Models
We model children and adults’ mental state inferences as a
kind of probabilistic causal reasoning. One way to approach
inverse problems is through Bayesian inference, which
describes the process by which people generate and test
hypotheses based on their expectations and evidence. The
probability of a hypothesized mental state H, given observed
evidence E, denoted P(H|E), depends on P(E|H), the
likelihood of the evidence, given the hypothesis, and P(H),
the prior probability that the hypothesis is true, according to
Bayes’ rule:
P(H | E) " P(E | H)P(H) .
Posed in the context of this study: given the path that the
bunny takes and the fruit that he chooses (E), what were his
initial beliefs and desires (H)?
To !
capture the development of the ability to represent and
infer mental states, we formulated three models: OutcomeBased (OB), Desire Theorist (DT), and Bayesian ToM
(BToM). The Outcome-Based model assigns full preference
to the fruit that the bunny chooses; it is not influenced by
the bunny’s beliefs or the path that he takes. The DT model
is based on the Copy Theorist model of Goodman, et al.
(2006). DT is a non-mentalistic model that represents how
an agent’s desires and the world state—but not the agent’s
beliefs—cause its actions, via the principle of rational action
(Gergely et al., 1995). The DT model can infer

Figure 3: Final frame of Check Turn Condition (red arrow shows
path).

Movie Ending After children viewed both the introduction
and path twice, they viewed a short ending. This ending
shows all three fruit roll within sight and reach of the bunny,
making it clear that this time, the bunny can choose any of
the fruits. All participants were shown a laminated picture
of the final frame of this ending, which shows the bunny
equidistant from all three fruit. This picture enabled children
to respond to questions by pointing, and was placed in front
of adults as they filled out the short questionnaire.
All participants sat approximately 12-18” from the movie,
which was played on a 15” MacBook Pro. Each participant
watched two trials of one condition for a total watching time
of 3:11 minutes (CT condition), 2:48 minutes (CS
condition), or 2:25 minutes (NC condition).

925

straightforward desires that do not depend on the actor’s
belief state. We expect this model to explain mental state
inferences that derive mainly from which fruit the bunny
chose. The third model is based on the BToM framework
proposed by Baker et al. (2011), which models a mentalistic
theory. BToM incorporates a principle of rational belief: the
assumption that agents maintain beliefs about the world that
are consistent with physical laws and depend on their
perceptual access to the world (i.e., visual access to different
fruits). This enables simultaneous inference of agents’
beliefs and desires, given observations of their behavior.
The DT and BToM models assume that the bunny’s
actions are guided by his degree of desire (subjective value)
for each fruit, which trades off against his expected costs to
reach them. The bunny incurs costs for effort (quantified by
the number of steps taken per path: 1.5 steps for NC, 2.75
for CT, and 3 for CS) and time (an additional cost of .25 for
checking around the wall). The bunny’s favorite fruit is
assigned a value of 15, the second-favorite fruit a value of 5,
and the least favorite fruit a value of 1. This desire scale
reflects a strong preference for one fruit and is calibrated to
the spatial scale of the environment; changing these
approximate values does not alter the trends observed. The
OB model also assumes that the bunny’s actions are guided
by desire, but does not assign incorporate costs or rewards;
the chosen fruit is considered the bunny’s favorite, and the
two unchosen fruits are equally least favorite.
The BToM model attributes initial uncertainty to the
bunny about the locations of the two non-visible fruit: both,
one, or neither of the two fruits may be available behind the
wall. In the BToM model, the bunny’s beliefs are updated
when he moves to the other side of the wall. The Desire
Theorist model, on the other hand, assumes the bunny’s
actions depend only on the true world state. For BToM,
costs incurred to check around the wall are rational if the
bunny desires one of the two non-visible fruits and believes
it could be there; in the DT model, there is no explanation of
why the bunny incurred these costs.
This key difference is most evident in the Check Turn
condition, which allows us to assess whether three/four-year
olds, five/six-year-olds, and adults incorporate information
about uncertainty, planning, and belief updating into their
desire inferences. If so, their responses should be better
predicted by the BToM model than the DT model. This
difference is comparable to the performance shift on the
False-Belief task between children who are three and five
years old; three-year-old children refer to salient outcomes,
actions, and desires, while five-year-old children take
beliefs into consideration.

each condition (CS, NC, CT). We binarized adult participant
data; the fruit that was assigned the highest number on the
Likert scale was coded as the favorite, and the fruit assigned
the lowest number was coded as the least favorite. Whereas
all participants picked one fruit as the favorite for each
condition, participants often reported two fruits as least
favorite. In this case, each fruit received half the weight
assigned to a single favorite or least favorite fruit (.5).
We used logistic regression to test for main effects of age
(a continuous variable), condition (CS, NC, CT), and age by
condition interactions on favorite and least favorite fruit
choice. We used a Bonferroni correction (n=3) for multiple
comparisons.
To compare behavioral judgments to the three models, we
separated participants into three groups: younger children
(age 3-4 years, n=56), older children (age 5-6 years, n=46),
and adults (n=54). We calculated the probability of
choosing each fruit (3) as favorite or least favorite (2) in
each condition (3). We compared the resulting 18 values for
each group to the corresponding predictions from each
model, using a Pearson’s correlation.

Results
Check Stay (CS) Condition
This condition is a good measure of spontaneous
understanding of preference; the bunny picks Fruit 2 after
explicitly passing Fruit 3. We expected that children of all
ages as well as adults would correctly identify Fruit 2 as the
favorite, as predicted by all three models. We found a
positive main effect of the CS condition on choosing Fruit 2
as the favorite fruit (p<0.001), and a negative effect of the
CS condition on choosing Fruit 2 as the least favorite fruit
(p=0.043). There were no significant effects of age on fruit
choice in this condition. Fig. 4 shows that participant
judgments were well predicted by the DT and BToM
models across age.

No Check (NC) Condition
This condition is an interesting measure of how participants
understand preference when there is less evidence available.
The bunny approaches the only visible (and closest) fruit,
Fruit 3, providing weaker evidence for his preference; his
choice may reflect efficiency or lack of options, rather than
a strong preference. Again, all groups successfully picked
Fruit 3 as the most likely favorite. We found a positive main
effect of the NC behavior on choosing Fruit 3 as the favorite
(p<0.001), and a negative main effect of the NC behavior on
choosing Fruit 3 as the least favorite (p=0.020). There was
no significant difference between age groups.
We were specifically interested in whether observers were
sensitive to the weaker evidence in NC compared to CS
paths; if so, Fruit 1 should be more likely to be chosen as
least favorite in the NC condition than in the CS condition
(because in the CS condition, the bunny explicitly avoided
Fruit 3). Only the BToM model showed this qualitative
pattern. Although this difference was not significant in any
age group individually, combining across age groups did

Data Analysis
Child responses to the four control and memory questions,
two preference questions, and two explanation questions
were transcribed from the recording of the testing session.
From these data we recorded the proportion of participants
in each age group (3-4yo, 5-6yo, and adults) who reported
each fruit (1,2, and 3) as “favorite” and “least favorite” in

926

Proportion of
responses (Humans)

Favorite

Least Favorite

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

Probability of
response (Model)

0

Fruit 1
Fruit 2
Fruit 3

0
3-4 5-6 Adult

3-4 5-6 Adult

3-4 5-6 Adult

3-4 5-6 Adult

3-4 5-6 Adult

Check Stay

No Check

Check Turn

Check Stay

No Check

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

3-4 5-6 Adult

Check Turn

0
OB DT BToM

OB DT BToM

OB DT BToM

OB DT BToM

OB DT BToM

OB DT BToM

Check Stay

No Check

Check Turn

Check Stay

No Check

Check Turn

Figure 4: Results of “Favorite” and “Least Favorite” judgments across conditions and age groups. The bottom row compares the results
of the OB, DT, and BToM models to human judgments, matching the qualitative developmental shift between younger and older
participants.

reveal the predicted pattern (25/47 chose Fruit 1 as least
favorite in NC, compared to 16/49 in CS, p<0.05, Fisher’s
exact test).

Model Comparison
Combining across the three conditions, we compared the
responses of each age group to the three models. Judgments
made by 3-4 year old children were most strongly correlated
with the predictions of the OB model (r=.902), followed by
the DT model (r=.898), and least with the BToM model
(r=.719). In contrast, judgments made by 5-6 year old
children correlated most strongly with predictions made by
the DT model (r=.898) followed by the BToM model
(r=.812), and correlated least with the OB model (r=.786).
Adult preference predictions were most strongly correlated
with the BToM model (r=.943), followed by the DT model
(r=.920), and least correlated with the OB model (r=.678).
These data support the idea that across development, people
increasingly incorporate spontaneously attributed beliefs
and desires into their understanding of agents’ behavior.

Check Turn (CT) Condition
This condition tests spontaneous inference of both the
beliefs and preferences of the agent. It requires participants
to consider the agent’s actions in terms of preferences
(which fruit did he really want?) and counterfactuals (what
was he looking for behind the wall, that he could have seen
but did not?) rather than outcome (which fruit did he pick?).
Given the well-documented shift from failure to success on
False-Belief tasks, we expected 3-4 year olds to perform
significantly worse than 5-6 year olds and adults on the
“favorite fruit” question.
We found a positive age by condition interaction on
choosing Fruit 1 as the favorite fruit (p=0.029) and a
significant negative age by condition effect on choosing
Fruit 1 as least favorite (p=0.021). These results show that
as participants got older, their judgments slowly came to
better resemble the predictions of the BToM model. The
salient fact that the bunny chose Fruit 3 was difficult for
younger participants to ignore, as suggested by the OB and
DT model predictions. As a result, there was also a positive
main effect of the CT condition on choosing Fruit 3 as the
favorite (p=0.001) and a negative main effect of condition
on choosing Fruit 3 as least favorite (p=0.020).

Discussion
In this study we used a novel ToM task to examine the
development of the ability to spontaneously attribute mental
states in order to understand an agent’s observed actions,
i.e., to solve inverse social inference problems. Our results
suggest that this ability emerges gradually, with
performance continuing to improve after age 5-6 years.
In particular, on the critical Check Turn condition a
sufficient explanation of the bunny’s behavior requires
children to infer that the bunny checked behind the wall
because he was looking for (and preferred) the missing Fruit
1. This inference depends on recognizing that the bunny

927

initially didn’t know which fruit was behind the wall, and
that he couldn’t have been looking for Fruit 2, because he
subsequently turned back to Fruit 3 (which he initially
bypassed). Observers would only make this complex
inference if they sought a sufficient rational explanation of
the bunny’s whole path. Most 3-4 year old children
effectively ignored the “checking” path, inferring that the
bunny prefers whichever fruit he chooses in the end. This
behavior mimicked the prediction of our Outcome-Based
and Desire Theorist models. Five and six year olds were
somewhat more likely to take the checking path into
consideration, recognizing Fruit 1 as the favorite, and adults
were even more likely to do so. This created a gradual
increase with age in the match between participants’ choices
and the predictions of the Bayesian Theory of Mind model.
One limitation of the current experiment is that we did not
test children older than 5-6 years, so we cannot say whether
children’s performance on these tasks reaches adult levels
by age 7-9 years, or whether there is extended development
through adolescence. Another limitation is that children’s
choices for the “least favorite” fruit were frequently
ambiguous (both fruits not identified as favorite were often
considered least favorite). We are currently working on an
extension in which children provide a full ordering of the
bunny’s preference for all three fruits.
The current results are amenable to multiple
interpretations. First, children may be becoming more
sophisticated and adept at thinking about other minds.
Simultaneously inferring a belief and a desire may require a
more robust ToM capacity than using beliefs and desires to
predict actions. If so, these results may be related to the
observation that children’s ToM brain regions also become
increasingly selective after age 5-6 years (Gweon, DodellFeder, Bedny, & Saxe, in press). Another possibility is that
over development, children become more committed to the
idea that agent’s actions are rational, and require sufficient
rational explanations. Thus, younger children may be less
likely to view others’ actions as efficient paths toward their
goals, and so the bunny’s deviant path may not seem to
require any explanation. As children expect more efficiency
from others, the deviant path may become more salient, and
demand an explanation. Finally, a third possibility is that
children’s ability to focus on and interpret the bunny’s path,
in addition to his (highly salient) final position, depends not
on ToM development per se, but on unmasking of prior
competence by the development of executive function
(Carlson, Moses, & Breton, 2002; Baillargeon, Scott, & He,
2010).
Another key question is how infants will perform on this
task. Recent evidence from looking time suggests that
infants have a nascent ToM, and can update representations
of agents’ beliefs and desires given their perceptual access,
in change-in-location and appearance-reality tasks (for a
review, see Baillargeon et al., 2010). We believe that if
infants make simultaneous inferences about beliefs and
desires in the current paradigm, it would be particularly

strong evidence for a mentalistic account of infant ToM
abilities.
In sum, the current study is an initial step toward
clarifying how we develop the ability to make joint beliefdesire inferences in order to understand other minds. It
contributes to the current literature on ToM development,
suggesting that children develop this ability in parallel with
other mentalistic reasoning abilities between the ages of
three and five, and could serve as a launching point for
future work studying rich social inferences made by infants.
Acknowledgements The authors were supported by the
Packard Foundation. We thank members of the Saxe and
Schulz labs for thoughtful discussion and feedback and
Mika Asaba for help with data collection. Thanks also to the
Children’s Museum of Boston and participating families.

References
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R.M., & He, Z. (2010). False-belief
understanding in infants. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14,
110-118.
Baker, C.L., Saxe, R.R., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2011). Bayesian
Theory of Mind: Modeling Joint Belief-Desire Attribution. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2469-2474).
Carlson, S.M., Moses, L.J., & Breton, C. (2002). How specific is
the relation between executive functioning and theory of mind?
Contributions of inhibitory control and working memory.
Infant and Child Development, 11, 73-92.
Gergely, G., Nadasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Biro, S. (1995). Taking the
intentional stance at 12 months of age. Cognition, 56, 165–
193.
Goodman, N.D., Baker, C.L., Bonawitz, E.B., Mansinghka, V.K.,
Gopnik, A., Wellman, H., Schulz, L., & Tenenbaum, J.B.
(2006). Intuitive Theories of Mind: A Rational Approach to
False Belief. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1382-1387).
Gopnik, A. and Wellman, H. (1992). Why the child’s theory of
mind really is a theory. Mind & Language, 7, 145-171.
Gweon, H., Dodell-Feder, D., Bedny, M., and Saxe, R. (in press).
Theory of Mind performance in children correlates with
functional specialization of brain regions recruited for thinking
about thoughts. Child Development.
Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old infants
understand false beliefs? Science, 308(5719), 255-258.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of
theory-of-mind development: the truth about false belief. Child
Development 72, 655-684.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs in
young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition,
13(1):103–128.

928

