UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Mental Imagery and Embodied Action on L2 Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4rb6111j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Morett, Laura
Gibbs, Ray
MacWhinney, Brian

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Mental Imagery and Embodied Action on L2 Word Learning
Laura M. Morett (morett@pitt.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh
210 S. Bouquet Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Raymond W. Gibbs (gibbs@ucsc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Cruz
1156 High Street, Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA

Brian MacWhinney (macw@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
Previous research has provided evidence that mental imagery
and embodied action can facilitate word learning in a novel
language. However, it is unclear how these factors interact—
as well as why they play a role—in word learning. Through a
set of four experiments, this research demonstrated that
neither mental imagery nor embodied action directly
promotes the acquisition of second language (L2) words by
adult learners. Notably, both passive viewing of images and
gestures, as well as active engagement in mental imagery and
gesture enactment, were insufficient to enhance L2 word
learning. These results suggest that adults are effective L2
word learners, and that, because of this, embodied action does
not play an essential role in supporting L2 lexical acquisition.
Keywords: Second language acquisition, word learning,
gesture, mental imagery, embodied cognition

Introduction
When setting out to learn a new language, it is common to
start by learning the meanings of its conceptually simplest
units: words. When learning a word, learners must associate
the acoustic and/or orthographic form of the word with a
representation of the word’s meaning. These representations
are based on real-world interactions between the learner and
the object to which the word refers; thus, they are a
composite of the object’s properties, as perceived and acted
upon by the learner. As a result, word learning likely
depends heavily upon both mental imagery and embodied
action, in conjunction with text/speech processing and
memory. The present research sought to investigate—and
dissociate—the contributions of mental imagery and
embodied action to second language (L2) word learning.
This research was based on two major goals: (1) elucidate
the cognitive processes responsible for L2 word learning in
adulthood; (2) determine how to engage these processes,
thereby enhancing L2 word learning.
Several lines of research indicate that mental imagery
plays a central role in L2 word learning. In the keyword
method of L2 word learning (Atkinson, 1975), learners are
instructed to choose a word from their native language that
is phonologically similar to the target L2 word, and to
formulate a mental image of the referents of these words

interacting. For example, for the Spanish word chico (boy),
a learner might choose the similar-sounding English word
chick, and then could imagine a boy holding a chick. This
method has been shown to be a more effective strategy for
L2 word learning than verbal association of target words
and translations (Atkinson & Raugh, 1975; Levin,
McCormick, Miller, Berry, & Pressley, 1982; Raugh &
Atkinson, 1975; Van Hell & Mahn, 1997). There is also
evidence that, particularly in the early stages of L2 learning,
the meanings of target words are learned more effectively
via physical images, which cue mental imagery through
isomorphism, than via verbal translation (Carpenter &
Olson, 2011; Chun & Plass, 1996). These findings
indicating that mental imagery promotes L2 word learning
can be explained by dual coding theory (Paivio, 1990),
which posits that long-term memory encoding can be
enhanced via the simultaneous processing of visual and
verbal information.
Aside from mental imagery, embodied action—action that
learners perform using their bodies—also plays an important
role in L2 word learning. Because learners’ representations
of word referents entail actions that learners have performed
on these objects, the use of embodied action during word
learning allows learners to create deeper, more meaningful
word-referent associations. One method that has taken
advantage of embodied action is the Total Physical
Response Method (Asher, 1969), which has been
successfully used to teach L2 words to novice learners
(Asher, Kusudo, & Torre, 1974; Asher & Price, 1967). In
this approach, the instructor teaches the target word by
saying it while demonstrating its meaning using the body,
and learners re-enact the instructor’s actions using their own
bodies in order to demonstrate comprehension of the words’
meanings. Other evidence supporting embodied action
comes from research showing that the enactment of gestures
representative of word meanings (e.g., placing the hands
together and opening them for book) during learning
facilitates recall of target words to a greater degree than
passively viewing pictures or representative gestures
(Tellier, 2008). Taken together, these findings indicate that
embodied action allows L2 learners to tap into their
representations of word referents, creating robust,

2037

multimodal associations between target words and the
objects that they represent.
Although extant research suggests that mental imagery
and embodied action both contribute separately to L2 word
learning, it is unclear from this work if—and how—they
interact. One way by which their respective contributions
could be clarified is by investigating whether gesture, which
typically accompanies and complements speech (McNeill,
2005), facilitates L2 word learning. Iconic (i.e.,
representative) gestures are created via embodied action and
evoke mental imagery via their iconicity, which conveys
visuospatial properties of the referent. Several studies
(Allen, 1995; Kelly, McDevitt, & Esch, 2009; Tellier, 2008)
have shown that L2 words are recalled more accurately over
longer intervals when they are learned via representative
iconic gesture than when they are learned via speech.
Additionally, when L2 words are accompanied by nonrepresentative iconic gesture (e.g., placing the hands
together and opening them as for book while the word drink
is presented), they are learned less effectively (Kelly et al.,
2009). All of these findings indicate that the combination of
mental imagery and embodied action in iconic gesture is a
powerful tool for enhancing L2 word learning when it is
synchronous with the meanings of the target words.
The objective of the current research was to clarify the
independent contributions of mental imagery and embodied
action—as well as their interactions—to L2 word learning.
To this end, target words were presented in four conditions
in which words were accompanied by stimuli that crossed
these factors in a 2-by-2 design (see Table 1). These stimuli
were designed to elicit either active or passive processing of
mental imagery and embodied action, depending on the task
instructions. Based on the research discussed above, it was
predicted that iconic gesture viewing and enactment would
result in the highest number of L2 words recalled, followed

Mode

+ Mental Imagery

- Mental Imagery

Passive

Iconic gesture

Beat gesture

Active

Gesture enactment

Meaningless hand
motion

Passive

Physical images

Text/Speech only

Active

- Embodied Action

+ Embodied Action

Table 1: Experimental design for Experiments 1-4.

Mental imagery
formation

Verbal repetition
only

by mental imagery, followed by meaningless embodied
action and text/speech only. Furthermore, it was predicted
that active learning conditions would allow participants to
recall more words than passive conditions due to greater
engagement of the sensorimotor system.

Experiment 1
Methods
Twenty-six undergraduate students (age: M = 20.25; SD =
1.5; sex: 11 males; 15 females) at a medium-sized public
university in the US participated in return for partial course
credit. All participants were fluent English speakers and had
no knowledge of Hungarian.
Twelve Hungarian words and their English glosses were
used in this research (see Table 2). Prior to this research, 15
English speakers who did not participate in this study were
asked to rate the concreteness, imageability, and
meaningfulness of the English glosses of 80 candidate
words, and to gesture in a way that represented the meaning
of each gloss. The 12 words with the most consistent
responses from each of the categories were selected for the
study. Videos of iconic gestures were created by recording a
fluent Hungarian-English bilingual saying these words in
each language while enacting the gestures produced by the
most participants. Images were line drawings representing
the English glosses of Hungarian target words from the
International Picture Naming Project (Szekely et al., 2004).
In order to control for possible vocal iconicity, audio of the
pronunciation of Hungarian and English words was
extracted from the iconic gesture videos and was played
during presentation of referent images and text of words.
Beat gestures—simple, non-iconic hand movements in time
to speech prosody—represented embodied action without
cuing mental imagery. Videos of these gestures were created
by recording the Hungarian-English speaker saying the
target words in each language while enacting beat gestures.
These videos were presented with their own sound track in
order to preserve prosodic speech-gesture synchrony.
The learning phase of this study consisted of three blocks
comprising 12 trials apiece. In each learning trial, the
Table 2: Hungarian and English words from Expts. 1-4.
Hungarian
Betegség
Kalapács
Kulcs
Löni
Mászni
Megütni
Orá
Öröm
Seprű
Tréfa
Unott
Varrni

2038

English
Illness
Hammer
Key
To shoot
To climb
To hit
Watch
Joy
Broom
Joke
Bored
To sew

following sequence of events was repeated twice: a
randomly-selected Hungarian word was presented for 2000
ms., and after a 1000 ms. interstimulus interval, the
corresponding English word was presented for 2000 ms.
This study used a within-participants design; thus, for each
experimental session, three Hungarian words and their
English glosses were assigned at random to each of the
following conditions: (1), iconic gesture, in which words
were accompanied by video of a gesture representing their
meaning; (2), beat gesture, in which words were
accompanied by video of simple, non-iconic gestures made
in time to speech; (3), image, in which words were
accompanied by an image representing their meaning; (4),
text, in which words were presented as text (see Materials
section for a description of the stimuli used in each
condition).
The test phase of this study consisted of a single block in
which each Hungarian word that participants had learned
was presented as text and speech. Participants responded by
saying the corresponding English word or by saying “skip”
if they could not remember it. In order to examine how
learning conditions affected long-term L2 word recall,
participants completed the test phase at three intervals
following the learning phase: five minutes, one week, and
one month.

Results and Discussion
L2 word recall was quantified by scoring responses using a
binary coding scheme (1 = correct, 0 = incorrect/skipped),
and by converting scores into proportion correct for each
participant and condition (in order to control for unscorable
responses due to factors such as unintelligibility or technical
errors in running the recall task). Proportional scores were
submitted to repeated measures ANOVAs, in which
participant and word were used as fixed factors.
This analysis revealed a main effect of recall interval,
Fpp(2, 51) = 12.16, p < .001, ηp2 = .36; Fword(2, 18) = 6.42, p
= .008, ηp2 = .42. Bonferroni-corrected post hoc analyses
showed that participants recalled more L2 words after five
minutes than they recalled after one week (ppp = .03; pword
=.02) and one month (ppp = .001; pword = .06). There was
also a main effect of learning condition, Fpp(3, 77) = 7.70, p
< .001, ηp2 = .26; Fword(3, 27) = 7.04, p = .001, ηp2 = .44, see
Figure 1. Post-hoc analyses showed that participants learned
more words via text than they did via beat gesture (ppp =
.002; pword = .008), iconic gesture (by participant; ppp = .05;
pword = .34) and images (ppp = .08; pword = .05). However,
the interval by condition interaction failed to reach
significance. Together, these results suggest that
orthographic representations of words may play a more
integral role in L2 word learning than mental imagery or
embodied action.

Experiment 2
One possible explanation why L2 words learned via text
were recalled better than words learned via iconic gesture,
beat gesture, or images is because Hungarian words were

Figure 1: Percent of word meanings recalled by condition
and recall interval for Expt. 1 (error bars represent SEM).
presented as text in test trials. This learning-test similarity
may have resulted in transfer-appropriate processing, which
occurs when similar cues are present at encoding and
retrieval (Morris, Bransford, & Franks, 1977). In order to
determine whether transfer-appropriate processing was
responsible for the facilitatory effect of text observed in
Experiment 1, recall trials were modified so that Hungarian
words were presented as speech only, without any text. If,
under these conditions, participants recalled similar numbers
of L2 words presented as text, representational gesture, beat
gesture, and speech, it could be concluded that the
facilitatory effect of text observed in Study 1 was due to
transfer-appropriate processing. Given a lack of conclusive
reported evidence showing that L2 words learned as text are
recalled better than words presented via other modalities
(e.g., images), it was predicted that no significant advantage
of text would be found in Study 2.

Methods
Twenty-six undergraduate students (age: M = 20.64; SD =
1.56; sex: 12 males; 14 females) at a medium-sized public
university in the US participated in return for partial course
credit. All participants were fluent English speakers and had
no knowledge of Hungarian. Additionally, participants had
not participated in Experiment 1.
Learning conditions and trials were identical to those used
in Experiment 1. Recall trials were also identical to those of
Experiment 1, except that Hungarian words were presented
as speech only, while the task instructions were displayed
on the screen as text.

Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 1, L2 word learning was quantified
proportionally and was submitted to repeated measures
ANOVAs with participant and word as fixed factors. This
analysis revealed a main effect of recall interval, Fpp(2, 51)
= 7.11, p = .003, ηp2 = .31; Fword(2, 10) = 47.14, p < .001, ηp2
= .90, see Figure 2. Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc analyses
showed that participants recalled more words after five

2039

minutes than they recalled after one week (ppp = .04; pword
=.001) and one month (ppp = .05; pword = .004). However,
learning condition failed to reach significance, as did the
interval by condition interaction. These results indicate that
the superior recall for words learned via text observed in
Experiment 1 was due to the presence of text in both
learning and test trials.

credit. All participants were fluent English speakers and had
no knowledge of Hungarian. Additionally, participants had
not participated in Experiments 1 or 2.
Learning trials were similar to those of Experiments 1 and
2, except that the order of language presentation was
reversed (2000 ms. English gloss, 1000 ms. ISI, 2000 ms.
Hungarian word). Learning conditions were also similar to
those of Experiments 1 and 2, except that the text condition
was replaced with a speech only condition, in which words
were presented as speech concurrently with a blank screen.
Recall trials were identical to those of Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion

Figure 2: Percent of word meanings recalled by condition
and recall interval for Expt. 2 (error bars represent SEM).

Experiment 3
Contrary to the predictions, Experiments 1 and 2 failed to
show that iconic gesture, mental imagery, or beat gesture
promote L2 word learning via mental imagery and
embodied action. One possible reason why iconic gesture
may not have produced the facilitatory effect observed in
other similar studies of L2 word learning is that participants
may have encountered difficulties mapping gestures onto
the words that they were intended to represent. Despite the
care that was taken in selecting gestures to represent target
words based on gesture production data from the norming
study, it is possible that the gestures chosen may logically
map onto the meanings of more than one word (e.g., the
gesture representing to climb may also map onto ladder).
Unclear gesture-word mappings such as these may cause
confusion, unnecessarily increasing cognitive load upon
presentation of “correct” English glosses, which in turn may
negatively impact L2 word learning and recall. Experiment
3 attempted to control for gesture-meaning mismatches by
presenting English glosses prior to Hungarian words, in
order to ensure that iconic gestures were immediately
associated with their intended meanings.
In addition to the reversal of language presentation order,
the text condition was replaced with a speech only
condition. The rationale for this replacement was that
speech with no visual representation may be a more
appropriate baseline condition (- embodied action, - mental
imagery) for this research than speech with text.

Methods
Twenty-seven undergraduate students (age: M = 21.05; SD
= 1.83; sex: 13 males; 14 females) at a medium-sized public
university in the US participated in return for partial course

As in Experiments 1 and 2, L2 word learning was quantified
proportionally and was submitted to repeated measures
ANOVAs with participant and word as fixed factors. This
analysis revealed a main effect of recall interval, Fpp(2, 53)
= 24.81, p < .001, ηp2 = .61; Fword(2, 14) = 36.59, p < .001,
ηp2 = .84, see Figure 3. Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc
analyses showed that participants recalled more words after
five minutes than they recalled after one week (ppp = .04;
pword = .002) and one month (ppp = .04; pword < .001).
However, learning condition failed to reach significance, as
did the interval by condition interaction. Taken together
with the findings of Experiments 1 and 2, these results
confirm that, in the passive form, mental imagery and
embodied action do not significantly enhance the acquisition
of L2 words.

Figure 3: Percent of word meanings recalled by condition
and recall interval for Expt. 3 (error bars represent SEM).

Experiment 4
The objectives of this experiment were to examine the
effects of the active engagement in embodied motion and
mental imagery on L2 word learning, and to compare them
to the effects of their passive counterparts, as documented in
Experiments 1-3. For young children, only enactment—not
mere viewing—of iconic gestures enhances word learning
(Tellier, 2008). Thus, it is possible that L2 word learning

2040

may be enhanced via enactment of iconic gestures and
visualization of mental imagery, even though word learning
was not facilitated via passive viewing of iconic gestures
and physical images. Experiment 4 tested this possibility by
examining the effectiveness of L2 word learning via the
active equivalents of the learning conditions of Studies 1-3.

Methods
Twenty-eight undergraduates (Age: M = 20.67; SD = 1.56;
Sex: 12 males; 16 females) at a medium-sized public
university in the US participated in return for partial course
credit. All participants were fluent English speakers and had
no knowledge of Hungarian. Additionally, participants had
not participated in Experiments 1, 2, or 3.
As in Experiments 1-3, the learning phase of Experiment
4 consisted of three blocks of trials that varied by condition
within participants. In learning trials, participants viewed
video of a speaker saying an English gloss while producing
a gesture representative of its meaning for 2000 ms., and
after a 1000 ms. interstimulus interval, viewed video of the
speaker saying a Hungarian target word while making the
same gesture for 2000 ms. After one additional repetition of
this sequence of events, participants repeated the English
and Hungarian words aloud while performing the action
corresponding to the condition to which the word had been
assigned for that session. For words assigned to condition
(1), gesture enactment, participants enacted the gesture that
they had viewed in the video; for words assigned to
condition (2), mental imagery formation, participants closed
their eyes and visualized the words’ meaning;1 for words in
condition (3), meaningless hand motion, participants made
an X-shaped hand motion three times; for words in
condition (4), repetition, participants repeated the words
aloud while keeping their hands still. Recall trials were
identical to those of Experiments 2-3.

Results and Discussion
As in Experiments 1-3, L2 word learning was quantified
proportionally and was submitted to repeated measures
ANOVAs with participant and word as fixed factors. This
analysis revealed a main effect of recall interval, Fpp(2, 56)
= 12.90, p < .001, ηp2 = .52; Fword(2, 20) = 10.37, p = .001,
ηp2 = .51, see Figure 4. Bonferroni-corrected post hoc
analyses revealed that participants recalled more words after
five minutes than they recalled after one week (ppp = .05;
pword = .02) or one month (ppp = .03; pword = .01). However,
learning condition failed to reach significance, as did the
interval by condition interaction. These results suggest that,
although enactment facilitates L2 word learning by children,
it does not seem to enhance L2 word learning by adults.

1

The results of two participants who indicated in response to a
question on the post-experimental survey that they did not follow
the instructions regarding mental imagery were excluded.

Figure 4: Percent of word meanings recalled by condition
and recall interval for Expt. 4 (error bars represent SEM).

General Discussion
The present research examined the independent roles and
interactions that passive and active engagement in mental
imagery and embodied action play in L2 word learning.
The lack of differences in word learning as a function of
condition suggest that neither of these factors plays an
integral role in L2 word learning by adults. Given that adults
are particularly effective word learners (Snow & HoefnagelHöhle, 1978), it is likely that the participants of this study
were using alternative methods to associate target words
with their meanings, such as phonological association or
generation. One notable difference between this study and
others (Kelly et al., 2009) is that, in the interest of
ecological validity, the stimuli accompanying the target
words in the current study were either congruent or neutral
to the word meanings. As a result, the variation in word
learning between conditions in the current study was more
modest than that observed in previous studies. This greater
similarity between conditions may explain the lack of
significant differences between conditions, as well as why
the results of the current study failed to replicate those of
previous work (e.g., Kelly et al., 2009; Tellier, 2008).
Surprisingly, the results failed to show that meaningful
embodied action, in the form of representative iconic
gesture, facilitated L2 word learning and recall more
effectively than mental imagery. This finding is inconsistent
with several previous studies showing superior recall of L2
words learned via viewing or enactment of iconic gesture
(Kelly et al., 2009; Tellier, 2008) or enactment of
meaningful motion using the body (Asher, 1969; Asher et
al., 1974). There are several possibilities why iconic gesture
may have failed to facilitate L2 word learning in the current
research. One possibility is that the gestures chosen to
represent target words may not have been sufficiently
iconic, and thus, may not have been as imagistic and
meaningful as gestures used in other studies. Another
possibility is that the learning phase may have been too brief
to allow for associations between gestures and target words

2041

to be formed. Future research should test these possibilities
by examining the acquisition of L2 words via imagisticallyrich gesture during an extended learning period, and by
comparing the results to those of the current research.
Overall, the results of the current research suggest that
neither mental imagery nor embodied action plays a key role
in L2 word learning by adults. More specifically, the results
indicate that the viewing of iconic gesture, images, and text
during L2 word learning result in comparable recall of target
words across both long and short learning-test intervals.
Finally, the results demonstrate that L2 words are recalled
more accurately over short (5 min.) learning-test intervals
than longer intervals (1 week, 1 month). Taken together,
these findings fail to replicate the results of work showing
that representative iconic gesture viewing and enactment
enhance L2 word learning (Kelly et al., 2009; Tellier, 2008),
suggesting that the word learning techniques of adult L2
learners are already so effective that mental imagery and
embodied action have a negligible impact on them.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a National Defense Science
and Engineering Graduate Fellowship and the Perlino
Award to Laura M. Morett. The authors thank Jana Iverson
for resources and helpful discussion.

References
Allen, L. Q. (1995). The effects of emblematic gestures on
the development and access of mental representations of
French expressions. The Modern Language Journal,
79(4), 521–529.
Asher, J. J. (1969). The total physical response approach to
second language learning. The Modern Language
Journal, 53(1), 3–17.
Asher, J. J., Kusudo, J. A., & Torre, R. de la. (1974).
Learning a second language through commands: The
second field test. The Modern Language Journal, 58(1/2),
24–32.
Asher, J. J., & Price, B. S. (1967). The learning strategy of
the Total Physical Response: Some age differences. Child
Development, 38, 1219–1227.
Atkinson, R. C. (1975). Mnemotechnics in second-language
learning. American Psychologist, 30(8), 821–828.
doi:10.1037/h0077029
Atkinson, R. C., & Raugh, M. R. (1975). An application of
the mnemonic keyword method to the acquisition of a
Russian vocabulary. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 1, 126–133.
doi:10.1037/0278-7393.1.2.126
Carpenter, S. K., & Olson, K. M. (2011). Are pictures good
for learning new vocabulary in a foreign language? Only
if you think they are not. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
doi:10.1037/a0024828
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Effects of multimedia
annotations on vocabulary acquisition. Modern Language
Journal, 80(2), 183–198.

Kelly, S. D., McDevitt, T., & Esch, M. (2009). Brief
training with co-speech gesture lends a hand to word
learning in a foreign language. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 24, 313–334.
doi:10.1080/01690960802365567
Levin, J. R., McCormick, C. B., Miller, G. E., Berry, J. K.,
& Pressley, M. (1982). Mnemonic versus nonmnemonic
vocabulary-learning strategies for children. American
Educational Research Journal, 19(1), 121 –136.
doi:10.3102/00028312019001121
McNeill, D. (2005). Gesture and thought. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977).
Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate
processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16(5), 519–533. doi:16/S0022-5371(77)800169
Paivio, A. (1990). Mental representations: A dual coding
approach. Oxford University Press US.
Raugh, M. R., & Atkinson, R. C. (1975). A mnemonic
method for learning a second-language vocabulary.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 67(1), 1–16.
doi:10.1037/h0078665
Snow, C. E., & Hoefnagel-Höhle, M. (1978). The critical
period for language acquisition: Evidence from second
language learning. Child development, 1114–1128.
Szekely, A., Jacobsen, T., D’Amico, S., Devescovi, A.,
Andonova, E., Herron, D., Lu, C. C., et al. (2004). A new
on-line resource for psycholinguistic studies. Journal of
Memory and Language, 51(2), 247–250.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2004.03.002
Tellier, M. (2008). The effect of gestures on second
language memorisation by young children. Gesture, 8,
219–235.
Van Hell, J. G., & Mahn, A. C. (1997). Keyword
mnemonics versus rote rehearsal: Learning concrete and
abstract foreign words by experienced and inexperienced
learners. Language Learning, 47(3), 507–546.
doi:10.1111/0023-8333.00018

2042

