UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Sound of Thickness: Prelinguistic Infants’ Associations of Space and Pitch

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7sb316vj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Dolscheid, Sarah
Hunnius, Sabine
Casasanto, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Sound of Thickness:
Prelinguistic Infants’ Associations of Space and Pitch
Sarah Dolscheid1,2
Sabine Hunnius3
Daniel Casasanto4
Asifa Majid1,3
(sarah.dolscheid@mpi.nl) (s.hunnius@donders.ru.nl) (casasand@newschool.edu) (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)
1

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, NL
3
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
4
Department of Psychology, The New School for Social Research, New York, USA
2

up or down with tones sweeping up or down in frequency
(Wagner et al., 1981).
These findings have led to the assumption that crossmodal mappings are innately hardwired in the brain
(Mondloch & Maurer, 2004) and represent an unlearned
aspect of perception (Walker et al., 2010). Accordingly,
some of these associations are posited to be universal
(Marks, Hammeal, & Bornstein, 1987; see also Spence,
2011).
However, there are other findings that seem to be at odds
with these conclusions. A number of cross-modal
correspondences are only acquired later in the course of
development. For instance, even 9-year-old children are not
able to systematically match size and pitch, a task that is
consistently solved by adults (Marks et al., 1987; but see
Mondloch & Maurer, 2004). Cross-modal correspondences
are also affected by developmental changes. Unlike adults
and older children, 2-year-olds consistently map light grey
to smaller objects and dark grey to bigger objects (Smith &
Sera, 1992). In the course of language acquisition, however,
children’s associations gradually shift. As a result, it has
been suggested that language may have an impact on the
trajectory of cross-modal relations (Smith & Sera, 1992).
On one hand, language appears to mirror cross-modal
experience. The auditory domain, for instance, is often
linguistically encoded in terms of other sensory modalities
(Williams, 1976). People use metaphors like “soft” voice,
“dark” timbre or “high” pitch, suggesting that language
echoes cross-modal perceptual impressions. On the other
hand, language also seems to affect cross-modal
associations. For example, Martino & Marks (1999) suggest
that cross-modal effects, like the association between space
and pitch, may be mediated by language. Various tasks
show correspondences between spatial height and pitch
consistent with high-low metaphors in language (Rusconi, et
al, 2006, Evans & Treisman, 2010). However, since
linguistic labels and height-pitch associations merely
coincide, the direction of influence is hard to establish and
the contribution of language remains unclear.
Cross-linguistic comparison provides one way to
overcome this limitation. Not every language uses the same
metaphors for pitch (Ashley, 2004; Levinson & Majid,
2007). For example, while languages like English and Dutch
talk about pitch in terms of “height”, other languages like,
Farsi, Turkish and Zapotec (spoken in Mexico) describe

Abstract
People often talk about musical pitch in terms of spatial
metaphors. In English, for instance, pitches can be high or low,
whereas in other languages pitches are described as thick or thin.
According to psychophysical studies, metaphors in language can
also shape people’s nonlinguistic space-pitch representations.
But does language establish mappings between space and pitch
in the first place or does it modify preexisting associations?
Here we tested 4-month-old Dutch infants’ sensitivity to heightpitch and thickness-pitch mappings in two preferential looking
tasks. Dutch infants looked significantly longer at cross-modally
congruent stimuli in both experiments, indicating that infants are
sensitive to space-pitch associations prior to language. This
early presence of space-pitch mappings suggests that these
associations do not originate from language. Rather, language
may build upon pre-existing mappings and change them
gradually via some form of competitive associative learning.
Keywords:
cross-modal;
multisensory;
synaesthesia; infant perception; language
language of perception; preferential looking

metaphors;
acquisition;

Introduction
Does a cake taste yellow? Or a tone played by a trumpet
sound scarlet? For some people they do. Yet synaesthesia, a
condition in which stimulation of one sensory modality
induces systematic perceptual experiences in another
modality, is relatively rare. Other types of cross-modal
associations, however, can be found in non-synaesthetes
too. Psychophysical studies have shown that adults and
children without synaesthesia associate higher pitches with
sharper edges (Marks, 1987; Parise & Spence, 2009),
positions higher in space (e.g., Ben-Artzi & Marks, 1995;
Melara & O’Brien, 1987), lighter color (Hubbard 1996;
Marks 1989; Melara 1989), and increasing brightness
(Marks, 1987).
Even infants seem to be sensitive to some of these
associations. Cross-modal correspondences between
loudness and brightness have been demonstrated in 20- to
30-day-old infants (Lewkowicz & Turkewitz, 1980). In a
preferential looking task, 3- to 4-month-old infants preferred
congruent trials – in which visuospatial height and pitch
height corresponded – over incongruent trials. (Walker et
al., 2010); that is, infants looked longer at a ball moving
upwards if it was accompanied by a rising pitch than if it
was accompanied by a falling pitch. Also, prelinguistic
infants under 1-year-old ‘matched’ visual arrows pointing

306

successfully. This is consistent with the proposal that
language input promotes cross-modal associations between
thickness and pitch. Note, however, that these results do not
rule out the possibility that the thickness-pitch mappings
were available to all infants prelinguistically, but are no
longer equally available to German children.
In order to determine the prelinguistic availability of
space-pitch mappings, we tested 4-month-old Dutch babies
using a preferential looking paradigm. To investigate
height-pitch correspondences, we followed Walker et al.’s
(2010) procedure. Infants watched a ball moving up and
down the screen accompanied by the sound of a sliding
whistle. The whistle’s fundamental frequency changed at a
constant rate. In the congruent condition, the pitch of the
sound “rose” and “fell” in accordance with the movement of
the ball. In the incongruent condition, the pitch of the sound
“rose” and “fell” in opposition to the movement of the ball
(see Fig. 1a). Walker et al. (2010) reported that infants
looked longer at the congruent compared to the incongruent
condition, suggesting an early preference for pitch-height
congruencies.
In a second step, we tested prelinguistic infants in a
thickness-pitch task analogous to the height-pitch task.
Instead of balls moving up and down the screen, a vertical
tube varied in thickness, changing continuously from thin to
thick (see Fig. 1b).
We reasoned that if both, height-pitch and thickness-pitch
mappings are available to infants prelinguistically, infants
should prefer both congruent height-pitch and congruent
thickness-pitch stimuli over incongruent ones. If however,
height-pitch and thickness-pitch relationships follow
different developmental trajectories, with thickness
mappings only becoming acquired later, then infants should
show preferences for congruent height-pitch stimuli but not
for congruent thickness-pitch stimuli.
a

high-frequency pitch as “thin” and low-frequency pitches as
“thick” (Shayan, Ozturk, & Sicoli, 2011). To find out
whether these differences in spoken metaphors correspond
to different mental representations of pitch, Dolscheid and
colleagues, conducted a series of nonlinguistic
psychophysical experiments in adult speakers of Dutch (a
“height” language) and Farsi (a “thickness” language).
Participants were asked to reproduce musical pitches that
they heard in the presence of irrelevant spatial information,
i.e. lines varying either in height or in thickness (Dolscheid
et al., submitted). Dutch speakers’ pitch estimates were
significantly modulated by spatial height but not by
thickness. Conversely, Farsi speakers’ pitch estimates were
modulated by spatial thickness but not by height. Overall,
the results indicated that nonlinguistic pitch-space
associations
follow
language-specific
vocabulary,
suggesting that cross-modal pitch representations are
language-specific.
At this point, however, it is unclear whether language
establishes cross-modal mappings between space and pitch
in the first place, or whether it merely modifies preexisting
associations. While some researchers stress the relevance of
language in concept formation (e.g. Gopnik & Meltzoff,
1997), others argue that conceptual representations must
precede the acquisition of language (e.g. Bloom, 2000;
Bloom & Keil, 2001). The former position allows for a
stronger role of language in space-pitch associations; while
the latter position suggests that children are likely to have
some notion of space-pitch correspondences prior to
learning language. Consistent with this latter view, infants
seem to be sensitive to height-pitch mappings even
prelinguistically (Walker et al., 2010). Critically, however,
nothing is known about the origins of thickness-pitch
relationships. Do children also have this mapping available
to them prior to language, or is it only learned on the basis
of language-input?
One possibility is that children could start out with both a
height-pitch and a thickness-pitch mapping even before they
learn language. The strength of these mappings might then
subsequently be adjusted, according to the relative
frequencies of space-pitch metaphors in the languages
children acquire (Casasanto 2008, 2010; Dolscheid et al.,
submitted; Smith & Sera, 1992). Alternatively, height-pitch
and thickness-pitch associations might follow different
trajectories. Whereas height-pitch associations are available
to prelinguistic infants, the thickness-pitch mapping might
only be learned later. Metaphors in language could provide
one possible way to learn this association. Using thickness
terminology to refer to pitch may invite speakers to align
correspondent representations and extract similarities
between space and pitch in a process called structural
alignment (see e.g. Boroditsky, 2001; Gentner, 2003). In
line with this proposal, Shayan et al. (submitted) found that
Turkish and Farsi 2- to 5-year-olds were able to successfully
map thickness to pitch but same-aged German children
(who like English and Dutch speakers do not have a
thickness metaphor) were not able to make this association

b

Figure 1: Examples of animations presented as stimuli in
Experiment 1 (Panel a) and Experiment 2 (Panel b). In (a) the
extremes of the ball’s vertical trajectory are shown. In (b) the
extremes of thickness are depicted. The images are reproduced to
scale.

307

Results

Experiment 1: Auditory pitch and visuospatial
height

A high level of agreement was confirmed between the two
observers in their coding of each infant’s individual looking
times (mean Pearson’s r(28) = .99, p<.001).
14 of the 20 infants looked longer at the congruent
animation than at the incongruent animation. On average,
infants looked at the congruent animations for 31.7 s (SD =
11,4) and at the incongruent animations for 26.1 s (SD =
13.3). A paired-samples t-test confirmed that infants looked
significantly longer at the congruent animations, t(19) =
1.99, p = .03, d = 0.45 (one-tailed).

Methods
Participants Ten male and ten female infants completed the
first (pitch-height) experiment (mean age = 129 days, range:
113 to 138 days). Another seven infants were tested, but not
included in the analyses: one infant was excluded due to
experimenter error; a further six infants were excluded due
to excessive fussiness.
Materials and Procedure QuickTime animations were
presented on a 102 x 76 cm Sony LCD screen using HABIT
software. Animations appeared within a 67 x 67 cm screen
area (25.6° x 25.6°), and lasted a maximum of 60 s. Before
each animation, a flashing light appeared to ensure that
infants attended to the screen. Infants sat in a Maxi-Cosi
infant seat which was placed on their parent’s lap, viewing
the animations from a distance of 1.50 m. Infants’ visual
fixations were monitored and recorded on video.
Animations were stopped if the infant looked elsewhere for
a single period of 1 s or more. The total duration an infant
looked directly at the animation was logged online during
the experiment using HABIT software and written to an
output-file. Additionally, looking times were determined by
a subsequent frame-by-frame coding of the digitized video
using SuperCoder. Coding was performed by a coder blind
to the experimental condition. 25 percent of the data was
double-coded by a second person, also blind to the
condition.
Infants watched a 10-cm (4°) diameter orange ball
moving up and down a 50-cm vertical trajectory in front of a
20 x 20 grid of small, white dots on a black field. The ball
moved at a constant speed of 20 cm/s and paused for 42 ms
at each endpoint. Animations were accompanied by the
sound of a sliding whistle (a sinusoidal tone). The
fundamental frequency of the sound changed at a constant
rate, between 300 and 1700 Hz over 2.5 s, coinciding with a
single phase of the animation (e.g. the ball moving up). The
amplitude of the sound increased and then decreased
between 47 and 84 dB within each phase of the animation,
peaking at 1000 Hz. Amplitude thus changed about twice as
fast as pitch to ensure that variation in perceived pitch and
loudness were not confounded.
Every infant viewed three congruent animations
interleaved with three incongruent animations. Half of the
children watched a congruent animation first and the other
half watched an incongruent animation first. During the
whole experiment, parents were listening to music via
headphones. Since parents could not hear the sliding sounds,
they were unable to distinguish between experimental
conditions (the spatial trajectories of the stimuli did not
differ between conditions). We therefore ensured parents
could not bias their infant’s looking behavior.

Experiment 2: Auditory pitch and visuospatial
thickness
Methods
Participants Ten male and ten female infants completed the
second (pitch-thickness) experiment (mean age = 127 days,
range: 113 to 138 days). An additional eight infants were
tested, but their data was not analyzed: one infant was
excluded due to technical problems; a further 7 infants were
excluded due to fussiness.
Materials and Procedure The same procedure as in
Experiment 1 was used. This time, infants watched a
vertical orange tube that varied in thickness, changing
continuously from thin to thick (see Figure 1).
The animation was presented on a 20 x 20 grid of small,
white dots on a black field, as in Experiment 1. The tube
was 60 cm long ranging from 6 to 26 cm in width. It
expanded at a constant speed of 8 cm/s and paused for 42
ms at each endpoint. Animations were accompanied by the
sound of the exact same sliding whistle as in Experiment 1.
The fundamental frequency of the sound changed at a
constant rate, between 300 and 1700 Hz over 2.5 s,
coinciding with a single phase of the animation (i.e. during
tube expansion). Each infant viewed three congruent
animations interleaved with three incongruent animations,
with half of the children watching a congruent animation
first and the other half watching an incongruent animation
first. During the whole experiment, parents were listening to
music via headphones.

Results
A high level of agreement was confirmed between the two
judges in their estimates of each infant’s individual looking
times (mean Pearson’s r(28) = .99, p<.001).
13 of the 20 infants looked longer at the congruent
animations than the incongruent animations. On average,
infants looked longer at the congruent 24.4 s (SD = 11.8)
than the incongruent animations 19.4 s (SD = 11.5). A
paired-samples t-test confirmed that infants looked
significantly longer at the congruent animations, t(19) =
2.19, p = .02, d = 0.43 (one-tailed).

308

children are unable to systematically map size (big vs.
small) to pitch until they are 13 years old, Mondloch and
Maurer (2004) find evidence for size-pitch congruency
effects in children as young as 3 years of age.1 Details about
the developmental trajectory of space-pitch mappings thus
remain unclear and are subject to future research.
One aspect that seems to facilitate detecting cross-modal
associations is motion (see also Jeschonek, Pauen &
Babocsai, in preparation). Mondloch and Maurer presented
children with moving balls that differed in size; while Marks
et al. and Shayan et al. used static stimuli. In the present
study, too, the dynamic display of spatial information (upand downward movement or horizontal expansion) and
pitch (presented as glides) may have facilitated the detection
of corresponding information. Displaying stimuli
dynamically and in synchronicity could direct infants’
attention to the relational correspondences across
modalities. However, movement by itself cannot explain the
pattern of results: infants must still align stimuli attributes
that are congruent to each other.

Between experiment comparison
Dutch infants looked significantly longer at cross-modally
congruent stimuli in both experiments. While this suggests a
comparable starting point for both thickness-pitch and
height-pitch mappings, it is nevertheless possible that
infants display differential preference with respect to the
two mappings. We therefore compared the results of the two
previous experiments directly.

Results
Submitting looking times to a 2 (Space: height vs.
thickness) by 2 (Congruency: congruent vs. incongruent)
mixed ANOVA yielded a significant main effect of Space
(F(2,38) = 4.40, p = .04, ηp2 = 0.10), showing that looking
times differed between height and thickness stimuli. Infants
looked longer at height stimuli as compared to thickness
stimuli, indicating that perhaps height was more salient for
the them. However, no interaction between Space and
Congruency (F(2,38) = 0.03, ns, ηp2 = 0.00) was observed.
There were thus no indications that looking time reductions
induced by incongruency differed between the two
experiments. In line with this, percentage reduction in
looking time across experiments was of comparable size,
i.e., 18% for the height-pitch experiment and 20% for the
thickness-pitch experiment.

Language acquisition and cross-modal associations
Our findings demonstrate that both height-pitch and
thickness-pitch correspondences are perceived before the
infant has mastery of language. While this finding is
consistent with the view that representations precede
language (e.g. Bloom, 2000), it does not entail that these
associations are fixed. Language could still influence the
structure and content of preexisting mental representations
via simple learning mechanisms. In the course of language
acquisition, the relative strengths of different space-pitch
mappings could be adjusted according to the languagespecific frequencies of metaphors that children acquire
(Casasanto 2008, 2010). Over time, speakers of a “height”
language like Dutch would strengthen the height-pitch
mapping at the expense of the thickness-pitch mapping –
and vice versa for speakers of a “thickness” language like
Farsi (Dolscheid et al., submitted). Evidence in support of
this associative learning account is provided by linguistic
training experiments. Dutch speakers, after being trained to
use Farsi-like metaphors describing pitch relationships in
terms of thickness, demonstrated nonlinguistic thicknesspitch mappings just like Farsi speakers. By contrast, when
participants received the same amount of linguistic training
with an alternative space-pitch mapping that is not present
in any known language, they showed no effect of training
(Dolscheid et al., submitted). These training studies
demonstrate a causal role for language in strengthening the
use of some nonlinguistic mappings more than others.

General Discussion
Our results demonstrate that prelinguistic infants are
sensitive to correspondences between auditory pitch and
spatial information of two different types, visuospatial
thickness as well as height. Dutch infants looked
significantly longer at cross-modally congruent stimuli in
both experiments, suggesting a comparable starting point for
height-pitch mappings and thickness-pitch mappings.
It is possible that these mappings are only present in very
young infants but get lost in the course of development due
to neuronal pruning. Whereas 2-to 3-month-old infants were
found to be sensitive to arbitrary associations between
colors and shapes, 8-month-old infants no longer show this
early synaesthetic association (Wagner & Dobkins, 2011).
Does the same developmental trajectory hold true for spacepitch mappings? Unlike synaesthetic color-shape
associations that seem highly individualized and thus
unspecific (e.g., one infant might associate triangles with
green, and another with red), space-pitch associations follow
a specific pattern, showing the same congruity preferences
found in languages. It is therefore possible that space-pitch
mappings persist during infancy and childhood. In line with
this suggestion, sensitivity to height-pitch associations has
been reported in 6-month-olds (Braaten, 1993) as well as in
children aged 4 to 5 years (Roffler & Butler, 1967). On the
other hand, 2- to 5-year-old German speaking children have
been found to be insensitive to the thickness mapping
(Shayan et al., submitted). There is also contradictory
evidence regarding children’s sensitivity to size-pitch
associations. Whereas Marks et al. (1987) report that

1

The thickness-stimuli used in Experiment 2 could also be
interpreted as a size manipulation. Indeed, even though movement
was restricted to the horizontal plane which is characteristic for
thickness, there is a concomitant difference in overall size. For the
present purposes, nothing rests on being able to make the
distinction between thickness and size, per se, since the reported
inconsistency in the ability to make the cross-modal mapping to
pitch applies equally to both spatial parameters.

309

(thick=high, thin=low) were not able to master this
association, even though they could learn the comparable
congruent mapping (Dolscheid et al., submitted). It thus
appears that language cannot easily retrain mappings that
are supported by correlations present prelinguistically
and/or supported by real world experience. Early sensitivity
to certain mappings might therefore constrain the set of
cross-modal associations that are likely to be observed in
language and the mind.

While language may enforce particular pitch-space
mappings, this proposal has to take into account that
metaphors pose additional demands in language acquisition.
Pitch metaphors are inherently polysemous; the acquisition
of both spatial and sound meanings is likely more complex
than when a single meaning has to be acquired (see e.g.
Johnson, 1992). Consistent with this proposal French
speaking children trained to describe sounds using either the
single-meaning terms aigu and grave (a pair of antonyms
used only to label high and low pitches) versus the
polysemous words haut and bas (which are used to refer to
pitch and space) were better able to label sound stimuli
(Costa-Giomi & Descombes, 1996).
Aside from polysemy, another important attribute of
metaphorical language lies in its directionality. Taking
spatial metaphors of time as an example, people talk about
time in terms of space far more often (“a long vacation”; “a
short meeting”) than they talk about space in terms of time
(though it occasionally occurs: “I live two minutes from
here”) (Casasanto, 2008, 2010; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
For pitch metaphors the same asymmetry seems to hold,
which has also been found to be reflected in adults’
nonlinguistic pitch representations (Casasanto, 2010). Note,
however, that our results are agnostic of a space-pitch
asymmetry in prelinguistic infants. While we have
demonstrated that infants are able to detect space-pitch
associations, our tasks do not speak to possible
directionality. Future studies are necessary to determine
whether language plays a role in introducing this asymmetry
(e.g. see Merrit, Casasanto, & Brannon, 2010), or whether it
is present independent of language (e.g. see Marks et al.,
1987).

Origins of cross-modal mappings?
Are cross-modal mappings innate? Based on the current
evidence, we can only conclude that cross-modal
associations between space and pitch are present from very
early. By the age of 4 months, however, infants may well
have encountered enough relevant co-occurrences in their
interaction with the world to have learned these mappings.
Thickness-pitch mappings seem especially prevalent:
thicker strings produce lower notes, bigger bells have lower
chimes, and people with bigger (‘thicker’) bodies tend to
have lower voices. While infants may have internalized
these regularities, the case for innate height-pitch mappings
is not conclusive (see also Walker et al., 2010).

Conclusions
No matter whether cross-modal associations are inborn or
learned, the finding that both height-pitch and thicknesspitch mappings can be observed in infants as young as 4
months of age constrains theorizing about the role that
language plays in shaping nonlinguistic mental
representations of pitch.
Our data show that space-pitch associations are present
prior to language, suggesting that language is unlikely to
create cross-modal mappings between space and pitch, even
if language seems to play this role in other domains
(Gentner, 2002).
It appears that both the height-pitch mapping found in
languages like Dutch and the thickness-pitch mapping found
in languages like Farsi are already present in prelinguistic
infants’ minds. This suggests that people who use different
spatial metaphors for pitch in their native languages come to
think about pitch differently not because language instills in
them one cross-modal mapping instead of the other, but
rather because language strengthens one pre-existing
mapping at the expense the other, via some form of
competitive associative learning (Casasanto, 2008, 2010;
Dolscheid, et al., submitted). The precise learning
mechanisms that give rise to cross-linguistic differences in
pitch representation, and the underlying neural mechanisms,
remain topics for future research.

Effects of cross-modal associations on language
Since cross-modal associations are present before children
acquire language, it is possible that the associations
themselves shape metaphors in language. We find the
height-pitch metaphor in languages such as Spanish,
German and Polish (Rusconi et al., 2006), as well as nonIndo-European languages, like Japanese and Chinese. In all
of these languages, “high” refers to high frequency sounds
and “low” to low frequency sounds, but not the reverse.
Likewise, psychophysical studies demonstrated that
participants associate higher pitches with smaller objects,
not with larger objects (e.g. Gallace & Spence, 2006). For
the Kpelle and Jabo people in Liberia, this association is
also encoded in language: “small” refers to high pitch and
“big” refers to low pitch (see e.g., Eitan & Timmers, 2010).
Prelinguistic associations, alongside correlations of
properties in the real world, may thus serve as guiding
principles that constrain the way pitch gets lexicalized,
across languages.
Consequently, it might be harder to learn linguistic
metaphors that are inconsistent with cross-modal mappings
for which there is evidence in the natural world. The results
of a training study support this suggestion. Dutch speakers
trained to use reversed thickness-pitch mappings

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Sho Tsuji, Manu Schuetze,
Angela Khadar, Margret van Beuningen, Nienke Dijkstra,
Laura Arendsen, Dirkje van der Aa & Webb Phillips.

310

Levinson, S. C., & Majid, A. (2007). The language of sound. In A.
Majid (Ed.), Field Manual Volume 10 (pp. 29-31). Nijmegen:
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics.
Lewkowicz, D. J., & Turkewitz, G. (1980). Cross-modal
equivalence in early infancy: Auditory–visual intensity
matching. Developmental Psychology, 16, 597-607.
Marks, L. E. (1987). On cross-modal similarity: Auditory–visual
interactions in speeded discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology and Human Perception Performance, 13, 384-394.
Marks, L. E. (1989). On cross-modal similarity: The perceptual
structure of pitch, loudness, and brightness. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
15, 586-602.
Marks, L. E., Hammeal, R. J., & Bornstein, M. H. (1987).
Perceiving
similarity
and
comprehending
metaphor.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
52(1), 1-102.
Martino, G., & Marks, L. E. (1999). Perceptual and linguistic
interactions in speeded classification: Tests of the semantic
coding hypothesis. Perception, 28, 903-923.
Melara, R. D., & O’Brien, T. P. (1987). Interaction between
synesthetically corresponding dimensions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 116, 323-336.
Melara, R. D. (1989). Dimensional interaction between color and
pitch. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 15, 69-79.
Merritt, D.J., Casasanto, D., & Brannon, E. M. (2010). Do
Monkeys Think in Metaphors? Representations of Space and
Time in Monkeys and Humans. Cognition, 117, 191-202.
Mondloch, C. J., & Maurer, D. (2004). Do small white balls
squeak? Pitch–object correspondences in your children.
Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 4, 133-136.
Parise, C., & Spence, C. (2009). “When birds of a feather flock
together”: Synesthetic correspondences modulate audiovisual
integration in non-synesthetes. PLoS ONE, 4, e5664.
Rusconi, E., Kwan, B., Giordano, B. L., Umiltà, C., &
Butterworth, B. (2006). Spatial representation of pitch height:
the SMARC effect. Cognition, 99(2), 113-29.
Shayan, S., Ozturk O., & Sicoli, M. (2011). Thickness of pitch,
cross-modal metaphors in Farsi, Turkish and Zapotec, The
Senses and Society.
Shayan, S., Ozturk, O., Bowerman, M., & Majid, A. (submitted).
Spatial metaphor in language can promote the development of
cross-modal mappings in children.
Smith, L. B., & Sera, M. D. (1992). A developmental analysis of
the polar structure of dimensions. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 99142.
Spence, C. (2011). Crossmodal correspondences: A tutorial
review. Attention, Perception & Psychophysics, 73, 971-995.
Roffler, S. K., & Butler, R. A. (1968). Factors that influence the
localization of sound in the vertical plane. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 43, 1255-1259.
Wagner, K., & Dobkins, K. R. (2011). Synaesthetic Associations
Decrease During Infancy. Psychological Science, 22, 10671072.
Wagner, S., Winner, E., Cicchetti, D., & Gardner, H. (1981).
"Metaphorical" Mapping in Human Infants. Child Development,
52(2), 728.
Walker, P., Bremmner, J.G., Mason, U., Spring, J., Mattock, K.,
Slater, A., & Johnson, S. P. (2010). Preverbal infants’ sensitivity
to synaesthetic cross-modality correspondences. Psychological
Science, 21(1), 21-25.
Williams, J. M. (1976). Synaesthetic adjectives. A possible law of
semantic change. Language, 52, 461-478.

References
Ashley, R. (2004). Musical pitch space across modalities: Spatial
and other mappings through language and culture. In P. W. S.
Lipscomb, R. Ashley, R. Gjerdingen (Ed.), Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Music Perception and
Cognition. Adelaide: Causal Productions.
Ben-Artzi, E., & Marks, L. E. (1995). Visual–auditory interaction
in speeded classification: Role of stimulus difference.
Perception & Psychophysics, 57, 1151-1162.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of words.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bloom, P., & Keil, F. (2001). Thinking through language. Mind
and Language, 16, 351-367.
Braaten, R. (1993). Synesthetic correspondence between visual
location and auditory pitch in infants. Paper presented at the
34th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought? Mandarin
and English speakers’ conceptions of time. Cognitive
Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Casasanto, D. (2008). Who is afraid of the big bad Whorf? Crosslinguistic differences in temporal language and thought.
Language Learning, 58(1), 63-79.
Casasanto, D. (2010). Space for Thinking. In V. Evans &. P.
Chilton (Eds.), Language, Cognition and Space: The State of the
Art and New Directions (pp. 453-478). London: Equinox
Publishing.
Costa-Giomi, E., & Descombes, V., (1996). Pitch labels with
single and multiple meanings: A study with French-speaking
children. Journal of Research in Music Education, 44(3), 204214.
Dolscheid, S., Shayan, S., Majid, A., & Casasanto, D. (submitted).
The Thickness of Musical Pitch: Psychophysical evidence for
linguistic relativity.
Eitan, Z., & Timmers, R. (2010). Beethoven’s last piano sonata
and those who follow crocodiles: cross-domain mappings of
auditory pitch in a musical context. Cognition, 114(3), 405-22.
Evans, K. K., & Treisman, A. (2010). Natural cross-modal
mappings between visual and auditory features. Journal of
Vision, 10(1), 1-12.
Gallace, A., & Spence, C. (2006). Multisensory synesthetic
interactions in the speeded classification of visual size.
Perception & Psychophysics, 68, 1191-1203.
Gentner, D. (2002). Analogy in scientific discovery: The case of
Johannes Kepler. In L. Magnani & N. J. Nersessian (Eds.),
Model-based reasoning: Science, technology, values (pp.21-39).
New York: Kluwer Academic/ Plenum Publisher.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and S.
Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in the
study of language and thought (pp.195-235). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, Thoughts, and
Theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hubbard, T. L. (1996). Synesthesia-like mappings of lightness,
pitch, and melodic interval. The American Journal of
Psychology, 109, 219-238.
Jeschonek, S., Pauen, S., & Babocsai, L. (in preparation). Crossmodal mapping of visual and acoustic displays in infants: The
effect of static and dynamic components.
Johnson, C. J. (1992). Cognitive components of naming in
children: Effects of referential uncertainty and stimulus realism.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 53, 45-71.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago
and London: The University of Chicago Press.

311

