UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Atoms of Cognition: A Theory of Ground Epistemics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9j55j16t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Author
Ho, Seng Beng

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Atoms of Cognition: A Theory of Ground Epistemics
Seng-Beng Ho (hosengbeng@nus.edu.sg)
Temasek Laboratories, National University of Singapore
5A Engineering Drive 1, #09-02, Singapore 117411

Abstract
We propose a set of “atomic cognitive operational
representations” on which higher level cognitive
representations and processes can be built, thus providing
fundamental building blocks for cognitive mechanisms
necessary for intelligent actions. The fundamental concepts
involved are elemental temporal changes of some quantities
and in this representational scheme the temporal dimension is
explicitly represented to fully characterize the meanings of the
concepts involved at the epistemic ground level. This
provides full grounding for all subsequent concepts that are
built upon them, allowing cognitive systems embodying these
concepts to have full and complete understanding and
characterization of the concepts involved that it can use for
various cognitive ends. This provides a firm theoretical
foundation for the study of cognition and intelligence.
Keywords: representation; operational representation;
spatiotemporal representation; conceptual grounding;
fundamental building blocks of cognition; experiential
memory

Introduction
Unlike the physical sciences, “standard” paradigms for
scientific investigation of cognitive phenomena still do not
exist for the sciences of cognition and intelligence (Arbib,
2002; Gazzaniga, 2008; Russell & Norvig 2010). Chief
among the achievements of the physical sciences is the
discovery of various fundamental particles and forces that
provide the foundation for the understanding of physical
reality. These fundamental particles and forces form the
necessary and sufficient building blocks upon which the
characterization of all other higher level physical
phenomena can be constructed.
We show that a set of representations, which we refer to
as “atomic cognitive operational representations” or ACORs,
can perform an equivalent function of providing the
fundamental building blocks for building cognition. Like
elementary particles and forces, ACORs allow ground level
semantics to be represented and all higher level semantics
and cognitive operations to be based on them. As a dual of
physical ontology, the atomic cognitive operational
representations provide the cognitive ontology for building
all cognitive phenomena.
In our theory, a set of correctly formulated ground level
“atomic” building blocks of cognition will be necessary for
allowing all cognitive processes to be constituted.
Furthermore, the same fundamental building blocks apply at
all epistemic scales to enable useful knowledge to be
derived through cognition for intelligent functioning.
Consider the following.

Before the advent of science, we dealt with the world as
best we could, at a level of description provided by our
natural sensory systems. Take for example the case of a tree
as perceived by our human senses. From a distance, a tree
can be sensed and conceptualized as consisting of a trunk,
some branches and many leaves. However close up, our
senses can tell the texture and the detailed shapes of the
trunk, the branches and the leaves, and perceive their
movements. The detailed perception of these subparts of a
tree in turn provides us with the necessary knowledge to be
able to use those subparts for various purposes, such as for
decoration or other more functional ends. When the wind
blows and the leaves on a tree move, the softness of the
movement might allow us to “imagine” using the leaves as a
broom for the purpose of sweeping, or as a fan to fan
oneself; in due course, we might proceed to act on those
ideas when the need for them arises. This would be the
characterization of the tree at an epistemic ground level at
which normal perception operates to provide useful
information for a cognitive system to function intelligently.
As science improves our understanding of the natural
world, our conceptualization of trees goes beyond just trunk,
branches and leaves as they appear to our natural senses.
We discovered chlorophyll and the photosynthetic
processes, for example. These biological processes involve
much smaller entities – various molecules – and attendant
complicated interactions that our natural senses cannot
detect directly. With this deeper understanding, we reach
another epistemic ground level. It is the thesis of this paper
that no matter which ground level we are looking at – i.e.,
whether it be the earlier one reached by our natural senses or
the deeper ones reached through scientific means – the same
fundamental building blocks of cognition are involved in
subserving cognitive mechanisms from which intelligent
actions emerge.
With the fundamental building blocks, we put the
sciences of cognition and intelligence on a firm theoretical
foundation, much as what the theory of fundamental
particles and forces has done for the physical sciences.

The Atomic Operational Representations of
Appearance and Existence
The vast canvas of space-time is the arena in which physical
and mental processes take place. One fundamentally
important concept that any mental process must deal with is
appearance and existence (of objects, events and processes).
We begin with the formulation of the atomic concept of
appearance.

1685

Figure 1a shows a one dimensional space with 5 discrete
positions x0 – x4. At time t0 it contains nothing. At time t1,
something appears at position x1. It could be an elemental
bit of substance or a point of light. Now, assuming an
intelligent system has perceptual detectors that can sense
and signal something appearing at a certain spot at a certain
time and has an explicit experiential memory that can store
its perceptual experiences and lay them out in a spatial
extent for simultaneous processing, Figure 1b shows what
the explicit experiential memory looks like in the time
interval t0 to t1. Figure 1b also shows a spatiotemporal
“appear” template that can pick up this change in the
physical situation in the one dimensional space. Basically
this template encodes the meaning of “appear.” It captures
the situation in which in a moment in time just prior to the
appearance of something, there was nothing in that point in
space and in the next moment something came into
existence.
In the spatiotemporal template, time is
spatialized and the temporal dimension is explicitly
represented.

Figure 1: Atomic operational representations for
“appearance” and related concepts. a. Appearance of an
object at a specific time and location. b. The experiential
memory and the “appear” operational representation. c.
“Persist” and “disappear” operators. d. Concept of
“blinking.” e. Re-composing operators – cognitive
manipulatability.
It should be stressed that the elemental “blob” that is
picked up and represented in the experiential memory of
Figure 1b may or may not correspond exactly to an
elemental “blob” in the physical world. It is an “elemental”

bit of occurrence as characterized by the sensory organ of
the cognitive system relevant to the cognitive task at hand.
Depending on the resolution of the sensory system and the
cognitive task involved, the “blob” could correspond to an
atom in the physical world, a vehicle or a person, or the
recognizable points on a human body or on the leaves of a
tree. It could also be something created by other internal
mental processes in a “mental space.”
We submit that this spatiotemporal appear template
captures the full meaning of appear at the ground level.
For the purpose of identifying an appear event, the template
is used as follows: it is matched to the spatiotemporal
patterns in the experiential memory as shown in Fig 1b. If
there is a match, an appear event is identified to have taken
place.
The appear template, other than being useful for the
purpose of identifying or recognizing the occurrence of an
appear event, is also usable in the opposite direction – that
of generating the action or idea of appear. Assuming that
an intervening system is available to translate an intelligent
system’s intention into physical realization, the intelligent
system can act, under the direction of the appear template,
to move a material substance into a specific point in space
and thus making it “appear” at that location, to materialize a
bit of substance from nowhere at a specific point in space,
or to cause a point of light to appear at a specific point, etc.
These are examples of “make-appear” – the appear template
used in the generation direction. The appear template can
also be used to generate an “idea” (i.e., a bit of “mental
substance” – e.g., the mental analog of a corresponding
physical quantity – or something more abstract) at a point in
a mental space for the purpose of mental manipulation. An
example of a mental space would be the spatiotemporal
representational structures that hold the experiential
memory for mental manipulation, such as the structure
shown in Figure 1c that might be implemented using a
computer memory. Generation of ideas in the mental space
is also sometimes referred to as “imaging” or “imagining”
(Kosslyn 1994). We will refer to this characteristic of these
atomic operational representations as “operational
bidirectionality” – i.e., they can be used for recognition as
well as generation.
We thus term the appear spatiotemporal template an
“operational representation” as it encodes the meaning of an
operational concept – appear – directly in terms of the
operations that it performs.
Such an operational
representation is atomic in that it captures knowledge at the
ground level. An atomic operational representation is
elemental in that it represents a smallest discrete change in
the spatial and temporal dimensions relevant to the
cognitive task at hand. A more succinct description of
“atomic operational representations” is “atomic operators.”
Figure 1c depicts two other concepts related to appear –
“persist” and “disappear.” Together with appear, they can
be used to capture the process of something appearing at a
point, persisting (existing) for some time, and then
disappearing. Figure 1b and 1c also suggest that these

1686

templates or operators can be picked up from the
environment, in the same manner as the “cookie-cutter”
approach described by Uhr and Vossler (1981) – i.e., when a
subpattern is perceived in the environment, it is simply “cutout”/“picked-up” and stored as an elemental pattern to be
used later to match with further pattern information coming
in through the perceptual system to recognize future
occurrences of the subpatterns. This is usually known as an
unsupervised learning process (Duda, Hart & Stork, 2001;
Fukushima, 1988; Malsburg, 1973). Whereas in Uhr and
Vossler (1981), the “cookie-cutters” work on static images
containing certain spatial patterns, thus they extract subfeatures of the spatial patterns for the purpose of
characterizing these patterns, the corresponding application
here would be extracting spatiotemporal sub-patterns that
serve to characterize activities or changes in the
environment, external or internal to the cognitive system.
Figure 1d shows how higher level concepts can be built
upon the atomic operators of appear, persist and disappear
– if something alternately appears and disappears over time,
the concept of “blinking” can be used to encapsulate the
process. The higher level concepts are firmly grounded
through the atomic operational representations.
This
process is termed “cognitive hierarchy construction.”
Figure 1e shows how the atomic operators can be
recombined into novel sequences that may not have been
encountered in the environment earlier in a generation
process through the conceptual hierarchy, directed by
reasoning and problem solving requirements. This
characteristic is referred to as “cognitive manipulatability” –
i.e., these representations can be directly manipulated in
cognitive processes.
Base on the foregoing discussion, the critical
characteristics of operational representations in general and
atomic operational representations in particular are
summarized as follows:
1. Explicit Temporal Representation - the temporal
dimension is explicitly represented in operational
representations – this requires the intelligent system
utilizing the representation to have an explicit
experiential memory – temporal changes are laid out in
a spatial extent for simultaneous processing.
2. Elemental Representation – atomic operators are
elemental in that they represent the smallest discrete
changes in the respective dimensions.
3. Cognitive Hierarchy Construction – higher level
concepts can be built directly upon the lower level as
well as the atomic level operational representations.
4. Operational
Bidirectionality
operational
representations can be used for recognition as well as
generation purposes. Recognition and generation can
involve things, events and processes in both the
physical environment and the mental space.
5. Unsupervised Extraction – atomic level as well as
higher level operational representations can be
extracted from the environment in an unsupervised
learning process.

6. Grounding of Representations – atomic operational
representations are grounded directly in the
environment or the mental space, higher level
representations are grounded on the atomic
representations.
7. Cognitive Manipulatability – The operational
representations, atomic or higher level, can be
recomposed and cognitively manipulated in cognitive
processes.
The atomic operational representations capture and
encode “meaning” in the operations themselves. For
example, appear is not defined in terms of other atomic or
non-atomic concepts but is instead defined directly in the
recognition and generation operations that it stipulates.

Figure 2: Operational representations of movements. a. Up
and down movements in a one-dimensional space and the
associated operational representations and conceptual
hierarchy. b. A “jerky trajectory.” c. Accelerate and
decelerate operators

Atomic Operational Representations of
Movement
Again, using events in a discrete one dimensional space, we
illustrate the atomic operational representations associated
with movements in Figure 2. In Figure 2a, we show the
operational representational characterizations of a point
object appearing at a certain location, moving “up” and
“down” in the one dimensional space, and then
disappearing. There are basically two kinds of
spatiotemporal templates associated with atomic movements
– “move-up” and “move-down.” Here we also introduce a
more specific kind of appear template called “strict-appear”
– i.e., the appearance of something in a specific location is
not caused by things moving into the location. If the earlier,
more general appear in Figure 1 is used, then at every
location where the point object moves into, the appear

1687

template will be triggered. Similarly for disappear – we
introduce a “strict-disappear” template. The “stay” template
is similar to the persist template in Figure 1. It is interesting
to note that the concept of stationarity – “stay” – can only
be represented adequately if there is an explicit temporal
dimension that can capture and encode the meaning of “no
change in position in time.” Similarly for the concept of
“persist” – “no change in the state of existence” – depicted
in Figure 1c.
Figure 2a shows a cognitive hierarchy built upon the
atomic operational representations of appearance and
movement, reaching a level where the concept of
“trajectory” is formed. Other than trajectory, concepts such
as “jerky trajectory” can emerge from the conceptual
hierarchy, as shown in Figure 2b.
Figure 2c shows the concepts of acceleration (an
“upward” acceleration) and deceleration (an “upward”
deceleration) captured in their corresponding operational
representations. Again, here we can see that the meanings
of move-up, move-down or acceleration and deceleration
are captured directly in the corresponding associated
operations stipulated by the operational representations.

Atomic Operational Representations of Scalar
and General Parameters

cognitive entities endowed with certain “qualia” such as
pain, sadness, anxiousness, brightness, darkness, redness,
saltiness, sweetness, spatiousness, etc. These atomic level
cognitive parameters as appear to consciousness can vary in
their intensities over time but otherwise have no further
internal structures scrutinizable by consciousness.

Figure 3: Other operational representations. a. Atomic
operational representations of scalar parameters (brightness
or pain) increasing and decreasing over time. b. Generalized
atomic representation of parameter change.

Representing and Reasoning about Time

At any given point in physical space, a physical quantity,
such as the hardness of some substance or the brightness of
a point of light, may change elementally. Similarly, in
mental space, the strength of an idea or feeling may also
change elementally. These non-spatial scalar parameters are
represented in the same manner as the spatial parameters as
atomic operational representations as shown in Figure 3a,
using the examples of a physical parameter such as
“brightness” or a mental parameter such as “pain” that
increases and decreases over time.
Atomic movement through space (physical or mental),
which involves an elemental change in spatial position, can
be considered a special case of a change in something, so
does a change in the state of existence in space – i.e., appear
or disappear. Therefore, the most general characterization
of all the atomic operators including those that capture nonspatial parameters is that they characterize an elemental
change of these parameters, spatial or otherwise, across
elemental time. Figure 3b shows a generalized atomic
operational representation of parameter change – like a
“God particle” of atomic operators – that subsumes all
possible atomic operators.
The number and kind of atomic operators that can be
found in a particular intelligent organism or system depends
on the parameters that are necessary for its survival or
intelligent operations. For example, if an organism needs
salt for survival and has the necessary sensory apparatus to
detect the presence of salt with varying intensities over time,
then for the purpose of cognitive processing it would need
“saltiness” atomic operators. In conscious perception such
as that typically experienced and reported by human beings,
the atomic level parameters typically appear as indivisible

If a cognitive system provides for the explicit representation
of time through an experiential memory such as that
described above, it can lead to another interesting mental
operation, which is the conceptualization of time as a
“thing” and the “movement” of it mapped onto
spatiotemporal dimensions in the cognitive system’s mental
space-time that allows the cognitive system to cogitate
about time itself. Figure 4 shows the representations and
operations involved for this.
In Figure 4 we re-label the horizontal axis as “cognitive
time,” to distinguish from the “real” physical time out there
in the real world. (All previous labels of “time” in Figures 1
- 3 should rightfully be “cognitive time” as these operational
representations are mental entities.)
Here, time is
characterized as a “thing” that can “move.” Normally, we
would conceptualize time as something that moves on
inexorably with a “constant speed.” In the physical
universe, it is hard to ascribe “speed” to time as one needs a
time reference to talk about speed, and such “super-time” is
non-existent. However, in our mental processes, we can
freely cogitate about these possibilities. Firstly, we often
imagine real-world events going faster or slowing down.
Therefore time can “accelerate” or “decelerate,” and that
would be applying the acceleration or deceleration
operators as depicted in Figure 2c in the time representation
here. We sometimes wonder if time has a beginning or end,
and these would correspond to applying the appear and
disappear operators as shown in Figure 4. If we cogitate
whether time can come to a halt, that would correspond to
applying the persist/stay operator. And in physics the
concept of time reversal has been invoked to explain certain
physical phenomena and that would correspond to applying

1688

a move-down operator as shown in Figure 4. The concept of
time travel to the past or future would correspond to a
sudden jump or accelerated movement to a different “point”
in “time” from the present point. Our reasoning processes
with time thus use similar mental processes as we use for
space, once time is conceptualized as a “thing” and its
“movement” mapped onto spatiotemporal dimensions in our
mental space-time.

Figure
5:
Interactions
captured
in operational
representations. a. Two objects reflect off each other. b.
Penetration of one object through another one.
An atomic operational representation that represents
elemental movements in one of 8 directions in a 2dimensional (2D), discrete, and Cartesian space would be a
cube of 3X3X1 as shown in Figure 6a. If some liquid on a
flat surface moves and changes shape more or less in a
plane, its complex shape changes can be captured by the 3D
(2D space + 1D time) atomic movement operator as shown
in Figure 6a. Higher level characterizations of the liquid
movement can be built from the 3D atomic operators.

Figure 4: Cogitating about time. Representations capturing
the movement, acceleration, deceleration, halting, beginning
(appearing), ending (disappearing), and reversal of time for
the purpose of cogitation about time.

Representing Interactions
The interactions between objects can be characterized using
operational representations. Figure 5a shows a situation in a
one dimensional world in which 2 objects hit each other and
are reflected. The concepts of “meet”, “part” and “reflect”
can arise in this situation as shown in Figure 5a and be
encoded in the form of operational representations. Figure
5b shows the situation with an alternative physics where a
moving object penetrates a stationary object and no
reflection takes place. The concept of “penetration” can
likewise be characterized at the ground level through
operational representations.

Figure 6: Complex object representations. a. Liquid moving
and changing shape in 2D and the associated 3D atomic
operator. b. Leaves and 3D micro trajectories of all their
elemental movements.

Extended Spatial Objects and Higher
Dimensional Representations
The object to be represented by an operational
representation can also be an extended object consisting of
more than one point. Each point on the object can be
represented by an atomic operational representation. If all
the points on an object move in unison, it is a rigid object
(the concept of “rigidity” can be characterized by some
higher level operational representations building on top of
the atomic operators in the same vein as the blinking and
trajectory concepts shown in Figures 1d and 2a
respectively). Otherwise, the object is deformable and the
deformations can be characterized by how the points on the
object move relative to each other likewise through the use
of some higher level characterizations of the deformations
built-up from the atomic operators.

Figure 6b shows a plant’s leaves whose movements can
be characterized using the atomic operators that can lead to
the intelligent construction of a “broom” or “fan” made
from leaves – i.e., having captured and understood a certain
soft character of the potential elemental movements of the
leaves on the tree, the cognitive system is then able to
imagine the use of the leaves for the purpose of sweeping
dirt or fanning air to cool oneself. For characterizing the
leaves, because of 3D movements, a 4D atomic movement
operator (3D space + 1D time) is needed. Bare branches
will not function correctly as a broom or a fan because their
elemental parts lack certain surfaces that can move in a
certain “soft” manner. This understanding requires the high
resolution ground level characterization of the potential
movements of the leaves as captured by the 4D atomic
movement operators and higher level characterizations of
the movements built on the 4D atomic operators.

1689

The atomic operational representations are the
fundamental building blocks of cognition. All events and
processes – including the operations of natural phenomena
ranging from the micro to the cosmic scales (e.g., from the
operations of bacteria to trees, weather, events and
processes in the heavens, etc.), operations of human-made
machineries (e.g., the operations of the finest mechanical
contraptions to the operations of a gargantuan rocket, etc.),
and mental operations (e.g., thinking processes in general,
abstract mathematical manipulations in the mind, etc.) – are
fundamentally cognitively describable based on the atomic
operational representations.

Discussion
It is not a coincidence that the “mental” atomic operational
representations described in this paper for the purpose of
cognitive processing bear a strong resemblance to the usual
“physical” spatiotemporal representations many a scientist
and engineer employs to represent physical events and
processes for the ease of understanding and manipulating
them. This is because there is an intimate link between the
physical and the mental world. Spatiotemporal
representations are fundamental and lie at the very
foundation of the descriptions of all events and processes
that can take place in this reality. Cognitive processes are
the dual of the physical processes in that they seek to
represent the physical processes but they have additional
and unique characteristics and operational requirements as
described in this paper as they need to manipulate the
representations in certain cognitively useful ways.
The grounding of concepts, and hence the learning of the
atomic operators, would take place in the early days of a
cognitive system’s interaction with the environment (e.g.,
the infant stage in humans). Future studies of cognitive
developmental processes could direct their investigative
efforts to uncover whether or how these atomic operators
are learned and used.
Our atomic operational representational scheme dictates
that the temporal dimension needs to be represented
explicitly for the adequate capture of the ground meanings
of concepts. Hence, it follows that for a system to qualify as
“cognitive,” it must have the capability of representing and
manipulating the temporal dimension explicitly. A critical
mechanism that subserves explicit temporal representation
is the experiential memory (Figure 1b). Neuroanatomically,
the experiential memory can be identified with the
hippocampus, which is supposedly the neural structure
responsible for memory over time – episodic memory
(Anderson et al, 2007). In this paper, for the sake of
exploring the basic principles we describe the experiential
memory as a structure that simply lays out the temporal
information in an uncompressed manner. In reality, because
of the amount of information in the temporal domain that a
cognitive system needs to process, compression in the time
dimension is probably necessary. We submit that the
hippocampus performs both the experiential memory
function as well as the compression function necessary for

its practical functioning. We also submit that for a system
to have “cognitive abilities” and be considered a “cognitive
system”, it must possess a structure that functions like the
hippocampus or the experiential memory that processes and
represents temporal information explicitly. This allows it to
truly conceptualize and understand events, processes and
causality in the world. Even the concept of stationarity and
changelessness can be captured adequately only if there is
an explicit temporal representational dimension as discussed
above. Hence, artificial or natural neural networks systems
that merely reproduce certain input-output mappings of
some seemingly “intelligent” processes are “reflexive” and
do not qualify to be characterized as “cognitive systems.”
A last and interesting fact to note is that the spatialization
of time in operational representations parallels the
spatialization of time in relativity which brought us a deeper
understanding of the reality in which we inhabit (Lorentz et
al, 1923).

Acknowledgments
I thank Dr. Kenneth Kwok and the anonymous reviewers for
their suggested changes to the manuscript.

References
Anderson, P., Morris, R., Amaral, D., Bliss, T., and
O’Keefe, J. (2007). The Hippocampus Book. Oxford UK:
Oxford University Press.
Arbib, M. A. (Ed.) (2002). The Handbook of Brain Theory
and Neural Networks. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press.
Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E. & Stork, D. G. (2001). Pattern
Classification. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Fukushima, K. (1988). Neocognitron: A hierarchical neural
network capable of visual pattern recognition. Neural
Networks, 1,119-130.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Ivry, R. B. & Mangun, G. R. (2008).
Cognitive Neuroscience: The Biology of the Mind. New
York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Griffiths, D. J. (2008). Introduction to Elementary Particle.
Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994) Image and Brain: The Resolution of
the Imagery Debate. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press.
Lorentz, H. A., Einstein, A., Minkowski, H., and Weyl H.
(1923) The Principle of Relativity: A Collection of
Original Memoirs on the Special and General Relativity,
with notes by A. Sommerfield. Methuen and Company,
Ltd.
Malsburg, C. V. D. (1973). Self-organization of orientation
sensitive cells in the striate cortex. Kybernetik 14, 85-100.
Russell, S. & Norvig, P. (2010). Artificial Intelligence: A
Modern Approach. New Jersey: Pearson Education, Inc.
Uhr, L. & Vossler, C. (1981) A pattern-recognition program
that generates, evaluates, and adusts its own operators. In
Feigenbaum, E. A. & Feldman, J. (eds.) Computers and
Thought. Malabar, Florida: Robert E. Krieger Publishing
Company, Inc.

1690

