UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Visually and Phonologically Misleading Nonwords on Lexical Decisions of
Native Japanese Readers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8zq361zw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Mizuno, Rika
Matsui, Takao

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Visually and Phonologically Misleading Nonwords
on Lexical Decisions of Native Japanese Readers
Rika Mizuno (mizunor@isc.chubu.ac.jp)
Takao Matsui (mat@psy.chubu.ac.jp)
Department of Psychology, Chubu University
1200 Matsumoto-Cho, Kasugai-shi, 487-8501 JAPAN
Abstract
Native Japanese readers were found to rely heavily on visual
codes and scarcely on phonological codes in letter/word
processing (Mizuno, Matsui, & Bellezza, 2007). This study
aimed to determine if this processing feature of native
Japanese readers influenced their process of lexical access by
lexical decision tasks using visually misleading transposedletter
(TL)
nonwords,
phonologically
misleading
pseudohomophones, and standard nonwords. Lupker and
Pexman (2010) found that the performance on a lexical
decision task of native English readers was impaired by both
TL nonwords and pseudohomophones. However, the results
of two experiments in this study showed that the performance
of native Japanese readers was impaired not by
pseudohomophones but by TL nonwords. The results suggested
that the processing features of native readers of various
languages should influence their process of lexical access.
Keywords: lexical decision; nonwords; transposed-letter;
pseudohomophone; native Japanese readers; native English
readers

Introduction
A lexical decision task (Meyer & Schvaneveldt, 1971) is a
task in which participants decide whether presented letter
strings are words or not. The lexical decision time of a word
is considered to reflect the access time to lexical
representation of the word, and the task has been used in
many studies to explore the structure of lexical
representation or the process of lexical access.
Various features of words have been found to influence
lexical decision time. Such features include word frequency
(e.g., Glanzer & Ehrenreich, 1979), neighborhood size 1
(Coltheart, Develaar, Jonasson, & Besner, 1977), semantic
relation to primes (Neely, 1977), spelling-to-sound
regularity (Parkin, 1982), and so on.
However, some research has shown that the effects of the
features of nonwords on lexical decision time are also not
negligible. For example, Shulman and Davidson (1977)
found that pronounceable nonwords delayed the lexical
decision time of words more than unpronounceable
nonwords. Perea and Lupker (2004) found that the
transposed-letter (TL) nonwords, which were made by
transposing the two letters of words, delayed the lexical
decision time for both words and nonwords. Lupker and
Pexman (2011) compared the size of frequency effect in the
TL, pseudohomophone, and standard nonword conditions.
Frequency effect means that the lexical decision time of
1
The number of words that can be created by changing one
letter while maintaining letter positions.

more frequent words is shorter. They found that lexical
decision time was longer and that frequency effect was
greater in the TL and the pseudohomophone nonword
conditions than in the standard nonword condition.
These findings about the effects of nonwords on lexical
decision time not only contributed to the improved
understanding of the process of lexical access but suggested
that the features of nonwords should also be considered in
using lexical decision tasks.
As described above, visually misleading TL nonwords
and phonologically misleading pseudohomophones were
confirmed to influence lexical decision time of words and
nonwords. However, they were confirmed only with native
English readers. Mizuno, Matsui, and Bellezza (2007) and
Mizuno, Matsui, Harman, and Bellezza (2008) conducted
several letter-matching experiments with native English and
native Japanese readers, and found that native Japanese
readers rely heavily on visual codes and not as much on
phonological codes as native English readers do. Mizuno
and Matsui (2012) also showed that visual similarity, rather
than phonological similarity, between targets and distracters
increased attentional blink of native Japanese readers, while
Chun and Potter (1995) suggested that phonological
similarity had a significant effect on the attentional blink of
native English readers.
Consequently, we hypothesized that performance on a
lexical decision task by native Japanese readers would not
be
impaired
by
phonologically
misleading
pseudohomophones because they rely scarcely on
phonological codes. If this is verified, we will be able to not
only indicate that their processing features of letters
influence performance on lexical decision tasks but also
alert many researchers using lexical decision tasks to take
the processing features of their participants into account in
choosing nonwords.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 compared lexical decision time and error rates
of native Japanese readers across the TL nonword condition,
the pseudohomophone condition, and the standard nonword
condition. We predicted that their lexical decision time
would be delayed and error rates for nonwords would be
high only in the TL condition, and not in the
pseudohomophone condition and the standard condition.

Method
Participants and Design Thirty-six undergraduate
students (14 women and 22 men) who were native Japanese

2031

Equipment The experiment was conducted on a personal
computer (Fujitsu, FMV Esprimo D5350) running an
experimental software (Cedrus Co., SuperLab2.0) with a 17in. liquid crystal monitor (EIZO, FlexScan S1731).
Responses were collected by a response box (Cedrus Co.,
RB-730). A chin support (Takei, T.K.K. 123i with 123j)
was placed on the edge of the desk. The distance between
participants’ eyes and the screen was about 45 cm, and the
height of the chin support was adjusted for each participant.
Stimuli All the stimuli were two-character and four-mora
Kanji words. In total, 120 words and 120 nonwords (40 TL
nonwords, 40 pseudohomophones, and 40 standard
nonwords) were selected/created in the following manner:
240 words of frequencies between 15,000 and 100,000 were
selected from the database (Amano & Kondo, 2003); 40 TL
nonwords were made by transposing two Kanji characters
(e.g., "盟連", from "連盟"), confirming that they had no
homophones; and the remaining 200 words were divided
into five sets of 40 words each. Three sets were assigned to
word sets, another set was used for making pseudohomophones,
and another was used for making standard nonwords. Forty
pseudohomophones were made by replacing each Kanji
character with another Kanji character with the same phone
(e.g., "案低", from "安定"). The 40 standard nonwords were
created by exchanging one of the two Kanji characters with
one of the other words (e.g.,"開税"), confirming that they
were nonwords and had no homophones. The three nonword
sets were combined with the three word sets to form six
counterbalancing groups.
Japanese letters are typically written from left to right or
from top to bottom but sometimes from right to left. The
two letters, therefore, were written vertically from top to
bottom lest the TL nonwords should be regarded as words.
A two-letter stimulus presented on the monitor subtended 3
degrees of visual angles vertically and 1.5 degrees
horizontally.
Procedure Six participants were allocated to each of the six
counterbalancing groups. In each group, the orders of three
nonword conditions were counterbalanced among the six
participants.
Participants were tested individually. Each participant
completed eight practice trials with standard nonwords
followed by three blocks of 80 experimental trials. The
order of the 80 trials was randomized. Participants were
instructed to decide as quickly and accurately as possible
whether the letter strings were a word or a nonword by
pressing the right-most key if they were a word and the leftmost key if they were not. In each trial, after a 1,100 ms
interval, two asterisks written vertically were presented on
the middle of the screen for 550 ms followed by the stimuli,
which remained on the screen for three seconds or until the

participant responded.

Results
Trials involving latencies greater than 1,500 ms (1.2% of the
word trials and 3.2% of the nonword trials) were removed
from the following analyses according to Lupker and
Pexman (2010).
Word Lexical Decision Time Means of correct lexical
decision time for words in the three nonword conditions are
shown in Figure 1. One-way repeated measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) revealed that the effect of the nonword
condition was significant, F (2, 70) = 27.29, MSE = 5,528.08,
p < .001. Multiple comparisons showed that the mean lexical
decision time in the TL condition was significantly longer
than that in the pseudohomophone condition and the standard
nonword condition, ps < .01, HSD = 53.04.
Word Error Rates Means and standard deviations of error
rates for words in the three nonword conditions are shown
in Table 1. ANOVA of arcsine transformed error rates
revealed that the effect of the nonword condition was not
significant, F (2, 70) = 1.62, MSE = 37.97, p = .20.
Nonword Lexical Decision Time Means of correct lexical
decision time for nonwords in the three nonword conditions
Mean Lexical Decision Time (ms)

readers participated in return for course credit. Participants
were assigned to all three conditions: the TL nonword, the
pseudohomophone, and the standard nonword conditions.

1100
1000
900
800
700
600
5000
Transposed
-letter

(

Pseudo
-homophone

Standard

Nonword Condition

Figure 1: Mean and standard deviation of lexical decision
time for words in each nonword condition in Experiment 1.
Table 1: Mean and standard deviation of error rates for
words in each nonword condition in Experiment 1.
Nonword Condition

2032

Transposed
-letter

Pseudo
-homophone

Standard

Mean

0.061

0.048

0.060

SD

0.043

0.039

0.037

Mean Lexical Decision Time (ms)

1100
1000
900
800
700
600
5000
Transposed
-letter

(

Pseudo
-homophone

Standard

Nonword Condition

Figure 2: Mean and standard deviation of lexical decision
time for nonwords in each nonword condition in Experiment 1.
Table 2: Mean and standard deviation of error rates for
nonwords in each nonword condition in Experiment 1.
Nonword Condition
Transposed
-letter

Pseudo
-homophones

Standard

Mean

0.097

0.042

0.060

SD

0.044

0.034

0.032

are shown in Figure 2. ANOVA revealed that the effect of
the nonword condition was significant, F (2, 70) = 29.86,
MSE = 13,857.37, p < .001. Multiple comparisons showed
that the mean lexical decision time in the TL condition was
significantly longer than that in the pseudohomophone
condition and the standard nonword condition, ps < .01,
HSD = 83.97, and that the time in the pseudohomophone
condition was shorter than that in the standard nonword
condition, p < .05, HSD = 66.71.
Nonword Error Rates Means and standard deviations of
error rates for nonwords in the three nonword conditions are
shown in Table 2. ANOVA of arcsine transformed error
rates showed that the effect of the nonword condition was
significant, F (2, 70) = 19.98, MSE = 26.92, p < .001.
Multiple comparisons revealed that the error rate in the TL
nonword condition was higher than that in the
pseudohomophone condition and the standard nonword
condition, ps < .01, HSD = 3.70, and that in the
pseudohomophone condition was lower than that in the
standard nonword condition, p < .05, HSD = 2.94.

This result was different from that of Lupker and Pexman
(2010) with native English readers, which showed that
lexical decision times for words in the TL condition and
pseudohomophone condition were longer than the
corresponding time in the standard nonword condition. This
result suggests that lexical decision time for words of native
Japanese readers, who do not rely so much on phonological
codes, is not delayed by phonologically misleading
nonwords. Error rates for words did not differ among
nonword conditions, consistent with the result of Lupker
and Pexman (2010).
As for nonwords, the results showed that lexical decision
time in the TL condition was longer than in the other two
conditions, and that error rates in the TL condition were
higher than those in the other two conditions. However,
Lupker and Pexman (2010) with native English readers
showed that their lexical decision times and error rates in
the TL and pseudohomophone conditions were greater than
those in the standard nonword condition. These results
indicated that the effect of phonologically misleading
nonwords was scarce in the case of native Japanese readers.
Nonetheless, we did not expect that the lexical decision
time in the pseudohomophone condition would be shorter
than that in the standard nonword condition, or that the error
rate in the pseudohomophone condition would be lower than
that in the standard nonword condition. These results were
inconsistent with the previously mentioned results indicating
that phonological codes have a scarce effect on lexical
decisions of native Japanese readers, and we considered it
implausible to suppose that the phonological codes of
pseudohomophones made lexical decision of nonwords easy.
Therefore, we reexamined the frequencies and stroke
counts of all Kanji characters consisting of the nonwords in
the three conditions. The stroke counts of Kanji characters
(see Table 3) reflect their visual complexities. The means of
frequencies and stroke counts (with standard deviations in
parentheses) were, respectively, 456,281.6 (566,312.9) and
9.775 (4.40) for TL nonwords, 305,685.2 (392,268.0) and
8.91 (3.24) for pseudohomophones, and 497,443.0
(515,634.1) and 9.56 (3.73) for standard nonwords. The
mean frequency and the mean stroke count of
pseudohomophones were smaller than the others. A low
frequency was likely to increase both lexical decision time
and error rate. It could not unexpectedly decrease lexical
decision time, or the error rate in the pseudohomophone
condition. Therefore, we concluded that the low stroke
counts were the real cause. Because native Japanese
speakers tend to rely heavily on visual codes, it was
Table 3: Examples of stroke counts.
Stroke Count
3

Discussion
The lexical decision time for words in the TL condition was
longer than the lexical decision times for words in the
pseudohomophone condition and in the standard condition.

2033

8

13

Experiment 2
Method
Participants and Design Thirty-six undergraduate students
(13 women and 23 men) who were native Japanese readers
participated in return for course credit. Participants were
assigned to all three conditions: the TL nonword, the
pseudohomophone, and the standard nonword conditions.
Stimuli The 120 words and 40 nonwords in the TL
conditions were the same as those used in Experiment 1.
Some of the Kanji characters in the pseudohomophone
condition and the standard nonword condition used in
Experiment 1 were substituted with other Kanji characters
to make the means of stroke counts, along with the
frequency of Kanji characters composing the nonwords, in
the three conditions as equal as possible. The resultant
means (with standard deviations in parentheses) of stroke
counts and frequency of Kanji characters composing the
nonwords in the TL condition were 9.78 (4.40) and
456,281.6 (566,312.9), respectively, those in the
pseudohomophone condition were 9.76 (3.52) and
412,652.3 (369,488.1), and those in the standard nonword
condition were 9.78 (3.72) and 422,790.2 (454,322.7).
Equipment and Procedure These were the same as in
Experiment 1.

Results
Trials involving latencies greater than 1,500 ms (2.9% of the
word trials and 6.7% of the nonword trials) were removed
from the following analyses as in Experiment 1.
Word Lexical Decision Time Means of correct lexical
decision time for words in the three nonword conditions are
shown in Figure 3. One-way repeated measures ANOVA
revealed that the effect of nonword condition was
significant, F (2, 70) = 12.47, MSE = 5,572.14, p < .001.
Multiple comparisons showed that the mean lexical decision
time in the TL condition was significantly longer than that
in the pseudohomophone condition and the standard
nonword condition, ps < .01, HSD = 53.25.
Word Error Rates Means and standard deviations of error
rates for words in the three nonword conditions are shown
in Table 4. ANOVA of arcsine transformed error rates
revealed that the effect of the nonword condition was not
significant, F (2, 70) = 0.32, MSE = 48.80, p = .73.

Mean Lexical Decision Time (ms)

extremely plausible that the small mean of stroke counts of
pseudohomophones made lexical decision time shorter and
error rates lower than those of standard nonwords.
In Experiment 2, therefore, some of the Kanji characters
consisting of pseudohomophones and standard nonwords
were substituted so as to make the means of stroke counts
and those of frequencies as even as possible in the three
nonword conditions.

1100
1000
900
800
700
600
5000
Transposed
Pseudo
-letter
-homophones

(

Standard

Nonword Condition

Figure 3: Mean and standard deviation of lexical decision
time for words in each nonword condition in Experiment 2.
Table 4: Mean and standard deviation of error rates for
words in each nonword condition in Experiment 2.
Nonword Condition
Transposed
-letter

Pseudo
-homophone

Standard

Mean

0.051

0.059

0.048

SD

0.044

0.049

0.038

Nonword Lexical Decision Time Means of correct lexical
decision time for nonwords in the three nonword conditions
are shown in Figure 4. ANOVA revealed that the effect of
the nonword condition was significant, F (2, 70) = 16.55,
MSE = 9,425.45, p < .001. Multiple comparisons showed
that the mean lexical decision time in the TL condition was
significantly longer than that in the pseudohomophone
condition and the standard nonword condition, ps < .01,
HSD = 69.25.
Nonword Error Rates Means and standard deviations of
error rates for nonwords in the three nonword conditions are
shown in Table 5. ANOVA of arcsine transformed error
rates showed that the effect of nonword condition was
significant, F (2, 70) = 5.36, MSE = 32.03, p = .007.
Multiple comparisons revealed that the error rate in the TL
nonword condition was higher than that in the
pseudohomophone condition and the standard nonword
condition, ps < .05, HSD = 3.21, and no difference was
found between the latter two conditions.

Discussion
As expected, the lexical decision time for words in the TL
nonword condition was longer than that in the
pseudohomophone condition and the standard condition, and
there was no difference between the latter two conditions.

2034

Mean Lexical Decision Time (ms)

1100
1000
900
800
700
600
5000
Transposed
Pseudo
-letter
-homophones

Standard

Nonword Condition

Figure 4: Mean and standard deviation of lexical decision
time for nonwords in each nonword condition in Experiment 2.
Table 5: Mean and standard deviation of error rates for
nonwords in each nonword condition in Experiment 2.
Nonword Condition
Transposed
-letter

Pseudo
-homophones

Standard

Mean

0.101

0.064

0.068

SD

0.055

0.036

0.050

This result suggests that phonologically misleading nonwords
have no effect on the lexical decisions of native Japanese
readers. The error rates for words did not differ between the
three nonword conditions, which is with the results of Lupker
& Pexman (2010) with native English readers.
The lexical decision time for nonwords was the longest in
the TL nonword condition, and there was no difference
between that in the pseudohomophone condition and that in
the standard nonword condition. This result was also
expected and indicates that native Japanese readers rely
scarcely on phonological codes. The error rate for words in
the TL condition was higher than that in the standard
nonword condition, and no other difference was found.
Lupker and Pexman (2010) found that error rates in both the
TL condition and the pseudohomophone condition were
higher than the error rate in the standard nonword condition
with native English readers. This result, therefore, suggests
that native Japanese readers make fewer errors when
deciding if phonologically misleading nonwords are
nonwords because they scarcely rely on phonological codes.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, the lexical decision times for words and
for nonwords were shorter and the error rate for nonwords
was lower in the pseudohomophone condition than those in

the TL nonword condition. These results suggested that the
processing feature of native Japanese readers relying heavily
on visual codes and scarcely on phonological codes had
influenced their performance on lexical decision tasks.
However, it was inconsistent with their processing feature
that the lexical decision time for nonwords was shorter and
the error rate for nonwords was lower in the pseudohomophone condition than those in the standard nonword
condition. This was considered due to the stroke counts
reflecting the visual complexity of Kanji characters consisting
of pseudohomophones more than those consisting of TL
nonwords and standard nonwords used in Experiment 1.
In Experiment 2, the experiment was replicated after
making the means of the stroke counts of Kanji characters
consisting of nonwords in the three conditions as equal as
possible. Consequently, lexical decision time was longer
and error rate was higher in the TL conditions than those in
the pseudohomophone condition and the standard nonword
condition, and no difference was found between the latter
two conditions. These results indicated that native Japanese
readers rely scarcely on phonological codes but rely heavily
on visual codes.
These results, in general terms, serve as evidence that
processing characteristics of native readers of a certain
language could influence performance on the lexical
decision task. We hope that this will be a warning to all
researchers who use this task.
We finally discuss the process of lexical decision of
native Japanese readers in terms of some models of lexical
access. According to Shimomura and Goryo (1998), the
models of lexical access are roughly divided into two
categories: single-route models and dual-route models.
Single-route models suppose that phonological information
processing always mediates lexical access (e.g., Van Orden,
1987). Dual-route models suppose that visual information
processing and phonological information processing
proceed in parallel (e.g., Coltheart, 1978), and some models
also suppose that the two routes interact with each other
(e.g., Ferrand & Grainger, 1994).
The results of this study indicated that phonologically
misleading pseudohomophones had no effect on the
performance of lexical decision tasks by native Japanese
readers. They indicate that phonology does not necessarily
mediate lexical access; this finding contradicts the singleroute model, which supposes phonological mediation. At
the same time, the results of this study contradict the dualroute model as well—the very reason Coltheart (1978)
proposed a dual-route model was that pseudohomophones
delayed the lexical decision time of native English readers.
However, a few recent studies support the validity of the
dual-route model. Grainger, Muneaux, Farioli, and Ziegler
(2005) examined the effect of visual and phonological
neighborhood density on lexical decision time. They found
that lexical decision time was short when both visual
neighborhood and phonological neighborhood were dense
or sparse because the target lexicon was likely to be the
same, namely, because the cross-code consistency was high.

2035

They also found that lexical decision time was prolonged
when only one of the neighborhoods was dense because the
target lexicon was likely to be different, namely, because
cross-code consistency was low. They asserted that these
results support the dual-route model, and these results were
also found by Hino, Nakayama, Miyamura, and Kusunose
(2011) with native Japanese participants.
We, therefore, felt that the results of this study should be
explained by a dual-route model. We also considered that it
is basically implausible to suppose that the processes of
lexical access are disparate among native readers of
different languages. How, then, could the results with native
English readers and those with native Japanese readers be
explained by the same dual-route model?
The Japanese language features an unparalleled number
of homophones. This situation is similar to the situation
when phonological neighborhood is dense and visual
neighborhood is sparse—the cross-code consistency being
very low. Native Japanese readers do know that the use of
both visual and phonological codes, especially of
phonological codes, delays their lexical access. Accordingly,
they choose to rely heavily on visual codes and scarcely on
phonological codes. On the other hand, the English
language does not have as many homophones, and the
cross-code consistency is high. Native English readers know
the situation and do not reduce their reliance on phonological
codes. Therefore, the use of pseudohomophones impaired
their performance on lexical decision tasks. In brief, we
believe that the results of this study are inconsistent with
those of Coltheart et al. (1977) because the phonological
processing features of native Japanese readers differ from
those of native English readers, although their processes of
lexical access are basically similar.
Human information processing must be highly efficient; it
is unconceivable that people adhere to inefficient processing.
We consider that it is most natural and reasonable to
suppose that people change flexibly the weights of visual
and phonological processing according to the features of
their languages or situations, realizing the most efficient
lexical access.

References
Amano, N., & Kondo, K. (2003). NTT database series:
Lexical properties of Japanese. Vol. 2. CD-ROM Version.
Tokyo: Sanseido.
Coltheart, M. (1978). Lexical access in simple reading tasks.
In G. Underwood (Ed.), Strategies of information
processing. New York: Academic Press.
Coltheart, M., Develaar, E., Jonasson, J. T., & Besner, D.
(1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.),
Attention and performance VI. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chun, M. M., & Potter, M. C. (1995). A two-stage model
for multiple target detection in rapid serial visual
presentation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 21, 109-127.
Ferrand, L., & Grainger, J. (1994). Effects of orthography
are independent of phonology in masked form priming.

Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47A(2),
365-382.
Glanzer, M., & Ehrenreich, S. L. (1979). Structure and
search of the internal lexicon. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 18, 381-398.
Grainger, J., Muneaux, M., Farioli, F., & Ziegler, J. C.
(2005). Effects of phonological and orthographic neighborhood density interact in visual word recognition. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58A, 981-998.
Hino, Y., Nakayama, M., Miyamura, S., & Kusunose, Y.
(2011). Orthographic and phonological neighborhood size
effects for Japanese Katakana words in a lexical decision
task. Japanese Journal of Psychology, 81, 569-576.
Lupker, S. J., & Pexman, P. M. (2010). Making things difficult
in lexical decision: The impact of pseudohomophones and
transposed-letter nonwords on frequency and semantic
priming effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36, 1267-1289.
Meyer, D. E., & Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1971). Facilitation in
recognizing pairs of words; Evidence of a dependence
between retrieval operations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 90, 227-234.
Mizuno, R., & Matsui, T. (2012). Difference due to native
language in the determinant of target-distracter
discriminabiliy influencing attentional blink. Tokai
Journal of Psychology, 6, 1-10.
Mizuno, R., Matsui, T., & Bellezza, F. S. (2007). Difference
between native English and native Japanese readers in the
use of visual and phonological codes in processing
phonograms. Japanese Journal of Cognitive Psychology,
5, 1-10.
Mizuno, R., Matsui, T., Harman, J. L., & Bellezza, F. S.
(2008). Encoding times of phonograms by English and
Japanese readers: Eliminating the time for attention
switching. Japanese Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 5,
93-105.
Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: Roles of inhibitionless spreading
activation and limited capacity attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 106, 226-254.
Parkin, A. J. (1982). Phonological recoding in lexical
decision: Effects of spelling-to-sound regularity depend on
how regularity is defined. Memory & Cognition, 10, 42-53.
Perea, M., & Lupker, S. J. (2004). Can CANISO prime
CASINO? Transposed letter similarity effects with
nonadjacent letter positions. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51, 231-246.
Shimomura, M., & Goryo, K. (1998). Shinteki jisyo gainen
kara mita tango ninchi no mondai [The problems of word
recognition in terms of lexicon]. In N. Osaka (Ed.), Yomi:
Nou to kokoro no jouhou shori [Reading: Information
processing in brain and mind]. Tokyo: Asakura.
Shulman, H. G., & Davidson, T. C. B. (1977). Control
properties of semantic coding in a lexical decision task.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16, 91-98.
Van Orden, G. C. (1987). A ROWS is a ROSE: Spelling,
sound, and reading. Memory & Cognition, 15, 191-198.

2036

