UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Task Characteristics in Children's Scalar Implicature Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/71b5c8pv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Janssens, Leen
Schaeken, Walter

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Task Characteristics in Children’s Scalar Implicature Production
Leen Janssens (Leen.Janssens@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven, BELGIUM

Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven, BELGIUM
meaning that is implied by the speaker but not explicitly
stated.
Considerable experimental research has been devoted to
scalar implicatures, i.e. implicatures based on the existence
of ordered terms on a scale of informativity (e.g., <all, most,
many, some>). The general consensus is that the weaker
term (e.g., the quantifier some), while logically compatible
with a stronger term from the same scale (e.g., all), prompts
the inference that „all‟ is not the case because the speaker
did not use the stronger term. Therefore, the scalar
expression „some‟ can be interpreted in two ways: either in
an inference-driven, pragmatic reading, which excludes
„all‟, or in its literal, semantic meaning, which is compatible
with „all‟.
Recent experimental investigations into children‟s
interpretation of scalar terms have concluded that preschool
children are often insensitive to scalar implicatures in tasks
involving language comprehension (Chierchia et al., 2001;
Noveck, 2001). In these studies, children, although
otherwise linguistically competent, were shown to attend
only to the logical/semantic meaning of the scalar terms. For
example, Noveck (2001) found that 89% of the seven-toeight-year olds in his study agreed with statements such as
„Some giraffes have long necks.‟ Such behavior has led
Noveck (2001) to conclude that “younger, albeit competent
reasoners, initially treat a relatively weak term logically
before becoming aware of its pragmatic potential”, and that,
in this respect, “children are more logical than adults”
(Noveck, 2001, p. 165).
The availability of cognitive resources is often used to
explain this typically found pragmatic delay in children. As
suggested by Noveck (2001), a plausible explanation for this
delay is that inferring scalar implicatures requires effort and
that children have less cognitive resources available than
adults. Two different theories make different predictions
regarding this issue. According to the neo-Gricean theorists
(e.g., Levinson, 2000), implicature production happens
automatically and only its inhibition demands processing
costs. Relevance Theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1995) in
contrast, suggests that an implicature will only be produced
if it is relevant in the context and they state that this
production requires additional processing costs. Evidence in
favour of Relevance Theory, regarding scalar implicatures,
has been presented among others by Noveck and Posada

Abstract
In two experiments, we aimed to show the importance of task
characteristics in scalar implicature production. In
Experiment 1, we found that five-year-olds were significantly
more pragmatic when given an Action-Based Task (ABT), in
which they had to respond by performing an action than in a
Truth-Value Judgement Task (TVJT), in which they had to
evaluate the truth-value of statements. Experiment 2 showed
that seven-year-olds were almost exclusively pragmatic on
the same ABT and TVJT used in Experiment 1. However, we
found a 22% drop in pragmatic responses when the TVJT
contained world-knowledge statements (rather than
statements about simple objects such as marbles). Together,
these two experiments provide evidence that not only the
nature of the task, but also its specific content is crucial in
determining the extent to which young children produce
scalar implicatures.
Keywords: scalar implicatures; task characteristics; ABT;
TVJT.

Introduction
People communicate with each other to express what they
feel, think, want, etc. Although this seems to happen
effortlessly and automatically, the communication process is
more than just the simple encoding and decoding of a
message by a messenger and a receiver. Not only the literal
meaning of a sentence is important, but also the implicit
meaning that the speaker wants to communicate. The first
systematic attempt to explain how these inferences are
derived, belongs to Paul Grice. He offered a comprehensive
framework of the mechanics of inferential communication
(Grice, 1975). According to Grice, communication is a cooperative enterprise between people, governed by certain
relational expectations about how a conversational exchange
should be conducted. These relational expectations are
called „maxims‟ and Grice proposed four of these maxims:
the Maxim of Quantity, the Maxim of Quality, the Maxim
of Relation and the Maxim of Manner. These maxims
respectively imply that interlocutors are always expected to
offer contributions which are informative, truthful, relevant
to the goals of the conversation and appropriately phrased.
Grice introduced the term „implicature‟, which refers to the

509

(2003). Their experiments indicated that pragmatic answers
require more time than logical answers. Assuming that
longer time is associated with more processing costs, this
provides indirect evidence for Relevance Theory.
In contrast to research showing that children initially
reason logically, there is also substantial experimental
evidence that children are not incapable of drawing scalar
inferences and that they are aware of the pragmatic potential
of scalar expressions. In these kinds of studies, the prime
interest is to discover what conditions facilitate implicature
production for children. A key factor seems to be the nature
of the task. For instance, Foppolo, Guasti, and Chierchia
(2004) conducted experiments concerning the quantitative
scale <all, some> using two different tasks: a Truth-Value
Judgement Task (TVJT) (Crain & Thornton, 1998), in
which participants had to decide whether (underinformative) statements were true or false, and a Felicity
Judgement Task (FJT) (Chierchia et al., 2001). In the FJT,
participants were presented with a pair of utterances with
the same truth-value but different levels of appropriateness
and were asked to choose the most felicitous description.
When five-year-olds completed the FJT, the number of
pragmatic responses was 95% while the number of
pragmatic responses in the TVJT was only 50%.
Pouscoulous et al. (2007) also examined the role of the
nature of the task. In their first experiment, they replicated
earlier findings showing that nine-year-olds were more
likely than adults to consider as true statements such as
„Some turtles are in the boxes‟ (uttered when all turtles are
in the boxes) in a TVJT. In their second experiment, they
presented an Action-Based Task (ABT), in which
participants did not have to give a metalinguistic evaluation
of statements but had to respond by performing an action.
Children were presented with five boxes and five tokens.
They were asked to adapt the situation to make it
compatible with a statement. For example, if they were told
“I would like all the boxes to contain a token” and two of
the five boxes already contained a token, they were
expected to put a token in every empty box. The results
showed that, when children were asked to perform an action
rather than give a metalinguistic truth evaluation, the
number of implicatures made by the children increases.
In our own study we built on these experiments by
Pouscoulous et al. (2007).

Second, there was an important difference in content
between the ABT and TVJT used by Pouscoulous et al.
(2007). Whereas the ABT in Pouscoulous et al. (2007) only
used tokens and boxes, in the TVJT, the children were
presented with three types of animals that remained in front
of them throughout the task. For each statement, they had to
focus on one type of animal and ignore the other animals.
Since the statements were randomly ordered, they
constantly had to switch their attention between the three
types, which placed greater demands on information
processing than in the ABT. To remedy this problem, we
made the two tasks more similar in design.
Third, we measured children‟s working memory (WM)
capacity and compared a group of low WM-span children
with a group of high WM-span children. As Pouscoulous et
al. (2007) suggested, cognitive resources are important in
implicature production and may explain why easier tasks,
that require less cognitive resources, lead to more pragmatic
answers than more difficult tasks. In adults, it has been
shown that burdening WM decreases implicature production
by 10% (De Neys & Schaeken, 2007). Consequently, it can
be assumed that people with less cognitive resources will be
less pragmatic than people with more cognitive resources.
But so far, no research has been conducted on children that
directly investigated the role of cognitive resources. That is
why we will measure WM-capacity in the children in our
experiments and investigate whether children with a high
WM-capacity produce more scalar implicatures than
children with a low WM-capacity.

Method
Participants The sample comprised 48 five-year-olds (28
boys and 20 girls) between the ages of 5.2 and 6.1 with a
mean age of 5.6 (SD=1.15), recruited from two different
schools in Belgium. All were native Dutch speakers.
Action-Based Task (ABT) The ABT consisted of three
scenarios, each involving five plastic boxes and five
marbles. In the „All-scenario‟, all five boxes contained a
marble. In the „None-scenario‟, all the boxes were empty. In
the „Subset scenario‟, two boxes contained a marble. In each
scenario, a puppet, handled by the experimenter, was used
to utter the same four requests: „I would like all the boxes to
contain a marble‟ („Ik zou willen dat er in alle dozen een
knikker zit‟), „I would like some boxes to contain a marble‟
(„Ik zou willen dat er in sommige dozen een knikker zit‟), „I
would like none of the boxes to contain a marble‟ („Ik zou
willen dat er in geen van de dozen een knikker zit‟) and „I
would like some boxes not to contain a marble‟ („Ik zou
willen dat er in sommige dozen geen knikker zit‟). This
amounted to a total of 12 requests. The participants were
instructed to make changes to the scenario to comply with
the puppet‟s requests. For example, if the puppet said „I
would like all the boxes to contain a marble‟ in the „Subsetscenario‟, the child was expected to put a marble in the three
empty boxes.

Experiment 1
Our primary goal was to directly test the role played by
the nature of the task in implicature production by five-yearolds. We therefore made three important changes to the
Pouscoulous et al. (2007) study.
First, we presented the same group of children with both a
TVJT and an ABT: manipulating the nature of the task
within subjects allowed direct comparison between the two
tasks.

510

converted into z-scores, which were then added up to
compute the WM span.

There were two critical situations and 10 control
statements. The first critical statement occurred in the „Allscenario‟ when the puppet stated „I would like some boxes
to contain a marble‟. If the child interprets „some‟ logically,
he or she will make no changes to the scenario. However, if
the child grasps the implicature, he or she will take at least
one of the marbles away. The second critical statement
occurred in the „None-scenario‟ when the puppet uttered the
statement „I would like some boxes not to contain a marble‟.
In this case, if the child interprets the statement logically, no
action should be taken. A pragmatic interpretation, on the
other hand, would require an action (adding at least one
marble to the boxes).
For the 10 control statements, there was no distinction
possible between pragmatic and logic interpretations. An
example is „I would like all the boxes to contain a marble‟
in the „None-scenario‟. In this case the child is expected to
put a marble in all 5 empty boxes.

Procedure Each participant was interviewed individually
for about 20 minutes. Participants first completed the three
WM tasks. The order of the other two tasks was
randomized, so that half of the participants started with the
TVJT and the other half with the ABT. In both tasks, the
experimenter used a puppet called Minnie. In the TVJT, the
children were informed that the puppet sometimes says
things that are correct and sometimes says things that are
wrong. In the ABT, the children were told that the puppet
would give instructions regarding the boxes and the marbles
and that they would either have to remove marbles, add
marbles, or make no changes. Before the start of the
experiment, the children were given three practice questions
in the ABT. These questions were very similar to the
experimental sentences but employed numbers instead of
quantifiers. The three training questions were: „I would like
two boxes to contain a marble‟, when only one box
contained a marble, „I would like three boxes to contain a
marble‟, when three boxes contained a marble and „I would
like two boxes to contain a marble‟, when three boxes
contained a marble. These training questions were
constructed so that the participants had to remove marbles,
add marbles and change nothing. This way, they got
acquainted with all types of actions they would have to
perform during the experiment. If the children made errors
on these training questions, the experimenter corrected them
and explained their mistakes.

Truth-Value Judgement Task (TVJT) The children were
presented with five boxes and five marbles in the three same
scenarios as in the ABT. In each scenario, a puppet made
the same four statements (amounting to a total of 12
sentences): „All the marbles are in the boxes‟ („Alle
knikkers zitten in de dozen), „Some marbles are in the
boxes‟ („Sommige knikkers zitten in de dozen‟), „None of
the marbles are in the boxes‟ („Geen van de knikkers zit in
een doos‟) and „Some marbles are not in the boxes‟
(„Sommige knikkers zitten niet in de dozen‟). After each
statement, participants had to decide whether it was true or
false. The two critical statements were „Some marbles are in
the boxes‟ in the „All-scenario‟ and „Some marbles are not
in the boxes‟ in the „None-scenario‟. In both cases, „true‟
would be the logical answer , whereas „false‟ would be the
pragmatic answer.
The other 10 statements were control statements (e.g. ‘Some
marbles are in the boxes’ in the „Subset-scenario‟).

Results
We hypothesized that there would be differences in
implicature production and performance between the TVJT
and the ABT. Our hypothesis about the difference in
performance was confirmed by the finding that the TVJT
leads to significantly more errors than the ABT on the
control statements (9% versus 5%, respectively. Wilcoxon
Matched Pairs test, n=23; T=57.5; p=.011).
With regard to the critical sentences, we hypothesized that
the ABT would lead to more pragmatic answers than the
TVJT. Again, our hypothesis was confirmed. The children
responded pragmatically to the critical sentences in 91% of
the instances on the ABT, compared to 70% on the TVJT
(Wilcoxon Matched Pairs test, n=20; T=22.5; p=.002).
These results are shown in Table 1.
For both tasks, we compared a high WM-span group
(N=16; M=2.13; SD=0.82) with a low WM-span group
(N=16; M=-2.37; SD=1.42) with regard to the number of
correct answers to the control sentences and the number of
pragmatic responses. While there were no significant
differences in pragmatic processing, the number of correct
responses to the unambiguous control sentences differed
significantly between the two groups. The high-span group
was more accurate than the low-span group on both the
ABT (98% vs 91% correct answers; Mann-Whitney U test,

Working Memory Tasks The children performed three
WM-tasks. First, the auditory (phonological loop)
component was measured using the Digit Span Forward task
in which subjects have to repeat an orally presented list of
numbers. The list starts with a sequence of two numbers and
keeps increasing until the child makes two errors within one
block of the same digit-length. Second, the visual
component (visuo-spatial sketchpad) was measured using
the Corsi Block Span test. In this test, the children were
presented with nine wooden blocks on which the
experimenter tapped a pattern and the children were
instructed to repeat the sequence. The sequence becomes
longer until the child makes two errors within one block of
the same difficulty level. The third WM task, which was
intended to provide a „central executive‟ measure, was the
Digit Span Backward task. This task is identical to the Digit
Span Forward, except that the subject needs to repeat the
numbers in reverse order. The raw scores for each of these
tasks (i.e. the total number of correct answers) were

511

Table 1: Percentage of logical responses in each scenario of the TVJT and ABT (Experiment 1).
Utterance

Task

All-scenario

None-scenario

Subset-scenario

(1) All the marbles are in the boxes.
(1) I would like all the boxes to contain a marble.

TVJT
ABT

100%
98%

100%
100%

98%
100%

(2) Some marbles are in the boxes.
(2) I would like some boxes to contain a marble.

TVJT
ABT

23%
4%

100%
96%

96%
98%

(3) None of the marbles are in the boxes.
(3) I would like none of the boxes to contain a marble.

TVJT
ABT

96%
98%

85%
92%

88%
98%

(4) Some marbles are not in the boxes.
(4) I would like some boxes not to contain a marble.

TVJT
ABT

94%
92%

37%
15%

58%
83%

Note: critical statements are in bold

n1=16, n2=16; U=96.5; z=-1.72 p=.04) and the TVJT (94%
vs 87% correct answers; Mann-Whitney U test, n1=16,
n2=16; U=76; z=-2.06; p=.02).

since the age of seven is mostly found to be the age at which
children really begin to demonstrate pragmatic skills (Guasti
et al., 2005), we ran the same experiment with a group of
seven-year-olds. We expected them to be even more
pragmatic than the five-year-olds. In addition to the ABT
and TVJT used in Experiment 1, we included a TVJT that is
often used in experimental research on implicatures, i.e. the
world-knowledge TVJT from Noveck (2001).

Discussion
The ABT led to significantly more pragmatic answers
than the TVJT. In addition, the five-year-olds made fewer
mistakes on the ABT control statements than on the TVJT
control statements.
These results indicate that meta-linguistic tasks are harder
than tasks that require no verbal response.
Our results show that even five-year-old children are
competent pragmatic reasoners. Their competence is still
„vulnerable‟, but taking into account certain factors such as
task complexity, task content, context, training, etc., they
are capable of producing scalar implicatures on a high level.
This confirms the findings of Pouscoulous et al. (2007).
Moreover, the validity of our results was enhanced by
manipulating the nature of the tasks within participants and
by changing the design of the TVJT to make it more
comparable to the ABT. This allows us to attribute the
results to the task‟s cognitive demands and to conclude that
the nature of the task is crucial in implicature processing in
five-year-olds.
Our WM-measures revealed no significant differences in
implicature processing between a group of low-span
children and a group of high-span children. Although the
high-span children made significantly fewer errors on the
control statements, these WM-results do not allow us to
draw firm conclusions about the role of WM in implicature
processing.
Remarkably, the five-year-olds in our experiment
produced a much higher percentage of pragmatic answers
than the children tested in Pouscoulous et al. (2007). They
were equally pragmatic on the ABT and more pragmatic on
the TVJT than the seven-year-olds and the adults in
Pouscoulous et al. (2007), who conclude that “Only 7-yearolds reveal behavior that approaches that of adults among
the standard cases and even among them adultlike
implicature performance is less likely when it concerns
negative sentences” (Pouscoulous et al., 2007, p.371). Since
we had only investigated one age-group (five-year-olds) and

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Thirty-four seven-year-olds (18 girls, 16 boys)
between the ages of 6.9 and 8.5 with a mean age of 7.5
(SD=.32) participated in this experiment. All participants
were recruited from the same school and were native Dutch
speakers.
TVJT, ABT and WM Tasks The same TVJT, ABT and
three WM tasks were used as in Experiment 1.
World-knowledge TVJT In order to investigate whether
the specific content of the task plays a role in implicature
production, the seven-year-olds conducted a task based on
Noveck (2001; Experiment 3). In this task, the children
were presented with 30 statements (translated into Dutch)
and were instructed to indicate whether or not they agreed
with each statement. The sentences were based on three
types of information: factually universal (that elephants
have trunks is arguably best represented with the quantifier
All), factually existential (that birds live in cages is arguably
best represented with Some), and absurd (that stores are
made of bubbles is arguably false with both kinds of
quantifiers). The statements can be categorized in six
subgroups:
(a) Five absurd All sentences (e.g. All birds have
telephones.)
(b) Five absurd Some sentences (e.g. Some fish are made
of leaves.)
(c) Five true All sentences (e.g. All elephants have
trunks.)

512

(d) Five true (and felicitous) Some sentences (e.g. Some
flowers are yellow.)
(e) Five false All sentences (e.g. All dogs have spots.)
(f) Five true (but pragmatically infelicitous) Some
sentences (e.g. Some giraffes have long necks.)

are shown in Table 2 whereas the results of the worldknowledge TVJT are shown in Table 3.
As in Experiment 1, we compared a group of high WMspan children (N=11; M=2.32; SD=1.07) with a low-span
group (N=11; M=-2.38; SD=1.06). No significant
differences were found between the two groups on any of
the three tasks, neither in pragmatic responses, nor in
performance on the unambiguous sentences.

We were particularly interested in the sentences from
category (f). If children agree with such statements they are
responding logically, while disagreeing implies a pragmatic
response. If we look at the different types of statements, it is
clear that switching quantifiers can make (c)
interchangeable with (f) as well as (d) with (e). In this way,
we created two versions of this task. In each version, both
the All and the Some sentences were randomized, as were
the different types of statements.

General Discussion
The two studies reported in this article investigated the
role of the task in scalar implicature production in young
children. Our goal was to show that the kind of task and
even the specific task content has an important impact on
scalar implicature production. In Experiment 1, we
investigated five-year-old children. We found, as expected,
that a more difficult TVJT caused the children to be less
accurate and less pragmatic than an ABT in which children
did not have to answer verbally. Given our methodological
improvements, this difference was not caused by a
difference in task design but by a difference in task
complexity. Manipulating the nature of the task is sufficient
to show that, under the right circumstances, children as
young as five years are capable of spontaneously producing
implicatures.
In Experiment 2, we investigated a group of seven-yearolds whom we expected to be even more pragmatic than the
five-year-olds in Experiment 1. This expectation was
confirmed by the results: the pragmatic response rate was so
high that it did not lead to a significant difference between
the ABT and the TVJT. However, when the children
performed a TVJT involving world-knowledge statements,
pragmatic responses dropped by 22%. For the worldknowledge TVJT, the children need to rely on the
knowledge they have stored in their memory, whereas in the
simple TVJT, they just have to rely on the boxes and
marbles in front of them, which is less demanding on
memory resources.

Procedure The procedure was exactly the same as in
Experiment 1. However, an additional test was administered
after all other tests were performed. All children received a
paper with the 30 statements included in the worldknowledge TVJT. These statements were read out to them
and they were asked to indicate, for each statement, whether
they agreed or disagreed by circling the appropriate answer.

Results
The TVJT control statements led to 96% correct answers,
compared to 99% for the ABT (Wilcoxon Matched Pairs
test, n=11, T=66, p=.001). For the control statements of the
world-knowledge TVJT, the number of correct answers was
94%, which differed significantly from the ABT (Wilcoxon
Matched Pairs test, n=3, T=42, p<.001), though not from the
other TVJT (Wilcoxon Matched Pairs test, n=9, T=133,
p=.11). Regarding the critical sentences, there were no
significant differences between the TVJT and the ABT in
the number of pragmatic answers (91% versus 94%,
respectively; Wilcoxon Matched Pairs test, n=5, T=22.5,
p=.48). In contrast, the world-knowledge TVJT only yielded
69% pragmatic answers, which differed significantly from
the other TVJT (Wilcoxon Matched Pairs test, n=3, T=46.5,
p=.005) and from the ABT (Wilcoxon Matched Pairs test,
n=3, T=34.5, p=.003). The results of the ABT and the TVJT

Table 2: Percentage of logical responses in each scenario of the TVJT and ABT (Experiment 2).
Utterance

Task

All-scenario

None-scenario

Subset-scenario

(1) All the marbles are in the boxes.
(1) I would like all the boxes to contain a marble.

TVJT
ABT

100%
100%

100%
100%

100%
100%

(2) Some marbles are in the boxes.
(2) I would like some boxes to contain a marble.

TVJT
ABT

0%
3%

100%
100%

94%
100%

(3) None of the marbles are in the boxes.
(3) I would like none of the boxes to contain a marble.

TVJT
ABT

97%
100%

94%
100%

97%
100%

(4) Some marbles are not in the boxes.
(4) I would like some boxes not to contain a marble.

TVJT
ABT

97%
100%

18%
9%

79%
91%

Note: critical statements are in bold

513

Table 3: Percentage of logical responses on the worldknowledge TVJT (Experiment 2).
Sentence type

measure of general language ability. Since it was found that
metalinguistic tasks are harder than action-tasks, it is
plausible that general language ability may account at least
partly for these results.

Correct Response

Utterances expressed with All
Absurd (false)
(e.g. All birds have telephones)
Appropriate (true)
(e.g. All elephants have trunks)
Inappropriate (false)
(e.g. All dogs have spots)

Acknowledgments
No

97%

Yes

94%

No

92%

No

100%

Yes

82%

Yes

31%

We would like to thank all schools – Sint-Pietersschool
Korbeek-Lo‟, „Ark Leuven‟ and „Gemeentelijke basisschool
Pellenberg‟- for allowing us to run our experiments. Leen
Janssens is a research assistant from the Fund for Scientific
Research Flanders.

Utterances expressed with Some
Absurd (false)
(e.g. Some fish are made of leaves)
Appropriate (true)
(e.g. Some flowers are yellow.)
Inappropriate (true though pragmatically
infelicitous)
(e.g. Some giraffes have long necks)

References
Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Guasti, M. T., Gualmini, A., &
Meroni, L. (2001). The acquisition of disjunction:
evidence for a grammatical view of scalar implicatures. In
A. H.–J. Do, L. Dominguez & A. Johansen (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 25th Boston University Conference on
Language Development (pp.157-168). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.
Crain, S., & Thornton, R. (1998). Investigations in
Universal Grammar. A Guide to Experiments on the
Acquisition of Syntax and Semantics. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
De Neys, W., & Schaeken, W. (2007). When people are
more logical under cognitive load: Dual task impact on
scalar implicature. Experimental Psychology, 54(2), 128133.
Foppolo, F., Guasti, M. T., & Chierchia, G. (2004).
Pragmatic inferences in children’s comprehension of
scalar items. (Talk presented at Second Lisbon Meeting
on Language Acquisition, Lisbon, 2004).
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and Conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3. New York:
Academic Press.
Guasti, M. T., Chierchia G. , Crain S., Foppolo F., Gualmini
A., & Meroni L. (2005). Why Children and Adults
Sometimes (But Not Always) Compute Implicatures.
Language and Cognitive Processes 20, 667–696.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory of
generalized conversational implicature. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78(2), 165-188.
Noveck, I. A., & Posada, A. (2003). Characterizing the time
course of an implicature: An evoked potentials study.
Brain and Language, 85(2), 203-210.
Pouscoulous, N., Noveck, I., Politzer, G., & Bastide, A.
(2007). A developmental investigation of processing costs
and implicature production. Language Acquisition, 14(4),
347-375.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance:
Communication and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Note: critical statements are in bold

Another difference between the two TVJT‟s is that the
TVJT with the marbles and the boxes is based on visual
input (the marbles and the boxes) whereas the worldknowledge TVJT is not based on visual input. The
hypothesis that easier tasks lead to significantly more
pragmatic answers than more difficult tasks is based on the
assumption that cognitive resources are critical in
implicature production (De Neys & Schaeken, 2007). As
easier tasks require fewer cognitive resources than complex
tasks, more cognitive resources remain available for
producing implicatures.
Based on these assumptions, we hypothesized that
children with a high WM-capacity would be more pragmatic
than children with a low WM-capacity since they have more
cognitive resources available. This hypothesis was not
confirmed.
Even when we performed the WM-analyses on the
combined sample from both experiments (with the highest
scoring children in each experiment as the „high-group‟ and
the lowest scoring children as the „low-group), we did not
find a significant WM-effect. Although a certain trend can
be observed in our WM-data, we are unable to find a single
significant WM-effect. However, this is hardly surprising
given that the significant WM-effect found in adults is small
(De Neys and Schaeken, 2007), which ensures a smooth
flow of communication.
In sum, the key finding of the present study is that the
nature of the task and the specific task content are very
important in scalar implicature production in young
children: more cognitive tasks or more cognitive task
content cause a decrease in implicature production. This
factor has to be taken into account when investigating
implicature production in children. Another factor that
might need to be taken into account in future research is a

514

