UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Tightening up Joke Structure: Not by Length Alone

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5m55g73k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Hempelmann, Christian F.
Taylor, Julia M.
Raskin, Victor

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Tightening up Joke Structure: Not by Length Alone
Christian F. Hempelmann (chempelm@purdue.edu)
CERIAS, Purdue University
656 Oval Dr., West Lafayette, IN 47907-2086 USA

Julia M. Taylor (jtaylor1@purdue.edu)
Department of Computer and Information Technology, Purdue University
401 N. Grant St., West Lafayette, IN 47907-2021 USA

Victor Raskin (vraskin@purdue.edu)
CERIAS, Purdue University
656 Oval Dr., West Lafayette, IN 47907-2086 USA
Abstract

by either participant. The first scenario enables the computer
to generate humor in reaction to a human cue in humancomputer interaction, the second scenario lets the computer
identify humor in the same scenario and enables it to react
competently to it.
Most existing theories available for humor detection or
generation fall short of providing the adequate support for
this task. These theories are either too fine-grained to be
useful or too coarse to correctly classify any given text as a
joke or a non-joke. But our ontological-semantic system
provides a sufficiently rich and flexible basis because it
operates at the level of human text-meaning processing. In
the following, we will summarize the state of the art,
introduce our approach, and then discuss a pilot study
assessing human appreciation of jokes in variants of
different length and types of manipulation.

The paper seeks to tighten up the notion of joke structure in
the context of the Ontological Semantic Theory of Humor for
computational use. The method is testing the prior hypothesis
that a minimalist version of a joke, consisting only of the
setup and punch line, is the most effective one. A small
‘human computation’ pilot study casts serious doubt on this
hypothesis.
Keywords: humor research; (minimalist) joke structure;
setup; punch line; joke versions.

1. Introduction
The human ability to communicate is incomplete without
humor. If a computational system is ever to approximate
this human communicative ability and act as a competent
partner in a conversation with a human, humor must be
accounted for. Over the last decades, humor research has
become an intense multidisciplinary effort with significant
contributions from linguistics, psychology, sociology,
neuro- and cognitive sciences (Raskin 1985, 2008; Ruch
1998, Oring 1992, Davies 1990, Attardo 1994. Morreall
1983). Along with theories and analyses of humangenerated and perceived humor, since the early 1990s, there
have been more explorations of computational humor as
well, starting with attempts at humor generation through
humor detection to semantically based systems (see Section
2.1 below).
Part of the difficulty in relating computational humorgeneration and, to a lesser degree, humor-detection systems
to human appreciation is the question how much
information has to be present in the text of a joke to ensure a
successful setup and the most effective punch line. This is
precisely what has not been addressed yet on the
computational front—how much information is enough and
not too much to carry a joke without risking the opposite
extremes of crypticality or verbosity.
Two related goals of this line of research are a) to create
an NLP system capable of understanding the mechanism of
a joke at a level sufficient for providing a punch line to a
human-generated setup (even if unintentionally) and b),
conversely, for the computer to react competently to a
human-generated punch line that follows a setup, generated

2. Background
2.1. State of the Art
The usefulness of and motivations for computational humor,
along with its feasibility, have been intensely discussed (see
Ritchie 2004, Hempelmann 2008, Taylor 2008, Strapparava
et al. 2011 and references in all of these sources). The most
useful work on computational humor is based on a humor
theory and seeks to gain further insights, to validate, and to
improve the theory, while taking advantage of its assets.
Work on humor theories has a long history, and, to this day,
the true multifaceted nature of humor is still being debated
(Raskin 1985, Morreall 1983, Oring 1992, Ruch 1998,
Davies 1990, Attardo 1994): there is no universally accepted
theory of humor that explains “what is funny, why it is
funny, how it is funny, when it is funny, and to whom it is
funny.” (Raskin 1985: 5).
The linguistic theories of humor (Raskin 1985, Attardo &
Raskin 1991) have reached a level of formal representation
that is adaptable for the computation of any humorous text
(Raskin et al. 2009a,b). But the best-known and most-used
linguistic theory of humor remains the early Script-based
Semantic Theory of Humor (SSTH: Raskin 1985).

450

According to the SSTH, there are two conditions for a text
to be humorous:
• A text has to be compatible, fully or in part, with two
different scripts.
• The two scripts with which the text is compatible are
opposite, and the text must overlap fully or partially with
them.
The compatibility of the text with two scripts is the
necessary condition for humor; the oppositeness of the
scripts is the sufficient condition. The former was to be
detected in the course of normal semantic analysis; the latter
was not included at that point.
The central concept, that of a script, is defined as “an
enriched, structured chunk of semantic information,
associated with word meaning and evoked by specific
words. The script is also a cognitive structure internalized
by the native speaker, and it represents the native speaker’s
knowledge of a small part of the world. […] Formally or
technically, every script is a graph with lexical nodes and
semantic links between the nodes” (Raskin 1985: 81).
Scripts
were
further
developed,
formally
and
computationally, in Ontological Semantics (Nirenburg and
Raskin 2004, Raskin et al. 2003), and the current, third stage
of the theory, the Ontological Semantic Theory of Humor
(OSTH), has the functionality both to perform the
computational semantic analysis that establishes the
necessary compatibility of scripts and encompasses their
sufficient oppositeness.
The scripts can be linguistic, general knowledge,
restricted, or individual. Linguistic scripts are known to any
“average,” “standard” native speaker (adult, reasonably
educated, mainstream culture, etc). General knowledge
scripts, such as crossing the street or going to a store, are
known to a large number of people and are not affected by
their use of language. Restricted knowledge scripts are
known to a smaller number of people and are not affected
by their use of language either. Individual scripts are
“owned” by one person: an example of an individual script
would be a child’s memory of her first swim.
The General Theory of Verbal Humor (GTVH: Attardo &
Raskin
1991),
is
an
extended,
second-stage
multidisciplinary theory of humor that is also built upon the
notion of script overlap and script oppositeness. The theory,
empirically verified in Ruch et al (1993), describes jokes in
terms of six knowledge resources: Script Opposition (SO),
informed largely by linguistics, deals with script overlap
and oppositeness presented in Script-based Semantic Theory
of Humor (SSTH); Logical Mechanism (LM), informed by
logic and cognitive psychology, accounts for the way in
which the two scripts in the joke are brought together in a
faulty, but locally valid way; Situation (SI), informed by
many disciplines, contains the “props” of the joke, the
textual materials evoked by the scripts of the joke that are
not necessarily funny; Target (TA), informed by sociology,
represents any individual or group from whom humorous
behavior is expected; Narrative Strategy (NS) is the
rhetorical structure of the text;. Language (LA) is the actual

lexical, syntactic, phonological, etc., choices at the linguistic
level that instantiate all the other choices. According to the
GTVH, each joke can be viewed as a 6-parameter vector
(Ruch et al. 1993): Joke = {SO, LM, SI, TA, NS, LA}.

2.2. Ontological Semantic Theory of Humor
Since Raskin’s (1985) definition of scripts and the general
conditions for a text to be humorous, the definition and
interpretation of script overlap and oppositeness have been
debated (Attardo et al. 2002, Hempelmann 2003, Taylor
2008). Basing the GTVH on Ontological Semantic
Technology (OST) allows a crisper definition of the
necessary and sufficient conditions for verbal humor
(Raskin et al. 2009a,b).
At the core of OST (Raskin et al. 2010, Hempelmann et
al. 2010, Taylor and Raskin 2011, Taylor et al. 2010) are
repositories of world and linguistic knowledge, acquired
semi-automatically (or, rather, in hybrid automatic and
human computation—see Law and von Ann 2011) and used
to disambiguate the different meanings of words and
sentences and to represent them comprehensively. These
repositories consist of the ontology, containing languageindependent concepts and relationships between them; one
lexicon per supported language, containing word senses
anchored in the ontology which is used to represent their
meaning; and the onomasticon, which contains names of
people, countries, organizations, etc., and their descriptions,
also anchoring them in ontological concepts and interlinking
them with its other entries.
Figure 1: A simplified representation of joke (4)

The lexicon and ontology are used by the OST Processor,
a software that produces Text Meaning Representations
(TMRs) from the text that it reads. The format of TMRs
conforms to the format and interpretation of the ontology.
The processed TMRs are entered into the Information
Repository, from which information is used for further

451

processing and reasoning.
Recent implementation of
components of the system have produced successful results.
OST progress has enabled enhanced meaning
representation of all the components of the joke, shedding
light even on such less linguistic ones as the Target and
Narrative Strategy (see a much simplified graphic
representation of Joke 4 below in Figure 1). OSTH is
reconsidering the six GTVH knowledge resources with the
additional emphasis on providing the ontological support to
tighten and straighten their definitions and conditions of
usage. However, one troubling, even if expected result, of
the formalization in OSTH is the realization that the SO of
GTVH and SSTH was defined inadequately. Because SO
constitutes the decisive factor in determining whether a text
is a joke, and thus dominates other knowledge resources, the
current theories have to be modified and revised to an extent
for future research, the rationale and pilot study for which
we are presenting here, will help to determine.

before. "What do I do if she's ugly?" says Andy, "I'll be
stuck with her all night." "Don't worry." Danny says. "Just
go up to her door and meet her first. If you like what you
see, then everything goes as planned. If you don't, just shout
Aaauuuggghhh! clutch your chest and fake a heart attack."
So that night, Andy knocks at Shirleys door, and when she
comes out he is awe-struck at how beautiful and sexy she is.
Andy's about to speak when the girl suddenly shouts,
"Aaauuuggghhh!", clutches her chest and falls to the
ground.
(2) Andy is going on a blind date but is worried that she
may turn out to be ugly. A friend advises him to fake a heart
attack if it turns out to be the case. When Andy arrives, the
door is open by a sexy and beautiful woman, who suddenly
clutches her chest and falls to the ground.
Both versions contain the same scripts, roughly
corresponding to the anticipation of the blind date and the
actual event. The second version is minimalistic in that it
contains virtually nothing that can be removed from the text
without rendering it incomprehensible and useless as a joke.
The first version adds much additional detail. The second
version is synthesized, and it is possible that it has lost too
much, and some supporting detail would actually improve
it. This optimality is of crucial significance in generating a
joke by a computer. To put it differently, removing
information that is redundant for a plain expository text may
result in a significant loss for a joke, as demonstrated in (3).
(3) Andy is going on a blind date but is worried that she
may turn out to be ugly. A friend advises him to fake a heart
attack then. The date turns out to be sexy and beautiful, but
she suddenly clutches her chest and falls to the ground.
It has been established in humor theory that the punch line
has to be short, and preferably by far to conclude the joke
(see, for instance, Attardo et al. 1994). What has not been
adequately researched is the punch line parameters,
including its boundaries and most effective delivery mode,
especially how minimalistic it can and should be. It has been
suggested (see, for instance, Giora 2002) that including a
familiar element within an innovative stimulus leads to
more pleasure for the subjects than a purely innovative
stimulus. Our preliminary research seems to indicate that,
while, generally, accompanying information can be
removed from the setup, some seemingly disposable
elements may have to be left in the punch line.
Thus, if we compare (3) above to (4) below, the former
reads more like the serious report of a somewhat funny
event than as a joke, while the latter is easier to perceive as
a joke.
(4) Andy is going on a blind date but is worried that she
may turn out to be ugly. A friend advises him to scream and
fake a heart attack then. The date turns out to be sexy and
beautiful, but she suddenly screams “aaauuuhhh,” clutches
her chest and falls to the ground.
The difference between these two versions is presence of
the clause she suddenly screams ‘aaauuuhhh’ in (4). Its
precise contribution to the text is something that we are
interested in establishing in this pilot.

3. Joke Variants
One of the recent discoveries, part of gaining new insights
into the Narrative Strategy within OSTH, is the apparent
need of some extra material right before the punch line (see
Taylor 2010, 2011). More generally, by observing the
coexistence of different versions of the same jokes, we
realized that some extra parts of jokes, in the setup and
punch line, may have specific functionalities, while others
are pure ballast contributing nothing but verbosity. To the
best of our knowledge, the contribution of seemingly
inessential information in jokes has never been
systematically studied.
Understanding the seeming importance of extra material
is needed to detect the essential and necessary information
for a joke to make sense and to be effective. Kuipers (2006:
204), for example, found that both in the United States and
the Netherlands, longer jokes are considered generally
funnier than shorter ones. Such information cannot be
measured in the number of words but rather by the
tightness/non-redundancy of the underlying conceptual
structures. An initial approach along these lines, proposing
“meaning density” as a factor in joke funniness was
presented in Hempelmann (2011), What allows for testing
this assumption is the fact that the same joke often exists in
several attested versions. One attractively simple hypothesis
may thus be that the essential information of all versions of
the joke is the conceptual structure of the minimalist version
of the joke. The rationale for computing the essential
information is to understand the proliferation of multiple
versions, of widely varying lengths and genres, of the same
joke—in conversational practice, in print and on the
Internet—and to test whether their “common core” can
carry the joke on its own.
To illustrate this point, let us compare two versions of the
following blind date joke:
(1) Danny sets up Andy to go on a blind date with
Shirley, a friend of a friend of his. But Andy is a little
worried about going out with someone he has never seen

452

4. Pilot Study

Qualtrics, in which they were presented with a random
variant of each of the ten jokes, in random order of joke.
Ideally, we would have gathered 40 ratings for each of the
50 variants, but some variation exists because raters who
took under 2 minutes for their 10 stimuli or had the same
rating for each stimulus were excluded, resulting in a
sample of 176 participants for the version without the
control stimulus presented here.

To test the hypotheses outlined in the previous section and
explore general effects between joke variants to generate
more hypotheses for more formal future inquiry, we created
a small test corpus for a pilot study.
This corpus of fifty stimuli consists of 10 jokes found
online in at least two variants differing in length,
complemented by another three synthesized variants for
each joke: one is the minimalist version, condensing the
joke to a summary only mentioning the necessary and,
presumably sufficient information for the joke to be
operational; another is this minimalist version together with
a dialogue element in the Narrative Structure of the joke,
since we realized in creating the non-dialogue minimalist
version that the joke seemed to us radically decreased in
funniness; the third artificial variant was added to be just
that, a control version based on the longer real variant of the
joke, to see if artificial manipulation in itself affected
perceived funniness. The rationale for the final version is
based on the fact that jokes are folkloristic creations
optimized by iterations of retelling and not owned by
individual authors, a characteristic that does not hold for
cut-and-paste online joke collections created to generate
traffic. In sum, the five variants1 for each of the ten jokes
are:
• long non-manipulated version
• shorter manipulated version
• non-dialogue manipulated minimalist version
• dialogue manipulated minimalist version
• longer manipulated minimalist version with paraphrasing
In this pilot study, we recruited raters for the funniness of
these variants using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, a method
generally deemed valid (Buhrmester et al. 2011) and now
proclaimed to be a form of ‘human computation (Law and
von Ann 2011), with an incentive of $0.10 for participation.
The Mechanical Turk aims to filter bots and human
responders who don’t pay attention to the instructions in
several ways. This includes the researcher’s ability to block
certain countries, including those where non-native English
issues might affect the research issue, and to select only
participants who have had a certain number of approved
assignments in the past. In addition to these controls, in a
second pilot study we included as the only difference from
the first study reported here one additional stimulus that
instead of a punch line had the direction to rate it at a given
level of funniness. We then excluded all responses who
didn’t follow this direction under the assumption that the
raters didn’t read the instructions and clicked through the
responses randomly. Interestingly, there was no significant
difference in the results to the initial study.
In both versions of this pilot study, the participants, of
whom we aimed for 200, were directed to a survey in

Figure 2: Mean funniness for each joke across all variants

An Analyses of Variance (ANOVA) for repeated
measurements for the funniness of the ten different jokes
across all variants revealed that the jokes were perceived to
differ in funniness, F (8.38, 1558.03) = 11.38, p < .001.
Joke 2 (“Matthew Chapter 11”) was considered significantly
less funny than the other jokes, while joke 10 (cheap
parking in New York City) was deemed funnier than all
others (see Figure 2). Low numbers did not allow for the
exclusion of these two jokes from further analysis homing
in on the variants.
Figure 3: Mean funniness of variant type across all jokes

More importantly for the line of inquiry that we are
pursuing here, a second ANOVA for repeated
measurements for the funniness of the five variants of jokes
revealed significant differences, F (3.72, 338.48) = 7.43, p <

1

For lack of space we can’t include all jokes here, but the
minimalist versions are in the appendix, while the full text of all
variants
of
all
jokes
can
be
found
at:
http://web.ics.purdue.edu/~vraskin/joke_variants.pdf

453

.001. Figure 3 shows that joke variant type 3, the
manipulated minimalist version without dialogue, was rated
as the least funny and significantly so against all other
variant types. This effect is most interesting in contrast to
the other minimalist manipulated variant type 4 that does
include a dialogue in its Narrative Structure. The importance
of this result, privileging dialogue over exposition, warrants
further investigation in our continued research.
Table 1 shows the levels of significance for the effects
summarized in Figure 3.

Attardo, S., & Raskin, V. (1991). Script theory revis(it)ed:
joke similarity and joke representation model. Humor:
International Journal of Humor Research 4(3-4): 293347.
Attardo, S., Hempelmann, C. F., & Di Maio, S. (2002).
Script oppositions and logical mechanisms: Modeling
incongruities and their resolutions. Humor: International
Journal of Humor Research 15(1): 3-46.
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S.D. (2011).
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A New Source of
Inexpensive, Yet High-Quality, Data? Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 6(1), 3-5.
Davies, C. (1990). Ethnic Humor Around the World: A
Comparative Analysis. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Hempelmann, C. F. (2008). Computational humor: Going
beyond the pun. In V. Raskin (Ed.), The Primer of Humor
Research, Berlin-New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 333360.
Hempelmann. C. F. (2011) Meaning Density: Explicitness is
Proverbially and at This Point in This Title Also
Obviously the Death of Wit, or is It? 2011 Annual
Meeting of the International Society for Humor Studies—
ISHS’11. Boston, MA: Boston University
Hempelmann, C. F., Taylor, J. M., & Raskin, V. (2010).
Application-guided Ontological Engineering. Proceedings
of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Las Vegas, NE.
Kuipers, G. (2006). Good Humor, Bad Taste. Berlin, New
York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Law, E., and von Ann, L. (2011). Human Computation. No
place: Morgan & Claypool.
Morreall, J. (1983). Taking Humor Seriously. Albany:
SUNY Press.
Nirenburg, S., & Raskin, V. (2004). Ontological Semantics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Oring, E. 1992. Jokes and Their Relations. Lexington, KY:
University Press of Kentucky
Raskin, V. (1985). Semantic Mechanisms of Humor.
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Raskin, V. (1990). Sophistication in humor and beyond. In
M. Glazer (ed.), Abstracts of the Eighth International
Conference on Humor, Sheffield, UK: University of
Sheffield Press.
Raskin, V. (2005). The threshold of triviality in telling tales:
Is it inherent in inferences? In S. Attardo and L. Birden
(eds.), Abstracts of ISHS 2005: The 17th Annual
Conference of the International Society of Humor Studies,
Youngstown, OH: Youngstown State University.
Raskin, V. (2008). Theory of humor and practice of humor
research: Editor’s notes and thoughts. In V. Raskin (ed.),
The Primer of Humor Research. Berlin-New York:
Mouton de Gruyter, 1-15.
Raskin, V., Hempelmann, C. F., & Taylor, J. M. (2009a).
How to understand and assess a theory: The evolution of
the SSTH into the GTVH and now into the OSTH,
Journal of Literary Theory 3(2): 285-312.

Table 1. Within-subjects contrasts
for the pairs of joke variant (v) types.
v2
v3
v4
v5
v1
2.71
25.91***
4.18*
1.69
v2
12.13**
0.41
0.20
v3
7.30**
19.68***
v4
1.06
Note. Cells contain F-statistics for the contrasts, F (1, 91).
* p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.
Clearly, the minimalist versions fared worst and the
longer versions overall were deemed funnier, if not
significantly so. But some amount of non-essential
information clearly accounts for relevant degrees of
funniness of jokes.

Summary and Outlook
With respect to our initial hypotheses, our results confirm
that condensing jokes so they only contain the SO-relevant
information is not optimizing their funniness. Something is
lost in the process and the difference between the dialogue
and non-dialogue manipulated variants seems to point at the
importance of that NS factor. A further speculation that
should be explored based on these results is that the
faultiness of the logical mechanism might no longer be
sufficiently hinted at to make it retrievable, rendering the
oppositeness of those variants too blunt. In terms of a
classic linguistic distinction, these initial findings are
pointing at the importance of performance-related factors in
jokes, in contrast to purely competence-based relation of
information. In other words, joke texts have an aesthetic
dimension that has yet to be allocated more clearly to a part
of the OSTH model in future follow-up studies with further
careful manipulations of joke variants.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Ursula Beermann, Department of
Psychology, University of California at Berkeley, for her
help with the pilot study. They would also like to thank the
IRB of Purdue University for the prompt granting of the
exemption.

References
Attardo, S. (1994). Linguistic Theories of Humor. BerlinNew York: Mouton de Gruyter.

454

Raskin, V., Hempelmann, C. F., & Taylor, J. M. (2009b).
Symposium ‘From SSTH to GTVH to OSTH—and never
ever back!’ 2009 Annual Meeting of the International
Society for Humor Studies—ISHS’09: International
Conference on Humor Research, Long Beach, CA:
University of California.
Raskin, V., Hempelmann, C. F., & Taylor , J. M. (2010).
Guessing vs. knowing: The two approaches to semantics
in natural language processing, Annual International
Conference Dialogue 2010, 642-650, Bekasovo
(Moscow), Russia.
Raskin, V., Nirenburg, S., Hempelmann, C. F., Nirenburg,
I., & Triezenberg, K. E. (2003). The genesis of a script for
bankruptcy in ontological semantics. In G. Hirst & S.
Nirenburg (Eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Text
Meaning, 2003 NAACL Human Language Technology
Conference, 27-31.
Ritchie, G. (2004). The Linguistic Analysis of Jokes.
London-New York: Routledge.
Ruch, W. (Ed.) (1998). The Sense of Humor: Explorations
of a Personality Characteristic. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Ruch, W., Attardo, S., & Raskin, V. (1993). Toward an
empirical verification of the General Theory of Verbal
Humor. Humor: International Journal of Humor
Research 6(2), 123-136.
Strapparava, C., Stock, O., Mihalcea, R. (2011).
Computational humour. In Cowie, R., Petta, P., and
Pelachaud, C. (Eds.) (2011), Emotion-Oriented Systems:
The HUMAINE Handbook, Cognitive Technologies,
chapter 6.4. Berlin: Springer.
Taylor, J. M (2008). Towards Informal Computer Human
Communication: Detecting Humor in Restricted Domain,
Ph. D thesis, Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Cincinnati, 2008.
Taylor, J. M. (2010). Ontology-based view of natural
language meaning: The case of humor detection, Journal
of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing 1(3),
221-234.
Taylor, J. M. (2011). Does SO2 always result in a joke:
How long is long enough? 2011 Annual Meeting of the
International Society for Humor Studies—ISHS’11.
Boston, MA: Boston University.
Taylor, J. M., and Raskin, V. (2011). Understanding the
unknown: Unattested input processing in natural
language, Proc. FUZZ-IEEE-11, Taipei, Taiwan.
Taylor, J. M., Hempelmann, C. F., & Raskin, V. (2010). On
an automatic acquisition toolbox for ontologies and
lexicons in Ontological Semantics, International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Las Vegas, NE.

2 Matthew has been in business for many years, and
suddenly the business is going down the drain. When he
looked for advice by opening the Bible on a random page. It
read, “Matthew. Chapter 11.”
3 A store manager overhears one of his salesmen telling
to a customer that the store hasn't had something for awhile
and it doesn't look like they’ll be getting any soon.
The manager yells after the departing customer to come
back next week because surely they’d have it by then. Irate,
he reprimands his salesman for telling a customer they're
out of anything and asks what the customer wanted. It was
rain.
4 A man gets pulled over by a policeman, who tells the
man that his wife fell out of the car about a mile back. The
man is relieved because he thought he'd gone deaf.
5 The Pope was finally persuaded by his cardinals to sleep
with a woman, so that he could better understand the
problems of mankind. The Pope agrees, but insists that she
has to have certain qualifications: first, she has to be blind,
so she cannot see who is doing it to her; second, she has to
be mute, so she can’t tell anyone what happened; and third,
she has to have big tits.
6 The door bell rings at the whorehouse. A girl who
answers the door, sees a guy with no arms and no legs and
asks what he thinks he’s going to do in there.
The guy points out that he was able to ring the bell after
all.
7 On a bus, a punk kid with red, green and orange hair
notices an old guy staring at him. When he asks the old
man if he himself never did anything wild in his time, it
turns out that the old man once screwed a parrot and was
wondering whether the punk was his son.
8 One day an angel made a male and a female statues that
have faced each other in a park for decades come alive to do
anything they wanted for thirty minutes. The two dashed for
the bushes, whose branches started shaking while there was
giggling and laughter. Fifteen minutes later, they emerged
with wide grins on their faces and they still had fifteen more
minutes. Then the female statue said to the male that this
time he should hold the pigeon down and she'll poop on its
head.
9 As a woman gets on a bus with her baby, and the driver
tells her that hers is the ugliest baby he’s ever seen. Angrily,
she complains to a man in the rear of the bus that the driver
just insulted her. The man suggests she go and tell the bus
driver off and offers to hold her monkey for her.
10 A man walks into a bank in New York City and asks
for a $4000 loan. The bank teller agrees to accept the man’s
black Porsche parked in the bank’s parking garage as
security. A few weeks later the man returns to pay off his
loan and the interest of $11 dollars. The manager wonders
why the man needed to borrow $4000 dollars, since the
bank found out that he was a millionaire. The man replies
that nowhere else in New York can he park his car for three
weeks for $11 dollars.

Appendix: Minimalist Joke Variants
1 Andy is going on a blind date but is worried that she
may turn out to be ugly. A friend advises him to fake a heart
attack then. The date turns out to be beautiful and sexy, but
she suddenly clutches her chest and falls to the ground.

455

