UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Accent to Induce Cultural Frame-Switching

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/90g319qn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Dehghani, Morteza
Khooshabeh, Peter
Huang, Lixing
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Accent to Induce Cultural Frame-Switching
Morteza Dehghani, Peter Khooshabeh, Lixing Huang, Angela Nazarian, Jonathan Gratch
morteza,khooshabeh,lhuang,nazarian,gratch@ict.usc.edu
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
12015 Waterfront Drive
Playa Vista, CA 90094
Abstract
Language plays a crucial role in the formation and categorization of one’s ethnic identity. Recent work on linguistic accent
emphasizes the role of accent in person perception and social
categorization, demonstrating that accent serves as a meaningful ethnic category indicator. In this paper, we examine
whether accent can be used to implement socio-cultural markers. We investigate whether the accent of a virtual character,
as a marker for culture, can cause cultural frame-shifts in individuals. We report an experiment, performed among bicultural
and monocultural individuals, in which we test the above hypothesis. Our results show that accent can have a socio-cultural
effect on people’s cognition.
Keywords: accent, culture, frame-switching, biculturalism

Introduction
There is a substantial amount of research focusing on the influence of language on human cognition. Language, at its
core, is a cognitive tool that helps us construct shared meanings, categorize our knowledge, and thus piece together the
various associative networks of collective experiences to form
our perception of the world around us. According to the
Whorfian hypothesis (Whorf, 1956), the grammar of a language and the manner in which the language is processed can
provide a glance into the implicit organization of knowledge
in that culture. This inherent influence is reflected in the belief that the grammatical structure of a language shapes our
interactions due to the speakers inherent exposure to certain
observations and mental representations, otherwise known as
the principle of linguistic relativity (Chiu, Leung, & Kwan,
2007).
The results from previous studies with bilingual participants support the use of language as a means of activating associated cultural constructs. For instance, Chinese bilinguals
randomly assigned to respond in Chinese reported more collective self-statements in open-ended self-descriptions, lower
self-esteem, and more agreement with Chinese cultural views
(Ross, Xun, & Wilson, 2002). These qualities are in line
with traits commonly associated with Eastern collectivist cultures. The findings also suggest that cultural identities may
be stored in separate knowledge structures and activated by
the associated language. Marian and Neisser (2000) examined the retrieval of autobiographical memories in bicultural
individuals and found that memories become more accessible when the language used at retrieval matched the language
used at encoding. In other words, Russian-English bilinguals were able to remember more events from the Russianspeaking period of their lives when they responded in Rus-

sian and more experiences from the English-speaking period
of their lives when they responded in English.
In their meta-analysis of cross-cultural studies of selfenhancement, Heine and Hamamura (2007) point out the limitations and confounds in existing research regarding whether
language can independently prime a cultural mindframe.
Lee, Oyserman, and Bond (2010) attended to these shortcomings in their study by exploring the effect of experimentally manipulated language use on value endorsements
and self-descriptions. By unobtrusively manipulating language as a prime, they found that bilingual participants randomly assigned to use English reported significantly more
self-enhancing social comparative judgements than those using Chinese. In addition, English users demonstrated more
social distancing after under-performance and standardized
their failure in the context of the behavior of their peers in
order to protect their positive self-regard. This is in line
with the expected behavior of someone from an individualist
culture and touches on the work done by Tesser (2000) and
Kwan et al. (2004) regarding the mechanisms employed to
protect, augment, or maintain self-esteem.The above findings
also support the claim that societies are socialized for both individual and collective mindsets, but responses are dependent
on the cultural mindset salient at the moment of self-reflection
(Lee et al., 2010).
This literature demonstrates the cognitive implications of
experimentally manipulating language as a prime to prompt
a shift in an individuals cultural mindset. The findings from
these studies support the use of language as a marker for culture, however, in this paper we aim tease apart the specific
aspects of language that act as cultural markers, e.g., by manipulating accents. Ethnolinguistic identity theory indicates
that language plays a crucial role in the formation and categorization of one’s ethnic identity (Giles, Bourhis, & Taylor,
1977). Rakič, Steffens, and Mummendey (2011a) compared
the strength of vocal accents compared to facial visual appearance as indicators for ethnic categorization. They found
that not only did accent serve as a meaningful ethnic category indicator, but participants also overlooked visual stimuli, such as facial features typically associated with a culture,
in the presence of this more meaningful auditory information
(Rakič et al., 2011a). In other words, sociopsychological processes were a more salient tool in determining memorability
than objective stimulus features. In a later study, they examined the effect of accent workplace context. Job applicants
with a standard German accent were compared to those with

1482

nonstandard regional accents to test for biases influenced by
the auditory information. Rakič, Steffens, and Mummendey
(2011b) found that speakers with a standard German accent
were perceived as more competent and more hirable than regional accent speakers. In addition, speakers with a Bavarian accent and the standard German accent were perceived
as having higher socio-intellectual status than the remaining
speakers. These results bolster the role of linguistic accent in
person perception and social categorization.

culture. Our method differs from studies that use language as
a prime in the sense that in our experiment participants only
listen and do not generate language explicitly.

Embodied Conversational Agents

In this paper, we examine whether accent can be used
as a marker for culture by evoking cultural frame-switching
(Hong, Morris, Chiu, & Benet-Martinez, 2000) in bicultural
individuals. Cultural frame-switching refers to the idea that
interpretive frames, in individuals who have internalized two
cultural identities, can shift due to situational cues (BenetMartinez, Leu, Lee, & Morris, 2002). For example, Hong et
al. (Hong et al., 2000) prime Chinese-Americans with American, Chinese or neutral iconic images and demonstrate that
participants in the Chinese prime condition interpreted the
next task with more of a Chinese interpretive lens (focused
more on external attributions) than those in the American or
control conditions. On the other hand, participants in the
American prime condition projected more American cultural
values by focusing on individual attributions for the same
task. A plausible explanation for frame-switching is that
multi-cultural individuals have different norms and culturally specific systems of meaning (D’Andrade, 1984), which
are activated depending on the context and the social environment. Hence, activation of different cultural interpretive
frames can result in varied constraints on the individual’s psychophysical behaviors.
The shift in the interpretive frames can be especially notable if there are significant differences in normative behavior
between an individuals two cultures. There is growing evidence in the social sciences that culturally normative behaviors vary across cultures (see Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan,
2010 for a review). In other words, behaviors that are considered typical in one culture may be considered abnormal in
another. The variability of culturally normative behaviors and
cognitions have been noted in different aspects of human behavior. Related to this work, researchers have shown cultural
differences in morally motivated decision-making by identifying moral domains that are present (or salient) in some cultures but not in others (Shweder, Much, Mahapatra, & Park,
1997; Haidt, Koller, & Dias, 1993). Domains such as respect
for authority and the saliency of the distinction between purity and impurity are some that have been identified in helping
people characterize certain situations as morally tinged within
one cultural group but not another. In this work, we carefully
control for non-verbal behavior and manipulate only accent
of spoken English, in order to experimentally evoke frameswitching and measure its effect on the participants’ perception and cognition. Based on the previous literature, we predict individuals interacting with a counterpart having a culturally congruent accent will use moral frames specific to that

Virtual agents, particularly when rendered as embodied conversational characters, are capable of providing a compelling
multimedia platform that serves as an effective interface for
research purposes, educational applications or entertainment.
Embodied conversational agents (ECAs) make it possible
to manipulate external features such as visual appearance,
speech type, and contextual graphical environments. This
ability makes ECAs a convenient platform to isolate unique
cultural characteristics and realize them through simulation.
Along with enhanced experimental control, ease of manipulations, consistency and controlled measurements (Loomis,
Blascovich, & Beall, 1999), these features make ECAs useful
and reliable tools for studying cultural cognitions. For example, we can objectively pinpoint certain social and behavioral
characteristics that are relevant to specific cultures and implement them using virtual agent technology. There have been a
small number of studies investigating how culturally congruent virtual agent characteristics can affect users’ cognition.
In an effort to examine the interaction between culture and
ECA design in the domain of education, Rader, Echelbarger,
and Cassell (2011) developed virtual peers that matched the
dialect of children speaking African-American English and
asked the children to complete a bridge building exercise. The
children alternated playing the role of student and teacher as
they explained the building process. Rader et al. found that
students who tend to speak more dialected English did so less
when they played the role of a teacher. This work suggests
that the virtual peer and culturally congruent context, coupled with the role switch, influenced students to speak mainstream English, which is shown to be related to higher student achievement. In another line of work, Yin, Bickmore,
and Cortes (2010) report that individuals who process information using peripheral cues perceived an agent tailored to
their own culture as more persuasive and trustworthy.

Experiment
In this paper, we experimentally model frame-switching
among bicultural individuals using the accent of an ECA and
measure if their preference for certain moral acts are affected
by this manipulation. Our hypothesis is that the accent of a
virtual agent should affect people’s perception of the culture
of the agent. If this is true, then a virtual human that has an
accent that is congruent with a participant’s culture will elicit
use of the congruent cultural frame. In order to test our hypothesis, we designed an experiment in which we control for
non-verbal behavior of an ECA while manipulating only its
accent. We recruited Iranian-American and American (US
majoity culture) participants and had them read a story which
included Iranian and US cultural values and customs. The
participants were then asked to summarize the story and answer a few questions about the material.

1483

Participants
Fifty-two Americans (mean age = 40) and Fourteen IranianAmericans (Iranians living in Southern California for more
than 5 years) (mean age = 34.61) participated in this study.
The participants were recruited using craigslist.com and
snowball sampling, which consisted of asking subjects to refer other subjects for the study. Each subject received $25 at
the end of the experiment for participating. The participants
were not aware that they were participating in a culture study.
Each participant completed the task in individual experimental sessions.

Design
The study employed a between subject 2 X 2 full factorial design. The first factor is the culture of the participants (American or Iranian-American). The second factor is the agent’s
accent, which was either a standard American English or Iranian English accent, spoken by the virtual agent.

Figure 1: The ECA used in our Experiments

human is nodding or not, looking away or not, and smiling
or not. Based on the perceived audiovisual features, the response model (Huang, Morency, & Gratch, 2011) decides, in
real-time, the most appropriate responses, such as head nod
and smile. These different styles of animations are first converted into Behavior Markup Language (BML) (Kopp et al.,
2006) and then sent to an action scheduler, which keeps track
of the duration of each animation. If the current animation
has not been completed, the new animation will be ignored.
The BMLs are passed to Smartbody (Thiebaux & Marsella,
2007), a virtual human animation system designed to seamlessly blend animations and procedural behaviors. Finally,
the byproducts of Smartbody are rendered by a commercial
game engine, Gamebryo4 , and displayed to users. For the
experiment, the voice of the ECA was prerecorded using the
voice of the second author, whom is familiar with both Iranian
and American cultures. The second author did not participate
in recruiting nor in running the experiments.

Stimuli
The participants were first asked to read a short story (Figure 2) about a student named Anthony who was asked to
go to dinner at this classmate’s (Shawn) house. After arriving in Shawn’s house, Anthony comes to the conclusion
that Shawn’s parents were not expecting a guest for dinner.
Anthony complements Shawn’s dad about an art piece in the
house, and Shawn’s dad insists that Anthony should take the
picture. Finally, Anthony’s friend picks him up from Shawn’s
house before dinner was served. The story included a balanced number of American and Iranian cultural products (e.g.
proverbs), values, and events that could be tied to the celebration of Iranian New Year and to Saint Patrick’s day1 . None
of these idea units were explicitly labeled with their cultural
referent (there was no explicit reference to St. Patrick’s day
as such) and the idea units were interleaved so as to minimize
memory distortions due to recency or primacy. After reading
the story, participants interacted with an ECA.

Procedure

Rapport Agent
The agent used in this experiment, Utah (Hartholt, Gratch,
Weiss, & Team, 2009) (Figure 1), is designed to establish rapport with human participants by providing contingent feedback while a user is speaking. To produce feedback, the agent
first detects and analyzes in real-time the human speakers’
audiovisual features, which are silence, head nod, eye-gaze
(looking at the agent or not) and smile. The audio feature
detector extracts intensity from the raw signal every 100ms
using Praat2 . With the intensity information, it outputs a binary feature, speech or silence, every 100ms. The visual feature detector3 tracks the position of the face, the facial feature
points, the direction of eye gaze and the smile level. With this
information, it outputs visual features indicating whether the
1 Saint

Patrick’s day is widely celebrated in North America
http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/
3 OKAO
Technology,
http://www.omron.com/r d/
coretech/vision/okao.html
2 Praat,

After participants finished reading the story, the virtual agent
greeted them, explained an overview of the research center
and asked them to verbally summarize the story they had just
read. Next, they filled out a questionnaire about the appropriateness of certain actions and intentions of the characters
within the story. They were specifically asked the following
two questions: 1. Was it appropriate for Anthony to leave before dinner? 2. Do you think Shawn’s parents really wanted
to give the picture to him? Our hypothesis predicts that participants should use culturally congruent frames to interpret
and answer these moral questions. The Iranian cultural frame
suggests that it is not appropriate to refuse someone’s generosity and hospitality. If cultural frame-shifting does indeed
take place for Iranians-Americans when interacting with the
culturally congruent agent, then they should say it is inappropriate for Anthony to leave dinner early. For the second
4 http://www.gamebryo.com

1484

... My classmate Shawn, who I’m not really good friends with and don’t know too well, invited me to a bonfire at the beach. I
told him that I was hungry and needed to get something to eat before going to the beach. He was going to his parent’s house for
dinner and invited me over. I don’t know him well, so I initially refused his offer. But he kept on insisting that it’s the beginning
of Spring and I should go and have dinner with his family. On the way to his house, Shawn asked why I was wearing almost all
green . I thought it was a strange question as a lot of students were wearing green that day...
I went over to his house and met his dad at the living room. I thought to myself that the apple doesn’t fall far from the tree. Upon
seeing his father, Shawn introduced me to him, saying this is my good friend Anthony. He seemed surprised by my presence.
Now I wasn’t sure if they were expecting a guest for dinner. Then Shawn’s mother came to the living room. I had met her before.
She used to work in the registrar of the school. I said hi to her and she greeted me back saying that it looked like water had gone
under my skin...
... I didn’t understand why they were asking me to stay for dinner, because I think they didn’t have any dinner prepared.
... I saw a very small art piece on the wall of their hallway. It was a picture of some Chinese looking guys playing with a ball on
horses. I told his dad that this is a lovely picture. He thanked me and told me that I could take it. I first thought he was kidding,
but he seemed serious and told me that he wants me to take it. Shawn’s mother also said that it will look better in my house and I
should take it. Given that they were insisting so much, and the piece didn’t look expensive I took it and thanked them for it.
... Shawn’s parents told Shawn that they had to wait for another hour and a half to serve dinner because some family friends had
just called and were coming to visit them for the first day of spring. Given that I had plans to go watch the game and couldn’t wait
that long, I got up thanked them for the picture and salad, and had my friend pick me up. Shawn and his parents insisted that I
should wait and have dinner with them. But my friend was already there to pick me up...

Figure 2: Excerpt from the story read by participants
question, the Iranian frame could interpret the event as an
instance of Iranian hospitality, especially when it comes to
sharing their cultural artifacts (in this case Persian miniature).
Next, participants were asked several questions about different emotions of the characters in the story. Lastly, to check
the effectiveness of our manipulation, participants answered
the following two questions in a random order: 3. Did the
agent have more of an American accent or Middle-Eastern accent? 4. Did the agent appear more Western or more MiddleEastern? Each question was answered on a 6-point scale (1
= No he did not, 6 = Yes he did; 1 = Not at all appropriate, 6 = Completely appropriate; 1 = Very much American,
6 = Very much Middle-Eastern; 1 = Very much Western, 6 =
Very much Middle-Eastern).

Results
For both manipulation check questions, we used the responses to questions 3 and 4 as dependent variables in a 2
X 2 ANOVA, where the first factor was the culture of the
participants (American or Iranian-American) and the second
factor was the accent of the agent (American or Iranian).
There was a main effect of agents’ accent for both questions (appearance: F(1, 62) = 11.038, p = 0.0015; accent:
F(1, 62) = 68.1434, p < 0.001). The agent with an Iranian accent was viewed to not only have a more MiddleEastern accent but also appeared more Middle-Eastern. Also,
there was a main effect of culture for the appearance question
(F(1, 62) = 4.276, p = 0.0428) where Americans ranked the
agent as more Middle-Eastern looking than did the IranianAmericans. The responses to the first question were used as
the dependent variable in a 2 X 2 ANOVA, with similar factors as above. There was a significant interaction between
the two factors (F(1,62) = 4.3649, p = 0.0408). A planned
comparison revealed that Iranian-American participants who
interacted with the agent with an American accent viewed
Anthony leaving before dinner as more appropriate than the
Iranian-Americans who interacted with the agent with an Ira-

nian accent (Welch Two Sample one-tailed t-test: t(10.596) =
10.596, p = 0.0512)5 (Figure 3). However, this difference did
not reach significance for Americans (t(49.48) = 1.4179, p =
0.1625).
Next, using the responses to the second question as the dependent variable, we ran the same 2 X 2 ANOVA. There was
a main effect of culture (F(1, 62) = 9.5759, p = 0.0029), where
Iranian-Americans ranked this question lower than Americans. There was an interaction between culture and accent
of the agent (F(1, 62) = 9.5759, p = 0.0029), where Iranians
who interacted with the American accent agent indicated that
Shawn’s parents didn’t want to give the picture to Anthony
compared to those in the Iranian accent condition (Welch Two
Sample t-test: t(9.008) = 3.1186, p = 0.0123). However this
difference did not reach significance for Americans (t(49.983)
= -1.2908, p = 0.2027).
There were also interactions between culture and agent’s
accent for Anthony’s feeling of happiness (F(1, 62) = 5.0474,
p = 0.0282) and satisfaction (F(1, 62) = 12.7468, p < 0.001).
For happiness, Iranian-Americans interacting with the agent
with an Iranian accent rated Anthony’s happiness higher than
those Iranian-Americans who interacted with an American
accented agent (t(11.725) = 2.4057, p = 0.0336), and vice
versa for American participants (t(49.408) = -2.2325, p =
0.0301). The same significant trend held for Anthony’s satisfaction (Iranian-Americans: t(11.855) = 3.2666, p = 0.0068);
Americans: t(48.815) = -3.543, p < 0.001). Similarly, there
was a two-way interaction between culture and accent for
Shawn’s parents’ satisfaction (F(1, 62) = 7.0429, p = 0.0101)
and the effect also approached significance for Shawn’s satisfaction (F(1, 62) = 3.0044, p = 0.0880). Similar to the
emotions reported above, participants ranked the satisfaction of Shawn’s parents and Shawn higher when the accent
5 A power test revealed that if we had the same number of Iranian-

American participants as American participants, with probability of
99.15% a two-tailed test with the means of the above sample would
have reached significance.

1485

Figure 3: Interaction between culture and accent of the agent

of the agent matched their own accent (Shawn’s parents’:
Iranian-Americans: t(10.121) = 3.6028, p = 0.0047; Americans: t(49.362) = -1.4053, p = 0.1662, Shawn’s: IranianAmericans: t(5.953) = 0.7476, p = n.s.; Americans: t(49.054)
= -2.2229, p = 0.0309).

Discussion
This study provides evidence of how spoken accent can make
a socio-cultural effect on people’s cognition. In a fully factorial design, Iranian-Americans who interacted with a virtual agent that spoke Middle Eastern accented English were
more likely to use a congruent cultural frame to interpret a
morally charged scenario. The compelling aspect of this effect is that the accented virtual agent’s visual appearance was
identical across experimental conditions and the only manipulation was the agent’s accent. Although simple effects were
not significant for the Americans, the trends were in the correct direction. The trends could be due to the fact that most of
the American participants recruited in this study have a multicultural background (33% African-American, 14% Latino).
To our surprise, our manipulation also affected people’s
evaluations of the emotions of the characters in the story. We
speculate that this effect might be due to the fact that participants who interacted with an agent whose accent matched
their own attributed intentions and goals that are congruent
to their own cultural mindset to the characters and, as a result, appraised the situation for the characters more positively.
Therefore, when Iranian-Americans interacted with the ECA
that had an Iranian accent, they appraised the intentions and
goals of the characters to be more in line with the Iranian culture, hence they evaluated the situation more positively, compared to Iranian-Americans who interacted with the American accented ECA.
We acknowledge the low number of Iranian-Americans

participants in our study. However, we would like to note
that the probability of replication of a result is dependent on
p-levels but not affected by sample size (e.g. Killeen, 2005).
In summary, contributions of this work are two-fold. First,
the study adds to the literature in cross-cultural psychology
by showing that just spoken language accent can induce cultural frame shifts. Second, this work makes a methodological
contribution to the field of human-computer interaction and
experimental psychology. Our results also have implications
for teaching cross-cultural fluency and competency.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by NSF
IIS-0916858, a postdoctoral fellowship to PK from the Army
Research Lab, and U.S. Army Research, Development, and
Engineering Command (RDECOM). The content of this paper does not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of
the Government, and no ofcial endorsement should be inferred. MD, PK and LH were involved in designing and analyzing the experiment and also in writing the paper. AN was
involved in running the experiment and writing the paper. JG
was primarily involved in the writing and analysis stages of
this work.

References
Benet-Martinez, V., Leu, J., Lee, F., & Morris, M. W. (2002).
Negotiating biculturalism: Cultural frame switching in biculturals with oppositional versus compatible cultural identities. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 33 (5), 492516.
Chiu, C., Leung, A. K., & Kwan, L. (2007). The handbook
of cultural psychology. In S. Kitayama & D. Cohen (Eds.),
(p. 259-276). Guilford Press.
D’Andrade, R. (1984). Cultural meaning systems. In

1486

R. Schweder & R. Levine (Eds.), Culture theory. essays
on mind, self and emotion (p. 88-119). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Giles, H., Bourhis, R., & Taylor, D. M. (1977). Language, ethnicity and intergroup relations. In H. Giles (Ed.),
(p. 307-348). Academic Press.
Haidt, J., Koller, S., & Dias, M. (1993). Affect, culture,
and morality, or is it wrong to eat your dog? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 613-628.
Hartholt, A., Gratch, J., Weiss, L., & Team, T. G. (2009).
At the virtual frontier: Introducing gunslinger, a multicharacter, mixed-reality, story-driven experience.
In
Z. Ruttkay, M. Kipp, A. Nijholt, & H. Vilhjálmsson (Eds.),
Intelligent virtual agents, lecture notes in computer science
(p. 500-501). Springer.
Heine, S. J., & Hamamura, T. (2007). In search of east asian
self-enhancement. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11 (1), 4-27.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The
weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(2-3), 61-83.
Hong, Y., Morris, M. W., Chiu, C., & Benet-Martinez, V.
(2000). Multicultural minds. a dynamic constructivist approach to culture and cognition. American Psychologist,
55 (7), 709-20.
Huang, L., Morency, L. P., & Gratch, J. (2011). Virtual rapport 2.0. In International conference on intelligent virtual
agents.
Killeen, P. R. (2005). An alternative to null-hypothesis signicance testing. Psychological Science, 16, 345-353.
Kopp, S., Krenn, B., Marsella, S., Marshall, A. N., Pelachaud,
C., Pirker, H., . . . Vilhjlmsson, H. (2006). Towards a common framework for multimodal generation: The behavior
markup language. In International conference on intelligent virtual agents (pp. 21–23).
Kwan, V. S. Y., John, O. P., Kenny, D. A., Bond, M. H.,
& Robins, R. W. (2004). Reconceptualizing individual
differences in self-enhancement bias: An interpersonal approach. Psychological Review, 111 (1), 94-110.
Lee, S., Oyserman, D., & Bond, M. H. (2010). Am i doing
better than you? that depends on whether you ask me in
english or chinese: Self-enhancement effects of language
as a cultural mindset prime. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 785-791.
Loomis, J. M., Blascovich, J. J., & Beall, A. C. (1999). Immersive virtual environment technology as a basic research
tool in psychology. Behavior research methods instruments
computers a journal of the Psychonomic Society Inc, 31(4),
557–64.
Marian, V., & Neisser, U. (2000). Language-dependent recall of autobiographical memories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129 (3), 361-368.
Rader, E., Echelbarger, M., & Cassell, J. (2011). Brick by
brick. In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on
human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 (p. 2971).

Vancouver, BC, Canada. doi: 10.1145/1978942.1979382
Rakič, T., Steffens, M. C., & Mummendey, A. (2011a).
Blinded by the accent! the minor role of looks in ethnic
categorization. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100 (1), 16-29.
Rakič, T., Steffens, M. C., & Mummendey, A. (2011b). When
it matters how you pronounce it: The influence of regional
accents on job interview outcome. British Journal of Psychology, 102 (4), 868-883.
Ross, M., Xun, W. Q. E., & Wilson, A. (2002). Language
and the bicultural self. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 28 (8), 1040-1050.
Shweder, R. A., Much, N. C., Mahapatra, M., & Park, L.
(1997). Morality and health. In A. Brandt & P. Rozin
(Eds.), (p. 119-169). New York: Routledge.
Tesser, A. (2000). On the confluence of self-esteem maintenance mechanisms. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 4 (4), 290-299.
Thiebaux, M., & Marsella, S. (2007). Smartbody: Behavior
realization for embodied conversational agents. In In 7th
international conference on intelligent virtual agents (iva).
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, thought, and reality. Cambridge, MA: Technology Press of MIT.
Yin, L., Bickmore, T. W., & Cortes, D. E. (2010). The
impact of linguistic and cultural congruity on persuasion
by conversational agents. In Proceedings of IVA, lecture
notes in computer science (pp. 343–349). Philadelphia, PA:
Springer.

1487

