UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Variation of Characteristics of Reading and Writing Difficulties in Japanese Children with
Learning Disabilities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tc297d0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Ogawa, Shino
Fukushima-Murata, Miwa
Kubo-Kawai, Namiko
et al.

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Variation of Characteristics of Reading and Writing Difficulties
in Japanese Children with Learning Disabilities
Shino Ogawa (ogawa.shino.57n@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University
Kanrin, Inuyama-city, Aichi, Japan

Miwa Fukushima-Murata (miwa.fukushima.murata@gmail.com)
Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
4-6-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Namiko Kubo-Kawai (namikokk@asu.aasa.ac.jp)
Faculty of Psychology, Aichi Shukutoku University
9, Katahira, Nagakute-cho, Aichi, Japan

Tomoko Asai (t.asai.at@city.nagoya.lg.jp)
Nagoya City Child Welfare Center
4-16 Orido-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya-city, Aichi, Japan

Hiroko Taniai (h.taniai.67@city.nagoya.lg.jp)
Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya Central Care Center for Disabled Children
4-16 Orido-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya-city, Aichi, Japan

Nobuo Masataka (masataka.nobuo.7r@kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University
Kanrin, Inuyama-city, Aichi, Japan

Abstract
There are conflicting hypotheses for the causes of Dyslexia in
reading and writing difficulties, such as the phonological
deficit hypothesis, double deficit hypothesis, magnocellular
deficits hypothesis etc. The cause of the difficulties may vary
between individuals. Moreover, most of these hypotheses
consider only a single disability, despite the fact that factors
related to reading and writing may affect the difficulty in
various ways. We conducted this study to identify individual
differences in the effect of Dyslexia. The participants were 12
Japanese children who were diagnosed with learning
disabilities or suspected to be learning disabled. In this study,
we considered how phonological awareness, visual perception,
and phonological processing are related to reading and
writing abilities in the Japanese language. In addition, we
checked “handwriting ability.” This study shows that reading
and writing difficulties are caused by a variety of factors and
that there are individual differences in the difficulties.
Keywords: Reading and writing Difficulties, Dyslexia,
Individual differences, Japanese education

Introduction
In Japan, official reports claim that 6.3% of elementary
and middle school students enrolled in normal classes
experience learning difficulties (MEXT Japan, 2002). This
means that each class has two or more students with actual
or potential learning problems, making learning disabilities
an issue that should be urgently addressed to provide these
students with special learning assistance. Students with

learning difficulties have more than one problem in reading,
writing, listening, communicating, calculating, planning,
and memorizing. In particular, support for reading and
writing are very important. Difficulty with reading
negatively affects all learning domains, thereby hindering
academic performance in all subjects. A person’s inability to
read well can also generate an inferiority complex that
results in the loss of his or her motivation to learn, which, in
turn, may be linked to symptoms leading to juvenile
delinquency (Kimberly & Richard, 2006; Siponmaa,
Kristiansson, Jonson, Nyden et al., 2001). The inability to
read also influences friendships outside of the classroom
(Stanovich, 1986) and children’s ability to process feelings
of anger (Kazdin, Rodgers, Colbus, & Siegel, 1987; Moffitt
& Henry, 1989). All of these factors suggest that addressing
reading difficulties should be a priority for helping children
with learning difficulties.
To support them, it is important to know the causes of the
difficulty. Moreover, there are different manifestations of
developmental dyslexia in different languages (Miles, 2000).
Researchers (e.g., Landerl, Wimmer & Frith, 1997; Paulesu,
McCrory, Fazio, Menoncello et al., 2000; Paulesu, Demonet,
Fazio, McCrory, 2001; Wydell & Butterworth, 1999) argue
that the discrepancy in the prevalence of reading
impairments in different languages might be primarily due
to inherent differences in the structure/characteristics of
each orthography, specifically the way in which phonology
is computed from it. In the alphabetic languages in which a

2109

finer “grain” processing of orthography-to-phonology
mapping is required, such as English or Danish,
developmental dyslexia forms a large minority group. For
these facts, to support Japanese children, it is necessary to
know the characteristics of Japanese children’s reading and
writing difficulties.
There are conflicting hypotheses for developmental
dyslexia, reading and writing difficulties, such as the
phonological deficit hypothesis (Shaywitz, 2003; Shaywitz
& Shaywitz, 2005), double deficit hypothesis (Wolf &
Bowers, 1999; Wolf & Bowers, 2000; Faust & SharfsteinFriedman,
2003),
magnocellular
deficits
hypothesis(Livingstone, Rosen, Drislane, & Galaburda,
1991), and so on. However, most of these hypotheses only
consider a single disability. Other studies that discuss the
issue with many factors don’t consider individual
differences (e.g., Uno, Wydell, Haruhara, Kaneko et al.,
2009). However, all factors related to reading and writing
may affect the difficulty in various ways. This paper
hypothesizes the influence of individual differences is
suspected to add to the difficulties.
The core ability of reading and writing skills is
phonological processing. Phonological processing is the
ability to see or hear a word, break it down into discrete
sounds, and then associate each sound with letter/s that
make up the word. The prerequisite skills for phonological
processing are the ability to analyze the phonological
structure of sound and the ability to recognize its characters.
According to the phonological model, the difficulty results
from an impaired ability to segment spoken words into
phonologic parts and link each letter to its corresponding
sound (Shaywitz, 2003; Shaywitz & Shaywitz, 2005).
Phonemes are small units of sound that can be
conceptualized as the building blocks of words (for example,
the word cat is comprised of three phonemes: k, aaaa, and t).
That is the ability to analyze phonological structure. The
Japanese language is based on a subsyllabic unit, the mora
(Otake, Hatano, Cutler, & Mehler, 1993). According to
magnocellular theory, the difficulty results from
abnormalities of the magnocellular component of the visual
system, which is specialized to quickly process temporal
information (Stein & Walsh, 1997). That is the ability to
recognize character. Furthermore, not only cognitive ability,
but also the ability to correctly produce sound is necessary
for reading. And handwriting abilities are necessary for
writing letters correctly. Therefore, it is also important to
possess these abilities. Moreover, in reading, there are two
strategies, one is a lexical strategy based on whole word
recognition and another a sub-lexical processing strategy
based on a grapheme-to-phoneme conversion (Wydell &
Butterworth, 1999). This means that if we want to know the
ability of phonological processing in reading, we have to
check not only word tests, but also non-word tests.
Additionally, Wydell & Butterworth (1999) established
“the Hypothesis of Granularity and Transparency.” Through
this hypothesis, they maintain that orthographies can be
described by two dimensions: “transparency” and

“granularity” and argue that: (1) any orthography where the
print-to-sound translation is one-to-one or transparent will
not produce a high incidence of phonological dyslexia,
regardless of the level of translation, i.e., phoneme, syllable,
character, etc. This is the “transparency” dimension, and (2)
even when this relationship is opaque and not one-to-one,
any orthography whose smallest orthographic unit
representing sound is coarse, i.e., a whole character or
whole word, will not produce a high incidence of
phonological dyslexia. This is the “granularity” dimension.
Any orthography used in any language can be placed in the
transparency-granularity orthogonal dimension described by
this hypothesis. This is illustrated in Figure 1. The
hypothesis argues that any orthography that falls into the
shaded area in Figure 1 should not produce a high incidence
of phonological dyslexia. Given the characteristics of
Japanese orthography, both Japanese Kana and Kanji can be
placed in the shaded area. For example, in Japanese Kana,
the granularity of the smallest orthographic unit representing
phonology is finer than the whole word, but coarser than the
grapheme and its orthography-to-phonology translation
relationship is at the level of syllables and one-to-one. For
Kanji, on the other hand, the unit of granularity is much
coarser, i.e., a character or a whole word and the
relationship between orthography and phonology is very
opaque, hence Kanji can be placed in the shaded area.

Figure 1: Hypothesis of granularity and transparency and
orthography-to-phonology correspondence made by Wydell
& Butterworth (1999).
In this study, we targeted the difficulties in Kana
(Hiragana and Katakana), the most basic character in
Japanese. We considered phonological awareness, visual

2110

perception, and phonological processing which relate to
reading and writing abilities in Japanese. In addition, we
checked the ability of “expression of handwriting.” We
conducted this study to bring out the effect of individual
differences on the disability.

Method
Participants
The participants were 12 children (eight boys and four
girls) who were recruited by the doctor of the Nagoya City
Child Welfare Center and Nagoya Central Care Center for
Disabled Children. The doctor believed that all had
difficulty in reading and writing which harbored the
possibility that they had developmental dyslexia. Table 1
presents participant profiles.
Table 1: Participant profiles.
Child

Grade

Gender

Dual diagnosis

A

6

M

B

5

M

C

4

M

D

4

M

E

4

M

F

3

M

PDD

G

3

F

PDD

H

3

F

PDD

I

3

F

PDD

AD/HD

J

3

M

K

3

M

PDD

AD/HD

L

3

F

PDD
AD/HD

score of 100.7. Performance IQ scores ranged from 80 to
120, with a mean IQ score of 95.1. No children stuttered and
all could correctly produce sounds.
Measures
Phonological awareness task: Each participant performed
two phonological awareness tests: isolation of unvoiced
sounds test and segmentation of choked sound test. Isolation
of unvoiced sounds requires recognizing the individual
unvoiced sounds in words, for example, “Tell me the second
sound of the word you hear.” The experimental stimuli of
isolation of unvoiced sounds test were 10 words of five
characters like “ka-ta-tsu-mu-ri,” in Japanese “かたつむ
り .” The participants were asked to identify the second
sound in three words, the third sound in four words, and the
fourth sound in three words. The achievement scale was
above 8/10. Segmentation of choked sound requires
recognizing the number of sounds in words, for example,
“Tell me how many sounds in the word you hear.” The
experimental stimuli of segmentation of choked sound test
were 10 words of six choked sound words and four
unvoiced sounds words. These words had three to six
characters. We analyzed only the choked sound words. The
achievement scale was above 4/6. We performed these tests
by checking references from the test performed by Hara
(2001).

PDD
AD/HD

Note. M = Male, F = Female, PDD =
Pervasive Developmental Disorder, ADHD
= Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
In December 2010, seven children were enrolled in third
grade, three in fourth grade, one in fifth grade, and one in
sixth grade. All of them were enrolled in regular elementary
school classes. Every child was either diagnosed as having
learning disabilities or suspected of being learning disabled
by the doctor. Five children exhibited symptoms that
coexisted with pervasive developmental disorder, two with
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and two with both
pervasive
developmental
disorder
and
attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. The Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children-Third Edition (Wisc-III) Full Scale IQ
scores ranged from 79 to 112, with a mean IQ score of 97.8.
Verbal IQ scores ranged from 72 to 120, with a mean IQ

Visual perception task: Each participant performed three
subtests of the Japanese version of the Developmental Test
of Visual Perception (DTVP; Frostig, 1977): figure ground,
position in space and spatial relations. Perceptual age was
determined by the test. Scaled Scores (SS) of each test was
determined using the DTVP. If the perceptual age was
younger than the calendar age, SS was equal to or less than
eight. Individual tests are not sufficiently different to
measure separate abilities (Olson, 1968), and all of the tests
are thought to be related to visual perception. In this study,
participant passed the task if his or her score showed more
than eight in every three scores of subtests. Otherwise, the
participant failed the task.
Phonological processing task: Each participant performed
six reading tests to examine their phonological processing
ability. Four tests were subtests of the Screening Test of
Reading and Writing for Japanese Primary School Children
(STRAW; Uno, Haruhara, Kaneko, & Wydell, 2006):
Hiragana character reading test, Katakana character reading
test, Hiragana word reading test, and Katakana word reading
test. These tests consist of 20 known words. The other two
tests were the Hiragana non-word reading test and Katakana
non-word reading test. These tests consist of 10 non-words.
The achievement scale of each test was more than or equal
to 90%. If a child’s score of the word reading test was above
the achievement scale, but the character reading test or nonword reading test was below the achievement scale for at
least one condition of Hiragana or Katakana, he or she can
use the lexical strategy based on whole word recognition but

2111

cannot use the sub-lexical processing strategy which is
based on a grapheme-to-phoneme conversion. In this case,
he or she was assumed to fail the phonological processing
task. If a child’s score of all the tests was above the
achievement scale, he or she was assumed to have passed
the phonological processing task.

Kana (Hiragana and Katakana). One child, F, passed only
the Hiragana character reading test. She appeared to have
read the words of Hiragana, but seemed to have a weak
ability for phoneme-to-grapheme conversion in Hiragana. In
addition, she couldn’t complete all of the Katakana tests.

Handwriting ability task
Handwriting ability task: Each participant performed one
subtest of the Japanese version of the Developmental Test of
Visual Perception (Frostig, 1977): eye-motor coordination.
Perceptual age was determined by the test. SS of the test
was determined using the DTVP. If the perceptual age was
younger than the calendar age, SS showed equal or less than
eight. Participants passed the task if his or her score showed
more than eight of the subtests.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room at the
Nagoya City Child Welfare Center. Each participant was
seen more than five times over one week, each time for
approximately 40 minutes. To exclude the factor of PDD or
ADHD, we organized the physical environment (e.g.,
Treatment and Education of Autistic and related
Communication handicapped Children). In each test errors
were recorded. Also, each child’s responses were
videotaped for later reviewing. Children were told that these
were not academic achievement tests, and that only the
investigators would see their results. The data was collected
from May 2010 to December 2010.

Four children, C, G, K and L, passed the task and eight
failed. These eight children’s writing movements may be
related to their writing difficulties.

Discussion
Table 2 presents the results of each test for each child and
the type of characteristics in reading and writing difficulties.
One child, F, is type 1 and failed all the tests. Three children,
D, E, and J, are type 2 and passed only the phonological
awareness test. Three children, C, G, and K, are type 3 and
failed in visual perception and phonological processing.
Three children, A, H, and I, are type 4 and failed in visual
perception and handwriting ability. One child, B, is type 5
and failed only in handwriting ability. One child, L, is type
6 and failed only in phonological processing.
Table 2: Type of characteristics in reading and writing
difficulties.
Type

PA

VP

PP

HA

Child

Grade

1

F

F

F

F

F

3

2

P

F

F

F

D

4

2

P

F

F

F

E

4

2

P

F

F

F

J

3

3

P

F

F

P

C

4

3

P

F

F

P

G

3

3

P

F

F

P

K

3

4

P

F

P

F

A

6

4

P

F

P

F

H

3

Phonological processing task

4

P

F

P

F

I

3

Four children, A, B, H, and I passed all tests and therefore
passed the phonological processing task.
Eight children failed the phonological processing task.
Four children, C, D, E, and J failed only the Katakana nonword reading test, while L failed both the Katakana nonword reading test and the Katakana character reading test.
They appeared to read the words of Katakana, but seemed to
have a weak ability for phoneme-to-grapheme conversion in
Katakana. Two children, G and K, failed both the Hiragana
and Katakana non-word reading tests. They appeared to read
the words of Kana (Hiragana and Katakana), but seemed to
have a weak ability for phoneme-to-grapheme conversion in

5

P

P

P

F

B

5

6

P

P

F

P

L

3

Results
Phonological awareness task
Every child passed the isolation of unvoiced sounds test.
In the segmentation of choked sound test, only one child, F,
failed. That means that only one participant had difficulty in
phonological awareness.

Visual perception task
Only two children, B and L, passed the task and the other
10 failed. This means that 10 children had problems in the
recognition of characters in some way.

Note: PA = Phonological awareness, VP = Visual
perception, PP = Phonological processing, HA =
Handwriting ability, F = Failed, P = Passed

By examining individual levels for the four elements, as
shown in Table 2, it becomes apparent that reading and
writing difficulties are not caused by a single disability, but

2112

rather by a combination of factors. Furthermore, the
combination of individual elements is different. This means
that students with learning disabilities need separate support
even they have the same symptoms or reading and writing
difficulties.
In the four elements, a higher percentage of children were
considered to have problems with visual perception. Type 4
children passed the phonological processing task even
though they failed the visual perception task. This result
may be caused by Japanese education methods. The
simultaneous oral spelling method is a good way for
dyslexic children to acquire reading and writing skills
(Thomson, 1996). Typical Japanese education methods,
however, utilize simultaneous oral spelling techniques.
Japanese has multiple characters that are similar to each
other. Also, there are many strokes in Japanese Kanji.
Therefore, we need to study the influence of visual
perception on difficulties in reading and writing Japanese in
the future.
The groundbreaking discovery of our study was that there
were many children who have poor handwriting abilities.
Stroke order is believed to very important in Japanese
education.
However, if there is difficulty in handwriting, it may be
hard for these children to write in handwriting stroke order.
When considering the difficulty of writing, handwriting
ability wasn’t considered. However, from the viewpoint of
quality of life, it is necessary to know a child’s handwriting
ability in an assessment. If a child has poor handwriting
ability, he or she should be supported and taught that the
stroke order is not necessarily important. In Japan, it is an
accepted practice to learn characters from a set of reading
and writing lessons. However, this method is not good for
children who have poor writing abilities, in particular type 5
children, like child B, who have difficulty only with
handwriting. These children need support in the form of
separate reading and writing practice.
In this study, only child F failed the phonological
awareness task. This supports the granularity dimension of
“the Hypothesis of Granularity and Transparency.”
However, some children failed the phonological processing
task because they failed the Katakana test. In particular,
child L, a type 6, passed other tasks like the phonological
awareness task, visual perception task and handwriting
ability task. Why is there difficulty only in the Katakana
phonological processing? Kana is a one-to-one from a
character standpoint, but not a one-to-one transparent from a
sound standpoint. This is illustrated in Figure 2.
Considering this, granularity and transparency and
orthography-to-phonology correspondence of KANA will
appear as presented in Figure 3.
For type 6 children, like child L, the Japanese syllabary
table may be a good education support tool. The Japanese
syllabary table may be utilized as a type of location map of
phonemes (Seki et al., 2004). If children have already
learned Hiragana, using the Katakana syllabary table may
help them learn Katakana characters.

Figure 2: Transparency dimension of Kana from character
and sound standpoints.

Figure 3: Granularity and transparency and orthography-tophonology correspondence of KANA
In this study, we demonstrated that reading and writing
difficulties in the Japanese language attributed to learning
disabilities are caused by variety of factors and that there are
individual differences in the difficulties. We also
demonstrated that an assessment of handwriting ability is
necessary to identify the proper types of support for

2113

problems. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Kana is not
one-to-one transparent from a sound standpoint. This
research will have a large impact on education methods and
techniques in Japan.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by JST RISTEX ImplementationSupport Program, Grant-in-Aid for challenging Exploratory
Research 20653076, consigned research fund from nagoyacity, and Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows 235191. We thank
Ms. Maki Ogawa for her enormous help with the
experiments. We also express our gratitude to the
participating children and their parents.

References
Kazdin, A. E., Rodgers, A., Colbus, D., & Siegel, T. (1987).
Children’s hostility inventory: measurement of aggression
and hostility in psychiatric impatient children. Journal of
Clinical Child Psychology, 16, 320-328.
Kimberly, A. M., & Richard, J. M. (2006). Disability and
Juvenile delinquency: issues and trends. Disability &
Society, 21, 613-627.
Faust, M. & Sharfstein-Friedman, S. (2003). Naming
difficulties in adolescents with dyslexia: Application of
the tip-of-the-tongue paradigm. Brain and cognition, 53(2),
211-217
Frostig, M. (1977). Developmental test of visual perception
(K. Iibachi, Y. Suzuki, & S. Mogi, Trans.). Palo Alto:
Consulting Psychological Press. (Original work published
1963).
Hara, K. (2001). The development of phonological
awareness in Japanese Children. Japanese Journal of
Communication Disorders, 18(1), 10-18.
Landerl, K., Wimmer, H., & Frith, U. (1997). The impact of
orthographic consistency on dyslexia: A German-English
comparison. Cognition, 63, 315-334.
Livingstone, M.S., Rosen, G.D., Drislane, F.W., &
Galaburda, A.M. (1991) Physiological and anatomical
evidence for a magnocellular defect in developmental
dyslexia. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 88, 7943-7947.
MEXT, Japan (2002). Nationwide Survey About Children
Who Are Needed For Special Support Education Program
In Enrolled In Ordinal School Education (in Japanese).
Miles, E. (2000). Dyslexia may show a different face in
different languages. Dyslexia, 6, 193–201.
Moffitt, T. E., & Henry, B. (1989). Neuropsychological
assessment of executive function in self-reported
delinquents. Development and Psychopathology, 1, 105118.
Olson, V. (1968) Factor Analytic Studies of the Frostig
Developmental Test of Visual Perception. The Journal of
Special Education, 2, 429-433.
Otake, T., Hatano, G., Cutler, A. & Mehler, J (1993) Mora
or syllable? Speech segmentation in Japanese. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32(2), 258-278.

Paulesu, E., Demonet, J. F., Fazio, F., McCrory, E.,
Chanoine, V., Brunswick, N., Cappa, S. F., Cossu, G.,
Habib, M., Frith C. D., & Frith, U. (2001). Dyslexiacultural diversity and biological unity. Science, 291,
2165–2167.
Paulesu, E., McCrory, E., Fazio, F., Menoncello, L.,
Brunswick, N., Cappa, S., Cotelli, M., Cossu, G.,Corte, F.,
Lorusso, M., Pesenti, S., Gallagher, A., Perani, D., Price,
C., Frith, C., & Frith, U. (2000). A cultural effect on brain
function. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 91–96.
Seki, A., Okada, T., Koeda, T. & Sadato, N. (2004)
Phonemic manipulation in Japanese: an fMRI study,
Cognitive Brain Research, 20, 261–272.
Shaywitz, S. E. (2003). Overcoming Dyslexia. Random
House Inc., NY.
Shaywitz, S. E. & Shaywitz, B. A. (2005). Dyslexia.
Biological Psychiatry, 57(11), 1301-1309.
Siponmaa, L., Kristiansson, M., Jonson, C., Nyden, A., &
Gillberg, C. (2001). Juvenile and young adult mentally
disordered offenders: The role of child neuropsychiatric
disorders. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry
and the Law, 29, 420-426.
Stanovich, K. E. (1986). Matthew effects in reading: some
consequences of individual differences in the acquisition
of literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 21, 360-407
Stein, J. & Walsh, V. (1997) To see but not to read; the
magnocellular theory of dyslexia. Trends in neurosciences
(Regulared.), 20(4), 147-152
Thomson, M. (1996) The teaching of spelling using
techniques of simultaneous oral spelling and visual
inspection. Australian Journal of Learning Difficulties,
1(1), 12-14.
Uno, A., Haruhara, N., Kaneko, M. & Wydell, T.N. (2006).
STRAW - Shougakusei no Yomikaki Screening Kensa [in
Japanese] - Screening Test for Reading and Writing for
Japanese Primary School Children. Hiroshima, Japan:
Saccess Bell Publishers.
Uno. A., Wydell, T.N., Haruhara, N., Kaneko, M. and
Shinya, N. (2009) Relationship between reading/writing
skills and cognitive abilities among Japanese primaryschool children: normal readers versus poor readers
(dyslexics). Reading and writing, 22, 755-789.
Wolf, M., & Bowers, P. G. (1999). The double-deficit
hypothesis for the developmental dyslexias. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 415-438.
Wolf, M. & Bowers, P.G. (2000) Naming-Speed Processes
and Developmental Reading Disabilities: An Introduction
to the Special Issue on the Double-Deficit Hypothesis.
Journal of learning disabilities, 33(4), 322-324.
Wydell, T. N. & Butterworth, B. (1999) A case study of an
English-Japanese bilingual with monolingual dyslexia.
Cognition, 70, 273-305.

2114

