UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Verbal Satiation of Chinese Bisyllabic Words: A Semantic Locus and its Time Course

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/71d0x7gz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Galmar, Bruno
Chen, Jenn-Yeu

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Verbal Satiation of Chinese Bisyllabic Words:
A Semantic Locus and its Time Course
Bruno Galmar (hsuyueshan@gmail.com)
Institute of Education, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, TAIWAN

Jenn-Yeu Chen (psyjyc@mail.ncku.edu.tw)
Institute of Cognitive Science, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, TAIWAN
Abstract

different components is disrupted and the character looks
weird. Hence, the primary subjective experience is an
orthographic decomposition of the character, not the loss of
the character’s meaning. Cheng and Lan (2009) advanced
that for the Chinese script there is no genuine semantic
satiation but mainly orthographic satiation. To our
knowledge, no one has tried to demonstrate whether for the
Chinese script a verbal satiation with a unique semantic
locus exists. If it does, semantic satiation would be genuine
and would not be a mere by-product of orthographic
satiation or of any pre-semantic satiation. Neither were we
aware of any studies that examined Chinese verbal satiation
at the word level rather than the character level.
In a most recent study on verbal satiation in English, Tian
and Huber (2010) designed a continuous speeded categorymatching task to track the time course of verbal satiation,
and to identify its locus. In their Experiment 1, subjects
performed for each trial a membership task for a category
name (the cue) and an exemplar (the target). Half of the 20
trials of an experimental block contained a repeated
category name (e.g. VEGETABLE). In half of these trials,
the repeated category name was paired with exemplars of
the category, producing matching trials (VEGETABLECARROT). In the other half of these trials, it was paired
with exemplars of non-repeated categories, producing
mismatching trials (VEGETABLE-GOLF). These 10 trials
constituted the satiation trials. The other 10 trials using 10
distinct category names constituted the non-repeated trials,
or the baseline trials. The satiation trials and the baseline
trials were mixed and ordered randomly within a block. In
their Experiment 1, Tian and Huber aimed at monitoring
continuously the effects of repetition of a category name.
They predicted that only response times for satiation trials
should slow down as the task progressed if satiation
occurred and if the task did not cause fatigue. The locus of
any detected satiation in this experiment could be: (a)
orthographic if the word’s orthographic form representing
the category name is satiated, (b) semantic if the meaning of
the word is satiated, (c) both orthographic and semantic, or
(d) on the associative link between the orthographic and
semantic units. To distinguish between these four possible
loci, Tian and Huber designed two more experiments based
on the same speeded category-matching task. In their
Experiment 2, Tian and Huber aimed at isolating a sole
semantic locus of verbal satiation. They tested whether
verbal satiation of the meaning of a category name (e.g.

Verbal satiation of Chinese bisyllabic words was studied in
three experiments to ascertain the phenomenon, to track its
time course, and to identify its locus. Experiment 1 asked the
participants to judge if an exemplar matched a category in 22
blocks of 40 trials each. Within a block, one category
appeared 20 times (repeated trials) while each of the
remaining 10 categories appeared only twice (baseline trials).
For the first 11 trials, response times (RTs) for the repeated
ones were similar to RTs for the baseline ones. For the
subsequent trials, repeated RTs were slower (by 9 ms) than
baseline RTs, indicating a satiation effect. Its loci could be
orthographic, semantic, or both, or on the associative links
between form and meaning. In Experiment 2, category names
were not shown. Participants judged if two exemplars
belonged to the same category. Repeated RTs were faster (by
6 ms) than baseline RTs for the first 12 trials. Then, verbal
satiation emerged but was short-lived (between the 13th and
the 17th trial) and was of greater magnitude (20 ms) than that
observed in Experiment 1. The satiation effect must be
semantic, as only meanings were repeated. Experiment 3
asked participants to judge if two category names were
identical, mostly an orthographic task. Repeated RTs were
similar to baseline ones across all trials, suggesting no
orthographic satiation. The results indicate that semantic
satiation of Chinese words can be directly semantic
(categorical). Its time course conforms to the habituation
model described in Rankin, et al. (2009), i.e., sensitization
(semantic priming) before habituation (semantic satiation) and
habituation followed by dishabituation (recovery).
Keywords: Verbal Satiation, Semantic Satiation, Repetitive
Semantic Processing.

Introduction
For more than a century, the self-reports collected by
psychologists (Moulin & Connor, 2006; Severance &
Washburn, 1907) mention a loss of the meaning of an
alphabetic word following its prolonged viewing (e.g., 3
min.) or its active repetition (oral or written, e.g., for 30
times). This experienced loss of meaning has been coined
semantic satiation. The term semantic satiation emphasizes
that the locus of satiation is thought to be semantic. In the
present work, we will also use the term verbal satiation
which is neutral regarding the locus of satiation. For the
non-alphabetic Chinese script, according to the self-reports
collected by Cheng and Wu (1994), prolonged viewing of a
multi-component Chinese character (e.g. 臉, which means a
face, can be decomposed at a first level into 月 + 僉) elicits
an orthographic satiation. The original binding of the

366

VEGETABLE) can be induced without repeating the
category name but instead by repeating many of its
exemplars (e.g., CARROT, LETTUCE, ...). In this
experiment, Tian and Huber used exemplars instead of
category names as the repeated words. The task for their
subjects was to judge whether two exemplars are members
of the same category (e.g. LION-TIGER, CAR-ROSE).
Within a block, exemplars of the category to be satiated
made half of the stimulus words. Trials with exemplars from
10 other categories served in the baseline trials. The
prevalence of the exemplars from the non-presented
category name to be satiated should elicit satiation of its
meaning. In Experiment 3, Tian and Huber aimed at
isolating an orthographic locus of verbal satiation. Subjects
had to perform lexical decisions about whether two words
were the same word (e.g., VEGETABLE-VEGETABLE,
ANIMAL-VEGETABLE). Within a block, the word to be
satiated was used repeatedly in half of the trials. Repetition
of the same word in this task was assumed to induce a
verbal satiation with a lexical locus. In their experiments 2
and 3, Tian and Huber did not observe a satiation effect, but
in Experiment 1 they did. Hence, Tian and Huber concluded
that verbal satiation occurs in a task only when two
conditions are met: (a) a word form is repeated, (b) the
meaning of the repeated word is repetitively accessed. Tian
and Huber posited that repeatedly viewing a word while
thinking of its meaning elicits associative satiation: the
information-flow channel from the lexical units to the
semantic units is satiated which caused the subjective
experience of the loss of meaning of a satiated word.
The lack of a satiation effect in Experiments 2 and 3 of
Tian and Huber’s (2010) study is critical to their
interpretation of the satiation effect observed in Experiment
1. Therefore, the findings need to be evaluated with rigor.
On the one hand, the satiation effect of Experiment 1 could
be due to the concomitant loci of satiation at the levels of
form, meaning, and form-to-meaning link. On the other
hand, the failure to observe a satiation effect in Experiment
2 could be the result of insufficient number of repetitions
(10). In previous studies, the smallest number of repetitions
for which semantic satiation effects were observed was 15
(Kounios, Kotz, & Holcomb, 2000).
Our main goal was to observe whether a verbal satiation
at the meaning level could occur in Chinese, and if it did, to
track its time course. To pursue this goal, we adapted Tian
and Huber’s (2010) three experiments by doubling the
number of repeated trials within a block and by using
traditional Chinese multisyllabic words as visual stimuli.

Materials and Design
The materials consisted of eleven Chinese category names:
蔬菜 (VEGETABLE), 動物 (ANIMAL), 水果 (FRUIT), 疾
病 (DISEASE), 親戚 (RELATIVE), 運動 (SPORT), 職業
(OCCUPATION), 國家 (COUNTRY), 城市 (CITY), 公司
(COMPANY) and 樂 器 (MUSICAL INSTRUMENT).
Twenty exemplars were selected for each category from a
Chinese corpus and word lists. Care was taken to ensure the
exemplars shared no characters with the category names.
One experimental block contained 40 trials of pair of words
as shown in Table 1. We detail the pairing in Experiment 1
to exemplify its general principles. Adaptations for
Experiments 2 and 3 are given in the respective Experiment
section. Within a block, all the 11 categories were
represented but only one category (VEGETABLES in Table
1) was to be satiated through long-term repetition. This
latter category is termed the dominant category of the block
and the 10 others the non-dominant categories. The 11
Chinese category names listed before and their respective 20
exemplars were used respectively as cues and targets.
Within a block, the 20 repeated trials contained as a cue the
dominant category name. Ten exemplars from the dominant
category served as targets to produce the repeated match
trials. Ten exemplars from the non-dominant categories
served as targets to produce the repeated mismatch trials.
The 10 non-dominant category names served twice as a cue
to produce the 20 baseline trials. They were randomly
assigned to one or two of the (baseline match, baseline
mismatch) groups to prevent any informed guessing about
the pairing of a second occurrence of a non-dominant
category name from viewing its first occurrence in a
previous trial. Ten exemplars, distinct from the ones in the
repeated mismatch trials, from the non-dominant categories
served as targets and are paired to their respective category
label to produce the baseline match trials. The 10 remaining
exemplars from the dominant category not used in the
repeated match trials served as targets to produce the
baseline mismatch trials. Hence in a block, all the 20
dominant exemplars occurred once. Each of the 220
exemplars was used only twice in a set. Each of the 11
category names served as the word to be satiated in one
block. The eleven blocks made a set. For the experiment,
participants ran 2 sets totaling 22 blocks of 40 trials.
Procedure
We describe the procedure of Experiment 1 to exemplify the
general common procedure to all experiments. Adaptations
for Experiments 2 and 3 are given in the respective
Experiment section. Subjects faced a screen with a black
background. For the first trial of a block, a fixation-cross
appeared in white at the center of the screen for 200 ms.
Then, a category name was presented in white at the center
of the screen. After 1000 ms, an exemplar in white was
presented below the cue. Within 2000 ms, subjects had to
decide whether the exemplar matched the above category
name. The two words remained on the screen until subjects
pressed a Right or Wrong button on a gamepad. After
pressing one of the buttons, the screen was cleared, and after

General Method
Participants
Participants were Taiwanese students from National Cheng
Kung University. The participants were different for each
experiment.
Apparatus
The experiments were programmed with DMDX (Forster &
Forster, 2003).

367

300 ms the next trial began with the presentation of the next
cue word.
Data Analysis
Both reaction time and accuracy for each trial were
recorded. The first trial of each block was suppressed from
the analysis because it tended to deviate from the trend of
the rest of the trials which are the primary focus of the
study. We analyzed both the RTs and accuracy data as a
function of the trial number ranging from 2 to 40. This
approach allows the most straightforward visualization of
the dynamics of verbal satiation within a block as the task
progresses and also equates the baseline/repetition
conditions in term of general fatigue along a block. In a first
statistical analysis, the range of the 39 trial numbers was a
priori and arbitrarily segmented and mapped onto four
equally spaced intervals. Mean RTs were calculated
separately for Yes and No responses for each subject and
separately for the repeated and baseline conditions for each
of the four intervals over the 22 blocks. The mean RTs
were subject to the analysis of variance. We run another
similar statistical analysis with both the number of intervals
and their unequal length informed by the data pattern over
the 39 trial numbers. As the conclusions derived from the
two statistical analyses were congruent, we reported only
the results of the latter which offered a finer tracking of the
dynamics of verbal satiation. Because of space limitation,
only data for Yes responses are presented. Data for No
responses were congruent with the ones from Yes
responses.

position 1 for the trials 2-11 and position 2 for trials 12-40.
A repeated measures two-way ANOVA was applied with
repetition (2: baseline and repeated) and position (2:
position 1 and position 2) as the two within-subject factors.
We found both a statistically significant main effect of
repetition, F(1, 38) = 4.13, p = .049, GES = .0016 (GES
being the generalized eta squared, Bakeman, 2005), a
statistically significant main effect of position, F(1, 38) =
33.65, p < .001, GES = .031, and a statistically significant
repetition × position interaction, F(1, 38) = 9.67, p = .0035,
GES = .003. The interaction is characterized by the RTs for
the repeated trials being comparable with the RTs for the
baseline trials at position 1 but becoming slower at position
2. A paired t-test comparing RTs for repeated and baseline
trials at Position 1 revealed no significant difference, t(38) =
-0.57, p = .58. Another paired t-test at Position 2 showed
that RTs for repeated trials were significantly slower (by
about 9 ms) than RTs for baseline trials, t(38) = 4.7, p < .
001.
Table 1. Block structure in Experiments 1, 2 and, 3.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we aimed at eliciting verbal satiation
through 20 repetitive access to a Chinese category name’s
word form and meaning.
According to three accounts of satiation (associative
satiation, semantic satiation, and orthographic satiation),
Experiment 1 should elicit verbal satiation. Repetitive
access from the same word form to the same meaning unit
should satiate the associative link between orthographic and
semantic units. Accessing repetitively the meaning of the
category name should satiate it. Repetitive access to the
same word form should elicit orthographic satiation.
Method
Forty students (female 33) participated in the experiment.
The subjects ran a category-matching task as described in
the General Method section.
Results and Discussion
One participant out of 40 was excluded based on a 90%
accuracy criterion. Figure 1 plots the time course of the RTs
for the correct Yes responses as a function of the trial
number. Both baseline and repeated trials showed a slowing
trend which revealed a general fatigue effect.
In Fig. 1, we drew a vertical line between trial number 11
and 12, a cutoff from which repeated RTs appeared to
become globally slower than baseline RTs until the end of
the block. From this cutoff, we defined two intervals:

Figure 1. Experiment 1. Reaction times as a function of
trial number for Yes responses.

368

The accuracy data were analyzed in the same way. We
found a statistically significant main effect of repetition,
F(1, 38) = 12.55, p = .001, GES = .049, revealing better
accuracy for repeated trials. The main effect of position was
not statistically significant, F(1, 38) = 0.44, p = .51, GES
= .003. There was no repetition × position interaction, F(1,
38) = 0.034, p = .85, GES < .001, suggesting that the
interaction effect in the RT data was not the result of a
speed-accuracy tradeoff.
Experiment 1 asked the subjects to determine if an
exemplar word matched a category word. In terms of YES
responses, response times for the first 11 repeated trials
were similar to RTs for the non-repeated baseline trials.
After that, RTs for the repeated trials became slower than
RTs for the baseline trials. The increased RT difference
between the repeated and the baseline trials from position 1
to position 2 was about 9 ms. Not due to a speed-accuracy
tradeoff, this difference represented a verbal satiation effect
brought about by the repeated processing of the same
category word.

repeated RTs recovered to be as fast as baseline RTs. This
qualitative interpretation of Fig. 2 was confirmed by the
thereafter statistical analysis. A repeated measures two-way
ANOVA on mean correct RTs was applied with repetition
(2) and position (3) as the two within-subject factors. We
reported the Huynh-Feldt corrections for all statistical
effects involving more than one degree of freedom in the
numerator. The main effect of repetition was not statistically
significant, F(1, 39) = 3.3, p = .077, GES = .0016.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 investigated whether pure semantic satiation
was possible by asking subjects to repeatedly process a
category but not its name. According to the three accounts
of satiation, Experiment 2 should elicit neither associative
satiation nor orthographic satiation because there is no
repetition of the category name. However, repetitive access
to the meaning of an unshown category name should elicit
satiation with a semantic locus.
Method
Forty-one students (female 26) participated in the
experiment. The materials for Experiment 2 were the 220
exemplars from the 11 categories used in Experiment 1.
Category labels were not shown. Within a block, the 20
exemplars of the dominant category occurred twice, once as
a cue in the repeated trials and once as a target. Exemplars
from the 10 other categories served as cues in the baseline
trials. Each of the 11 category names served as the unshown
word to be satiated in one block. For the procedure, the cue
word was no more a category name but a changing
exemplar. Hence, subjects had to decide whether two
exemplars belonged to the same category.
Results and Discussion
One participant out of 41 was excluded based on a 90%
accuracy criterion. Figure 2 plots the time course of the RTs
for the correct Yes responses. As for Experiment 1, both
baseline and repeated trials showed a slowing trend which
revealed a general fatigue effect. In Fig. 2, we drew two
vertical lines at trial numbers 13 and 17, two cutoff trial
numbers separating the plot in three intervals: position 1 for
the trials 2-12, position 2 for trials 13-17, and position 3 for
trials 18-40. During position 1, repeated RTs appeared
globally faster than baseline RTs which could signal a
facilitatory semantic priming effect. Position 2 represents a
potential verbal satiation interval during which repeated RTs
became slower than baseline RTs. During position 3, the

Figure 2. Experiment 2. Reaction times as a function of
trial number for Yes responses.
However, we found a statistically significant main effect of
position, F(2, 78) = 31.5, p < .001, GES = .026, and a
statistically significant repetition × position interaction, F(2,
78) = 11.09, p < .001, GES = .007. The interaction is
characterized by the RTs for the repeated trials compared to
the RTs for the baseline trials being faster at position1,
slower at position 2 and equally fast at position 3. A paired
t-test comparing RTs for repeated and baseline trials at
position 1 revealed marginally statistically significant faster
reaction times (by 6 ms) for repeated trials, t(39) = -1.88, p
= .068, 95% CI [-12.8, 0.48]. Repeated trials are made of
exemplars of a same dominant category, therefore the
observed facilitation at position 1 for repeated trials
revealed the occurrence of semantic priming. Another
paired t-test at Position 2 showed that RTs for repeated trials
became statistically significantly slower (by 20 ms) than
baseline trials, t(39) = 4.7, p = .003 , 95% CI [7.5, 33.6].
Such a reversal from semantic priming at position 1 to
semantic impairment at position 2 for repeated trials
supported the occurrence of verbal satiation at position 2.
Another paired t-test at position 3 showed that repeated RTs
were no longer slower than baseline RTs, t(39) = 0.55, p
= .58 , 95% CI [-4.1, 7.1]. Hence, at position 3, verbal
satiation vanished.
Analysis of the accuracy data showed a statistically
significant main effect of repetition: F(1, 39) = 6.27, p = .
017, GES = .018, a statistically significant main effect of
position: F(2, 78) = 3.3, p = .043, GES = .02, and a
marginally statistically significant repetition × position
interaction: F(2, 78) = 3.11, p = .058, GES = .018. Of main
interest to us, accuracy rates for repeated trials were

369

statistically significantly higher only for position 1, t(39) =
4.05, p < .001. Then, they decreased to the level of baseline
trials for position 2 and 3, (t(39) = 0 .38, p = .7; t(39) = 0.54,
p =.59). Hence, at position 2 RTs for repeated trials
increased as shown previously whereas their accuracy rates
decreased, indicating no speed-accuracy tradeoff. The RT
and the accuracy data constituted convergent evidence
towards the occurrence of verbal satiation at Position 2.
In Experiment 2, the main result was that repeated
processing of exemplars of a same category increased the
RTs differences between repeated trials and baseline trials.
We posited that these RTs differences signaled the
occurrence of verbal satiation. Verbal satiation occurred
roughly at the same trial number than in Experiment 1.
Unlike the verbal satiation in Experiment 1, verbal satiation
in Experiment 2 was short-lived (limited to trials 13-17) and
of higher magnitude (20 ms versus 9 ms). The verbal
satiation in Experiment 2 must be purely semantic because
the word form of the dominant category name was never
shown and the cues in repeated trials had all a different
word form. Hence, with Experiment 2, we identified a
semantic locus to verbal satiation which could have
contributed to the verbal satiation found in Experiment 1.

measures two-way ANOVA on mean correct RT was
applied with repetition (2) and position (3) as the two
within-subject factors. None of the main effect of repetition,
the main effect of position, and the repetition × position
interaction, (F(1, 38) = 0.037, p = .85, GES < .001; F(2, 76)
= 0.7, p = .47, GES = .001, F(2, 76) = 2.08, p = .14, GES
= .001) were statistically significant.

Experiment 3

The latter result invalidated our hypothesis of occurrence of
a verbal satiation elicited by repetitive processing of a
repeated word form. None of the paired t-test comparing
RTs for repeated and baseline trials for each of the three
positions reached statistical significance. Hence in
experiment 3, speed of processing for both conditions was
equal.

Figure 4. Experiment 3. Reaction times as a function of trial
number for Yes responses.

Experiment 3 investigated whether pure orthographic
satiation was possible by asking subjects to repeatedly
recognize the word form of a category name. According to
the three accounts of satiation, Experiment 3 should elicit
neither associative satiation nor semantic satiation because
there is no need to access repetitively the meaning of the
category name. However, repetitive processing of a same
word form name should elicit its orthographic satiation as
demonstrated in (Cheng & Lan, 2009).
Method
Forty-one students (female 20) participated in the
experiment. The materials for Experiment 3 were the 11
category names used in Experiment 1. Table 1 illustrates the
pairing of trials. The exemplars in Experiment 1 were all
replaced by category labels. Hence, within a block, the
dominant category label was repeated 20 times as a cue and
20 times as a target. Non-dominant category names served
twice as a target. The task became lexical rather than
semantic. Subjects had to decide whether the cue and the
target were a same word.
Results and Discussion
Two participants out of 41 were excluded based on a 90%
accuracy criterion. Figure 3 plots the time course of the RTs
for the correct Yes responses. Unexpectedly, not only no
occurrence of verbal satiation could be observed around the
12-13 trials as in the two previous experiments but it also
appeared that repeated RTs were globally equally fast to
baseline RTs. We partitioned the 40 trials into three
intervals: trials 2-30, trials 31-35 and trials 36-40. The
second interval could be the seat of a weak and delayed
verbal satiation. We proceeded to a statistical analysis to
evaluate this possibility. For Yes responses, a repeated

General Discussion
The present study explored the existence of verbal satiation
in Chinese and questioned whether its nature would be
semantic. In both Experiments 1 and 2, we found within 40
trials an interval for which RTs for repeated trials became
slower than baseline RTs after being equally fast over the
first 11 trials in Experiment 1 and after being slightly faster
over the first 12 trials in Experiment 2. In Experiment 3,
RTs were similar for repeated trials and baseline trials. For
Experiments 1 and 2, we ruled out a speed-accuracy tradeoff strategy. Instead, we posited that verbal satiation
occurred in both experiments and we advanced that its
nature is semantic as it can be induced by mere repetitive
processing of exemplars of a category without repetition of
the word form of the category label. Before defending our
viewpoint, we considered a number of alternative
explanations.
Did subjects strategically generate exemplars impairing
semantic retrieval?
If subjects on seeing a cue category name or an exemplar
retrieve strategically from semantic memory a few
exemplars for further responding, these exemplars could
block competing exemplars impeding semantic processing if
the target words differ from the expected exemplars.

370

Repeated RTs for Yes responses will become increasingly
slower than baseline RTs because of the repetitive
impediment of blocking on the exemplars of a same
category in repeated trials. This specific slowing down of
repeated trials should happen from the very beginning
within a block. However, our results in Experiments 1 and 2
refuted this latter prediction.

dynamics of our enduring verbal satiation in Experiment 1
is akin to the long-term semantic satiation obtained in a
semantic generation task by Kuhl and Anderson (2011).

Conclusion
The semantic satiation account of verbal satiation (Smith &
Klein, 1990) which stipulates that semantic units became
habituated with repetitive access to the meaning of word
was newly validated for Chinese multisyllabic words. The
time course of semantic satiation follows the classic
habituation model (Rankin, et al., 2009): sensitization
(semantic priming) before habituation (semantic satiation)
and habituation followed by dishabituation (recovery).
Semantic satiation exemplifies that conceptual processing
can be habituated as early suggested by Baars (1987).
Hence, the cognitive system would respond to both
perceptual information redundancy (see the example of
stabilized retinal images (Pritchard, Heron & Hebb, 1960))
and meaning redundancy with the same habituation
mechanism.

Does inhibition underlie verbal satiation?
Semantic inhibition of return (IOR) (Weger & Inhoff, 2006)
refers to an attentional bias towards semantic novelty
slowing down processing of repeated or semantically related
words compared to unrelated and nonrepeated words.
Weger and Inhoff (2006) found that for semantic IOR
tended to not occur when repeated/related words with large
item variability are mixed with a rather heterogeneous pool
of nonrepeated/unrelated words. Hence, both of the designs
in Experiment 1 and 2 are not propitious to semantic IOR.
A semantic habituation model of verbal satiation
In Rankin, et al. (2009), ten characteristics of behavioral
habituation are listed. We described thereafter the first five
characteristics and showed that data in Experiment 2 in the
light of data in Experiment 1 matched realistically a
semantic habituation model of verbal satiation. The first
three characteristics in Rankin, et al. (2009) shaped the
usual time course of habituation: sensitization before
habituation and dishabituation following habituation. In
Experiment 2, the three intervals of the 40 trials in Figure 2
delineated respectively first the sensitization phase with
facilitatory semantic priming for repeated trials, then a
habituation phase corresponding to the semantic satiation of
the unshown dominant category name, and finally a
dishabituation phase for which repeated RTs recovered from
habituation to return to the level of baseline RTs. The fourth
characteristic of habituation (Rankin, et al., 2009) can be
stated as: more frequent stimulations can result in more
pronounced response decrement (slowing reaction times in
our case). We considered that if we count the number of
distinct stimuli to the meaning of the dominant category
name, it was greater in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1,
simply because in Experiment 2 many exemplars replaced
the dominant category name. We thought that the higher
number of external stimuli (exemplars) in Experiment 2
could be translated as a higher frequency of external
stimulation to the meaning of the category name. Following
the fourth characteristic of habituation, a higher magnitude
of verbal satiation could be expected in Experiment 2 than
in Experiment 1. The fifth characteristic of habituation can
be stated as: the weaker the stimulus, the more pronounced
is habituation. We considered that in Experiment 2, the
exemplars replacing the dominant category name as a cue
constituted weaker semantic stimuli to the meaning of the
category name than the category name itself. Hence, using
weaker stimuli in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1, we
could expect, according to the fifth characteristic, again a
higher magnitude of verbal satiation in Experiment 2. The

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NSC97-2410-H-006-095MY3 grant awarded to Jenn-Yeu Chen as well as a doctoral
fellowship grant (NSC100-2420-H-006-007-DR) awarded
to Bruno Galmar.

References
Bakeman, R. (2005). Recommended effect size statistics for repeated measures
designs. Behavior Research Methods, 37(3), 379-384.
Baars, B. J. (1988) A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge University
Press.
Cheng, C. M., & Lan, Y. H. (2009). An implicit test of Chinese orthographic
satiation. Reading and Writing, 1-36.
Cheng, C. M., & Wu, S. J. (1994). Orthographic satiation and disorganization in
Chinese. Advances in the study of Chinese language processing, 1, 1-30.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows display program
with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Kounios, J., Kotz, S. A., & Holcomb, P. J. (2000). On the locus of the semantic
satiation effect: Evidence from event-related brain potentials. Memory and
Cognition, 28(8), 1366-1377.
Kuhl, B., & Anderson, M. (2011). More is not always better: paradoxical effects
of repetition on semantic accessibility. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1-9.
doi: 10.3758/s13423-011-0110-0
Moulin, C. J., & Connor, A. R. (2006). Semantic satiation and subjective
experience: The strange case of jamais vu. Paper presented at the
International Conference of Memory, Sydney.
Pritchard R.M., Heron W., & Hebb D.O. (1960). Visual Perception Approached
by the Method of Stabilized Images. Canadian J. Psych., 14, 67-77.
Rankin, C. H., Abrams, T., Barry, R. J., Bhatnagar, S., Clayton, D. F., Colombo,
J., et al. (2009). Habituation revisited: an updated and revised description of
the behavioral characteristics of habituation. Neurobiology of learning and
memory, 92(2), 135-138.
Severance, E., & Washburn, M. F. (1907). The loss of associative power in
words after long fixation. The American Journal of Psychology, 18(2), 182186.
Smith, L., & Klein, R. (1990). Evidence for semantic satiation: Repeating a
category slows subsequent semantic processing. Learning, Memory, 16(5),
852-861.
Tian, X., & Huber, D. E. (2010). Testing an associative account of semantic
satiation. Cognitive Psychology, 60, 267-290.
Weger, U. W., & Inhoff, A. W. (2006). Semantic inhibition of return is the
exception rather than the rule. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 68(2),
244-253.

371

