UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When doing the wrong thing is right

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80k4h655

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Kirsh, David
Caballero, Richard
Cuykendall, Shannon

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When doing the wrong thing is right
David Kirsh
(kirsh@ucsd.edu)

Richard Caballero
(richc117@gmail.com)

Shannon Cuykendall
(scuykend@uci.edu)

Cognitive Science, 0515, UCSD
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Cognitive Science, 0515, UCSD
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Dept. of Dance, UCI
Irvine, CA 9 92697 USA

Abstract

This idea challenges common sense and previous work
on complex motor learning. It is common sense that
practicing something the way it should be performed
ought to be more effective than practicing it with
intentional distortions, or with essential components
missing. If that were not so then repeatedly drawing a
face in caricature rather than drawing it realistically ought
to lead to drawing the face more realistically later.
Similarly, practicing tennis stokes without a ball, or using
the wrong approach and form ought to lead to better
shots, at times, than always practicing in proper form. It
is noteworthy that experiments have shown that both
these marking-like methods are, at times, better forms of
practice than always practicing in an undistorted, full
way. In music performance, for example, using
exaggeration in rehearsal is thought to be a helpful
method of practicing, delivering results that surpass
repeated full-out play [Hinz, 08]. Musicians practice
passages both faster and slower than written. It is
standard to manipulate phrasing, dynamics, articulation,
intonation, and tempo, to name a few. [Chaffin et al 2002,
Friberg et al, 06]. In sports viewing, [Hill & Pollack, 00;
Pollack et al 01] found that subjects have learned to
recognize complex actions better, such as certain types of
tennis strokes, when some of the parts of the stroke have
been exaggerated. Evidently, marking may have a place in
training. But as a general method, practicing only
distorted versions of the real thing, or versions that leave
out essential components, is a counterintuitive method of
rehearsal.
Our unanticipated result is that this
counterintuitive method is effective.
Our findings also challenge work on mental simulation.
In sports psychology, imagery is often referred to as
cognitive enactment or visualization, and is one of the
most popular performance enhancement and rehabilitation
techniques. It has been shown in numerous studies that
mental simulation in sports contexts can significantly
improve an athlete’s performance on measures of style,
speed and strategy. [Weinberg 08]. In music, PascualLeone [2001] reported a similar finding about learning to
play a five-finger exercise on a piano keyboard. After
five days, the group that mentally simulated playing,
performed an exercise comparably to the third day level
of those who practiced physically. All these experiments
showed that mental practice leads to substantial
improvement. We therefore came to the experiment
believing our dancers would significantly benefit from
their ten minutes of mental simulation.

We designed an experiment to explore the learning
effectiveness of three different ways of practicing dance
movements.
To our surprise we found that partial
modeling, called marking in the dance world, is a better
method than practicing the complete phrase, called
practicing full-out; and both marking and full-out are better
methods than practicing by repeated mental simulation. We
suggest that marking is a form of practicing a dance phrase
aspect-by-aspect. Our results also suggest that prior work
on learning by observation and learning by mental practice
may not scale up to complex movements.
Keywords: Dance practice; Marking; Mental Simulation;
Aspect-by-Aspect.

Introduction
We report here on a surprising finding in an experiment
that compared the relative effectiveness of three different
ways of practicing dance phrases. We found that 1)
partial modeling of a dance phrase by marking the phrase,
as it is called in the dance world, is a better method than
practicing the complete phrase, called practicing full-out;
and 2) both marking and full-out are better learning
methods than practicing by repeated mental simulation.
This is surprising because when a dancer marks a phrase
they are literally doing the wrong thing – like humming a
piece of music instead of singing it. The result raises the
interesting possibility that practicing a movement in a
simplified manner, or aspect-by-aspect, rather than
practicing all of its components at once, may be the best
way to practice. In marking, subjects intentionally
practice the phrase in an improper form, with distortions,
exaggerations, simplifications, even with substitutions
such as using hands for legs, or gestures for entire body
movements, such as pirouettes. The official reason for
marking is to save energy. But we believe that when
cleverly mixed, this diversity may provide a powerful
method for a dancer to explore the structure of a phrase
more exhaustively than regular full-out practice.

Full-out

Marking

Simulate in the Head

Figure 1. The three conditions in the experiment.

1

1786

Failure to find this improvement from mental
simulation also bears on the findings of [Cross et al, 09],
who, in several experiments, found that repeated
observation of a target phrase – and hence ‘practice’ in
the motor resonance system – leads to comparable
performance to full-out physical practice. Simulation has
been to shown to facilitate in much the same way as
observation – by activation of covert actions via the motor
resonance system, [Jeannerod, 01]. The unexpected result
by Cross et al [op cit] was found to hold for learning the
rhythm and steps for pieces in a game like Dance Dance
Revolution (DDR), where subjects must stamp their right
or left foot onto footprints on a mat in time with music.
Subjects watched the video repeatedly and may have
played covertly. In our experiment, the phrases to be
mastered were far more complex than DDR, involving
movement of the entire body, with dynamics and feeling,
and not driven in response to a stimulus. And they were
simulated and not observed. But if observation works so
well there is reason to suspect that mental simulation
should not as well.
If our results about marking are true then marking
during dance practice should not be seen as a sign of
fatigue or laziness, as so often it is in dance studios.
Rather, it may be a strategic method for selective training.
This opens the door to developing more effective methods
of selectively working on ‘aspects’ of a phrase. This
likely applies to domains other than dance. We speculate
that the success of marking also tells us something about
how the body itself can be used to help manage attention,
improve focus and even facilitate simulation in a selective
way. The body may well draw attention to what is
important in the way a hand in speed-reading drags the
eyes along so that a speed reader can move through the
page faster and more effectively. It is yet another way the
body itself can be involved in cognition.

Procedure: The design required dividing the ten dancers
into three groups: A, B, C. All three groups were then
brought into the studio and taught a dance phrase new to
them, lasting about 55 seconds. The dancers were taught
this phrase during a 10-minute teaching period, and at the
end of it, the group left the studio and the dancers
returned, one by one, to the studio and performed the
dance in front of the teacher. As shown in figure 1 above,
there were three conditions: practicing full-out, practicing
by marking the phrase, and lying still mentally simulating
the phrase. After the first round the dancers changed
condition and were taught a second phrase of about the
same duration and complexity as the first. The
experimental design is a 3 by 3 Latin Square where each
group is run in each condition. Thus, if group A started
by Marking, they progressed to Full-Out, and then
finished in the third trial in the Simulation condition.
Each dancer’s performance was graded according to
established criteria (technicality, memory, timing, and
dynamics – discussed below), first by the teacher in realtime and later by two independent expert observers who
reviewed the video frame by frame. Once all dancers
were graded, the group returned to the same large studio
and practiced the dance for 10 minutes. While practicing
they were asked to face in different directions and not
look at each other. Once this 10-minute practice period
was over they left the studio and, as before, returned one
by one to be graded by the same criteria as before. See
figure 2. Learning is understood as the change in grade
acquired during the 10-minute practice phase.

Conjecture and Method. In designing the experiment,
our conjecture was that:
a. practicing a dance phrase full-out would lead to
better performance than mental simulation, and
b. marking would lie somewhere in the middle: better
than mental simulation but worse than full-out.
c. Mental simulation would also lead to better
performance.

Figure 2. The temporal structure of the
experiment is displayed. There were three trials.
Measures: In mastering a dance phrase it is customary to
be evaluated on technicality, memory, timing and
dynamics.
Technicality means the level of precision in positions and
transitions. Are the forms full and well-formed (e.g. juicy,
fully rounded)?
Memory, or level of detail, refers to the completeness of
each movement. Was something left out – a hand gesture,
a turn, a foot angle?
Timing refers to the duration of individual steps and the
duration of the transitions. Our timing coder used frameby-frame measures of timing for great precision in
comparing test conditions to the target standard.
Dynamics refers to the force, speed and acceleration of
movements. Also included are various qualities of
motion – resistance, emotionality, and intentionality.
On analyzing the experimental results we found that:

Owing to the presumed power of the motor resonance
system we wanted to see if anything extra would be
gained by adding body activity to the mental simulation
and projection we thought already occurred during
marking. Our belief was that dancers would learn
something from marking, just not as much as from
practicing full-out. To test this idea we used the dancers
from Random Dance, the contemporary company we have
been studying. [Kirsh et al, 09; Kirsh, 12] All are superexperts, having been chosen from an audition pool of 800
professional dancers throughout Europe and the States.

2

1787

1) Marking was the most effective method of practicing,
being slightly more learning efficient than practicing
full-out (p =.0189);
2) Both marking and full-out led to substantially more
learning than mental simulation (p = .0001);
3) Mental simulation was not a strong form of practice;
there was negligible improvement between pre and
post tests in the simulation condition and in many
cases it led to a decrease in performance.
Our finding both support and violate our hypotheses.
We were correct that the learning achieved by marking is
more effective than mental simulation (mean difference =
1.19, with p < .0001) across the key dimensions of
Memory, Technique and Timing. But we were surprised
by its magnitude. We were greatly surprised that marking
is more effective than Full-Out (mean difference =. 31,
with p = .0189), though the difference is quite modest.
We were also surprised that mental simulation did not
facilitate at all. To compute these values we first
performed one-way ANOVA’s on all measures in all
conditions and found highly significant differences
throughout. We then ran pair-wise post-hoc comparisons
(Tukey’s HSD) and computed p values as shown in table
2. All p values were computed over z-scores to reduce
noise caused by variability in dancers, measure-types, and
graders.

interfering with it. Our main idea of a mechanism is
that marking provides a physical anchor for mental
simulation, thereby scaffolding imagination and leading
to higher realism in simulation and increased priming
of motor preparation. (See Kirsh, 10) We found
qualitative support for this idea from interviews with
the dancers. When asked what they think about when
marking our subjects reported that they have in mind
the full-out movement – though with fewer dynamics.
They do not ‘see’ themselves as dancing in a distorted
way, as they would if observing themselves in the
mirror. They project off of their movement to the
normative movement they want to be making. This is
the movement they have in their mind’s eye. Marking
seems to serve as a physical scaffold for projecting
movement imagery. Thus, part of our conjecture was
right: marking is better than simulation, though nothing
we found proves our conjectured explanation of why it
is better (i.e. projection). We were surprised, however,
by just how much more effective marking is than
mental simulation as a practice technique.
We also found that marking is better than full-out as
a practice technique. This falsified our conjecture that
full-out practice is the best form of practice.
Learning broken down by dimension
2.0

Mean Improvement From Practice

Memory

Measure
Technicality
Timing

Condition
Dynamics

Full
Marking
Simulation

1.5
1.0

Mean(Grade)

Mean(raw delta)

1.0

0.5

Condition

0.5

0.0

Full
-0.5

0.0

Marking
Simulation

-1.0

Table 3. Marking was significantly better than Full-out for
learning the aspects of a phrase related to technicality and
memory and trending to significance in timing.
Not
surprisingly it was less effective at learning dynamics, which
are rarely practiced in marking. Mental simulation was most
effective (but still yielding zero or negligible improvement) for
thinking about technical elements (precision in movement). It
led to decreased performance – negative learning – for
movement details.

-0.5

Table 1. Mean improvement from practice (the learning
delta), as measured on a 5-point scale. The absolute
difference in delta between Marking and Full-out is 0.31,
which is significant when measured by the z-score for
Technicality, Memory and Timing (p = .0189). Full is better
for Dynamics but not significantly (p = .145).
Table 2 P values
Measure

M>F

F>M

M>S

F>S

Memory

.7334

<.0001

<.0001

Technicality

.0029

<.0001

.0005

Timing

.0194

<.0001

<.0001

.0003

<.0001

<.0001

<.0001

Dynamics
Mem, Tech, Timing

.145
.0189

Marking vs. Full-Out Discussion: There are a few
possible explanations why marking is better than full-out.
The simplest is that it is possible to mark more steps in a
10-minute period than it is to execute them full-out. To
explore this idea we coded the video’ed activity of four
dancers as they practiced their phrase in the experiment:
two subjects in marking, were compared with two
subjects in full-out, for each phrase.
The results
unambiguously show that the marking group performed
significantly more steps and repetitions than the full-out
groups. See table 4. The reason marking might be a

We assumed that marking would add something to
mental simulation because somehow the process of
marking would facilitate mental simulation rather then

3

1788

better way to practice, then, may be as simple as that
dancers get in more trials in the same time by marking
than by working full-out.
Phrase
I
II
III
Mean

Marking
351
317
317
328

however, dancers need to execute a movement as near to
its full form as they can. This suggests that narrowing in
on to a single aspect to practice will be harder because all
aspects must be performed at once.
It seems, therefore, that marking offers dancers just
what they want: a way of working on their movements
aspect by aspect. Dancers do not think they are dancing
incorrectly when they mark; they think they are dancing
incompletely. They are focusing on some aspect of each
step – its timing, extension, path or shape.
This ability to confine attention selectively may also
explain why marking is better than full-out in
remembering details. Intuitively, marking is akin to
ephemeral sketching, instead of using a paper of pencil to
sketch, dancers use their bodies, and the sketch is gone as
soon as it made. But, ephemeral of not, dancers can still
work on specific aspects of movement, the way their
hands or feet specifically should move. They can cycle
back to these parts while leaving everything else
stationary. This is something dancers cannot do when
dancing full-out. This reinforces the idea that by marking
they can practice in a more incremental, piecemeal
fashion than when practicing full-out. During one pass a
particular aspect of a movement can be the center of
attention, whereas another aspect can be the center of
attention on a second pass. To be sure, the final
conception of the target object requires the subject to
integrate and assemble the aspects together in a unified
whole. So there remains a puzzle about how a subject can
come up with an effective whole movement from a set of
disparate aspects that may interact in complex ways. This
need for integration may impose limits on the
effectiveness of marking as a learning method. But it also
suggests that if aspects are relatively independent from
each other, then marking can be an effective way of
practicing because it facilitates a divide and conquer
strategy: work on the problematic parts of a phrase and
then assemble all parts into the final product. This is
likely to be a more powerful method than practicing a
target phrase holistically, whether through mental
simulation or full-out.

Full-Out
275
300
188
254

Table 4. A simple enumeration of the number of steps
executed in marking vs. full-out, matched by phrase.

Related to this number of steps argument is that
marking might be a better form of practice because it is
easier to fast forward or skip quickly through steps when
marking, or to jump completely to new sequences. Fullout requires correct timing so there is no such thing as fast
forward. Jumping to new sequences or sub-sequences is
possible but it seems to be harder for dancers. From
reviewing the steps that dancers practiced full-out we
observed that the average sub-sequence was longer in
full-out than in marking. See table 5. We observed this
same phenomenon in actual dance sessions, where
dancers jump to different parts of a phrase more often
during marking.

Table 5. The string-of-steps, on average, is
shorter for marking (12) than full-out (19). A
string-of-steps is a sequence of steps performed in
the right order. Dancers jump around within and
between sequences more often when marking than
when practicing full-out. In full-out, dancers
alternated between very long and very short
string-of-steps.

Marking vs. Mental Simulation Discussion: Prima
facie, one reason mental practice – mental simulation – is
less effective than marking is that when simulating,
subjects do not receive sensory feedback from the body
and the environment. In marking, by contrast, there is
additional information available that a subject may use to
reduce error. For instance, there is input about balance,
gravity, weight and inertia. These physical features are
not available through mental simulation, at least not in
any realistic manner. This extra input from the physical
world also means that dancers can re-evaluate their
movement in a different way on the basis of how they
interpret their perception of their own movement. The
paradox of marking, however, is that the literal feedback
from the body during marking is distorted feedback.
Subjects are dancing incorrectly (in a very literal sense).

A second possible explanation of why marking is best
is that in full-out practice there are more aspects to attend
to at once. Not all aspects are equally in need of practice.
Every step has many qualities. For instance, in Laban
Movement Analysis [Newlove, 05], a distinction is drawn
between ‘effort qualities’: flow (free/bound), weight
(light/heavy),
time
(sustained/sudden),
space
(direct/indirect) and ‘shape qualities’: Rising/Sinking,
Spreading / Enclosing, Advancing / Retreating, Growing /
Shrinking. In practice, a dancer cannot attend equally to
all these qualities simultaneously. Attention must be
focused more narrowly.
When practicing full-out,

4

1789

So the literal feedback they might use to determine an
error measure, and so to sharpen their form, is not correct.
To resolve this paradox the place to start is with the
dancers’ own comment that when marking they have in
mind their full-out movement, that marking is the
physical scaffold for projecting to this normative imagery.
To explain how an imperfect model of a movement –
which is what marking literally is – can behave as a
physical scaffold we need to introduce a few ideas. We
begin with the concepts of projection, imagination and
anchoring.
Projection is akin to attaching a mental image to a
physical structure. When we project onto an object, we
experience ourselves intentionally augmenting the object.
The object anchors our mental image, and successful
projection requires spatially locking the projected image
onto the anchoring structure. To spatially lock, the
mental image to be attached must be the right size and be
connected to a specific location on the external structure.
When we imagine an object, we again are dealing
with mental images but we do not attach it to anything in
the seen world. It has no anchor and it need have no
particular size.
Mental simulation is a kind of
imagination.

simulation of harder problems. This may explain why
Cross et al found observation to be facilitative in simple
dance whereas we found that mental simulation of
complex dance was not facilitative.
Anchoring projection, therefore, is one possible
explanation why marking helps dancers. The major
limitation of this view is that anchoring and projection are
themselves inadequately understood. For instance, how
does anchoring a projection differ from using an external
structure or process as a mediator, an idea that regularly
surfaces in discussion of the effects of culture and
learning [Vygotsky, 78; Wertsch, 07]?
Here’s a case in point. If a musician uses his foot to
keep beat, does his tapping anchor his projection (and
performance) or mediate it? In this instance, the reason to
call it an anchor is that the target rhythm is not a regular
beat per se – the rhythm he taps – it is the musical rhythm
played ‘on top of the beat’ (e.g. da joom da joom, daah
tika daah tika). He is thinking about the rhythm and using
his beating as a stable pulse to help him. This is
analogous with the tic tac toe grid, because, presumably,
the beat is running on an automatic oscillator, [Eck et al,
00] liberating higher motor planning centers to work on
different, but coordinated, sorts of covert actions. Beating
is a way of scaffolding rather than mediating the correct
rhythm.
Compare tapping a basic rhythm with the gestures an
orchestra leader makes as he conducts a musical piece.
Once again the underlying beat is embodied, though
gesturally now rather than by tapping a foot. But a
conductor also adds emphasis to help instrumentalists
interpret the music. By gesturing a conductor directs
musicians to attend to specific musical features. Are those
gestures anchoring the musicians’ projection? Or are they
mediating their performance, without relying on a third
thing called projection to help them perform? Projection
seems a mental extra, pointless. The musicians can
follow the conductor’s directions immediately, without a
further process of projecting what they need to do.
Contrast conducting with this last case. In [Frank &
Barner, 12] elementary students in Gujarat, India, were
taught to add and multiply using an abacus and then asked
to perform calculations without the physical abacus. This
practice, known as mental abacus, involves visual
manipulations of an imagined abacus. Interestingly, when
students work on their mental abacus they almost always
flick their fingers, miming the movement of the beads.
Performance suffers when abacus users are not permitted
to use their hands (Frank & Barner, ibid; Hatano, 77].
Apparently, gesture plays a vital role in creating, or at
least sustaining, mental abacus structures. Hand motions
interact with the visual system, improving mental
simulation. As before we cannot say whether this process
involves projecting off of gestures or is better understood
as some sort of meditational process. But projection
seems the simpler account. Gestures scaffold mental
imagery for the human calculator.

Fig 4. The differences between, projection and
imagination can be understood as projecting an
image of X and O onto a blank tic tac toe grid
versus imagining an X and O on a grid while
staring at a blank sheet of paper or better still,
when blindfolded.
In Kirsh [09a], the results of running 20 subjects
playing tic tac toe in the projection and imagination
conditions was reported. To play the game all subjects
first learned to name cells using 1 to 9 for a three by three
board. They then would call out their move after hearing
their opponent’s. The numbers 1 to 3 were used for the
top row, left to right, 4-6 for the middle row and 7 to 9 for
the bottom row.
The results were not simple. Subjects did not play tic
tac toe faster in the 3 by 3 condition in any condition,
which we had predicted. Having a grid to anchor
projection did nothing in the three by three game where
subjects rarely needed to recall more than 5 or 6 moves.
To challenge the subjects, we then taught them to play
four by four games. Here the visual memory load is
greater and we found that having a grid appears to
facilitate subjects. Projection > Imagination (p = .002).
As predicted a grid now serves as an understructure or
scaffold for projecting moves. However, given the
unhelpfulness of a 3 by 3 scaffold it seems that the value
of a scaffold increases with the complexity of task. In
fact, scaffolding may be necessary for successful mental

5

1790

Conclusion

Friberg, A., Bresin, R., Sundberg, J., (2006) Overview of
the KTH rule system for musical performance. Vol 2,
No 2-3. pp 145-161
Hatano, G., Miyake, Y., & Binks, MG. (1977).
Performance of expert abacus operators. Cognition, 5,
47-55.
Hill H. & Pollick F.E. (2000) Exaggerating temporal
differences enhances recognition of individuals from
point light displays Psychological Science Vol.11(3) pp
223-228
Hinz, Bob. (2008). Practice Exaggeration for Large
Intervals and Leaps. Creative Keyboard. Http://
http://www.creativekeyboard.com/oct08/hinz.html
Jeannerod, Marc, (2001). Neural Simulation of Action: A
Unifying Mechanism for Motor Cognition. NeuroImage
14, S103–S109
Kirsh, D., et al. (2009) Kirsh, D., Choreographic
Methods for Creating Novel, High Quality Dance. 5th
International workshop: Design and Semantics of Form
and Movement.
Kirsh, D. (2010). Thinking with the Body, in (eds) S.
Ohlsson R. Catrambone, Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society. Pp 2864-2869.
Kirsh, (2012). How marking in dance constitutes thinking
with the body. Versus.
Kranczioch, C. S., Mathews, P. Dean, A. Sterr. (2009).
On the Equivalence of Executed and Imagined
Movements: Evidence from Lateralized Motor &
Nonmotor Potentials.Human Brain Mapping 30:3275–
3286
Newlove, J. & Dalby, J. (2005) Laban for All. Nick Hern
Books, London.
Pascual-Leone, A. (2001), The Brain That Plays Music
and Is Changed by It. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 930: 315–329
Pollick F.E., Fidopiastis C. & Braden V. (2001)
Recognising the style of spatially exaggerated tennis
serves Perception Vol.30(3) pp 323-338
Rhodes, Gillian; S. Brennan, S. Carey, Identification and
ratings of caricatures: Implications for mental
representations of faces, Cognitive Psychology,
Volume 19, Issue 4, October 1987, Pages 473-497,
Weinberg, R. (2008). Does Imagery Work? Effects on
Performance and Mental Skills. Journal of Imagery
Research in Sport and Physical Activity, 3, 1.
Vygotsky, L., 1986. Thought and Language. The MIT
Press, Cambridge , MA.
Wertsch, J.V. (2007). Mediation. In H. Daniels, M. Cole,
& J.V. Wertsch (Eds.), The Cambridge companion to
Vygotsky (pp. 178-192). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press

In this study we set out to test whether marking is a more
effective form of practice than mental simulation. It is.
We also found that marking seems to be a better form of
practice than the standard method of dancing full-out, and
that mental simulation did not facilitate learning as it
typically does.
When looking for the cause of marking’s power we
speculated that marking might function as the
understructure for projection. When marking, a dancer
creates a physical scaffold that facilitates projection. This
would explain what ‘extra’ dancers get by physically
marking a phrase rather than mentally rehearsing it. They
get an external structure they can extrapolate from. This
enables them to generate a conception of the final target
that is more vivid, complete, and requiring less mental
effort than the targets they imagine when they mentally
rehearse without the support of overt movement. So it is
not that a dancer is either marking or mentally simulating:
marking is way to do mental simulation better.
We speculated further that mental simulation
performed poorly because the target structure was a
complex dance phrase about 1 minute long and this level
of complexity exceeds most studies of the use of
simulation.
Lastly, we conjectured that dancing is more effective
than full-out because it allows dancers to focus on aspects
of their movement rather than on all aspects at once,
which is what is required during full-out. In music and
most sports, it is customary to work on aspects of one’s
performance rather than working on everything all at
once. Marking is tailor made for that purpose.
The success of marking warrants rethinking the best
ways to practice motor activities.
Acknowledgements. We benefited from the and
skillful help of Gina Bello, Leo Trottier, Ethan SoutarRao, Paul Zaino, the students in Cogs 160, and Wayne
McGregor | Random Dance. Funding for this project
under NSF: IIS-1002736 is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Chaffin, R., Imreh, G., & Crawford, M. (2002). Practicing
perfection: Memory and piano performance. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Cross, Emily, et al. (2009). Sensitivity of the Action
Observation Network to Physical and Observational
Learning. Cerebral Cortex. 19:315-326.
Eck, D., Gasser, M., and Port, R. (2000). Dynamics and
embodiment in beat induction. In P. Desain and L.
Windsor (Eds.), Rhythm perception and production.
Exton, PA: Swets and Zeitlinger
Frank, M., Barner, D, (2012). Representing exact number
visually using mental abacus. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General. Vol 141(1), pp. 134-149

6

1791

