UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Students Don’t Benefit From Attention Guidance in Animations: The Role of Working
Memory in Learning From Animations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ww1q10m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 34(34)

Authors
Skuballa, Irene Therese
Schwonke, Rolf
Renkl, Alexander

Publication Date
2012-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Students Don’t Benefit From Attention Guidance in Animations: The Role of
Working Memory in Learning From Animations
Irene T. Skuballa (skuballa@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Rolf Schwonke (schwonke@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Alexander Renkl (renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg,
Department of Educational and Developmental Psychology, Engelbergerstr. 41,
79085 Freiburg, Germany

meaningful learning that requires learners to actively select
and organize relevant information in order to integrate it
into existing schemata in long-term memory can be
impeded.
Motivated by possible disadvantages of animations,
design factors have been proposed that aim at guiding
learners’ visual attention (Ayres & Paas, 2007). We tested
two promising ways of fostering attention guidance to
relevant information in animations, namely instructional
guidance by giving verbal instruction prior to the
presentation of the animation and visual guidance by
blurring out irrelevant information in the animation. In
addition, we investigated the influence of working memory
(WM) capacity on learning from animations with these two
types of attention guidance.

Abstract
The present study examined how students’ working memory
capacity influences learning from animations with or without
guidance. We tested three different conditions: visual
guidance, instructional guidance, and no guidance. The results
show that especially visual guidance was perceived as being
helpful for making references between narration and display
of an animation. However, students without guidance
outperformed both groups of students with guidance on a
domain-specific knowledge test. A significant interaction
between type of guidance and working memory capacity
revealed that visual guidance impeded learning in students
with high working memory capacity, whereas instructional
guidance impeded learning in students with low working
memory capacity. Our results suggest that working memory
capacity is an important learner variable that should be taken
into account to understand intervention effects and to
customize learning environments to learners’ needs.

Guidance in animations

Keywords: learning; working memory capacity; animation.

Instruction

Introduction
Animations can make unseen movements, interrelationships,
and interdependencies or “difficult-to-see” particles and
components in a system visible and thus accessible to
comprehension. Animation can be defined as “a pictorial
display that changes its structure or other properties over
time and which triggers the perception of a continuous
change” (Schnotz & Lowe, 2008, p. 304). This definition
also pertains to dynamic visualizations, for example,
presentations of how a technical device works or how a
complex object is assembled. After a long line of research,
nowadays there is no doubt that well-designed animations
are helpful tools for fostering learning and transfer in
different domains (Höffler & Leutner, 2007; Linn, Chang,
Chiu, Zhang, & McElhaney, 2011).
Disadvantages of animations in the context of learning are
grounded in their transitory and simultaneous nature. First,
the presentation of entities in an animation is time-limited
and subject to transience. This can hamper processing of
important pieces of information, especially when the learner
has not paid immediate attention to the relevant animated
parts. Second, the simultaneity that characterizes one of
animations’ advantages for learning is potentially also a
pitfall. When a series of events takes place at the same time,
learners’ limited capacities may be overwhelmed. Hence,

Providing instructions on how to select and integrate
information that is presented in different modes can have a
positive effect on learners’ attention allocation and, thus, on
learning processes. Instructions can be given before rather
than during the presentation of a certain learning
environment in order to avoid interference with the display
of the learning contents during the actual learning phase. On
the other hand, processes of recalling and maintaining the
instructions during learning may “bind” WM capacities.
In the context of multiple external representations,
instructing learners on the functional relationships between
representations can foster learning outcomes by guiding
visual attention (Schwonke, Berthold, & Renkl, 2009).
Gopher, Weil, and Siegel (1989) argue that mere prolonged
exposure to a complex and dynamic task does not
necessarily improve a learner’s performance. Instead, a
complex task should be decomposed into subcomponents,
and the focus of attention should be changed according to
these predefined subcomponents. Computer game players
who received instructions to focus on single sub-tasks—for
example, first ship control and then mine handling—
outperformed players without any instructions to change
their focus (Gopher et al., 1989). When following these
instructions, “by a systematic manipulation of emphasis on
different task subelements, subjects were led to explore a

2345

wider range of attention strategies and improved their ability
to cope with the high load of tasks” (Gopher, Weil, &
Bareket, 1994, p. 389). Moreover, trainee pilots who first
adopted strategies in attention allocation according to the
emphasis change method in a computer game were better at
actual piloting of an airplane than trainees who did not
(Gopher et al., 1994). The emphasis change method works
by way of external instructions prior to the learning phase. It
is based on change of focus on components of a complex
task and feedback (Gopher et al., 1989). However, it
remains open whether such a method fosters only
sensomotoric skills or also (meaningful) learning from
animations.

Cueing
Cueing and signaling to highlight key information offer a
more apparent and invasive way of attention guidance
(Ayres & Paas, 2007). In general, cueing “refers to the
addition of design elements that direct the learner’s attention
to important aspects of the learning material” (Plass, Homer,
& Hayward, 2009, p. 39). Learners are not required to
remember prior instructions. Cueing can be achieved by
adding attention-directing objects such as arrows, circles, or
colors to make relevant parts more noticeable. Another
possibility is to reduce the luminance or the clarity of
irrelevant parts in the visual display so that the important
parts attract attention (“spotlight display”; Jarodzka et al.,
2010). This technique makes animations less complex by
directing learners’ attention to relevant information, thereby
reducing the search space and freeing capacities for
meaningful learning (De Koning, Tabbers, Rikers, & Paas,
2010; Mautone & Mayer, 2001). Whereas arrows and colors
run the risk of delivering too much new information, a
change of luminance or acuity creates a spotlight and may
be perceived as less distractive. The latter methods
minimalize the visual display to the most important parts
and events while preserving a holistic view. The advantages
of cueing should fit especially the needs of learners with
low WM capacity and those who are easily distracted by
simultaneity.
In a study on learning a perceptual task (i.e., diagnosing
seizures in infants), cueing was used to guide the learners’
visual attention in a tutorial video. A spotlight display was
superior to a circle display that was supposed to direct
attention and to a control condition without visual guidance
(Jarodzka et al., 2010). In line with these results, De
Koning, Tabbers, Rikers, and Paas (2007) reported
encouraging findings on the superiority of cued animations
over non-cued versions in terms of comprehension and
transfer performance. Unfortunately, these results could not
be replicated. Cueing in an animation on the cardiovascular
system did not lead to better learning outcomes than noncueing, although eye tracking data revealed that learners’
visual attention was guided more frequently to cued than
non-cued contents (De Koning et al., 2010). In sum, it is
unclear why learners do not always benefit from cueing,
even when their attention was successfully directed to the

relevant regions in the animations. Considering learner
variables such as WM capacity may help in providing
adequate answers to this open question.

Working Memory in Multimedia Learning
Learning and comprehension are dependent on learners’
ability to allocate and regulate attention. Before information
can be stored in long-term memory it has to be processed in
WM (Baddeley, 2003). Given the limited capacity of WM,
only a small amount of the perceived information can be
actively processed in order to acquire knowledge in the form
of schemas. In their review, Schüler, Scheiter, and van
Genuchten (2011) showed that WM capacity is a stable
construct that affects the processing of static multimedia
learning material such as texts and graphics. Because of its
constraints, capacity likely plays a prominent role in
learning from animations which can put high demands on
learners.
Animations are often complemented by narrations.
Consequently, in addition to information presented in visual
mode (i.e. display) learners have to integrate information
presented in auditory mode (i.e., narration). This leads to
simultaneous demands on different components of WM.
Auditory information is processed in WM’s phonological
loop, while visual information from the animated visual
display is processed in WM’s visuo-spatial sketchpad. Both
types of information have to be temporarily stored and
integrated in the episodic buffer (Baddeley, 2003).
WM measures reflect a domain-free ability to hold and
process several information chunks “actively” while
ignoring irrelevant information through the control of
attention. This ability varies between individuals and
influences the task performance. Hence, higher WM
capacity facilitates not only processing of multiple
information but also suppression of distracting information.
Individuals with high WM capacity outperformed
individuals with low WM capacity on visual selective
attention tasks thanks to their flexibility in allocating their
attention to visual stimuli (Bleckley, Durso, Crutchfield,
Engle, & Khanna, 2003). The same results apply to the
auditory channel. In a replication of the cocktail party
phenomenon, individuals with low WM capacities detected
their name in an irrelevant message more often than
individuals with high WM capacities did, indicating that
low WM individuals are more susceptible to distraction; at
the same time, high WM individuals outperformed low WM
individuals on a shadowing task (Conway, Cowan, &
Bunting, 2001).
The results demonstrate that WM capacity is of vital
significance in the process of attention allocation to visual
and auditory information. Thus, WM capacity should have
an influence on learning from animations. Furthermore, it is
reasonable to assume that learners with different capacities
may require different types of attention guidance for
successful learning. By implication, learners with different
levels of WM span may react differently to the same

2346

instructional design, such as verbal instruction or visual
guidance.

Hypotheses
In our approach, we tested the effects of two types of
guidance in an animation depicting the processes within a
technical device (i.e., parabolic trough power plant system).
We tested three conditions: a visual guidance group, who
watched an animation with a clear spotlight on the relevant
information while the visual clarity of irrelevant parts was
reduced; an instructional guidance group, who received an
instruction prior to the animation to make references
between the narration and the visual display; and a noguidance group, who did not receive any guidance on how
to process the animation. We tested the following
hypotheses:
(1) As part of a manipulation check, we expected that
subjectively perceived difficulty to make references
between narration and visual display would be higher
in the no-guidance group than in the groups with
guidance.
(2) With regard to the learning outcome, we expected the
guidance groups to outperform the no-guidance group
on a domain-specific posttest.
(3) Besides a general effect (“main effect”) of WM
capacity on the learning outcomes, we assumed an
interaction between guidance and WM capacity.
Participants with low WM capacity should benefit
more from guidance than would participants with high
WM capacity.

Method
Participants
The participants were N = 81 (62 female) students from the
University of Freiburg (age M = 22.14, SD = 3.18).
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: visual guidance, instructional guidance, or no
guidance. Each condition comprised of 27 participants.

Materials
Prior knowledge test A pretest on prior knowledge of solar
energy and the parabolic trough power plant system
consisted of 30 items. Knowledge about technical devices
entails being able to describe their structures, processes, and
functions (Kalyuga & Hanham, 2011): Structures are the
components an object consists of and their relationships;
processes describe what happens in the system and how the
device operates; functions characterize the purpose of the
device and its sub-components and “provide” the answer to
the question of what it is designed for. The prior knowledge
test thus required participants to answer questions on solar
energy in general but also on the structures, processes, and
functions of the system (Cronbach’s α = .79).
Learning performance In our animation structures,
processes, and functions were specified visually and

verbally by the visual presentation and narration. Hence, the
posttest also comprised questions on the structures,
processes and functions of the parabolic trough power plant.
The learning outcome was assessed with 40 items. The
overall reliability of the posttest was good (Cronbach’s α =
.90).
Test of WM capacity: Letter-Number Sequencing test
(LNS) WM span was assessed by the Letter-Number
Sequencing test measuring especially the WM and attention
span (adapted from the German version of the Wechsler
Adult Intelligence Scale, WAIS-III; von Aster, Neubauer, &
Horn, 2009). Participants listened to a sequence of letters
and numbers (e.g., T-9-A-3) and reproduced them
afterwards, but were asked to place the numbers in
numerical order and the letters in alphabetical order, (e.g., 39-A-T). The level of complexity was defined by the number
of elements, namely letters and numbers. The test started
with two elements, and the level of complexity gradually
increased by adding one element at a time up to a final
sequence of eight elements. For each correctly announced
sequence participants received one point. All points were
summed up to a total score (between 0 and 21 points).
Animation The animation was colored and lasted about 5
minutes. It depicted how a parabolic trough power plant and
its three cycles (i.e., oil cycle, water-steam cycle, and salt
cycle) work. Each cycle is characterized by unique
structures and serves a specific role in the conversion of
solar energy to electric power. The solar radiation as well as
the direction and flow of the different fluids in the system
were animated.
Corresponding to our three conditions, we developed
three versions of the animation. The visual guidance version
included cueing by blurring out the cycles of the system that
were not in the focus of the narration. In this way, a holistic
view of the animation was preserved, while the relevant
parts were made more salient by “spotlights.” The purpose
of cueing was to visually guide participants’ attention
through the animation and to assist them in making
references between narration and the animated visual
display. In the instructional guidance version, participants
had to read an instruction prior to the animation on how to
make references between the narration and the visual
display. They were informed that several things would
happen simultaneously and that it was thus crucial to follow
the narration and map it to the animation. A third version
involved no guidance at all, neither visual nor instructional.

Procedure
Participants were tested in individual sessions
approximately 60 minutes in length. After being explained
the procedure, participants were asked to complete a short
questionnaire on demographic data. They were then seated
in front of a 22” computer monitor screen that was set at an
operating distance of 60 to 80 cm. Next, prior knowledge
was assessed and participants were asked to give subjective

2347

evaluations of their knowledge about the system (ten-point
Likert scale from 1 = no knowledge to 10 = very good
knowledge). The assessment of WM capacity followed
(Letter-Number Sequencing), after which participants
watched the animation. They were then asked to rate their
knowledge about the system once again (after watching the
animation), and asked how difficult it was for them to map
between the narration and the animated visual learning
content, again on a ten-point Likert scale. Finally, learning
performance was assessed by a domain-specific posttest.

[23.63, 28.78]) outperformed both the instructional guidance
group (adjusted M = 21.54, 95% CI [18.95, 24.12]) and the
visual guidance group (adjusted M = 21.48, 95% CI [18.77,
24.20]).

*

Results
First, we conducted a one-way ANOVA on the pretest. The
conditions did not differ with respect to prior knowledge,
F(2,78) = 0.00, p = .998, η2 = .00. Before and after the
animation, participants had to rate their knowledge about
parabolic trough power plants. Participants in each
condition showed a significant increase in their subjectively
perceived knowledge about the system after having seen the
animation (no guidance: Mbefore = 1.30, SDbefore = 0.87; Mafter
= 6.12, SDafter = 2.41; t(25) = 9.81, p < .001, η2 = .79;
instructional guidance: Mbefore = 1.26, SDbefore = 0.71; Mafter =
5.35, SDafter = 2.45; t(24) = 9.05, p < .001, η2 = .77; visual
guidance: Mbefore = 1.44, SDbefore = 1.31; Mafter = 5.00, SDafter
= 2.74; t(25) = 6.50, p < .001, η2 = .62). There were no
differences between groups with respect to their perceived
knowledge after watching the animation, F(2,74) = 1.73, p =
.184, η2 = .05.
As part of our manipulation check, participants were
asked to rate how difficult it was to map between the visual
display and the narration during the learning phase. Because
the assumption of homogeneity of variance was violated, we
conducted a Kruskal-Wallis test. The type of guidance
(experimental condition) significantly affected the perceived
difficulties in making references between visual display and
narration, H(2)=7.57, p = .021. Mann-Whitney tests were
used to follow up this finding (Figure 1). There was no
difference between the no-guidance group (M = 5.19, SD =
2.47) and instructional guidance group (M = 4.22, SD =
1.93; U = 282, p = .149, r = -.20), but participants in the noguidance group reported significantly more difficulties in
making references than did participants in the visual
guidance group (M = 3.48, SD = 1.63; U = 217, p = .009, r =
-.35).
Nor were there any differences in WM capacity (LNS)
between the conditions, F(2,78) = 1.42, p = .248, η2 = .035.
Overall, WM capacity was positively correlated with the
learning outcomes, r = .32, p = .004. To test our next two
hypotheses, we performed a general linear model in which
we predicted learning outcomes by condition, WM capacity
(as continuous variable), and the respective interaction term.
Condition had a significant effect on learning outcomes,
F(2,78) = 5.78, p = .005, η2 = .133. Pairwise comparisons
revealed a significant difference between the no-guidance
group and the instructional group, p = .039, as well as
between the no-guidance and the visual guidance group, p =
.043. The no-guidance group (adjusted M = 26.20, 95% CI

Figure 1: Perceived difficulties in referencing between
visual display and narration (1 = none, 10 = many; 95% CI).
The effect of WM capacity on learning outcomes failed to
reach statistical significance, F(2,78) = 3.73, p = .057, η2 =
.05. However, there was a significant interaction effect
between WM capacity and type of guidance (experimental
condition), F(2,78) = 5.24, p = .007, η2 = .12. Students with
low WM capacity were hindered by instructional guidance
and students with high WM were hindered by visual
guidance (Figure 2). Overall, no guidance was a good fit for
learners with low as well as high WM span.

Figure 2: Interaction between working memory capacity (zscores) and learning outcomes (%).

Discussion
The present study tested whether learners benefited from
guidance in an animation on how a technical device works,
and whether different types of guidance led to different
learning outcomes. Furthermore, it investigated the
interaction between learners’ WM capacity and type of
guidance. Learners in all conditions indicated a significant
increase in their knowledge after watching the animation. In
accordance with our first hypothesis, the no-guidance group
reported the highest level of difficulties with making

2348

references between the visual display and the narration,
followed by the instructional group and the visual group,
who reported the fewest difficulties. Nevertheless, because
only the difference between the no-guidance and visual
guidance group was statistically significant, we consider our
hypothesis only partially confirmed. Contrary to our
expectations expressed in the second hypothesis, the noguidance group outperformed both guidance groups on
learning outcomes. Our third hypothesis was partially
confirmed, given that WM capacity did affect learning from
animations. In our experimental conditions, visual guidance
had a detrimental effect on learners with high WM capacity,
whereas instructional guidance had a detrimental effect on
learners with low WM capacity. In general, the no-guidance
group performed best, despite more perceived difficulties in
making references. It follows that low WM learners
benefited from no and visual guidance while high WM
learners benefited from no and instructional guidance.
Contradicting conclusions drawn by Ayres and Paas
(2007) that animations are more effective when key
information is cued or signaled, our findings suggest that
cueing does not necessarily have a positive effect on
learning outcomes although it can reduce the level of
perceived difficulties. Cueing as well as instruction aim at
reducing cognitive load by directing learners to the relevant
information in the learning content. Making references
between different sources of information (auditory and
visual) can be assumed to be an indicator of cognitive load.
In this respect, visual guidance accomplished its purpose by
synchronizing highlights on visual information with
narration and hereby facilitating mapping. However, we
assume that this might have led learners to invest less effort
in active learning, after perceiving the content as (too) easy
to comprehend. The framework of desirable difficulties
offers an explanation as to why visual attention guidance
does not always lead to better learning outcomes in the field
of dynamic visualizations (De Koning et al., 2010): learners
may be “lulled into a false sense of understanding” that
makes them overestimate their understanding of the learning
content (Linn et al., 2011, p. 239). Hence, an animation that
is designed to make comprehension and processing
subjectively too easy can mislead learners about the
necessary effort. One might deduce from this that some
degree of perceived difficulty can challenge learners and
make them invest more effort in active learning processes.
When learners perceive the stimulus as being more
demanding, they may try to compensate for that by
expending more effort in understanding the material
(Salomon, 1984). Based on these findings, we propose that
in order to promote active integration of learning materials,
learners need to be given some challenges. More research is
needed to find the balance between promoting effort and
overload.
Another explanation for the poor performance of both
guidance groups may be unfamiliarity with the chosen types
of guidance. Blurring out the irrelevant parts can irritate
learners. Visual guidance is an invasive form of alteration to

the original display. It restricts learners’ natural exploration
behavior to the highlighted parts of the learning
environment; spotlights expose only the parts that are
important for the immediate moment. As a consequence, a
deeper holistic integration of past and present information
may be disrupted. Instructional guidance, on the other hand,
is a less invasive type of support, at least with respect to the
visual display. However, it requires learners to keep the
instruction in mind while processing the animation. In light
of limited WM capacities, learning processes and recall of
instruction may conflict; especially learners with low WM
capacity may suffer from this type of guidance. High WM
learners, by contrast, may be able to follow the strategy they
were instructed to apply while simultaneously blocking
irrelevant and distracting information through the course of
learning. Furthermore, guidance, whether invasive or not,
can interfere with already established strategies and, thus,
with self-regulatory processes. In contrast to the method of
emphasis change (Gopher et al., 1989), we did not offer any
feedback to our participants in the instructional guidance
condition, neither on their performance nor on their
attention allocation. As a suggestion for further research we
propose a real-time feedback on learners’ eye movements.
Narration per se influences a learner’s attention. It can
evoke expectations and provide knowledge directly prior to
the processing of visual information. Consequently, prior
expectations and knowledge can affect attention allocation
to a visual display and influence the integration of new
information (Kriz & Hegarty, 2007). Narration can therefore
function as a top-down guidance of visual attention (Kriz
& Hegarty, 2007; Lowe & Boucheix, 2008). Students in the
no-guidance condition were guided by the narration but still
had enough room to explore the whole display and thus
integrate diverse information. In sum, the no-guidance
condition seems to be a perfect fit for learners who can selfregulate their needs according to their resources, for
example, their WM capacity and prior knowledge. At this
point it should be stressed that our participants were
students in a highly selective psychology program who
already had thirteen successful years of school education
and thus may be considered highly experienced in learning
from multiple external representations and dynamic
visualizations.
Based on our findings, we suggest that future multimedia
research should place more emphasis on learner variables
such as WM capacity to shed light on intervention effects of
instructional designs. From our point of view, WM capacity
could play a severe role in learning processes that could be
comparable to the significance of prior knowledge in this
context (Kalyuga, Ayres, Chandler, & Sweller, 2003).

Acknowledgments
We thank our technical consultants and supporters: Adrian
Skuballa for programming computer-standardized tests,
Michael Kutz for bringing our storyboard to life, and Clara
Pieck for giving our animation her professional voice.
Furthermore, we thank our student assistants: Nicole

2349

Dillner, Caroline Fortunski, and Sabina Panetta. This
research was supported by the ScienceCampus Tübingen
“Informational Environments” (Adaptable and Adaptive
Multimedia Systems).

References
Ayres, P., & Paas, F. (2007). Can the cognitive load
approach make instructional animations more effective?
Applied
Cognitive
Psychology,
21,
811–820.
doi:10.1002/acp.1351
Baddeley, A. H. (2003). Working memory: looking back
and looking forward. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4,
829–839. doi:10.1038/nrn1201
Bleckley, M. K., Durso, F. T., Crutchfield, J. M., Engle, R.
W., & Khanna, M. M. (2003). Individual differences in
working memory capacity predict visual attention
allocation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 884–889.
doi:10.3758/BF03196548
Conway, A. R. A., Cowan, N., & Bunting, M. F. (2001).
The cocktail party phenomenon revisited: The importance
of working memory capacity. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8, 331–335. doi:10.3758/BF03196169
De Koning, B. B., Tabbers, H. K., Rikers, R. M. J. P., &
Paas, F. (2007). Attention cueing as a means to enhance
learning from an animation. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 21, 731–746. doi:10.1002/acp.1346
De Koning, B. B., Tabbers, H. K., Rikers, R. M. J. P., &
Paas, F. (2010). Attention guidance in learning from a
complex animation: Seeing is understanding? Learning
and
Instruction,
20,
111–122.
doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2009.02.010
Gopher, D., Weil, M., & Bareket, T. (1994). Transfer of
skill from a computer game trainer to flight. Human
Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics
Society,
36,
387–405.
doi:
10.1177/001872089403600301
Gopher, D., Weil, M., & Siegel, D. (1989). Practice under
changing priorities: An approach to the training of
complex skills. Acta Psychologica, 71, 147–177. doi:
10.1016/0001-6918(89)90007-3
Höffler, T. N., & Leutner, D. (2007). Instructional
animation versus static pictures: A meta-analysis.
Learning
and
Instruction,
17,
722–738.
doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2007.09.013
Jarodzka, H., Balslev, T., Holmqvist, K., Nyström, M.,
Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Eika, B. (2010). Learning
perceptual aspects of diagnosis in medicine via eye
movement modeling examples on patient video cases. In
S. Ohlson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1703–1708). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kalyuga, S., Ayres, P., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003).
The expertise reversal effect. Educational Psychologist,
38, 23–31. doi: 10.1207/S15326985EP38 01_4
Kalyuga, S., & Hanham, J. (2011). Instructing in
generalized knowledge structures to develop flexible

problem solving skills. Computers in Human Behavior,
27, 63–68. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.05.024
Kriz, S., & Hegarty, M. (2007). Top-down and bottom-up
inﬂuences on learning from animations. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 65, 911–930. doi:
10.1016/j.ijhcs.2007.06.005
Linn, M. C., Chang, H.-Y., Chiu, J. L., Zhang, Z. H., &
McElhaney, K. (2011). Can desirable difficulties
overcome deceptive clarity in scientific visualizations? In
A. S. Benjamin (Ed.), Successful remembering and
successful forgetting. A festschrift in honor of Robert A.
Bjork (pp. 235–258). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Lowe, R., & Boucheix, J.-M. (2008). Learning from
animated diagrams: How are mental models built? In G.
Stapleton, J. Howse, & J. Lee (Eds.), Diagrammatic
representation and inference. 5th International
Conference, Diagrams 2008, Herrsching, Germany,
September 19-21, 2008; proceedings (pp. 266–281).
Berlin: Springer.
Mautone, P. D., & Mayer, R. E. (2001). Signaling as a
cognitive guide in multimedia learning. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 93, 377–389. doi:10.1037/00220663.93.2.377
Plass, J. L., Homer, B. D., & Hayward, E. O. (2009). Design
factors for educationally effective animations and
simulations. Journal of Computing in Higher Education,
21, 31–61. doi:10.1007/s12528-009-9011-x
Salomon, G. (1984). Television is "easy" and print is
"tough": The differential investment of mental effort in
learning as a function of perceptions and attributions.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 647–658.
doi:10.1037/0022-0663.76.4.647
Schnotz, W., & Lowe, R. (2008). A unified view of learning
from animated and static graphics. In R. Lowe & W.
Schnotz (Eds.), Learning with animation. Research
implications for design (pp. 304–356). Cambridge, New
York: Cambridge Univ.
Schüler, A., Scheiter, K., & Van Genuchten, E. (2011). The
role of working memory in multimedia instruction: Is
working memory working during learning from text and
pictures? Educational Psychology Review, 23, 389–411.
doi:10.1007/s10648-011-9168-5
Schwonke, R., Berthold, K., & Renkl, A. (2009). How
multiple external representations are used and how they
can be made more useful. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
23, 1227–1243. doi:10.1002/acp.1526
Von Aster, M., Neubauer, A., & Horn, R. (Eds.). (2009).
Wechsler-Intelligenztest für Erwachsene WIE (2nd ed.).
Frankfurt am Main: Pearson Assessment & Information
GmbH.

2350

