UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
(Category) Learning by Doing: How Goal Directed Tasks Constrain Conceptual Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vt3s99k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Chin-Parker, Seth

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

(Category) Learning by Doing: How Goal Directed Tasks Constrain Conceptual
Acquisition
Seth Chin-Parker (chinparkers@denison.edu)

Department of Psychology, Denison University
Granville, OH 43023 USA
Abstract
The current study explores conceptual acquisition that occurs
as the result of completing a task in a novel domain. The
items encountered in the domain were complex in that there
were multiple sources of information that might be used to
organize conceptual knowledge related to the domain. I test
the hypothesis that goal-directed interactions will constrain
the acquisition of knowledge such that functional categories
of the items, organized around goal-relevant features, are
learned. Converging evidence from two measures provided
strong support for the idea that participants organized their
knowledge of the domain in terms of goal-relevant features,
and the conceptual organization was able to support both the
completion of the task and subsequent categorization tasks.
Keywords: category learning, goals, similarity.

Prior experience underlies intelligent behavior – people
learn through interactions with the environment what
behaviors lead to successful outcomes and what ones do not.
An important component of this is recognizing categories of
events and items among those experiences, a process that
leads to the acquisition of conceptual knowledge,
knowledge of those categories. That knowledge can be used
to categorize, communicate, reason, and problem solve at
later points. A fundamental question then is how coherent
categories of items are identified so that the conceptual
knowledge can be appropriately applied. Theories of
categorization address what ties together items within a
category and subsequently coheres the conceptual
organization that reflects those categories, and most theories
rely on a notion of similarity for at least a component of that
cohesion (Hahn & Ramscar, 2001). Thus, the question shifts
to how this similarity is determined.
There have been two basic approaches to answering this
question (Malt, 1995). The first assumes that the
environment constrains the similarity. Rosch et al. (1976)
nicely capture this idea by positing that features of items in
the world occur in reliable clusters and the conceptual
system learns to recognize that structure. They go so far as
to illustrate in one “experiment” (1976, Exp. 3) how
overlaying tracings of the members of various basic level
categories (e.g. cat, shoe, truck) results in greater perceptual
overlap within-category than across categories. Similarly,
others (e.g. Anderson, 1991) have stressed the role of the
environment in determining conceptual structure. That view
can be contrasted with one that places much of the emphasis
on the individual to constrain the similarity. Murphy and
Medin (1985) argued information from the environment has
to be situated within the knowledge structures (e.g. inter-

category relations and theories) that the individual brings to
any interaction with the environment. In this way, the
structure of conceptual knowledge is constructed as the
individual interprets what is to be considered feature
information and how those features relate to one another.
Although most researchers interested in concepts and
categories stake out some middle ground in this debate,
much of the work in human category learning assumes that
the environment provides structure. This assumption has
seemingly created a disconnect between work exploring
more naturalistic concepts and the basic experimental work
examining conceptual acquisition (Murphy, 2005). I identify
two critical differences between basic experimental studies
and more naturalistic ones and explore them in the current
study. First, in most experimental work, the categories are
well defined in terms of their features and structure. Second,
participants interact with members of those categories with
the goal of differentiating the items they encounter based on
that structure. In more naturalistic studies, the presence of
the categorical structure is less clear and people interact
with the items not with the goal of classifying items, but
with the goal of accomplishing some other task. I present a
study that incorporates a more complex, arguably more
naturalistic, structure and vary the interactions that
participants have with the items. In this manner, I examine
how goal-directed behaviors within a domain affect the
structure of the conceptual knowledge acquired about items
within that domain.
I begin this research with the assumption that the
environment is not a source of simple, unambiguous
information about the categories that exist. For instance,
people are able to recognize and use information about the
taxonomic categories of food items, e.g. breads and
vegetables, but they also recognize and use goal-related
categories, e.g. snack foods and breakfast foods, to guide
inferences and determine appropriate groupings of foods
(Ross & Murphy, 1999). Similarly, people can identify and
use ad-hoc categories (Barsalou, 1991) to guide behaviors.
A study by Medin, Lynch, Coley, and Atran (1997)
illustrates how this complexity can be reflected in
conceptual knowledge. The experimenters asked various
tree experts to sort cards labeled with tree names into
groups. Those experts concerned with research and teaching
tended to create groups that were highly correlated with the
biological taxonomy, but landscapers tended to create
groups that reflected the way the trees would be
incorporated into landscaping decisions (e.g. a shade tree
versus a weed tree). These cross-classifications and the
development of ad-hoc categories of items are problematic

2381

for an account that posits that the environment alone
provides structure to our conceptual knowledge (although
see Anderson, 1991, for a rebuttal). Although we have
evidence of the complexity of naturalistic categories, the
structure of the categories used in basic experimental work
does not reflect this complexity (Murphy, 2005). Most items
that comprise the categories are defined by specific feature
lists or simple visual features, and the relation of the
features to the categories is also carefully controlled. This
typically results in a structure with only one “correct”
organization for the items. Instead of operating in a situation
with multiple possible configurations, participants in
experimental studies are placed into a situation that is much
more constrained by the information available.
Within these experimental studies, the interactions that
people have with the categories are also different from what
occurs in more naturalistic situations. In a typical category
learning study, an item is presented, the participant predicts
the category membership of the item, and feedback is given
on the classification judgment. This approach has produced
a great deal of information about how people learn to
classify items, but may not capture important aspects of how
people learn about categories in more naturalistic situations
(Ross, Chin-Parker, & Diaz, 2005). Numerous studies have
shown that classification learning promotes a near exclusive
focus on diagnostic information, the features that distinguish
the categories (Chin-parker & Ross, 2004; Rehder &
Hoffman, 2005), but it is not apparent whether other means
of category learning share this restricted focus (e.g. Minda
& Ross, 2004). Arguably, the interactions we have within
more naturalistic contexts are more varied and richer than
the classification decisions made in a typical experimental
setting. Importantly, I note that these interactions occur not
with the primary intention to learn about the categories but
rather to accomplish some other goal. The importance of
goal-directed interactions has been explored by a range of
cognitive scientists (e.g. Ram & Leake, 1995), and goals are
implicated to some extent in how we come to recognize
structure in the environment (Love, 2005). For instance, the
naturalistic studies mentioned prior (e.g. Medin, Lynch,
Coley, & Atran, 1997) suggest goal-directed interactions
give rise to conceptual organizations that are able to support
those interactions.
So, it seems that we can begin to bridge the chasm
between experimental and naturalistic study of concept
acquisition by adopting more complex categorical structures
and varying the goals of the participants as they interact
with the items that comprise those categories. Recently, Jee
and Wiley (2007) did just that. They had participants learn
about creatures that could be distinguished in terms of their
perceptual features, shown through simple line drawings, or
the nutritional value and ability to avoid predators
(information about these features was conveyed through a
list of features located beneath the picture). In their study,
participants initially organized items in terms of similarity
of the simple perceptual features, but as they learned about
the domain and interacted with items, they either learned to

identify the nutritional value or how the creature avoided
predators, the goal-relevant information came to be
important within the conceptual organization. Subsequent
transfer tasks showed that a participant adopted a conceptual
organization that reflected the information that was critical
to their interactions within the domain, and the participants’
similarity judgments were shaped by the presence of that
information. Their study provides more clear evidence that
the goal-directed interactions caused the shift in the
conceptual structure.
In the current study, I examine category learning that
occurs as the result of goal-directed interactions with items.
Like Jee and Wiley (2007), I have a complex structure and
participants interact with the items in accordance with
different goals. In our study, the items are Flux Capacitor
Boards, actual physical boards with various electrical
components (non-functioning) affixed to them. As is
described below, I created the boards so that there were two
types of the boards that the participant would encounter
during their initial task. However, only the classification
participants were informed that these categories existed; the
other participants were simply asked to complete their
assigned task with the boards. Our primary hypothesis is
that the conceptual organization adopted by the participants
will be organized around the features of the boards that are
relevant to the attainment of their goal.
As is described below, the goal-relevant features of the
boards varied across the conditions. In one condition, the
goal-relevant features are the configuration of specific
components of the boards. In another condition, the goalrelevant features are relationships that exist between the
components of the boards. For the classification condition,
there were several possible sources of information that
would be considered goal-relevant, or diagnostic. As noted
in Jee and Wiley (2007), working towards a specific goal
can often lead to information that is not goal-relevant to be
left out of the conceptual organization. In this study, I
expect that the two conditions with specific goal-relevant
information will focus exclusively on that information, like
classification learners in previous studies (e.g. Chin-Parker
& Ross, 2004). Interestingly, since the classification
condition will have multiple sources of information relevant
to differentiating the categories, I predict that they will show
a more general knowledge of the boards. I have no strong
prediction as to whether the difference in the kind of goalrelevant information available to the two non-classification
task conditions will affect the participants’ acquisition of
useful conceptual knowledge.
Experiment
Methods
Participants and Design Fifty-seven participants were
randomly assigned to three experimental conditions: 18
participants were assigned to the flexible condition, 19 to the
solid condition, and 20 to the classification condition. Two
participants in the classification condition failed to show
evidence of learning during their initial task, so their data

2382

were removed from all analyses. All participants interacted
with the same set of items during the initial task and
completed the same two transfer tasks1. The presentation
order of items during the initial and transfer tasks was
randomized for each participant.
Materials and Procedure The primary materials for the
study consisted of the Flux Capacitor boards and the
connectors used to complete the boards. Each board had a
series of nine terminal posts and various electrical
components affixed to the board (see Figure 1). The posts
were organized into three sets: One set in the upper, lefthand region of the board, one in the middle region, and one
in the lower, right-hand region. The other components were
placed around these posts according to the parameters
described below. The boards were designed so that there
were two types of boards that the participants encountered
during the initial task, and variations of these two types of
boards were created for the transfer tasks. During the initial
task, participants in the flexible and solid conditions were
given connectors that they placed onto the terminal posts to
complete each board. The participants in the classification
condition did not use connectors during their initial task
In the flexible condition, the connectors were made of
wire and varied in terms of how they fit onto the terminal
posts: The connector either fit over an open post or was
inserted into a hole drilled into the “capped and drilled”
post. As can be seen in Figure 1, each set of terminal posts
in the Type A boards featured one post that has been capped
and drilled and two posts that were open. In contrast, the
Type B boards featured sets consisting of two capped and
drilled posts and one open post. The configuration of the
posts is considered to be the goal-relevant feature for the
flexible condition because they constrain how the flexible
connectors can be placed onto the board.
In the solid condition, the connectors were made of
inflexible aluminum pieces, and the placement of these
connectors was constrained by the presence of components
situated near the terminal posts. For the Type A boards, the
connectors had to go between components. For the Type B
boards, the connectors had to go around the components.
Thus, the relationship of the components to the posts is
considered the goal-relevant feature for the solid condition
because it constrained how the solid connectors could be
placed onto the board.
The electrical components were unique to each board.
However, each of the boards featured a perceptually salient
correlated component. The correlated component for the
Type A boards was a two-inch section of a computer
memory module placed in the near left corner, and the
correlated component for the Type B boards was a stack of
silver clips with copper wire loops placed in the far right
1

Participants also completed a sorting task following the samedifferent task. However, the classification condition was
inadvertently given different instructions for the task, so we are
unable to compare performance across the groups. The results of
the task very closely tracked those of the same-different task.

corner. These components were not implicated in how the
connectors in either condition could be placed onto the
board but were perfectly diagnostic of the two board types.
During the initial task, participants in the solid and flexible
conditions were asked to complete the boards by placing
three of the six connectors onto the terminal posts. The
participants in the classification condition were told that the
boards were incomplete and before they could be completed
they needed to be identified as “positive flux” or “negative
flux” boards. The classification participants were instructed
to learn how to identify the two types of boards. There were
eight boards used in the initial task phase, half were Type A
and half were Type B. Each participant encountered each
board twice during this phase.
In the classification condition, a board was placed into the
holder, and after the participant responded with either
“positive flux” (correct for the Type A boards) or “negative
flux” (correct for the Type B boards), the experimenter
provided feedback about the classification and allowed the
participant to study the board. In the solid and flexible
conditions, the experimenter placed a board into the holder,
and the participant determined which connectors to place
FILLER
Figure 1: Example problem boards from Experiment 1

Notes: The boards on the left are Type A boards, and the
boards on the right are Type B boards. The top images show
boards with no operators present. The center images show
boards completed with the flexible connectors. The bottom
images show boards completed with the solid connectors.

2383

onto the board. After each trial, the board was removed
from sight and a new board was placed into the holder.
After the initial task, all participants completed the same
two transfer tasks. The materials for the transfer tasks
consisted of photographs of flux capacitor boards the
participants had not encountered during the initial task. The
boards in the images were designed so that they varied in
terms of how they related to the Type A/Type B board
distinction that had been present during the initial task. No
feedback was given to participants as they completed the
transfer tasks.
First, the participants completed the same-different task.
During each trial, the participant was presented with images
of two boards affixed to a piece of paper. She was asked to
indicate whether she would consider the two boards pictured
to be the same type or different types. Across the sixteen
items in the same-different task, I balanced whether the
boards matched or mismatched in terms of the goal-relevant
features. Eight of the pairs of boards maintained the same
structure as the initial tasks boards; four of those pairs
matched and four mismatched. All participants regardless of
condition should identify the matches as the same and the
mismatches as different if they picked up on any of the
sources of information that differentiated the Type A and
Type B boards during the initial task. The other eight boards
were designed so that the goal-relevant features from the
solid and flexible conditions were placed into opposition.
For instance, if the goal-relevant features for the flexible
condition matched what had been seen on the Type A board,
the goal-relevant features for the solid condition would
match what had been seen on the Type B board. Four of
these board pairs were designed so that flexible condition
goal-relevant features matched while the solid condition
goal-relevant features mismatched. The other four board
pairs were designed so the flexible condition goal-relevant
features mismatched while the solid condition goal-relevant
features matched.
The category goodness-rating task was the final task. I
balanced whether the Type A or Type B boards were rated
first. The participant was first shown a target board, one of
the boards solved during the initial task phase, and was told
that the board was either an “X-12” (Type A) or “G-59”
(Type B) board. She was asked to rate each subsequent
board shown in terms of the category indicated by the target
board on a scale from one (“excellent example of this board
type”) to nine (“not this type of board”); also anchored at
three (“good example of this board type”), five (“ok
example of this board type”), and seven (“poor example of
this board type”). After the participant studied the target
board for a minute, it was removed, and the items for the
goodness-rating task were shown to the participant one at a
time. There were five types of boards pictured in the stimuli
for this task, and the participant rated two of each type for
each of the categories. The category consistent boards were
structurally identical to the target board. The category
inconsistent boards were structured like the other type of
board; so if the target board was a Type A board, the

category inconsistent board was a Type B board. The
correlation violation boards were the same type of board as
the target board, but the correlated feature was replaced by a
small, perceptually dissimilar component. The flexible
violation boards were of the same type as the target board,
but were altered so the flexible connectors would not fit
onto the posts. The solid violation boards were also of the
same type as the target board, but they were altered so the
solid connectors would not fit. Once the participant
completed rating the ten boards for the first type, the target
board for the second type was shown to the participant, and
the task repeated for the second type.
Results
In the same-different task (Table 1), I found strong
evidence that the participants in the flexible and solid
conditions organized their knowledge of the domain in
terms of the goal-relevant features. Across all items in the
task, both the flexible condition, M = 0.95, SD = 0.13, t(17)
= 14.72, p < 0.001, and the solid condition, M = 0.87, SD =
0.18, t(18) = 8.64, p < 0.001, were above chance
performance in terms of assigning the pairs as the same or
different in terms of the goal-relevant features for their
conditions. The difference between the flexible and solid
conditions was not significant, t(35) = 1.57, p = 0.12. A
similar summarization of the results for the classification
condition is not possible because there was no a priori
prediction of how the classification participants would
handle the items when the two goal-relevant features were
placed in opposition. However, as can be seen in Table 1,
when both of the goal-relevant features matched, they
considered the boards as the same, and when both did not
match, they considered the boards as different. When the
goal-relevant features for the flexible and solid conditions
were put into opposition (as in the “Flex + / Solid -” and
“Flex - / Solid +” items), the participants in the
classification condition did not show a preference for one
source of information over the other as a group. Within the
filler
Table 1: Proportion of Items (standard deviation) Identified
as “the Same” in the Same-Different Task

Condition
Flexible

Relation of Boards in the Pair
Flex + Flex - Flex + Flex Solid + Solid - Solid - Solid +
0.94
0.01
0.90
0.04
(0.24) (0.06) (0.26) (0.18)

Solid

0.86
(0.21)

0.11
(0.23)

0.15
(0.29)

0.86
(0.21)

Classification

0.83
(0.33)

0.19
(0.24)

0.46
(0.39)

0.36
(0.36)

Notes: For each item, the boards pictured either matched in
terms of the goal-relevant features of the flexible (Flex +) or
solid (Solid +) conditions or mismatched in terms of those
features of the flexible (Flex -) or solid (Solid -) conditions.

2384

classification condition, five participants had a pattern of
response that indicated that they were using information
about the goal-relevant features for the flexible condition,
four participants appeared to be using information about the
goal-relevant features for the solid condition, and nine
participants had a pattern of responding that did not clearly
indicate a preference for either source of information.
The category-goodness rating task provided a more
specific indication of what information from the domain
was being used by the participants in each condition. The
data from the task (Figure 2) were analyzed using a series of
ANOVAs. I report the results of five one-way ANOVAS
that compared the ratings for each items type across the
experimental conditions. I also include relevant withincondition comparisons where appropriate (full analyses are
not included due to space restrictions).
There were no differences as to how participants in the
three conditions rated the category consistent items, F(2, 54)
= 0.01, MSE = 0.02, p = 0.99, but there were significant
differences within all the other item types. Participants in all
conditions rated the category inconsistent items as less good
category members compared to all other items. Also, within
the ratings for the category inconsistent items, there were
some differences between the conditions, F(2, 54) = 3.41,
MSE = 1.27, p = 0.04, primarily between the classification
and flexible conditions. The ratings of the correlation
violation items also varied by condition, F(2, 54) = 3.72,
MSE = 3.45, p = 0.03. The classification condition rated
these items as significantly worse category members than
the category consistent items (p < 0.01) but the other two
conditions did not. There were significant differences in the
ratings of both the flexible violation items, F(2, 54) = 21.62,
FILLER
Figure 2: Mean Category-Goodness Ratings by Condition
and Item Type

Figure Note: The category-goodness rating scale ranged
from one (“excellent example of this board type”) to nine
(“not this type of board”).

MSE = 3.69, p < 0.01, and the solid violation items, F(2, 54)
= 40.51, MSE = 3.04, p < 0.01. As predicted, the
participants in the solid condition rated the solid violation
items as significantly worse than the category consistent
items (p < 0.01), but did not rate the flexible violation items
differently than the category consistent items (p = 0.54).
The participants in the flexible condition rated the flexible
violation items as significantly worse category members
than the category consistent items (p < 0.01), but not the
solid violation items (p = 0.83). The classification condition
did not rate the solid violation items as significantly worse
than the category consistent items (p = 0.13), but did rate
the flexible violation items as worse category members (p =
0.02).
Discussion
I return to the question regarding what constrains the
similarity underlying conceptual organization. The results of
the participants in the flexible and solid conditions clearly
show that the goal-relevant features are central to their
notion of similarity for the items and thus critical for the
organization of categories of boards within the domain.
They identify novel boards as the “same” when they match
in terms of the goal-relevant features and “different” when
those features do not match. They also show a pattern of
category goodness ratings that indicates that violating those
goal-relevant features makes the boards less good members
of the category while violating other sources of information
have little or no effect on those judgments. The participants
in the classification condition seem to maintain a more
diffuse attentional focus during the initial task. This is
interesting given earlier studies that show a very narrow
focus for classification learners. However, these results fit
well together when we consider that the goal of
classification learning is to predict the category membership
of items. Typically only a subset of the information
available within the experimental materials allows those
judgments to be accurately made, so the classification
learner attends most to that subset of information. In this
study, multiple sources of diagnostic information existed, so
the classification learners maintained a correspondingly
wide attentional focus. It was the participants in the solid
and flexible conditions that had a narrow focus in this
experiment, and this was due to the fact that only a subset of
the information available within the domain was goalrelevant for each condition.
In one sense the results of this study are not surprising –
there are numerous models of learning that incorporate an
attentional mechanism (as discussed in Kruschke, 2003) to
account for shifts across the information available during
learning. Although attention obviously plays a critical role
in the learning, it is not a sufficient determinant of learning;
we need to understand what drives the attention. I propose
that attention is guided by comparisons between the boards
as the participants interact with them in terms of the goal
they have (how to place the connectors or classify the
board), and those features that are relevant to the person’s

2385

goal are picked out during the comparison process (e.g.
Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993). It is important to note
that this approach helps to explain how “simple” perceptual
features (e.g. the capped and drilled posts) and relational
information (e.g. how components were positioned with
regard to the posts) can both be picked up and used in
grounding similarity.
One critical question is whether the participants in this
study were really engaged in category learning, or to put it
another way, did they really recognize categories of boards
during the initial task? In the typical classification learning
paradigm, this question is deflected because the participants
explicitly know of the presence of the categories and their
responses are made in response to those categories.
However, as has been noted prior, there are questions as to
whether even that really constitutes learning a category
(Ross, Chin-Parker, & Diaz, 2005). For this study, I would
argue that the participants acquire knowledge that is
sufficient to support their task (identifying the “type” of
board facilitates the placement of the connectors, and there
was ample evidence of this facilitation occurring during the
learning) and to guide later, more explicitly category-based
tasks. It is at least the foundation of category learning.
The current study was not designed to address all facets of
this process. For instance, additional study within this
paradigm will be able to determine whether the participants
came to adopt different representations of the features (e.g.
Schyns, Goldstone, & Thibault, 1998) or whether they
learned to ignore certain information (e.g. Denton &
Kruschke, 2006) as they better discriminated the features
during the learning. This paradigm provides a unique way to
approach these types of questions and to situate the study of
them within a larger framework intended to guide our
understanding of the acquisition of conceptual knowledge.
Conducting this type of study within a more complex, and
arguably more naturalistic, domain, we can begin to see the
interaction between the individual and the environment that
helps to shape the acquisition of conceptual knowledge. We
can extend our understanding of the ways in which goals are
implicated in category learning and how we might bridge
the chasm that has separated naturalistic studies of concepts
from more experimental studies.
References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98, 409-429.
Barsalou, L.W. (1991). Deriving categories to achieve
goals. In G.H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning
and motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol.
27, pp. 1-64). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Chin-Parker, S., & Ross, B. H. (2004). Diagnosticity and
prototypicality in category learning: A comparison of
inference learning and classification learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 216-226.

Denton, S. E., & Kruschke, J. K. (2006). Attention and
salience in associative blocking. Learning & Behavior,
34, 285-304.
Hahn, U., & Ramscar, M. (Eds.). (2001). Similarity and
categorization. New York : Oxford University Press.
Jee, B. & Wiley, J. (2007) How goals affect the organization
and use of domain knowledge. Memory & Cognition, 35,
837-51.
Kruschke, J. K. (2003). Attention in learning. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 171-175.
Love, B. C. (2005). Environment and goals jointly direct
category acquisition. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 14, 829-835.
Malt, B. C. (1995) Category Coherence in Cross-Cultural
Perspective. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 85-148.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100, 254278.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Atran, S.
(1997). Categorization and reasoning among tree experts:
Do roads lead to Rome? Cognitive Psychology, 32, 49-96.
Minda, J. P., & Ross, B. H. (2004). Learning categories by
making predictions: An investigation of indirect category
learning. Memory & Cognition, 32, 1355-1368.
Murphy, G. L. (2005). The study of concepts inside and
outside the laboratory: Medin versus Medin. In W. Ahn,
R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman, & P. Wolff
(Eds.), Categorization inside and outside the lab:
Festschrift in honor of Douglas L. Medin. Washington,
DC: APA.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985) The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 95, 289316.
Ram, A., & Leake, D. B. (Eds.). (1995). Goal-driven
learning. Cambridge; MIT Press.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005). Eyetracking and
selective attention in category learning. Cognitive
Psychology, 51, 1-41.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W., Johnson, D., & BoyesBraem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.
Ross, B. H., Chin-Parker, S., & Diaz, M. (2005). Beyond
classification learning: A broader view of category
learning and category use. In W. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B.
C. Love, A. B. Markman, & P. Wolff (Eds.),
Categorization inside and outside the lab: Festschrift in
honor of Douglas L. Medin. Washington, DC: APA.
Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1999). Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a
complex real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
495-553.
Schyns, P. G., Goldstone, R. L., & Thibaut, J-P (1998).
Development of features in object concepts. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 21, 1-54.

2386

