UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cognitive Model of Positive and Negative Congruency Effects in Unmasked Priming: The
Role of Attentional Limit and Conflict

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7h01w7ft

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Sohrabi, Ahmad
West, Robert

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cognitive Model of Positive and Negative Congruency Effects in Unmasked
Priming: The Role of Attentional Limit and Conflict
Ahmad Sohrabi (a.sohrabi@uok.ac.ir)
Department of Psychology, University of Kurdistan, Pasdaran Blvd.
Sanandaj, Kurdistan 66177 15175 Iran

Robert L. West (robert_west@carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology and Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6 Canada
Abstract
Positive priming effect has been found with a short interval
between the prime and the target, while negative priming effect
(i.e., a congruent prime causes longer RTs) has been found with
a long time between the prime and the target. Negative priming
effect has been shown mainly using masked priming but some
recent studies have shown it without masks (i.e., in unmasked
or conscious conditions). We employed our previous model of
masked priming for the unmasked condition here, only by
removing mask presentation. The model successfully simulated
the negative priming effect in unmasked condition found in
previous experimental studies.
Keywords: Negative congruency effect; Negative
compatibility effect; modeling; attention; consciousness.

Introduction
Studies on priming have long shown reliable positive effects
of the congruent prime on target processing. An early study,
in the age of using tachistoscopes, was one conducted by
Marcel (1983) on word and color naming. The effect of
masked priming showed that masked stimuli are indeed
processed to the level of response. Later studies on
unmasked and masked conditions showed similar results
both for masked priming (e.g., Neumann & Klotz, 1994;
Dehaene et al., 1998; Eimer & Schlaghecken, 2002) and
masked and unmasked priming differences (e.g., Cheesman
& Merikle, 1986; Dehaene, Artiges, et al., 2003;
Schlaghecken & Eimer, 2002).
In masked priming tasks, a brief masked stimulus
(the prime) can affect the processing of the stimulus that
follows (the target). A prime, a mask, and a target are
presented sequentially and the task is to make a decision on
the target. The result is usually a Positive Congruency
Effect (PCE), also known as the positive compatibility
effect. In PCE, the prime speeds up the performance on the
target if they are congruent and slows down the performance
if they are incongruent (e.g., Neumann & Klotz, 1994;
Dehaene et al., 1998; Eimer & Schlaghecken, 2002;
Jaśkowski & Ślósarek, 2007). Conversely, a negative
priming effect has been found, called the Negative
Congruency Effect (NCE). This effect is also known as the
negative compatibility effect, where paradoxically the prime
increases the performance on the target if they are
incongruent and decreases the performance if they are

congruent (e.g., Schleghecken & Eimer, 2000, 2002, 2006;
Eimer, 1999; Eimer & Schlaghecken, 1998; 2001, 2002;
Lleras & Enns, 2004, 2006; Verleger et al., 2004; Jaśkowski
& Ślósarek, 2006). The PCE has been shown with a short
mask-target Stimulus Onset Asynchrony (SOA), while the
NCE has been shown with a longer mask-target SOA (see
below).
The PCE has been found usually with verbal and
shape stimuli and a short mask (e.g., 71 ms, as in Dehaene
et al., 1998) and no or a small interval between stimuli. In
contrast, the NCE has been shown mainly with arrow
stimuli and a longer mask (e.g., 100 ms). Recently, it has
been replicated with other stimuli, for example shapes
(Jaśkowski & Ślósarek, 2006) and faces (Bennett, Lleras,
Orient, & Enns, 2007). This effect has been found by using
a long mask (about 100 ms) and a long mask-target SOA
(>80 ms) or a long (> 30 ms) prime-mask Inter Stimulus
Interval (ISI) or mask-target ISI (e.g., Eimer &
Schleghecken, 1998, 2002; Jaśkowski & Ślósarek, 2007).
These manipulations all increase the prime-target SOA.
In
Eimer
and
Schlaghecken’s
(2002)
aforementioned experiments on the role of prime duration
and mask density, participants who were better at detecting
the prime showed a later change from positive to negative,
and conversely those who were not good in reporting the
prime showed an earlier change from positive to negative,
showing that there is a close relationship between prime
reportability and the direction of priming. Schlaghecken and
Eimer (2000) and Eimer and Schlaghecken (2002, see also
2003) found that when there is no mask or the mask is
peripheral (i.e., it does not make the prime unreportable),
the result is PCE, unlike the situation with masked priming.
Using their motor self-inhibition hypothesis, they argued
that the inhibition is initiated (as an automatic or evolved
process) when visual input disappears, otherwise is blocked
by visual input. Therefore, they claimed that an NCE, being
a result of this self-inhibition, occurs only in the masked
condition because prime input is stopped by the mask. They
added that with the reportable prime, motor self-inhibition is
prevented by the prime, so a PCE occurs. However, recently
Lleras and Enns (2006), by comparing different studies,
showed that prime visibility has no linear relationship with
NCE, meaning that NCE is not necessarily caused by prime
invisibility (see below).

2075

To investigate whether there is any differences
between masked and unmasked priming, Cheesman and
Merikle (1986) employed Marcel’s colour priming task with
modifications. They changed the ratio of congruent to
incongruent trials, so that in one condition this ratio was
25:75 and in the other one it was 75:25. In the unmasked
condition, they found that when the number of congruent
trials was high (i.e., the 75:25 condition), the congruency
effect was higher than when this number was low (i.e., the
25:75 condition). In other words, when an incongruent trial
was frequently preceded by a congruent trial, the
congruency effect increased, and conversely, when an
incongruent trial was frequently preceded by an incongruent
trial, the congruency effect decreased. This difference was
not found in the masked condition. They argued that
participants can use a strategy based on context only in the
unmasked condition.
Jaśkowski
(2007)
combined
Eimer
and
Schleghecken’s paradigm and Merikle and colleagues’
(Cheesman & Merikle, 1984, 1986; Merikle & Joordens,
1997) to study the difference between the masked and
unmasked conditions. In a congruent to incongruent ratio of
20:80, a PCE was found in the unmasked condition with
both medium (100 ms) and long (800 ms) prime-target ISI.
While in the congruent to incongruent ratio of 80:20, a PCE
was found in medium (100 ms) ISI but an NCE was found,
interestingly enough, in long ISI condition. In another
experiment, while Jaśkowski found an NCE in the masked
condition with a prime-target ISI of 100 ms, he found only a
non-significant NCE with a long ISI. Therefore,
surprisingly, with the long ISI the NCE for the unmasked
condition was larger than it was for the masked condition,
ruling out the necessity of the mask and invisibility of the
prime in NCE. A similar result had already been found with
a Stroop task (Merikle & Joordens, 1997).
In our previous work we have modeled masked
priming using a neurocomputational cognitive model
(Sohrabi and West, 2009a, b; see also Sohrabi, 2008). We
employed that model of masked priming for the unmasked
condition here. We only removed the mask presentation to
simulate the unmasked condition in human experimental
studies (here, Jaśkowski, 2007).

The Model
The model is based on previous neurocomputational
modeling and nurophysiological studies (e.g., Usher &
Davelaar, 2002; Gilzenrat et al., 2002, see also Aston-Jones
& Cohen, 2005). It has been demonstrated that these types
of reduced models can resemble the neural computation of a
large group of neurons (e.g., Wong & Wang, 2006).
The model has been described previously (Sohrabi
and West, 2009a, b; see also Sohrabi, 2008 and Sohrabi and
West, 2010). It is a multi-layer dynamic neural model
(shown in Figure 1) that consists of a feed-forward
component for perceptuo-motor processing from the Input
Layer (IL) to the Representation Layer (RL) and Motor
Layer (ML, not shown). An assumption is that the cognitive

processing, including the response, is modulated by
attention. The Alert Attention layer (AA) simulates
attentional modulation that is supposed to be a model of
Locus Coeruleus (LC) that potentiates cortical areas through
norepinephrine (Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005). The
executive attention is only modelled through its effects on
AA, using a Task Layer (i.e., TL) for conflict monitoring.
The effect of TL on AA simulates direct cortical projections
to LC (Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005). The TL and ML are
affected by both prime and target. The ML’s architecture is
identical to TL’s, with the exception that it sends no outputs
to AA, is slower, and noisier (see Table 1).
Each condition in a simulation consists of 20,000
trials (200 independent blocks of 100 trials each, with
congruent and incongruent trials counterbalanced randomly
within each block). A single trial takes 1100 cycles. Each
block starts with 500 cycles without changes in IL to let the
units in other layers reach a steady state of activation.
Similarly the Inter-Trial Interval (ITI) for each trial is 500
cycles, which allows the activation of units to return to
baseline following the responses. The prime is presented by
clamping one of the two units in the IL to 1, intended to be
left or right in the case of arrows. The mask units in IL are
set to 1 at the time of mask presentation and are otherwise
set to 0. Therefore, the recognition of the stimuli is
implemented with a localized representation, for example,
the left unit is turned on when the stimulus is an arrow
pointing left; otherwise the right unit is turned on.
Accordingly, as will be described below, in a congruent trial
the two corresponding units (e.g., the left unit of the prime
and target in IL) is set to 1 or 0 at the time of stimulus
presentation, while in an incongruent trial, one of the two
relevant units of the prime or target is set to 1 and the other
to 0.
The units in each layer make connections, via
excitatory weights, to their corresponding units in other
layers. The activations of these units (except IL) are
calculated by a sigmoid (logistic) function of the incoming
information, and a small amount of random noise. The RL
sends excitatory activities to ML and TL continuously but
activates AA only if a unit of the prime or target reaches a
designated threshold of .62. Similarly, when one of the two
units in the ML reaches the same designated threshold it
triggers a manual response (i.e., initiating a hand
movement). When AA is activated and its activation reaches
a threshold, it starts modulating information processing in
RL, TL, and ML by making the activation function of their
units steeper (see Figure 2, as described below).
As shown in Figure 1, the IL encodes the prime,
the mask, and the target, and projects to RL through
excitatory connections. For the sake of simplicity, prime and
target units, as well as an identical mask unit for each (not
activated in this simulation) were implemented in two
separate paths. All units in TL have a self-excitation
connection, intended to simulate mutual excitation among a
group of neurons. Connections between mutual units (for
prime and target and to the mask) from IL to TL have small

2076

cross-talks (see Table 1), indicating feature overlaps or
similarities among stimuli. The units also have lateral
inhibition with neighboring units within the same layer.
The mask units are activated after the prime and before the
target for a specific time. They have lateral inhibition with
prime and target. To simulate unmasked condition here the
mask units are not activated (i.e., are not clamped) but units'
baseline activities were preserved for the sake of model
stability without changing the parameters.

Figure 1. Architecture of the model showing hypothetical
networks and connections. Unit types:  IL  TL and ML
(not shown here) AA. Attention types: - Cue/Orient
Attention (OA) (not employed here) - Executive (conflict
driven) - Alert. Activation types:  Self-excitation and
recurrent excitation Lateral inhibition
activation.

→ Feed-forward

The units in all layers (except IL and AA) receive additive
Gaussian noise (zero mean and variance σ), intended as
general, irrelevant incoming activities. The activations in
the model are represented using units with real valued
activity levels. The units excite and inhibit each other
through weighted connections. Activation propagates
through the network when the IL is clamped with input
patterns, leading to a final response. As will be described
below, the states of units in RL, ML, and TL are adopted in
a method similar to a noisy, leaky, integrator algorithm
(Usher & Davelaar, 2002; Gilzenrat et al., 2002). These
types of models are noisy versions of previous connectionist
models.
In each trial or epoch, one of the prime units in the
IL is turned on and the network is left active for 43 cycles,
then it is turned off for 168 cycles (short prime-target SOA),
234 cycles (long prime-target SOA), or 294 cycles (very
long prime-target SOA), followed by turning on the target
input in IL for 200 cycles. This is similar to a trial in human
data (Dehaene et al., 1998; Eimer & Schleghecken, 2002;
Jaśkowski & Ślósarek, 2006; Jaśkowski, 2007).
The prime and target units in the IL are used to
represent the stimulus features (here, direction). However,
as mentioned before, the recognition of the stimuli is not
implemented in detail, but is encoded as a binary code. For
example, in the case of arrows here, 1 is used for the left
unit if it points left, and 0 is used for the opposite
(reciprocal) unit. In the congruent condition, the RL units of
the prime and target at the same side (left or right randomly)
are turned on (1) or off (0) in each trial at the time of
stimulus presentation. By contrast, in the incongruent
condition, the two units at the opposite sides are turned on
and the other two are left off, with random selection of the
two possible cases.
The RL is governed by a modified version of
previous models (Usher & Davelaar, 2002; Gilzenrat et al.,
2002), which is calculated with discrete integrational time
steps using the dynamic equation:
Xi (t + 1) = λx Xi (t)
+ (1- λx) ƒ [WXiXi Xi(t) + WXiIi Ii(t)
- WXiXj Xj(t) - θXi+ ξXi]

(1)

Likewise, ML and TL are modelled in a similar way with
their inputs coming from RL:
Yi (t + 1) = λy Yi (t)
+ (1- λy) ƒ [WYiYi Yi(t) + WYiXi Xi(t))
WYiYj Yj(t) - θYi+ ξYi]

Figure 2. Effect of gain modulation on nonlinear activation
function (adapted from Servan-Shreiber et al., 1990, see also
Astone-Jones & Cohen, 2005).

(2)

In equations (1) and (2), X and Y denote the activity
of units through time t. W is the weight of the connections
between units, I is the input, and the subscripts i and j are
indexes of the units. The three weight parameters in the
brackets correspond to recurrent self-excitation, feedforward excitation, and lateral inhibition, respectively.
However, for the sake of simplicity in equation 1, the lateral

2077

excitation from mask units to the prime and target, WXiXj
Xj(t), and the cross-talk in prime and target to reciprocal
units and mask units, WXiIj Ij(t), are not present. The term θ
is the bias, the term ξ is noise, and ƒ is a sigmoid function
(see equation 3). The term λ represents neural decay which
is related to the discrete integrational time steps in the
underlying equation (Usher & Davelaar, 2002).
The AA modulates other layers by changing their
activation from sigmoid toward binary responses. The
activation function, ƒ, transfers the net input, X, of a unit,
and modulatory gain, g, to its activity state, implementing
the firing rate of a neuron or the mean firing rate of a group
of neurons:
ƒ(Xi)=1/(1+exp (-Xig))
(3)

Figure 3. An unmasked congruent trial (where no conflict
occurs) of 1100 cycles, including 500 cycles inter-trial
interval) with 234 cycles prime-target SOA that crosses the
threshold after 876 cycles (including 500 cycles inter-trial
interval). From the top, ML, TL, and AA (but RL-prime,
RL-target, and IL are not shown).
A conflict-monitoring measurement was employed to
take the activations of the units in the TL layer to adjust
phasic and tonic response modes of AA. The activation of
the TL units was used to measure the Hopfield energy
function between units (Hopfield, 1982), as used previously
(Botvinick et al., 2001). Conflict can be defined as the
concurrent activation of the competing units and as the joint

effect of both prime and target in TL. Hopfield energy can
be calculated as

(4)
where E denotes energy, X denotes the activity of a unit, W
is the weight of the connection between units, and the
subscripts 1 and 2 are indexes of the two units.
As noted above, TL combines prime and target
activations and measures conflict between its two units.
When one TL unit is active and the other is inactive, conflict
is low. However, when both units are active concurrently,
the conflict is high. Activations in TL units are converted to
1 if they are equal to or greater than .5, and to 0 otherwise
(i.e., using a threshold function). Also, E > .5 is considered
as a conflict, otherwise as no conflict. When the activation
of a prime or target unit in TL reaches the designated
threshold, .62, the AA is activated with a phasic or tonic
mode, depending on the absence or presence of conflict in
TL. The change in AA response mode usually occurs by the
presentation of a target that is incongruent with the prime.
Here the AA is modeled using a reduced or abstracted
version of LC neurons in a Willson-Cowan type of system
(e.g., Wilson & Cowan, 1972) adopted recently (Usher &
Davelaar, 2002) (there are similar models and detailed
implementations of this type of attention (Gilzenrat et al.,
2002):
X(t + 1) = λx X(t)
+ (1- λx) ƒ [c (ax X (t) – bY(t) + Ix (t) - θx)],
Y(t + 1) = λy Y(t)
+ (1- λy) ƒ [c (ay X(t) – θy)],
G(t + 1) = λg G(t)
+ (1- λg) X(t)
(5)
where ƒ is again a sigmoid function (as in equation 3), X is
the fast variable representing AA activity and Y is a slow
auxiliary variable, together simulating excitatory/inhibitory
neuron groups in the LC (Usher & Davelaar, 2002). The X
and Y variables have decay parameters λx and λy,
excitatory/inhibitory coefficients, ax and ay, as well as
thresholds θx and θy, respectively. The G variable is the
output of the AA, which is based on X. The g (used in
equation 3) is computed from G: g = G * K. The AA
modulates other layers when g crosses a threshold, 1. Its
activity modes can be phasic or tonic depending on the
conflict state, low or high, respectively.
In all conditions the TL can change the AA mode
according to the conflict between prime and target (i.e.,
using within-trial conflict). The phasic and tonic modes of
AA responses are implemented using high or low c value (3
or 1) (see equation 5). The c value is 3 at the beginning of
each trial (for the prime), but it is set to 1 (for the target) if
conflict occurs. The number of computer simulation cycles
from the target onset until one of the ML units reached a
designated threshold, .62, was considered as RT. A
constant, as other sensory and motor processes, could be
added to this RT, to increase the match between simulation
and human data.

2078

Figure 5. Unmasked priming using 168, 234, and 294 cycles
prime-target SOAs, indicated by 1, 2, and 3, respectively,
compared to 116.7 and 816.7 SOAs in Jaśkowski (2007),
indicated by 1 and 2, respectively.

Discussion

Figure 4. An unmasked incongruent trial (where no conflict
occurs) of 1000 cycles, including 500 cycles inter-trial
interval) with 234 cycles prime-target SOA that crosses the
threshold after 876 cycles (including 500 cycles inter-trial
interval). From the top, ML, TL, and AA (but RL-prime,
RL-target, and IL are not shown).
Simulation Results
To create the short and long prime-target SOA conditions, a
relatively short SOA (168 cycles) and two relatively long
SOAs (234 and 294 cycles) were used. As shown in Figure
5, a strong PCE was found at prime-target SOA 168 cycles
and a strong NCE was found at SOA 234 and 294 cycles. In
the unmasked condition, in the current simulation, NCE
remains high with further increases in SOA but it decreases
slowly.
The simulation results in Figure 5 show a change
from PCE to NCE and a drop in RTs, similar to the human
data. However, the SOA in the long condition in Jaśkowski
(2007) is much longer than the long conditions in the
current simulation, due to a limited time course in the
model, as the parameters were set for a short trial.
The activities in three layers (ML, TL, and AA) are
shown for a given congruent and incongruent trial in
Figures 3 and 4, respectively. There is smaller activation left
in AA for the target, but it can be recovered as an effect of
conflict in the incongruent condition as the phasic mode
becomes tonic.

A model that we have used for simulating masked
positive and negative priming previously could simulate
unmasked priming effect as well. Because there was no
interruption by the mask, in the relevant unmasked prime
condition, a PCE was found for short prime-target SOA. In
this case, the PCE was large, consistent with the unmasked
condition in Jaśkowski (2007). We assumed that a relevant
or predicting prime as in Jaśkowski (2007) evokes a phasic
activation in the so called alert attention to the prime but can
lead to a refractory period of attentional response to the
target.
An unmasked prime caused large PCE and NCE at
short and long prime-target SOA, respectively. A few
studies have previously shown an NCE in the unmasked
condition. Here it is assumed that this effect was found in
those studies because they used a medium (Koechlin et al.,
1999) and long (Jaśkowski, 2007) prime-target SOA, and
especially the tasks required action on (which requires
attention too), or attention to, the prime, respectively. In the
former, especially because of controlling physical repetition
priming (and an action on the prime was required as on the
target), and in the second, especially because of prime
relevance (participants were told that prime highly predicts
the target), the NCE was large. It could be caused by the
strong refractory period created by attention to the
unmasked prime. To simulate this phenomenon, in this
simulation the prime was unmasked and AA mode for the
prime was put in the high phasic mode (c=3), as with
simulations of masked conditions.
At longer prime-target SOA, the relevant
unmasked prime caused an NCE even larger than an
equivalent masked condition (see Sohrabi and West, 2009a,
b; see also Sohrabi, 2008; Sohrabi and West, 2010),
consistent with Jaśkowski & Ślósarek, (2006) and
Jaśkowski (2007). Interestingly, the conflict period caused
by an unmasked incongruent prime (in all unmasked

2079

conditions) was longer than that of masked incongruent
prime consistent with Dehaene et al. (2003) that have shown
more brain activations in unmasked incongruent compared
to congruent condition.
Table 1. Parameters in the model, fixed for all conditions,
unless otherwise mentioned.
WXiIi (IL to RL) [P & T] & WYiXi 3 & 1.5
(RL to ML) [P & T]
WXiIi (IL to RL) [M] & WYiXi (RL 1.5 & 1
to TL) [P & T]
WXiXi (RL) [P & T], WXiXi (RL) 1.5, 1.25, 1, & .9
[M], WYiYi (TL), & WYiYi (ML)
WXiXj (RL) & WYiYj (ML & TL)
1&1
WXiXj (RL) [M to P & T] & WXiIj .75+.1 & .33
(IL to RL)
K (AA)
4.52
α & β (RL, TL, & ML) [M, P, T]
1&1
θx, θy (AA), θx (RL), θy (TL), & θy 1.25, 1.5, .5, .85, &
(ML)
2
b,c, ax & ay (AA)
4, 1-3, 2, & 3
λx, λg, & λy (AA)
.92, .98, & .996
λ (TL), λ (ML), & λ (RL)
.75, .925, & .95
σ (CL), σ (RL) [P & T], σ (ML), & .025, .2, .25, & 1.25
σ (RL) [M]
IL=Input Layer; RL=Representation Layer; TL= Task
Layer; ML=Motor Layer; AA=Alert Attention; P=Prime;
T=Target; M=Mask.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the Carleton Cognitive
Modelling Lab, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada and the University
of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, Kurdistan, Iran.

References
Aston-Jones, G. & Cohen, J. D. (2005). An Integrative Theory of
Locus Coeruleus-Norepinephrine Function: Adaptive Gain and
Optimal Performance, Nature Review Neuroscience, 28, 403450.
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S., &
Cohen, J. C. (2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive control,
Psychological Review, 108, 624-652.
Bowman, H., Schlaghecken, F., Eimer, M. (2006). A neural
network model of inhibitory processes and cognitive control.
Visual Cognition, 13, 401–480.

Cheesman, J. & Merikle, P. M. (1984). Priming with and
without awareness. Perception & Psychophysics, 36,
387–395.
Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Le Clec'H, G., Koechlin, E.,
Mueller, M., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., van de Moortele, P.
F., and Le Bihan, D. (1998). Imaging unconscious
semantic priming. Nature, 395, 597-600.
Dehaene, S. et al. (2003). Conscious and subliminal conflicts in
normal subjects and patients with schizophrenia: the role of the
anterior cingulated, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 100, 13722-13727.
Eimer, M. & Schlaghecken, F. (1998). Effects of masked stimuli
on motor activation: Behavioural and electrophysiological

evidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 24, 1737-1747.
Eimer, M. & Schlaghecken, F. (2002). Links between conscious
awareness and response inhibition: evidence from masked
priming. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 514–520.
Gilzenrat, M. S., Holmes, B. D., Rajkowski, J., Aston-Jones, G., &
Cohen, J. D. (2002). Simplified dynamics in a model of
noradrenergic modulation of cognitive performance. Neural
Networks, 15, 647–663.
Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with
emergent collective computational abilities. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 79, 2554-2558.
Jaśkowski, P. & Ślósarek, M. (2007). How important is a prime’s
gestalt for subliminal priming? Consciousness and Cognition,
16, 2, 485-497.
Lleras, A., Enns, J.T. (2006). How much like a target can a mask
be? Geometric, spatial, and temporal similarity in priming. A
reply to Schleghecken & Eimer (2006). Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 135, 495–500.
Marcel, A.J. (1983). Conscious and unconscious perception:
experiments on visual masking and word recognition.
Cognitive Psychology 15, 197-237.

Merikle, P. M., & Joordens, S. (1997). Parallels between
perception without attention and perception without
awareness. Consciousness and Cognition, 6, 219–236.
Neumann, O., Klotz, W. (1994). Motor responses to unreportable,
masked stimuli: Where is the limit of direct motor
specification. In C. Umiltà and M. Moscovitch (Eds.),
Attention and Performance XV: Conscious and non-conscious
information processing (pp. 123-150). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Nieuwenhuis, S., Gilzenrat, M. S., Holmes, B. D. & Cohen, J. D.
(2005). The Role of the Locus Coeruleus in Mediating the
Attentional Blink: A Neurocomputational Theory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 3, 291–307.
Schlaghecken, F., & Eimer, M. (2002). Motor activation with and
without inhibition: Evidence for a threshold mechanism in
motor control. Perception & Psychophysics, 64, 148–162.
Schlaghecken, F., Eimer, M., (2000). A central/peripheral
asymmetry in subliminal priming. Perception and
Psychophysics, 62, 1367–1382.

Servan-Schreiber, D., Printz, H., Cohen, J.D. (1990). A
network model of catecholamine effects gain signal to
noise ratio and behaviour. Science 249,892–895.
Sohrabi, A. (2008). Positive and Negative Congruency Effects in
Masked and Unmasked Priming: Match of representation
strength, Attention, and Consciousness. Ph.D. dissertation,
Carleton University.
Sohrabi, A. and West, R. L. (2010). Cognitive Science of Primed
Decision Making. VDM-Verlag Publishing.
Sohrabi, A. & West, R. L. (2009a). Positive and Negative
Congruency Effects in Masked Priming: A Neurocomputational Model Based on Representation, Attention, and
Conflict, Brain Research, 1289, 124-132.
Sohrabi, A. & West, R.L. (2009b). A Biologically-Plausible
Cognitive Model (BPCM) of Positive and Negative
Congruency Effects in Masked Priming. Proceedings of the
31st annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Amsterdam, Netherlands, pp. 911-916.
Usher, M., & Davelaar, E. J. (2002). Neuromodulation of decision
and response selection. Neural Networks, 15, 635–645.
Wilson, H., & Cowan, J. (1972). Excitatory and inhibitory
interactions in localized populations of model neurons.
Biological Cybernetics, 12, 1–24.

2080

