UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cross-linguistic Model of the Acquisition of Inflectional Morphology in English and Modern
Greek

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5jr0v7hz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Karaminis, Themis
Thomas, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cross-linguistic Model of the Acquisition of Inflectional Morphology in English
and Modern Greek
Themis Karaminis (tkaram01@students.bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of London,
Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, UK

Michael S. C. Thomas (m.thomas@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of London,
Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, UK

tive developmental patterns in the acquisition of English
and Modern Greek, including the order of acquisition
across inflection types and proportions of error types
across development.

Abstract
We present a connectionist model of a general system for
producing inflected words. The Multiple Inflection Generator (MIG) combines elements of several previous models
(e.g., association between phonological representations of
stem and inflection form: Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986;
multiple inflections for a grammatical class: Hoeffner &
McClelland, 1993; lexical-semantic input: Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1999; multiple grammatical classes: Plunkett &
Juola, 1999). MIG assumes that the goal of the morphological component of the language system is to output a phonological form appropriate to the grammatical context in
which the word appears. Our aim was to demonstrate that
the model is able to capture developmental patterns in the
acquisition of morphology in two different languages: one
with a simple morphological system (English), and one
characterized by rich morphology and absence of default
forms (Modern Greek).

Previous connectionist models of morphology
Rumelhart and McClelland’s (1986) model of the acquisition of the English past-tense was the first to apply the
principles of Parallel Distributed Processing in the domain of inflectional morphology. This influential model
showed that a two-layered feed-forward neural network
architecture could learn mappings between phonological
representations (Wickelfeature representations) of stems
and corresponding past tense forms of English verbs. The
model also simulated a wide range of phenomena reported
in empirical studies of the acquisition of morphology,
such as frequency effects and the U-shaped learning curve
for the acquisition of irregulars (Brown, 1973).
This model demonstrated that an explicit representation of rules was not necessary for the acquisition of morphology. Instead, rule-like behavior was an emergent
property of the learning system and reflected statistical
regularities in the mappings of the training set. Rumelhart
and McClelland challenged the existing ‘symbolic’ view,
which proposed the dual-route account for morphological
development (Pinker, 1984). According to this account,
two separate mechanisms were involved in the learning of
morphology. A rule-based system supported the learning
of regular mappings, while a rote-memory system supported the learning of irregular mappings. The so-called
'past tense debate' emerged within the field of language
acquisition.
Criticisms against the connectionist approach (e.g.,
Pinker & Prince, 1988) ranged from those pointing out
implementational issues (e.g., the psycholinguistic implausibility of Wickelfeature representations) to those
questioning the ability of the connectionist framework to
address certain aspects of language acquisition (e.g., generalization). Subsequent connectionist studies addressed
many of these criticisms by proposing more detailed
models: Plunkett and Marchman (1993) refined the general principles of the model of Rumelhart and McClelland
(1986) in a three-layered feed-forward architecture which
employed more realistic phonological representations;

Keywords: Inflectional Morphology; Cross-linguistic
Language Acquisition; Neural Network Modeling

Introduction
The Rumelhart and McClelland (1986) model for the acquisition of past tense was extremely influential and
spawned new models on morphological acquisition. The
model had several drawbacks. First, it is unlikely that the
language system would have a specific component for one
inflection type within one grammatical class. Second, the
model did not simulate all the error patterns that children
exhibit in development, notably the presence of unmarked
forms. Third, the generalization of inflectional rules to
unusual novel inputs was somewhat poor. More widely, it
remains to be seen whether an architecture appropriate for
modeling morphological acquisition in one language can
readily extend to other languages that may have quite
different inflectional paradigms. In this article, we present
a model that is generalized to all inflectional types within
a language (English) and show how the same architecture
can be generalized to a different language with a richer
inflectional structure (Modern Greek).
Our approach assumes that the language system comprises functional components and that at least one of the
components is involved in conditioning the phonological
properties of words during output so that their forms are
appropriate to the grammatical context in the sentence in
which they will appear. The goal was to simulate qualita-

730

other studies incorporated lexical-semantics in the connectionist architecture to address dissociations in the
learning of regular and irregular verbs (e.g., Joanisse &
Seidenberg, 1999); Plunkett and Juola (1999) studied the
acquisition of noun plural and verb past tense in a single
connectionist network, while Hoeffner and McClelland
(1993) considered multiple verb inflections. Finally, other
work demonstrated that implementing a developmental
deficit in connectionist architectures could simulate the
acquisition of morphology in atypical language development. (e.g., Hoeffner & McClelland, 1993; Joanisse,
2004; Thomas & Karmiloff-Smith, 2003).

stems (e.g., *thinked / thought). Overregularization errors
appear later in development than omission errors (Brown,
1973). As a result, in Brown’s stage II (age range: 28-36
months, MLU range: 2.0-2.5) a sudden drop in the production of correct irregular forms was observed. This
phenomenon is often described in terms of a U-shaped
learning curve of irregulars. Overregularization errors are
sometimes taken as evidence for the productive use of
rules in child language (Marcus, 2000). Finally, a related
error type is the blend error or double-marked error (e.g.,
Kuczaj, 1978). These errors refer to cases in which children apply a rule to an irregularly inflected form (e.g.,
*wented / went).

Acquisition of inflectional morphology in English
Acquisition of inflectional morphology in Modern
Greek

English inflectional morphology is characterized by its
simplicity, manifested by the extensive use of default
(base or uninflected) forms. For example, noun inflection
does not consider gender and does not distinguish between the nominative and the accusative case. Psycholinguistic studies of inflectional morphology in English often
focus on the domain of the past tense. This paradigm is of
particular theoretical interest because it is quasi-regular.
The majority of verbs form their past tenses through stemsuffixation (e.g., walk / walked). A rule determines the
appropriate allomorphic suffix (/t/, /d/, or /^d/)) based on
the last phoneme of the stem. However, a significant
number of verbs form their past tenses irregularly (e.g.,
swim / swam, hit / hit, go / went).
Early studies on child language (e.g., Berko, 1958;
Brown, 1973; de Villiers & de Villiers, 1973) established
that different inflections in English are acquired in a consistent order along development. For example, the progressive of the verbs is acquired earlier than the past
tense. Other studies addressed the profile of individual
inflections in greater detail. For example, van der Lely &
Ullman (2001) showed that accuracy rates are greater for
regular than for irregular inflections. Accuracy also depends on type and token frequency. Frequency effects are
more pronounced in irregular inflections (the so-called
frequency by regularity interaction). Finally, children are
efficient in generalizing the rule to novel forms (e.g., wug
/ wugged).
Morphological development is characterized by developmental error patterns. For example, children often produce base forms in contexts in which grammatical marking is obligatory (e.g., *He come home / He comes home).
This type of error is referred to variously as a no-mark
error, no-change error or omission error. Rice, Wexler,
and Cleave (1993) suggested that omission errors define
an early stage in language development, in which morphological marking is not applied consistently on the base
forms. They termed this stage as the Optional Infinitive
(OI) stage. Zero-mark errors occur in greater percentages
in irregular inflections (e.g., Matthews & Theakston,
2006; van der Lely & Ullman, 2001).
Another prototypical error pattern is overregularization or over-generalization. This type of error
refers to the (incorrect) application of a rule on irregular

Modern Greek is a language with a rich morphological
system. As Stephany (1997) describes, there are no default forms of words in Modern Greek. Instead, many
different grammatical features are fused in single word
forms. For example, nouns have grammatical gender, and
are inflected with respect to case and number. Verbs are
inflected with respect to person, tense, aspect and voice.
Modern Greek also presents different conjugational
classes in nominal and verbal inflections, challenging the
dichotomy between regular and irregular inflectional categories. For example, studies on the perfective past tense
(e.g., Stavrakaki & Clahsen, 2001) describe three classes
of verbs with respect to the marking of the perfective aspect. The ‘sigmatic’ class is the major class of verbs. The
perfective past tense forms in this class are characterized
by the addition of the aspectual marker /s/ (‘sigma’ in
Greek) to the stem (e.g. pez-o / e-pek-s-a, play / played 1st person singular). The addition of the aspectual marker
may invoke phonologically predictable changes to the
stems. A second class of verbs does not employ the aspectual marker /s/, and presents unpredictable modifications
of the stem (e.g., plen-o / e-plin-a, wash / washed - 1st
person singular). Finally, a third class of verbs have idiosyncratic perfective past tenses forms (e.g., tro-o / e-fag-a,
eat / eaten - 1st person singular).
Stephany (1997) studied the production data of three
children. Based on these data she suggested an order for
the acquisition of different grammatical inflections and
different grammatical features in Modern Greek. For example, tense is acquired earlier than aspect. Rare nominal
conjugational categories are acquired late in development.
As default forms are missing in Modern Greek, it has
been suggested that the Optional Infinitive stage is realized by production of certain frequent forms in inappropriate contexts. Stephany (1997) observed that children
undergo an early stage of development (up to 3 years old)
in which they produce a lot of 3rd singular forms instead
of the correct verbal inflections. Thus, 3rd singular forms
could be considered an analogue of root infinitives in
English (Varlokosta, Vainikka & Rohrbacher, 1998). Finally, with regard to the perfective past tense, Stavrakaki

731

and Clahsen (2009) found that the sigmatic rule is overgeneralized in verbs belonging to non-sigmatic categories.
The sigmatic rule is also preferred for the production of
past tenses of novel verbs.

of 19 binary articulatory features (Thomas & KarmiloffSmith, 2003). The articulatory features (e.g., sonorant,
consonantal, voiced, rounded) corresponded to standard
linguistic categorizations (Fromkin & Rodman, 1988).
The Input Phonology layer used only the first three slots
to encode the phonological structure of monosyllabic
words. (2) Following Joanisse and Seidenberg (1999),
Lexical Semantics (1600 units) were used to provide localist representations of the meaning of each base form.
(3) Grammatical Category (3 units) provided part-ofspeech information. (4) Target Inflection (10 units) provided information on the type of inflection the network
should consider (e.g., for verbs: base, past tense, 3rd singular or progressive).
The network was required to produce a phonological
representation of the appropriate inflected form in the
output layer (Output Phonology). The Output Phonology
layer employed 95 units to implement a five-slot scheme.
The last two slots were used to encode inflectional suffixes. In order to address morphology in Modern Greek, limited changes were introduced to the initial architecture
solely to capture differences in the morphological structure of Modern Greek. In particular, the Target Inflection
cue was expanded to include: gender, number and case
information for nouns; gender, number, case, and grade
information for adjectives; tense, aspect and person information for verbs. Additionally, Input Phonology provided phonological representations of word stems, without considering any inflectional suffixes and affixes. Finally, the Input and Output Phonology layers employed a
twelve-slot scheme to incorporate morphological affixes,
suffixes and disyllabic stems.

Simulations
Design
Our aim was to increase the generality of the original past
tense model across inflection types, grammatical classes,
and across languages. We began by combining elements
of previous connectionist models of morphology (e.g.,
multiple grammatical classes: Plunkett & Juola, 1999;
multiple inflections for a grammatical class: Hoeffner &
McClelland, 1993; lexical-semantic input: Joanisse &
Seidenberg, 1999) to implement a generalized inflectional
system. The Multiple Inflectional Generator (MIG) considered three grammatical classes (nouns, verbs, and adjectives) and multiple inflections for each grammatical class
(e.g., nouns: base forms, plurals, and possessives). The
aim of MIG was to output a phonological form appropriate to the grammatical context in which the word appeared.
Following Plunkett and Marchman (1993), we constructed two training sets based on artificial languages
that reflected the basic features of the morphological systems of English and Modern Greek. We performed two
sets of simulations. In the first set of simulations, MIG
was trained using the English training set. In the other,
MIG was trained on the Modern Greek training set. In
each condition, we contrasted the learning profile of MIG
to corresponding data from empirical studies on the acquisition of morphology outlined above. For reasons of
space, from the full set of behaviors exhibited by the
model, we concentrate on reporting results from past
tense. The goal was to replicate the following empirical
effects: For English: (i) the relative acquisition of regular
and irregular verbs; (ii) the frequency by regularity interaction in accuracy; (iii) the Optional Infinitive stage; (iv)
the greater incidence of unmarked stem errors for irregulars; (v) the relative incidence of over-generalization and
blend errors; (vi) generalization to novel stems. For Modern Greek: (i) the relative acquisition of sigmatic and nonsigmatic categories; ii) the production of 3rd singular
forms as analogue of the Optional Infinitive stage; iii) the
over-generalization of the sigmatic rule in verbs belonging to non-sigmatic categories; (iv) the generalization of
the sigmatic rule to novel stems.

Figure 1: The architecture of MIG with an example of inputoutput mappings (here, to output the plural noun cats)

Training Sets
English Training Set. The training set for English was
constructed based on measurements of type frequencies of
different grammatical categories, different inflections or
allomorphic subcategories of the same inflection. These
measurements were derived from the tagged Brown corpus (Francis & Kucera, 1999) via computational linguistics methods. The NLTK open source software
(http://www.nltk.org, accessed May 2010) was used for
processing the Brown corpus. Frequencies of different
grammatical categories and different inflection types were
based on the counts of different tags in the corpus. Fre-

Architecture
The MIG employed a three-layered feed-forward neural
network architecture. Four sources of information (cues)
were presented in the input layer (Figure 1). (1) Input
Phonology (95 units) encoded the phonological properties
of the base forms using a five-slot scheme parallel to the
that used in Plunkett & Marchman (1991, 1993). Each
slot could encode a phoneme based on a distributed code

732

quencies of the allomorphic categories (e.g., /t/, /d/, /^d/
past tenses) were obtained using algorithms that identified
the last phoneme of the stems.
The training set consisted of 1,600 words and 5,200
inflections based on those words (word-to-inflection ratio:
~0.3). The 1,600 words were artificial monosyllabic phoneme strings (800 verbs, 400 nouns, and 400 adjectives)
which followed one of three templates (CCV, VCC and
CVC; see Plunkett & Marchman, 1993). Ten different
inflections were considered for the English training set
(nouns: base form, plural, possessive; verbs: base form,
progressive, 3rd singular, past tense; adjectives: base
form, comparative, superlative). The inflected forms incorporated two additional phonemes for the inflectional
suffixes. Combining words with their different possible
inflections, the English training set comprised 5,200 stem
/ inflected form mappings. A simplified two-level scale of
token frequency (Thomas & Karmiloff-Smith; 2003) was
implemented by scaling the weight changes computed by
the Back-propagation of Error algorithm (Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986) after the presentation of each
mapping. For arbitrary mappings (e.g., go / went) the
weight changes were multiplied by 9 for tokens of highfrequency and 6 for tokens of low-frequency. For all other
mappings, the weight changes were multiplied by 3 for
high-frequency tokens, and 1 for low-frequency tokens.
A generalization set of 1,600 novel types and the corresponding 5,200 tokens was also created. It consisted of
three subsets of stems with differing degrees of similarity
to the stems of the training set. Items for the first subset of
the generalization set were created by changing the first
phoneme of existing stems. Items for the second subset
were generated by changing the first two phonemes of the
existing stems. In both cases a consonant was replaced by
another consonant and a vowel with another vowel to
conform to the phonotactics imposed by the three templates used for the training set. Items in the third subset
were generated by changing the first two phonemes of
existing stems in a way that violated the phonotactics of
the artificial language.
Modern Greek Training Set. For the Modern Greek
training set, type frequencies of different inflections and
different conjugational categories were based on descriptions of Stephany (1997) or sampling of the Hellenic National Corpus of the Institute of Speech and Language
Processing (ISLP, http://hnc.ilsp.gr/en/, accessed May
2010). In the absence of any other constraints, type frequencies were made parallel to type frequencies of the
English training set. The Modern Greek training set consisted of 1600 types and 26,400 tokens (type to token ratio: ~0.06). The 1,600 types were a vocabulary of 800
verbs, 400 nouns and 400 adjectives. Items were dissyllabic, and conformed to the phonotactics of Modern
Greek. Nouns were inflected in the nominative, the genitive and the accusative case of the singular and plural
number. Verbs were inflected with respect to person (1st,
2nd, and 3rd), number (singular, plural) and tense (present,
perfective past, imperfective past). Adjectives were in-

flected with respect to gender, case and number in the
plain, comparative, and superlative grade. The Modern
Greek training set consisted of a total of 26,400 mappings
(tokens). A generalization set of 1,600 novel types and the
corresponding 26,400 types was also constructed. Items
for the generalization set were generated by changing the
phonemes of the first syllable of the stem of items of
training set.

Procedure
Networks were trained for 400 epochs, using the Backpropagation of Error algorithm (Rumelhart, Hinton, &
Williams, 1986). The length of training was selected to
ensure that the networks achieved final ceiling levels of
performance. Based on piloting, the following parameters
were used in both English and Greek versions of the model: 75 hidden units, learning rate 0.01, momentum 0. Results were averaged over 10 replications with different
random seeds. Training was not incremental but used the
full training set throughout, with one caveat: in each
epoch, the network was exposed to a random 30% of the
total inflected forms, corresponding to the number of different words in the training set.

Results
Network output was evaluated using a variant of the
Nearest Neighborhood algorithm. The output activation
for each slot was made equal to its nearest neighbor in the
Euclidean space of the phonemes, so that continuous activations were converted to phonemic strings. The string
was then assessed against pre-defined categories, based
on patterns presented in empirical investigations of children’s productivity (e.g., ‘correct’, ‘omission errors’,
‘over-generalization errors’, ‘blend errors’, ‘other’). In
this section we present initial results from the two simulations, demonstrating the viability of the more general
model.

Simulation 1: English Training Set
The simulation results were parallel to the acquisition
profile of the English past tense in several ways. Accuracy rates were higher for regulars than for irregulars. Type
frequency effects were more pronounced for irregulars.
MIG reproduced an OI stage, characterized by high percentages of omission errors for both regulars and irregulars. The rates of no-mark errors were higher for irregulars than for regulars. MIG also simulated overgeneralization errors and blend errors. Finally, the past tense rule
was efficiently generalized in novel items with accuracy
rates of 88%, 86%, and 43% for novel stems most to least
similar to stems in the training set. Importantly, for the
latter, accuracy levels went up to 83% when errors in the
reproduced stem were ignored. That is, while the network
sometimes struggled to output very strange, phonotactically illegal novel stems, it nevertheless showed a high
level of accuracy in outputting an appropriate past tense
morpheme. It was able to do so because the Verb gram-

733

matical class unit and Past Tense target inflection units
could form strong connections to the inflectional morpheme region of the output layer. In some respects, this is
equivalent to an implementation of a ‘rule’ for past tense
formation (Marcus, 2001). In this way, the MIG improves
on the rule induction ability shown by the original Rumelhart and McClelland model.
Figures 2 and 3 contrast the developmental trajectory
of MIG for the first 100 epochs of training with corresponding cross-sectional behavioral data from van der Lely
and Ullman (2001) for 6-8 year old children, for regular
and irregular past tense formation. As training was performed in a non-incremental fashion, we do not take the
very early stages of training to be psychologically realistic
(see Plunkett & Marchman, 1993). To evaluate the modeling results in light of the empirical data, we identified a
window in the training time of the model (epochs 20-70)
in which the accuracy rates of the model in the regular
past tense were matched to those reported in the developmental study of van der Lely and Ullman (2001). In
this time window, the rates of the main error patterns in
the simulation results present qualitative similarities to the
rates in the empirical data. Once more, compared to the
Rumelhart and McClelland model, MIG now combines
simulation of correct performance with error patterns.

The model also captured the major developmental error patterns. It simulated an early phase in which 3 rd singular forms were produced in inappropriate contexts,
which Varlakosta et al. (1998) identified as a marker of
the Optional Infinitive stage. It also captured the pattern
of overgeneralization of the sigmatic rule in non-sigmatic
conjugational classes. Both of these error patterns are
depicted in Figure 4, which compares the learning profile
of MIG in the 2nd person singular non-sigmatic category
(e.g., plen-o / e-plin-es, wash / washed) and corresponding data by Stavrakaki and Clahsen (2009).

Figure 4: Non-sigmatic perfective past tense in MIG and
empirical data from Stavrakaki & Clahsen (2009)

Conclusions
Connectionist approaches to the acquisition of morphology have faced four challenges: to simulate developmental
error patterns as well as accuracy levels; to demonstrate
that associative systems can generalize inflectional rules
to unusual novel stems; to show that architectures can be
general across inflection types and grammatical classes,
rather than focusing on narrow inflectional paradigms;
and to show that architectures can be general across languages, even though those languages may place very different demands on acquisition due to the complexity of
their morphology.
In this paper, we introduced the Multiple Inflection
Generator. The model is novel in that phonological output
forms are conditioned to be appropriate to their grammatical context by the integration of multiple input cues.
These input cues include the phonological form of the
stem, lexical-semantics, grammatical class, and target
inflection information. Cues are relied on differentially
depending on the mappings of various inflectional forms
(see, e.g., Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1998, for the greater
reliance of irregular verbs on lexical-semantic information, also shown by our model).
Focusing on the past tense, we showed how the MIG
reproduced error patterns as well as accuracy levels. Notably, in both English and Modern Greek, an Optional Infinitive stage was observed, even though the character of
that stage is different in each language (unmarked stems
vs. 3rd person singular). Generalization rates of the past
tense rule were high for novel stems, even for phonotactically illegal stems. MIG captured the order of emergence
of different inflection types for different grammatical
classes. And it was able to capture developmental patterns
for two languages of different morphological complexity.

Figure 2: Regular past-tense acquisition in MIG compared to
empirical data on from van der Lely & Ullman (2001)

epoch

age

Figure 3: Irregular past-tense acquisition in MIG compared
to empirical data on from van der Lely & Ullman (2001)

Simulation 2: Modern Greek Training Set
MIG was also able to learn the complex mappings of the
Greek training set. For the perfective past tense, accuracy
rates were higher for the sigmatic class than the other
conjugational classes. The sigmatic rule was generalized
efficiently to novel items (accuracy rates for generalization: 71%).

734

These results are only preliminary. More detailed
work is required to establish quantitative fits both within
and between languages. However, our initial findings
demonstrate the viability of a more general, crosslinguistic model of the acquisition of inflectional morphology.

tive and deductive approaches. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp 154-176.
Marcus, G.F. (2001). The Algebraic Mind: Integrating
Connectionism and Cognitive Science (Learning, Development, and Conceptual Change), Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language
development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Pinker, S., & Prince, A. (1988). On language and connectionism: Analysis of a parallel distributed processing
model of language acquisition. Cognition, 28, 73–193
Plunkett, K., & Juola, P. (1999). A connectionist model of
English past tense and plural morphology. Cognitive
Science, 23, 463-490.
Plunkett, K., & Marchman, V. (1991). U-shaped learning
and frequency effects in a multi-layered perceptron:
Implications for child language acquisition. Cognition,
38, 1-60.
Plunkett, K., & Marchman, V. (1993). From rote learning
to system building: Acquiring verb morphology in
children and connectionist nets. Cognition, 48, 21-69.
Rice, M.L. (2000). Grammatical symptoms of specific
language impairment. In: D.V.M. Bishop & L.B. Leonard (Eds.), Speech and Language Impairments in
Children: Causes, characteristics, intervention and
outcome (pp.17-34). Hove, England: Psychology Press.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R.J. (1986).
Learning internal representations by error propagation.
In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland and The PDP Research Group, Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Volume 1:
Foundations (pp. 318–362). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Rumelhart, D. E. & McClelland, J. L. (1986). On learning
the past tense of English verbs. In J. L. McClelland, D.
E. Rumelhart and PDP Research Group (Eds), Parallel
distributed processing: Volume 2: Psychological and
Biological models. (pp. 216-271). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Stavrakaki, S. & Clahsen, H. (2009). The perfective past
tense in Greek child language. Journal of Child Language, 36, 113-42.
Stephany, U. (1997). The Acquisition of Greek. In:
Slobin, D. I. (ed.). The cross-linguistic study of language acquisition 4 (pp.183-333).Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thomas, M.S.C. & Karmiloff-Smith, A. (2003). Modelling language acquisition in atypical phenotypes. Psychological Review, 110, 4, 647-682.
van der Lely, H. K. J., & Ullman, M. (2001). Past tense
morphology in specifically language impaired children
and normally developing children. Language and Cognitive Processes, 16, 177-217.
Varlokosta, S., Vainikka, A., & Rohrbacher, B. (1998).
Functional projections, markedness, and ‚root infinitives’ in early child Greek. The Linguistic Review
15:187-207.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by UK MRC Grant G0300188
and the European Commission Grant NEST-029088
(ANALOGY) to the second author. The studies of the
first author are funded by the Greek State Scholarship
Foundation (IKY) and the Greek Ministry of Education.

References
Berko, J. (1958). The child's learning of English morphology. Word, 14, 150-177.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages.
London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Clahsen, H., & J. Dalalakis (1999). Tense and agreement
in Greek SLI: A case study. Essex Research Reports in
Linguistics, 24, 1-25.
de Villiers, J.G., & de Villiers, P.A. (1985). Acquisition
of English. In D. Slobin (Ed.), The crosslinguistic study
of language acquisition: Vol. 1. The data (pp. 27-140).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Francis, W.N., & Kucera, H. (1979). Manual of Information to Accompany a Standard Sample of Present-day
Edited American English , for Use with Digital Computers. Original ed. 1964, revised 1971, revised and
augmented 1979. Department of Linguistics, Brown
University, Providence, R.I.
Hoeffner, J. H., & McClelland, J. L. (1993). Can a perceptual processing deficit explain the impairment of inflectional morphology in developmental dysphasia? A
computational investigation. In E. V. Clark (Ed.), Proceedings of the 25th Child Language Research Forum.
Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Joanisse, M.F. (2004) Specific language impairments in
children: Phonology, semantics and the English past
tense. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13,
156-160.
Joanisse, M.F., & Seidenberg, M.S. (1999). Impairments
in verb morphology following brain injury: A connectionist model. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science USA, 96, 7592-7597.
Kuczaj, S.A. (1977). The acquisition of regular and irregular past tense forms. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 16, 589-600.
Matthews, D. E., & Theakston, A. L.(2006) 'Errors of
omission in English-speaking children's production of
plurals and the past Tense: The effects of frequency,
phonology, and competition', Cognitive Science: A
Multidisciplinary Journal, 30: 6, 1027 — 1052.
Marcus, G. F. (2000). Children's Overregularization and
Its Implications for Cognition. In P. Broeder, & J.
Murre (eds). Models of Language Acquisition: Induc-

735

