UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Accessing the Unsaid: The Role of Scalar Alternatives in Children’s Pragmatic Inference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7wv5781w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Brooks, Neon
Bale, Alan
Barner, David

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Accessing the Unsaid: The Role of Scalar Alternatives in Children’s Pragmatic
Inference
Neon Brooks (neonblue@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 5848 South University Avenue, Rm. Green 510
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Alan Bale (acbale@alcor.concordia.ca)
Department of Linguistics, Concordia University, H663, 1455 de Maisonnueve Blvd. W.
Montreal, Quebec CA

David Barner (barner@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, 5336 McGill Hall, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
When faced with a sentence like, “some of the toys are on the
table”, adults, but not preschoolers, compute a scalar
implicature, taking the sentence to suggest that not all the toys
are on the table. Although this difference is sometimes
attributed to children’s difficulties in processing and
pragmatic understanding, this paper explores the hypothesis
that children fail to compute scalar implicatures because they
lack knowledge about relevant lexical alternatives to words
like “some”. Four-year-olds were shown pictures in which
two objects fit a description and a third object did not, and
were asked to judge the truth value of statements that relied
on context-independent alternatives (e.g. only some of the toys
are on the table) or contextual alternatives (e.g. only the drum
and the ball are on the table). Children computed scalar
implicatures only in the case of contextual alternatives, and
only when the statements were grammatically strengthened,
supporting the hypothesis that children’s difficulties with
scalar implicature result from a lack of knowledge of the
relevant alternatives.
Keywords: scalar implicature; pragmatic
processing limitations; contextual alternatives

reasoning;

Introduction
As children acquire language, their task is complicated by
the fact that speakers’ intended meanings go beyond the
literal meanings of their utterances. Word learning is not
simply a process of mapping strings of words to speaker
intentions. Instead, children must infer the core lexical
meanings of words by distinguishing what is logically
entailed from that which is merely implied. For example,
given a dialogue like (1), John is likely to infer that Mary
did not eat all of his cake.
(1)
John: Did you eat my cake?
Mary: I ate some of it.
Although Mary’s statement would be literally true if she
had eaten the whole cake (eating all entails eating some),
her utterance implies that she did not. This inference relies
on the assumption that, if Mary had eaten the whole cake,
and was communicating cooperatively, she would have
uttered a more informative statement like “I ate all of it”
(Grice, 1989).
The language acquisition literature is filled with examples
of children learning words by making inferences about

speaker intentions. A classic demonstration of this comes
from experiments investigating mutual exclusivity. When a
child is shown two objects, one of which has a known label
(e.g., a car), they infer without difficulty that a novel label
(e.g., dax) refers to the previously unlabeled object. Such an
inference follows from the assumption that the speaker
would not use two words to denote one kind of object (i.e.,
words exhibit mutual exclusivity, or contrast; Markman,
1989; Clark 1987). Children apply such strategies not only
when learning nouns, but also when interpreting other
classes of words, such as numerals. For example, when 2year-olds who know the meaning of the word one (but no
higher number) are shown two sets – e.g., 1 balloon and 5
balloons – they readily infer that five refers to the set of five
objects (Wynn, 1992; Condry & Spelke, 2008).
Amidst such evidence, and further studies which find that
children are sensitive to subtle intentional cues like eye
gaze, speaker desires, etc. (Baldwin, 1993; Tomasello,
1992) children also exhibit striking failures in computing
some simple inferences, including the inference in (1),
which is a type of scalar implicature. Following Horn
(1989), it is typically assumed that the quantifier some
belongs to a larger class of terms called “scalar items”.
Scales are used to generate sets of alternative meanings,
which are ordered according to their informativeness, and
are implicitly contrasted during interpretation. In the case of
some, the relevant scale includes other quantifiers – e.g., a,
some, many, most, all. Examples of such scales are shown in
(2):
(2)
a. <some, many, most, all, etc.>
b. <warm, hot, boiling, etc.>
c. <one, two, three, etc.>
By most accounts, deriving a scalar implicature involves
at least four steps, summarized in I - IV. First, the listener
computes the basic, literal, meaning of the expression (Step
I). Second, she considers the alternative sentences that might
have been uttered (by substitution of scalar alternatives;
Step II). Third, she restricts these alternatives by removing
those that are less informative (Step III). Finally, she
“strengthens” the interpretation of the sentence by negating
the remaining alternatives – e.g., “I ate some (but not all) of
the cake” (Step IV).

1178

I.
Compute basic meaning of a sentence S containing
L, a scalar item.
II.
Generate a set of alternatives (a1, a2, . . . , an) to S,
called Salt. These are all the sentences that can be generated
by replacing L with its scalar alternatives.
III. Restrict the alternatives in Salt by removing any
alternative that is entailed by the original utterance S. Call
this restricted set S*.
IV. Strengthen the basic meaning of S (containing L)
with the negation of all of the members of S*.
A large number of studies have found that children fail to
derive such implicatures. This has been shown for many
scalar contrasts, including might vs. must (Noveck, 2001), a
vs. some (Barner, Chow, & Yang, 2009), some vs. all
(Huang & Snedeker, 2009; Papafragou & Musolino, 2003;
Noveck, 2001), and or vs. and (Chierchia et al., 2001). For
example, in a study by Papafragou and Musolino (2003), 5year-old children were shown a scene including three
horses, in which all three jumped over a log. When asked
whether the sentence, “Some of the horses jumped over the
log” was a good description of the event, most children said
yes. Adults, in contrast, denied that this was a good
description, since all of the horses jumped over the log.
Adults, unlike children, computed a scalar implicature.
Children do not always lack a so-called strengthened
meaning. Papafragou and Musolino found that children
provided adult-like responses when tested with numerals.
Children denied that “Two of the horses jumped over the
log” when three horses did. Thus, although children failed to
have adult-like response with some and all, they interpret
numerals with an exact-meaning just like the adult controls.
Previous studies have suggested factors that could affect
children’s derivation of implicatures, including limitations
on working memory, limited understanding of context and
meta-linguistic tasks, and the salience or availability of
relevant scalar alternatives (see Chierchia et al., 2001;
Papafragou & Tantalou, 2002; Pouscoulous et al, 2007;
Reinhart, 2004). According to Papafragou and Musolino
(2003), since each of these factors might limit children’s
computation of implicatures, and since children readily
assign exact interpretations to numerals, children must not
be using implicatures to derive exact meanings of numerals.
Instead, by their view, the difference between quantifiers
and numerals is due to the fact that numerals have lexically
strengthened, exact meanings (see also Huang, Snedeker, &
Spelke, under review).
Context clearly affects whether children (and adults) will
compute implicatures (e.g., Papafragou & Musolino, 2002).
It is also well established that working memory capacity
grows over the course of development (e.g., Gathercole &
Baddley, 1990). Nevertheless, the role of these factors in
children’s pragmatic difficulties has not been empirically
established. First, although previous studies find that
implicatures are more likely in some contexts than others
(e.g., Papafragou & Musolino, 2002), the fact that strong
contextual cues can push children towards one interpretation
over another does not demonstrate that their difficulties are

due to contextual misunderstanding. For example, strong
contextual cues may compensate for difficulties that
originate elsewhere in the process of deriving implicatures.
Second, there is currently no direct evidence that
processing constraints are responsible for limiting children’s
implicatures. Studies that attribute their problems to
processing limitations (Chierchia et al., 2001; Pouscoulous
et al., 2007; Reinhart, 2004) do not actually assess working
memory, nor do they demonstrate that individual differences
in processing capacity predict differences in pragmatic
abilities. For example, Chierchia et al. (2001) tested 3- to 6year-old children’s interpretation of or. Unlike adults, when
children were told, “Every boy chose a skateboard or a
bike,” they accepted situations in which a boy chose both
objects. Thus, they accepted the weak inclusive
interpretation of or, when adults did not. However, when
explicitly presented with a sentence containing and as an
alternative, children strongly preferred it over a sentence
containing or. This study shows that when children are
presented with explicit scalar alternatives, they know when
to use the stronger statement. However, it does not single
out working memory as the source of children’s difficulty.
Instead, we suggest that it is also consistent with the idea
that children lack knowledge of scales, and which words are
activated as relevant alternatives during interpretation (Step
II, see also Papafragou & Tantalou, 2004). An inability to
generate relevant scale-mates could explain numerous
failures in the literature, as well as the apparent discrepancy
between children’s difficulty with implicatures and their
relatively sophisticated use of pragmatic cues elsewhere in
language acquisition. Further, this account, as noted by
Barner and Bachrach (2010), could explain children’s ability
to assign exact interpretations to numerals, which belong to
an explicitly memorized set of alternatives – the count list.
Barner and Bachrach (2010) argued that young children
routinely make inferences that are similar in structure to
scalar implicatures when interpreting unknown numerals.
As noted earlier, when a child who knows the meaning of
one is shown two sets – e.g., one containing one balloon,
and the other containing five – they systematically point to
the larger set when asked to find five balloons. However,
they do not do so when asked to find blicket balloons.
According to Wynn (1992), “Since all the children knew
that the word ‘one’ refers to a single item, then if they knew
that, for example, the word ‘five’ refers to a numerosity,
they should infer that it does not refer to a single item since
they already have a word for the numerosity one.” (p. 229).
This inference – that five refers to the larger set by virtue
of not referring to one – requires all of the processing
resources that an implicature would require, as well as
several of the same steps. The child must generate a weak
meaning for five (Step I), generate one as an alternative
(Step II), and strengthen the interpretation of five by
negating one (Step IV). The only missing component of
implicature is that weaker items are not exhaustified by
appeal to stronger ones (this would be impossible here, since
stronger numeral words have not yet been acquired). Still,

1179

once children acquire a meaning for two, they should be in a
position to compute an implicature for one, meaning that
even 2-year-olds could compute implicatures to derive exact
meanings for numerals.
Children do not have difficulty accessing one as a relevant
alternative to five. Also, once children have accessed one as
an alternative, they appear capable of inferences not far
from a full-fledged scalar implicature. These facts suggest
that children’s failure to compute implicatures for other
scales may be due to a failure to generate relevant scalar
alternatives. While children begin to explicitly memorize a
count list well before they learn any numeral meanings (see
Fuson, 1988), no child is taught to recite a list of quantifiers.
The present study tested the hypothesis that children’s
difficulty computing implicatures is caused by a failure to
generate relevant alternatives. We asked whether children
could strengthen their interpretation of utterances containing
the quantifier some when used with the focus word only. In
English, the algorithm for calculating scalar implicatures is
grammatically mirrored by the semantics of only, a fact that
allows us to isolate the role of access to alternatives in
implicature. As with implicatures, only triggers the negation
of alternative sentences. For example, consider the sentence
in (5).
(5) I ate only some of the cake.
This sentence indicates that the speaker did not eat all of
the cake, like Mary’s statement in (1). The difference
between the sentences in (1) and (5) is that in (5) the denial
of the alternative “I ate all of the cake” is logically entailed
by the sentence’s core, literal meaning (it is not merely
implied). Still, in order for this entailment relation to be
realized, the listener must access all as a relevant alternative
and negate it. Therefore, evidence that children comprehend
only but fail to strengthen sentences containing only some
would suggest that their difficulty is caused by a failure to
access scalar alternatives.
To manipulate the accessibility of alternatives, we
contrasted children’s interpretation of some, whose scale
members are specified in a context-independent way, with
their interpretation of words that have contextually specified
alternatives (for discussion, see Hirschberg, 1985). Previous
studies find that young children are able to strengthen
utterances that rely on contextual alternatives. For example,
Goro, Minai & Crain (2006) found that children rejected
sentences like “Only Bunny Rabbit will eat a carrot or a
pepper” in contexts where another character ate a pepper.
We tested the hypothesis that children’s difficulty is due
to difficulty generating relevant alternatives by (1)
manipulating the availability of alternatives by contrasting
utterances that involve context-independent scales like
<some/all> to utterances that draw on contextually specified
sets of alternatives, and (2) forcing the exhaustification of
utterances by including the focus element only in sentences.
Critical trials in the experiment presented situations
involving three things (e.g., three animals sleeping), and
asked children to evaluate one of the questions in (6):
(6)
a. Are some of the animals reading?

b. Are only some of the animals reading?
c. Are the cat and the dog reading?
d. Are only the dog and the cat reading?
If children’s difficulty computing implicatures for
context-independent scales is due to a failure to access
alternatives, then they should accept statements like (6a) and
(6b) regardless of whether only is present. They should fail
to construct an alternative sentence containing all, and
therefore be unable to strengthen either sentence. In
contrast, children should have no difficulty strengthening a
sentence like (6d), since the alternative contrast set is
contextually specified and therefore readily available.

Method
Participants
Sixty 4-year-olds (M=53.94 months, age range: 48.7–59.8
months) participated in this experiment. Two additional
children were excluded due to failure to complete the task.

Stimuli
Stimuli were twelve picture cards, each depicting a scene of
three items. Four cards were used in a familiarization phase,
and eight in the test phase. Familiarization cards depicted
sets of animals with distinct characteristics, such as color or
clothing. The test cards depicted four scenes (in 1 – 4).
(1)
Cookie Monster holding fruit (an orange, an apple,
and a banana)
(2)
Animals sleeping (a dog, a cat, and a cow)
(3)
Animals reading (a dog, a cat, and a rabbit)
(4)
Toys on a table (a ball, a drum, and a train)
Two versions of each scene were created: one in which all
three items shared a property (e.g., Cookie Monster is
holding all three fruits), and one in which two of the three
items shared the property (e.g., Cookie Monster is holding
two fruits, and one is on the floor). An example is provided
in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Example test stimulus card.

Procedure
Children were first shown the familiarization cards one at a
time and asked to identify each animal (“What’s this? That’s
right, it’s a cow!”). If the child labeled an animal
incorrectly, they were given the correct label and
encouraged to repeat it (“That’s a cow, can you say ‘cow?”).

1180

Children were then asked a question about the scene (e.g.,
“Is the cow wearing a hat?” when the fish is wearing a hat).
This exercise was designed to accustom children to
answering both yes and no to questions. If a child answered
any question incorrectly, the experimenter moved on to the
next familiarization card, but returned to the problematic
card after completing the remaining familiarization trials. If
a child failed twice on any single familiarization trial, the
experimenter ended the testing session.
At test, children were given nine trials using the test
cards, presented in one of two counterbalanced orders.
Again, children were asked to identify all of the items in the
picture, and then to evaluate the truth-value of a statement.
Each child participated in one of four conditions. In
Conditions 1 and 3 (Context-Independent Alternatives),
children were asked questions that required them to evaluate
the meanings of the quantifiers some and all, e.g. Is Cookie
Monster holding some / all of the fruits? In Conditions 2 and
4 (Contextual Alternatives), the individual animals, fruits,
etc. were labeled separately, e.g., Is Cookie Monster holding
the banana, the apple and the orange? The questions in
each condition were identical, except that in Conditions 3
and 4 (Grammatically Exhaustified conditions) the word
only was inserted– e.g., Are only some of the animals
reading? or Are only the dog and the rabbit reading?
There were 9 questions in each condition. On “2-item,
False” questions, children were shown a picture in which
only two of the three items fit a description, and were asked
whether the description was true for all the items (e.g., Is
Cookie Monster holding all of the fruits? or Is Cookie
Monster holding the apple, the orange, and the banana?).
These were used as control trials, to be sure that children
were attending to the task, and were presented identically in
conditions 1 and 2 and conditions 3 and 4. On “2-item,
True” questions, children saw pictures where two of the
three items fit a description, and were asked whether the
description was true for a subset of the items (e.g. Are (only)
some of the animals reading? or Are (only) the rabbit and
the dog reading?). Lastly, on “3-item, Test” questions,
children were shown pictures in which all three items fit the
description, and asked whether the description was true for a
subset of the items (questions were identical in the 2-item,
True and 3-item, Test trials).
Neither the word only nor the quantifier was emphasized
by the experimenter’s prosody.

Results
The use of the word only had a significant effect on how
children interpreted sentences involving contextual
alternatives, but had no effect on their interpretation of
sentences involving context-independent alternatives (some
and all). A 2x2x2 repeated measures ANOVA was
conducted with Trial Type (“2-Item True” vs. “3-Item
Test”) as a within-subjects variable and Scale Type
(context-independent vs. contextual) and Grammatical
Exhaustification (only vs., no-only) as between-subjects
variables. Two-Item False Trials were excluded from this

analysis as children were expected to reject these sentences
(results for these trials are described below).
Overall, children were significantly more likely to accept
sentences on 2-Item True Trials (87.9%), than on 3-Item
Test Trials (59.6%), F(1,56)=37.05, p<.001. They were also
less likely, overall, to accept sentences with only, such as
“only the drum and the ball are on the table” (84.8% of
trials) than those that did not contain only (62.7% of trials,
F(1,56)=672.2, p<.001). There was no main effect of
Alternative Type (p>0.05). Crucially, there were two-way
interactions between Alternative Type and Grammatical
Exhaustification (F(1,56)=13.74, p<.001), Trial Type and
Grammatical Exhaustification (F(1,56)=15.08, p<.001),Trial
Type and Alternative Type (F(1,56)=8.87, p<.01), and a
three-way interaction between Trial Type, Alternative Type,
and Grammatical Exhaustification (F(1,56)=13.28, p<.001).
These interactions were due to the fact that only had a
significant effect on children’s judgments only for
contextual alternatives, and only on 3-item Test trials.
Figure 2 shows the percentage of children who said “yes”
to questions in the contextual alternatives conditions. In
contexts involving 2 items (e.g., Cookie Monster holding an
apple and a banana), children correctly agreed to sentences
like, “Is cookie monster holding the apple and the banana?”
on 95.8% of trials, and correctly denied that he was holding
“the apple, the banana, and the orange” on 80.5% of trials.
As expected, adding the word only had no effect on either
trial type (ps>.05). In contrast, on critical 3-item Test trials,
children tested with contextual alternatives were highly
sensitive to the presence of only. These children said “yes”
when asked, “Is cookie monster holding the apple and the
banana?” on 92.9% of trials, but rarely said “yes” when only
was added: “Is cookie monster holding only the apple and
the banana?” (14% of trials; t(28)=8.98, p<.001).

Figure 2: Percentage of children who said “yes” to sentences
in contextual alternatives conditions.
When children were tested with the word some (ContextIndependent Alternatives conditions), they also correctly
said “yes” on 2-item true trials (80.0% of trials), and
correctly said “no” 2-item false trials (87.2% of trials). The
insertion of only again had no effect on children’s responses
for these trial types (ps>0.05). As in other studies, children
did not strengthen utterances containing some in absence of
only. There was no significant difference in children’s
response for 2-item True trials and 3-item Test trials

1181

(t(14)=1.0, p>.3). For example, children were equally likely
to agree that some animals were reading when all three of
them were, relative to when only two were. The insertion of
only did not improve matters and had no effect on the 3-item
test trials (t(28)=.16, p>.8). For example, when three
animals were reading, children were equally likely to say
“yes” when asked, “Are some of the animals reading” and
“Are only some of the animals reading”. Thus, whereas only
had a huge impact on children’s interpretation of utterances
including contextual alternatives, it had no effect at all when
children interpreted utterances containing the word some.

Figure 3. Percentage of children who said “yes” to questions
in context-independent conditions.

Discussion
Children’s ability to generate scalar alternatives places a
significant constraint on their ability to compute scalar
implicatures. In this study, children assigned strengthened
interpretations to utterances when they included the focus
element only, if alternatives were provided contextually. For
context-independent scales (e.g., some/all) children failed to
compute implicatures, even when only was added. Since
only forces exhaustification grammatically (and did so for
contextual alternatives), children’s failure to derive
strengthened readings for some must be attributed to a
failure to generate relevant scalar alternatives – in this case
the quantifier all.
These data also suggest, contrary to speculation in the
literature (e.g., Chierchia et al, 2001; Pouscoulous et al.,
2007) that children’s difficulties are not purely attributable
to processing constraints. Children were perfectly capable of
deriving strengthened interpretations for utterances that
involved contextual alternatives, but failed for identical
sentences that involved some. This result is not predicted by
theories that posit processing limitations, since the sentences
in these conditions did not differ in grammatical complexity.
They only differed with respect to the type of scale that they
implicated. The possibility that there are differences in
processing difficulty between these conditions cannot be
completely ruled out. However, no previous study has
provided direct evidence that children’s failures are related
to processing limits or working memory. Also, as they are
presented, the previous accounts of processing limits are too
vague to explain why they would affect Horn scales but not
context dependent scales. Thus, we see no compelling

reason to conclude that processing limits are at the root of
children’s difficulties on this task or with scalar implicature
generally. Instead, we submit, children lack knowledge that
is scale-specific – i.e., they lack the knowledge that all is a
relevant alternative when interpreting some.
Our hypothesis – that children interpret “only” like adults
but fail to compute scalar implicatures because they lack
knowledge of specific scales – allows us to explain a much
wider array of data than previous accounts, while explaining
why children appear pragmatically sophisticated in some
domains but not in others. As noted in the introduction,
previous studies of children’s number word acquisition find
that children can make inferences that resemble scalar
implicature from a very early age (Wynn, 1992; Condry &
Spelke, 2008). These inferences – e.g., that five cannot refer
to sets of one, because one does –involve processes similar
to those needed for scalar implicature. (see Barner &
Bachrach, 2010).
Children’s ability to make such inferences for numerals
and contextual scales, but not for scales like <some, all>,
points to differences in scale-specific knowledge. In the case
of contextual scales, no scale-specific learning is required
since these scales are constructed on the fly in context. In
the case of number words, children begin acquisition by
learning numerals as an ordered list of alternatives. They
acquire a partial count list before learning any individual
numeral meanings (for review, see Carey, 2009). Thus, the
first thing that children learn about the numeral five is that it
is a member of the count list. In contrast, normal children
never learn to recite a sequence of quantifiers like some,
many, most, all, etc. This view of acquisition suggests,
contrary to previous reports (e.g., Papafragou & Musolino,
2003; Huang, Snedeker, & Spelke, under review) that
children may derive exact meanings of early numerals via
scalar inference (by contrasting numerals with one another).
The idea that children’s difficulties are scale-specific,
rather than due to pragmatic immaturity, is also consistent
with reports of pragmatic sophistication in other domains,
such as noun learning (see Baldwin, 1993; Clark, 1987,
1988; Markman, 1989; Tomasello, 1992). For example,
when shown a novel object next to an alternative with a
known label – e.g., a shoe – children readily infer that a
novel label like blicket must refer to the new object (Clark,
1987, 1988; Markman, 1989). Similarly, children infer that a
novel color word, like chromium, must refer to a novel
color, and not to known colors like red or blue (Carey &
Bartlett, 1978). Children fail to respect mutual exclusivity if
they believe the novel word is not at the same level of
description as the label for the known object, or if they are
told the word is from another language (Au & Glusman,
1990). In these cases, the known label is not considered a
relevant alternative to the novel label. These simple
inferences, though distinct from implicatures in many ways,
nonetheless require both pragmatic understanding (including
ascription of speaker intent), and the processing abilities
needed to entertain and restrict possible alternatives. These
abilities would be difficult to explain if children’s

1182

difficulties with scalar implicature were due to processing
limits or a general insensitivity to pragmatics.
What must children learn about scales to use them for
implicature? Clearly children must learn the meanings of
scale mates, and how these meanings differ in informational
strength in different contexts. At 4 years of age, children
easily differentiate meanings like some and all, and are able
to correctly choose stronger descriptions over weaker ones
when provided with a forced choice (e.g., Chierchia et al.,
2001). Children’s difficulty, it seems, is in recognizing that,
for communicative purposes, these scale mates are
alternatives to one another – i.e., that using one implies that
the others are not true. Thus, a failure to generate words as
alternatives does not mean that children have difficulties
with lexical retrieval. Rather, our claim is that even when
children can retrieve all when interpreting some, they do not
access it as a relevant alternative to some.
A remaining puzzle, and one that is not addressed by the
current study, is how children eventually come to acquire
such scales. Our results, and others from the literature,
suggest that children are capable of strengthening utterances
by appeal to alternatives, so long as these alternatives are
contextually specified or memorized explicitly as a list. It is
not clear children they come to associate scale mates, such
as quantifiers, that they do not learn as a list. We suggest
that the association of these lexical items may take place by
trial and error learning – by hearing words used
contrastively in context, or via explicit cancellations of
implicature in the speech of adults. Future studies should
explore the effects that such input has on children’s
pragmatic reasoning, and how experience with different
scales affects their ability to compute implicatures.

References
Au, T. K., & Glusman, M. (1990). The principle of
mutual exclusivity in word learning: To honor or not to
honor? Child Development, 61, 1474-1490.
Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Infants’ ability to consult the
speaker for clues to word reference. Journal of Child
Language, 20, 395–418.
Barner, D., Bachrach, A. (2010). Inference and exact
numerical representation in early language development.
Cognitive Psychology, 60, 40-62.
Barner, D., Chow, K., & Yang, S. (2009). Finding one’s
meaning: A test of the relation between quantifiers and
integers in language development. Cognitive Psychology,
58, 195–219.
Carey, S. (2009). The Origin of Concepts. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Guasti, M. T., Gualmini, A., &
Meroni, L. (2001). The acquisition of disjunction: Evidence
for a grammatical view of scalar implicatures. In A. H.-J.
Do, L. Domingues, & A. Johansen (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 25th Boston University Conference on Language
Development). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Clark, E. (1987) The principle of contrast: A constraint
on language acquisition. In B. MacWhinney, Ed.,

Mechanisms of language acquisition
Condry, K. F., & Spelke, E. S. (2008). The development
of language and abstract concepts: The case of natural
number. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
137(1), 22-38.
Crain, S., Goro, T., & Minai, U. (2007). Hidden units in
child language. In Shalley, A., & Khlentzos, D. (Eds.),
Mental states, Volume I: Evolution, Function, Nature (pp.
275-294). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Fuson, K.C. (1988). Children's Counting and Concepts of
Number. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Gathercole, S.E., & Baddeley, A.D. (1990). Phonological
memory deficits in language disordered children: Is there a
causal connection? Journal of Memory and Language,
29(3), 336-360.
Goro, T., Minai, U., & Crain, S.B. (2006). Bringing out
the logic in child language. In Bateman, L., & Ussery, C.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the North
East Linguistic Society (pp. 245-256). Amherst, MA: GLSA
Publications.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hirschberg, J. (1985). A theory of scalar implicature.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA.
Horn, L. (1989). A Natural History of Negation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Huang, Y., Snedeker, J. & Spelke, E. (under review).
What exactly do numbers mean?
Huang, Y. & Snedeker, J. (2009). Online interpretation of
scalar quantifiers: Insight into the semantics–pragmatics
interface. Cognitive Psychology, 58(3), 376-415.
Markman, E.M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical
than adults: Experimental investigation of scalar
implicatures. Cognition, 78, 165–188.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar
implicatures: Experiments at the semantics–pragmatics
interface. Cognition, 86, 253–282.
Papafragou, A., & Tantalou, N. (2004). Children’s
computation of implicatures. Language Acquisition, 12, 71–
82.
Pouscoulous, N., Noveck, I. A., Politzer, G., & Bastide,
A. (2007). A developmental investigation of processing
costs in implicature production. Language Acquisition, 14,
347–375.
Reinhart, T. (2004). The Processing Cost of ReferenceSet Computation: Acquisition of Stress Shift and Focus.
Language Acquisition, 12(2): 109-155.
Tomasello, M. (1992). The social bases of language
development. Social Development, 1, 67–87.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children's understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36, 155-193.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of number words
and the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 220–
251.

1183

