UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Actor-Observer Differences in Intentional Action Intuitions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0f5051zj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Feltz, Adam
Harris, Maegan
Perez, Ashley

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Actor-Observer Differences in Intentional Action Intuitions
Adam Feltz (ADFeltz@schreiner.edu)
Philosophy and Interdisciplinary Studies, 2100 Memorial Blvd.
Kerrville, TX 78028, USA

Maegan A. Harris (MAHarris@schreiner.edu)
Schreiner University, 2100 Memorial Blvd.
Kerrville, TX 78028, USA

Ashley L. Perez (ALPerez@schreiner.edu)
Schreiner University, 2100 Memorial Blvd.
Kerrville, TX 78028, USA

Abstract
Empirically minded researchers have begun exploring the
“folk” notion of intentional action, often with surprising results. In this paper, we extend these lines of research and
present new evidence from a radically new paradigm in exploration of folk intuitions about intentional action. Our results suggest that in some circumstances people make strikingly different judgments about intentions and intentionality
as a function of whether the person brings about or observes
an event. Implications for action theory and the experimental
study of folk intuitions are discussed.
Keywords: Experimental Philosophy; Intentional Action;
Actor-Observer Differences; Side-Effect Effect

Determining whether a person's behavior was intended or
intentional is crucial for a host of important judgments such
as assigning blame and praise. This part of human experience has been of central concern for philosophers of action
(Mele, 1992). Many of these philosophers take themselves
to be exploring the everyday or “folk” concept of intentional
action (Adams, 1986; McCann, 1986, 2005; Mele, 1992).
Some philosophers even write that “a philosophical analysis
of intentional action that is wholly unconstrained by that
[folk] concept runs the risk of having nothing more than a
philosophical fiction as its subject matter” (Mele, 2001, 27).
Empirically minded researchers (e.g., experimental philosophers) have helped shed light on this folk notion of intentional action, often with surprising results. In this paper, we
extend these lines of research and present evidence using a
new paradigm to study folk intuitions about intentional action. Our results suggest that in some circumstances people
make strikingly different judgments about intentions and intentionality partially as a function of whether a person
brings about or observes an event. Implications for traditional action theory and the study of philosophically relevant folk intuitions are discussed.

Experimental Philosophy and Action Theory
Arguably the best known studies in the experimental investigation of intentional action intuitions are Knobe's (2003a)

harmful (underlined) and helpful (bracketed) chairman
cases:
Harm/Help: The vice-president of the company went to
the chairman of the board and said, “We are thinking of
starting a new program. It will help us increase profits, but
[and] it will also harm [help] the environment.” The chairman of the board answered, “I don't care at all about harming [helping] the environment. I just want to make as much
profit as I can. Let's start the new program. They started the
program. Sure enough, the environment was harmed
[helped]. (191)
The only difference between the two cases is the moral
valence of the consequence of the chairman's decision. Remarkably, this shift in the moral valence of the consequence
drastically changed people's intentionality judgments about
the consequence: 82% of participants judged that the chairman brought about the harm to the environment intentionally whereas only 23% judged the chairman brought about
the help to the environment intentionally. This general effect
(the side effect-effect or the Knobe effect) has been replicated using similar scenarios (Cushman and Mele, 2008;
Knobe, 2003a, 2003b, 2004a, 2004b) across cultures
(Knobe and Burra, 2006), as well as across ages (Leslie,
Knobe, and Cohen, 2006).1
Knobe-style cases feature side effects. If a consequence of
an intended action is foreseen but not intended, then that
consequence is a side effect of the intended action. 2 Side effects have been considered important test cases of some theories of intentional action. Just to take one example, Knobestyle cases have been argued to challenge a prominent view
in intentional action—the Simple View (SV). According to
the SV, if an agent intentionally performs an action A then
the agent intends to A. Some philosophers have argued that
the SV is supported by folk intuitions (Adams, 1986; McCann 1986, 2005). However, as judgments in Harm suggest,
sometimes the folk make judgments that are contrary to the
SV. If the harm to the environment is a side effect, then it is
1

See Feltz (2007b) for a more detailed overview.
See Cushman & Mele (2008) for a detailed definition of
a side effect.

2560

2

not intended. But, most people think that the harm is
brought about intentionally. Hence, in some circumstances,
many have the intuition that one can harm the environment
intentionally without intending to do so. This pattern of intuitions seemingly falsifies that the SV is supported by folk
intuitions (Nadelhoffer, 2006).
In the next two sections, we suggest that folk intuitions
surrounding intentional action may be much more complicated than originally thought and may be influenced by a
variety of factors including one's perspective.

Actor-observer differences
Actor-observer differences refer to a common effect where
people who engage in behaviors (actors) see things differently than those who watch behaviors (observers). The traditional conception of the actor-observer asymmetry posits
that the “actor's view of his behavior emphasizes the role of
environmental conditions at the moment of action. The observer's view emphasizes the causal role of stable dispositional properties of the actor” (Jones & Nisbett, 1972, 80).
While it is debatable whether this traditional conception is
completely accurate (Malle, Knobe, & Nelson, 2007), some
actor-observer asymmetries have been revealed in decisions
made in risky environments (Fernandez-Duque & Wifall,
2007), moral judgments (Nadelhoffer & Feltz, 2008), and
action explanations (Malle & Knobe, 1997; Malle, Knobe,
& Nelson, 2007). To illustrate, consider one case from
Nadelhoffer and Feltz (2008) where an actor-observer
asymmetry was found:
Trolley: A trolley is hurtling down the tracks. There are
five workers on the track ahead of the trolley, and they will
definitely be killed if the trolley continues going straight
ahead since they won’t have enough time to get out of
harm’s way. There is a spur of track leading off to the side
where another person is working. The brakes of the trolley
have failed and there is a switch which can be thrown to
cause the trolley to go to the side track. Imagine that you are
an innocent bystander who happens to be standing next to
the switch. You realize that if you do nothing, five people
will definitely die. On the other hand, you realize that if you
throw the switch, you will definitely save the five workers.
However, you are also aware that in doing so the worker on
the side track will definitely be killed as the result of your
actions.3
Observers received the same scenario except 'you' was replaced with 'John' (along with appropriate verb conjugations). Participants were asked if flipping the switch is morally permissible and rated how much control over the situation one has. People given the 'John' version were more
likely than those given the 'you' version to judge (a) that
flipping the switch was “morally permissible” and (b) that
John had control over the events.4
3
These scenarios modified cases used by Petrinovich and O'Neil
(1996), but Trolley Problem cases are well known in the literature.
4
Ninety percent in the 'John' version thought it was permissible
versus 65% in the 'you' version. Also, the mean control rating in
the 'John' version was 4.28 and 5.12 for the 'you' version (on a 7

But why do actors and observers sometimes display this
asymmetry? According to Malle, Knobe, & Nelson, one
reason is that “we can expect that actors normally have better access to their own reasons than observers do and that
they are normally more motivated to portray themselves as
active, conscious, and rational agents” (2007, 508). Hence,
because actors may be motivated to (a) portray themselves
in a positive light and (b) have special access to their own
reasons, they are prone to judge their own behaviors differently from others' behaviors. This explanation could account
for the asymmetry in the Trolley example. Because actors
are motivated to portray themselves in a positive light and
flipping the switch results in the awful killing of a person,
they are less likely to judge it permissible for them to flip
the switch. However, because they are relatively less interested in portraying others in a positive light, they judge that
it is permissible for others to flip the switch. But actors who
realize that flipping the switch is the optimal decision even
if it kills a person may excuse themselves by judging they
had no control over the situation.
Given that there are actor-observer differences in a wide
variety of contexts, we thought that similar actor-observer
differences would be found in judgments about intentions
and intentionality. In our first experiment, we used a new
method in the study of folk intuitions about intentional action borrowed from experimental economics. We had participants engage in a real decision making process with real
rewards and penalties. Because participants actually became
actors, we hypothesized this methodology would have the
greatest chance of revealing actor-observer differences in
intentional action intuitions.

Experiment 1
We constructed a decision making environment where participants could (a) engage in helpful and harmful behaviors
and (b) observe others' helpful and harmful behaviors. We
call Actors those who generate a behavior. We call Observers those who watch a behavior. In the Harm condition, an
actor generates a harm to one other person. In the Help condition, an actor generates a benefit to one other person. We
hypothesized that actors would judge behaviors as (a) less
intended and (b) less intentional than when they judge behaviors as observers.

Participants
Participants (N = 40) were recruited via email at a small
southern university. 5 Participants were tested in 6 groups
consisting of no more than 12 participants and no fewer than
4. Participants received $10 for attending. They also had the
opportunity to earn an additional $10 depending on their
performance in the experiment (Range = $16-$20). Participants were told that they would be paid as a function how
many Experimental Currency Units (ECUs) they earned in
the experiment. The payoff function was not disclosed.
point ascending scale).
5
The expense of the experiment necessitated a small sample size.

2561

Each participant was an actor and an observer (counterbalanced for order). However, each participant was in only
one of the Help or Harm conditions. Because we were interested in intuitions about actions, all participants who did not
perform the desired action (contributing to Account A, see
below) were excluded. Five participants were thereby excluded in Harm. For the purposes of analyzes, there were 20
participants in Help and 15 in Harm.

Methods and Materials
Participants completed the experiment on a computer
programed using Z-Tree software (Fischbacher, 2007). Actors in the Harm condition were instructed to indicate how
many of their 10 “tokens” they wished to invest in 'Account
A'. They were told that for every token they invested in Account A, they would earn 12 ECUs. For every token they
did not invest in Account A, they would earn 10 ECUs.
However, for every token invested in Account A, they
would generate a 3 ECU penalty to one other person in the
experiment. Actors in Help were given the same instructions
as Actors in Harm but instead of generating a 3 ECU penalty, the actor generated a 3 ECU bonus by contributing to
Account A. Observers in Harm read a display indicating that
somebody else had contributed 10 tokens to Account A generating a 30 ECU penalty to them. Observers in Help read a
display stating that another participant contributed 10 tokens
to Account A generating a 30 ECU bonus for them. There
was one unpaid practice round followed by one paying
round in each condition.
After each instance of acting or observing, participants
were asked to rate on a 7 point scale (1=disagree, 7=agree)
their level of agreement with the appropriate version of each
of the following sentences: 1. You/the other participant intended to generate the penalty/bonus; 2. You/the other participant intentionally generated the penalty/bonus; 3. You/the
other participant are/is blameworthy/praiseworthy for generating the penalty/bonus. Participants were also given the opportunity to explain their answers in a few sentences. So,
each participant answered 3 actor questions and 3 observer
questions in only one of Harm or Help conditions and had
the opportunity to explain their answers in each condition.

Results and Discussion
To test our hypothesis, a mixed-model Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) was preformed with Harm/Help and observer order as between participants variables and answers to the
Actor Intended and Observer Intended prompts as within
participants variables.
Table 1: Actor/Observer
Actor Intended

M = 3.3, SD = 2.08

Actor Intentionally

M = 3.5, SD = 2.17

Observer Intended

M = 4.0, SD = 2.8

Observer Intentionally

M = 4.11, SD = 2.15

The predicted difference in actor/observer judgments was
found for intention judgments, F (1, 31) = 4.51, p =. 04, ηp2
= .13. Neither order F (1, 31) = 1.12, p =. 29, ηp2 = .04 nor
condition interacted with judgments F < 1. A similar mixedmodel ANOVA found the predicted differences in intentionality judgments, F (1, 31) = 4.14, p =. 05, ηp2 = .12. Order
did not interact with judgments, F < 1.
Theoretically, there should be differences in people’s
Harm and Help judgments (Knobe, 2003a) and a moderately
sized non-significant trend toward an interaction for
Harm/Help was observed, F (1, 31) = 2.61, p = .12, ηp2 =.08.
To help illuminate these possible differences, each condition
(Harm or Help) was selected and four mixed-model ANOVAs were conducted with order as between participants
factors and judgments about (1) Actor Intention/Observer
Intention and (2) Actor Intentional/Observer Intentional as
within participants factors.
In Harm, predicted differences were found for Intention
judgments, F (1, 13) = 5.63, p= .03, ηp2 = .3. Order did not
interact with judgments F (1, 13) = 1.05, p = .33, ηp2 = .07.
Predicted differences were also found for Intentional judgments F (1, 13) = 9.15, p = .01, ηp2 = .41. Order did not interact with judgments (F < 1). In Help, no actor-observer
differences were detected (all F's < 1).
Table 2: Harm Actor/Observer
Actor Intended

M = 2.13, SD = 1.13

Actor Intentionally

M = 2.5, SD = 1.96

Observer Intended

M = 3.2, SD = 2.01

Observer Intentionally

M = 3.73, SD = 2.25

This experiment also allowed us to explore some other
possibly interesting actor-observer differences. We thought
that actors would display a reversed side effect-effect while
observers would display the traditional side effect-effect. As
side effects can occur when a behavior is judged intentional
but not intended, we selected only those participants who
did not judge the behavior in the relevant condition to be intended. After excluding those who did not intend the behavior (responding 4 or less), 14 participants remained in
Harm and 10 remained in Help. A univariate ANOVA indicated the predicted shift in judgments in Harm that
trended toward significance: Harm M = 2.35, SD = 1.2, Help
M = 3.1, SD = 1.97, F (1, 23) = 2.46, p =. 13, ηp2 = .11.
However, order appeared to interact with judgments, F (1,
23) = 2.46, p = .13, ηp2 = .11. To eliminate any possible order effect, only first responses were analyzed. 6 After eliminating those who were in the actor condition second, did not
contribute to Account A, and responded that they intended
the bonus or penalty, a very large marginally significant dif6
Participants could not go back to the previous condition after
they had entered their answers. Once participants gave their actor
judgments, they could not go back and change them after they
entered the observer condition.

2562

ference was observed: Harm (N = 7, M = 2.43, SD = 1.9),
Help (N = 3, M = 5.0, SD = 1.0), F (1, 8) = 4.68, p = .06, ηp2
= .37.7 However, we did not find the predicted side effect-effect for observers (all F's < 1).
Finally, previous research indicates that some intentional
action intuitions are predictable by the global personality
trait extraversion (Cokely & Feltz, 2009a). Extraversion is a
member of the Big Five personality model and is represented in almost all modern personality models (John, 1999).
The current experiment allowed us to test for possible actorobserver differences in relation to extraversion. To this effect, participants also completed the Brief Big Five Inventory at the end of the experiment (Gosling, Rentfrow, &
Swan, 2003). Extraversion was negatively correlated with
judgments in Harm for Actor Intention, r (15) = -.64, p = .01
and Actor Intentionally, r (15) = -.55, p = .03 but was not
correlated with Observer Judgments p < .05. To illustrate
the difference, a rough median split of extraverts was created. Those who were relatively more introverted (scoring 9
or less) were more likely than extraverts (scoring higher
than 9) to respond that they intended (Introverted M = 2.63,
SD = 1.3, Extraverted M = 1.57, SD = .53, F (1, 14) = 3.92,
p = .07, ηp2 = .26) or intentionally (Introverted M = 3.5, SD
= 2.2, Extraverted M = 1.29, SD = .49, F (1, 14) = 5.67, p =.
04, ηp2 = .34) brought about the harmful behavior. Order did
not interact with judgments (F's < 1). Of note, there was a
strong overall correlation of intention and intentionality
judgments: Other Intention/Other Intentional r (35) = .83, p
< .001, Self Intention/Self Intentional, r (35) = .77, p < .001.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 suggested that providing the right environment could engender an Actor-Observer difference in judgments about intentions and intentionality. However, a question remains whether Actor-Observer differences can occur
in traditional pencil-and-paper surveys where participants
are asked to imagine themselves in the role of the chairman.
To address this possible worry that the effect found in Experiment 1 is not the result of the testing environment but
rather is a more general phenomenon, Experiment 2 was designed to suggest that Actor-Observer differences are not
likely to be found when participants are merely asked to
imagine that they are the chairman.

Participants
One hundred and one participants were recruited from
Amazon's Mechanical Turk to complete the survey for a
small reward ($0.15). Participants were excluded if they reported that their first language was not English or if they
failed the comprehension question. After excluding these
participants, 95 remained.

7
The small sample size and unequal cells are problematic. The
small sample size in Help was anticipated because it is unlikely
that good behaviors would be judged unintended by actors. See
Feltz (2007a) and Nadelhoffer (2007) for a discussion.

Methods and Materials
Participants were redirected from Amazon's Mechanical
Turk to complete the surveys at SurveryMonkey.com. There
were four different scenarios: 1. Harm Observer, 2. Harm
Actor, 3. Help Observer, and 4. Help Actor. The following
were the Help and Harm cases in the Actor condition:
Actor Harm/Help: Imagine that you are the chairman of
the board. The vice-president of a company comes to you
and says, “We are thinking of starting a new program. It
will help us increase profits for this year’s balance sheet, but
in ten years it will start to [harm/help] the environment.”
Imagine that you answered, “I don’t care at all about [harming/helping] the environment. I just want to make as much
profit for this year’s balance sheet as I can. Let’s start the
new program.” The program was started. Sure enough, ten
years later, the environment started to be [harmed/helped].
Immediately following the scenario, participants were
asked to rate their level of agreement with the following
sentences (1 = strongly disagree, 4 = neutral, 7 = strongly
agree):
1. You intended to [harm/help] the environment;
2. You intentionally [harmed/helped] the environment;
3. You are [blameworthy/praiseworthy] for harming/helping] the environment.
Participants were also asked the following comprehension
question:
4. How long did it take before the [harm/help] began?
The following were Help and Harm in the Observer condition:
Observer Harm/Help: The vice-president of a company
went to the chairman of the board and said, “We are thinking of starting a new program. It will help us increase profits
for this year’s balance sheet, but in ten years it will start to
[harm\help] the environment.” The chairman answered, “I
don’t care at all about [harming/helping] the environment. I
just want to make as much profit for this year’s balance
sheet as I can. Let’s start the new program.” They started
the new program. Sure enough, ten years later, the environment started to be [harmed/helped].
Immediately following the scenario, participants were
asked to rate their level of agreement with the following
sentences (1 = strongly disagree, 4 = neutral, 7 = strongly
agree): 1. The chairman intended to [harm/help] the environment; 2. The chairman intentionally [harmed/helped] the
environment; and 3. The chairman is [blameworthy/praiseworthy] for [harming/helping] the environment. Participants
were also asked the following comprehension question: 4.
How long did it take before the [harm/help] began?
Each participant was an Actor and an Observer in only
one of the Harm (N = 46) or Help (N = 49) conditions.
The order of presentation was counterbalanced. Once participants completed their responses to one condition, they
could not go back and change their answers.

Results and Discussion
Univariate ANOVAs found a large Knobe-like effect for
Actor judgments about intentions, F (1, 93) = 231.92, p < .

2563

001, ηp2 = .71. Order did not interact with judgments p > .
22. A similar effect was found for Observer judgments
about intentions, F (1, 93) = 64.54, p < .001, ηp2 = .41. Order did not interact with judgments F < 1. A Knobe-like differences was also found for intentionality judgments for
Actors, F (1, 93) = 369.8, p < .001, ηp2 = .80 and Observers,
F (1, 93) = 122.29, p < .001, ηp2 = 57. Order did not reliably
interact with judgments for Actors (F < 1) or Observers (p >
.09).
A mixed-model repeated measures ANOVA with Actor-Observer judgments as within-participants variables and
order as between participants factor did not reveal a reliable
Actor-Observer in Harm, all F's < 1. However, a significant
difference was found for judgments in Help Intention F (1,
47) = 9.77, p = .003, ηp2 = .17 and Help Intentionally F (1,
47) = 8.46, p = .006, ηp2 = .15.
Table 3: Means for Paper Survey
Harm

Help

Actor Intend

M = 4.94
SD = 1.65

M = 1.14
SD = 0.54

Actor Intentionally

M = 5.83
SD = 1.36

M = 1.35
SD = 0.88

Observer Intend

M = 4.94
SD = 1.65

M = 1.96
SD = 1.94

Observer Intentionally

M = 5.83
SD = 1.24

M = 2.04
SD = 1.99

The results of Experiment 2 suggest that the Actor-Observer asymmetry produced in Experiment 1 is not likely to
exist when participants are only encouraged to imagine they
are the chairman.

General Discussion
Consistent with and extending previous research, our results
suggest that in some circumstances people tended to judge
their own behaviors differently than they judge the identical
behavior of others. In addition, our evidence suggests that a
well-known result in experimental philosophy—the traditional side effect-effect—can be reversed. Finally, replicating previous work (Cokely & Feltz, 2009a), extraversion
was systemically and predictably related to some intention
and intentionality judgments.
These results provide further evidence that impression
management can play a key role in people's intention and intentionality judgments. An important clue for this interpretation comes from the results of the Harm case. Participants
were much less likely to judge that they intended the Harm
or intentionally brought it about compared to their judgments as observers. Presumably, participants did not want to
be a “bad guy” by bringing about the bad side effect whereas they were relatively less interested in managing their impression of others. Hence, they were more motivated to re-

spond that they did not intend or intentionally bring about
the Harm. In addition, extraverts were much more likely to
respond this way in Harm. Because extraverts are socially
minded individuals, they would be relatively more concerned with possible social aspects of their behavior. However, because the behavior in Help is beneficial, there is less
motivation to mitigate possibly negative implications of that
behavior. So in Help, the responses between actors and observers would be similar.
These data also provide some important insights into the
side effect-effect. We found strong correlations between
people's intention and intentionality judgments. Those who
favor the SV may take these as supporting data. However,
defenders of the SV should be cautious for two reasons.
First, correlation indicates that there is some relation
between intention and intentionality judgments. These correlations do not necessarily indicate that an intention to A is
a necessary condition for A-ing intentionally. These results
are equally consistent with intending to A is a sufficient condition for A-ing intentionally when one A's—a condition
that most theories of intentional action would endorse under
normal conditions (e.g., no causal deviance). Second, we
have some evidence that a new but equally problematic side
effect-effect exists. For actors who did not think they intended to bring about the penalty or bonus, the moral valence
of the consequence influenced their intentionality judgments. Specifically, participants were more likely to judge
they brought about the beneficial consequence intentionally
than the harmful consequence. These results suggest that at
least some folk do not treat an intention to A as necessary
for A-ing intentionally, contrary to the SV.
Third, our results reinforce the importance of individual
differences in judgments about intentions and intentionality
and provide more evidence that philosophically relevant intuitions are systematically fragmented (Feltz & Cokely,
2009; Cokely & Feltz, 2009b). Those who were extraverted
were less likely to judge that they intended or intentionally
brought about the penalty. Importantly, we were able to predict a priori who were likely to make those judgments. If
there are predictable and systematic differences in intuitions
regarding intentions and intentionality, then perhaps there is
not a single folk concept of intentional action, but several
(Cushman & Mele, 2008).
Finally, we would like to note one limitation of previous
work in experimental philosophy that has relied on “pencil
and paper” surveys. Rather than simply asking participants
to respond to a scenario they read, we asked participants to
perform an action and observe an action. We find that participants are less likely to think that a harm they actually
bring about is intentional compared to a harm somebody
else brings about to them. Hence, using this alternative
method uncovered actor-observer differences in intuitions
about intentions and intentionality, found an intriguing possible reversal of the side effect-effect, and provided additional evidence that folk intuitions about intentional action
are predictably fragmented. We hope that the present experiments open up new methodological avenues for the experi-

2564

mental investigation of folk intuitions about intentional action.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Al Mele, Joshua Knobe, Shaun
Nichols, Mark Isaac, and participants at the NEH Summer
Institute for Experimental Philosophy for very helpful comments.

References
Adams, F. (1986). Intention and intentional action: The
Simple View. Mind and Language, 1, 281-301.
Cushman, F., & Mele, A. (2008). Intentional action: Twoand-a-half folk concepts? In J. Knobe & S. Nichols
(Eds.), Experimental Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cokely, E.T., & Feltz, A. (2009a). Individual differences,
judgment biases, and Theory-of- Mind: Deconstructing
the intentional action side effect asymmetry. Journal of
Research in Personality, 43, 18-24.
Cokely, E. T., & Feltz, A. (2009b). Adaptive variation in
folk judgment and philosophical intuition. Consciousness
and Cognition, 18, 355-357.
Feltz, A. (2007a). Knowledge, moral praise, and moral side
effects. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 27, 123-126.
Feltz, A. (2007b). The Knobe effect: A brief overview.
Journal of Mind and Behavior. The Journal of Mind and
Behavior, 28, 265-277.
Feltz, A., & Cokely, E.T. (2008). The fragmented folk:
More evidence of stable individual differences in moral
judgments and folk intuitions. In B. C. Love, K. McRae &
V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Feltz, A., & Cokely, E.T. (2009). Do judgments about freedom and responsibility depend on who you are?: Personality differences intuitions about compatibilism and incompatibilism. Consciousness and Cognition, 18, 342350.
Fernandez-Duque, D., & Wifall, T. (2007). Actor/observer
asymmetry in risky decision making. Judgment and Decision Making, 2, 1-8.
Fischbacher, U. (2008). z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Readymade Economic Experiments. Experimental Economics,
10, 171-178.
Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., & Swann, W. B. (2003). A
very brief measure of the Big-Five personality domains.
Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 504-528.
John, O. (1999). The Big-five Trait Taxonomy: History,
Measurement, and Theoretical Perspectives. In L. Pervin
& O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of Personality: Theory
and Research. New York: Guilford.
Jones, E., & Nisbett, R. (1972). The actor and the observer:
Divergent perceptions of the causes of behavior. In E.

Jones, D. Kanouse, H. Kelly, R. Nisbett, S. Vallins & B.
Weiner (Eds.), Attribution: Perceiving the Causes of Behavior. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.
Knobe, J. (2003a). Intentional action and side-effects in ordinary language. Analysis, 63, 190-194.
Knobe, J. (2003b). Intentional action in folk psychology: An
experimental investigation. Philosophical Psychology, 16,
309-323.
Knobe, J. (2004a). Folk psychology and folk morality: Response to critics. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 24, 270-279.
Knobe, J. (2004b). Intention, intentional action and moral
considerations. Analysis, 64, 181-187.
Knobe, J., & Burra, A. (2006). Experimental philosophy and
folk concepts: Methodological considerations. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 6, 331-342.
Leslie, A., Knobe, J., & Cohen, A. (2006). Acting intentionally and the side-effect effect: Theory of mind and moral
judgment. Psychological Science, 17, 421-427.
Malle, B., & Knobe, J. (1997). Which behaviors do people
explain? A basic actor-observer asymmetry. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 288-304.
Malle, B., Knobe, J., & Nelson, S. (2007). Actor-observer
asymmetries in explanations of behavior: New answers
to an old question. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 491-514.
McCann, H. (1986). Rationality and the range of intention.
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 10, 191-211.
McCann, H. (2005). Intentional action and intending: Recent empirical studies. Philosophical Psychology, 18,
737-748.
Mele, A. (1992). Recent work on intentional action. American Philosophical Quarterly, 29, 199-217.
Mele, A. (2001). Acting intentionally: Probing folk intuitions. In B. F. Malle, L. J. Moses & D. A. Baldwin
(Eds.), Intentions and Intentionality. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2007). Fringe benefits, side effects, and intentional actions: A reply to Feltz. The Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 27, 801-809.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2006). On trying to save the simple view.
Mind and Language, 21, 565-586.
Nadelhoffer, T., & Feltz, A. (2008). The actor-observer bias
and moral intuitions: Adding fuel to Sinnott-Armstrong's
fire. Neuroethics, 1, 133-144.
Petrinovich, L., & O'Neill, P. (1996). Influence of wording
and framing effects on moral intuitions. Ethology and Sociobiology, 17, 145-171.

2565

