UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adults' self-directed learning of an artificial lexicon: The dynamics of neighborhood
reorganization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2fx2698c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Bardhan, Neil
Aslin, Richard
Tanenhaus, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adults' self-directed learning of an artificial lexicon:
The dynamics of neighborhood reorganization
Neil P. Bardhan (nbardhan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Richard N. Aslin (aslin@cvs.rochester.edu)
Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Meliora Hall, Box 270268
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

Aslin, & Dahan, 2003) further revealed another intricacy of
neighborhood structure, specifically by asking whether all
segment differences, regardless of type (i.e., consonant vs.
vowel) have an equal influence on confusion of newly
learned words. Two CVCV items with matching consonants
are more often confused with each other than two CVCV
items with matching vowels; in other words, segment type
matters. Furthermore, the position of the consonants played
a role: VCVC items with matched consonants did not elicit
such confusions.
One outstanding question concerning neighborhoods is
how they develop. After a pre-lexical infant learns its first
word (e.g., ”no” or its own name), how does
acoustic/phonetic similarity affect the learning of new
words? Do infants acquire words based solely on frequency
of occurrence in the ambient linguistic environment, or do
they systematically avoid attending to novel words that are
similar in sound-structure with known words? Based on
corpus analyses, Charles-Luce and Luce (1990, 1995) made
just such a prediction, but others have provided conflicting
evidence (Coady & Aslin, 2003; Dollaghan, 1994). More
direct evidence comes from word-learning studies with
toddlers. Swingley and Aslin (2007) taught young children
new words that were either neighbors to words they already
knew (e.g., “tog” vs. “dog”) or non-neighbors (e.g., “meb”).
Neighbor items were more difficult than non-neighbors for
the children to learn. However, conflicting evidence from
toddlers exists (Newman, Samuelson & Gupta, 2008),
suggesting that with more exposure they can learn a novel
item from a high-density neighborhood as well as from a
very low-density neighborhood.
This same question of neighborhood effects on word
learning applies to adults, who are constantly acquiring new
words in their lexicon (e.g., “locavore”, “staycation”).
Perhaps more relevant to the growing adult lexicon is the
case of learning words in a second language. Here there is
both a neighborhood effect within the L2 lexicon and
interference effects between the L1 and L2 lexicons. There
is conflicting evidence of between-language neighborhood
effects (Spivey & Marian 1999; Ju & Luce, 2004) in spoken
word recognition, but virtually no evidence for such effects
in word learning. One reason for this limited evidence is
that studies of L1 and L2 lexicons are extremely difficult to
control, and L2 often provides the learner with phonetic and

Abstract
Artificial lexicons have previously been used to examine the
time course of the learning and recognition of spoken words,
the role of segment type in word learning, and the integration
of context during spoken word recognition. However, in all of
these studies the experimenter determined the frequency and
order of the words to be learned. Here we ask whether adult
learners choose, either implicitly or explicitly, to listen to
novel words in a particular order based on their acoustic
similarity. We use a new paradigm for learning an artificial
lexicon in which the learner, rather than the experimenter,
determines the order and frequency of exposure to items. We
analyze both the temporal clustering of subjects' sampling of
lexical neighborhoods during training as well as their
performance during repeated testing phases (accuracy and
reaction time) to determine the time course of learning these
neighborhoods. Subjects sampled the high and low density
neighborhoods randomly in early learning, and then oversampled the high density neighborhood until test performance
on both neighborhoods reached asymptote. These results
provide a new window on the time-course of learning an
artificial lexicon and the role that learners’ implicit
preferences play in learning highly confusable words.
Keywords: spoken word recognition; phonological
neighborhoods; word learning; artificial lexicon

Introduction
Since the pioneering work of Marslen-Wilson (1987) on the
role of acoustic/phonetic similarity in on-line spoken word
recognition, there has been debate over the structure of
phonological neighborhoods in the mental lexicon. In the
cohort model, lexical items were neighbors—and, thus,
competitors—if and only if their sound-forms overlapped
from the beginning of the word, such as in “pat” and “pack”.
The Neighborhood Activation Model (Luce, Pisoni &
Goldinger, 1991; Luce & Pisoni, 1998) quantified
neighborhood similarity as a combination of factors: the
frequency of the single item in question, neighborhood
density (also describable as confusability), and overall
neighborhood frequency. Neighbors as defined by NAM
can include rhyme words (e.g. “pat” and “rat”) and words
with other one-segment differences, such as “pat” and
“past”.
A series of studies by Creel, Aslin, and Tanenhaus (2006)
employing an artificial lexicon (Magnuson, Tanenhaus,

364

phonological cues that clearly mark the lexical item as a
member of only one language.
Another approach to the study of neighborhood effects in
word learning is to create new words that are designed to
compete with known words. Gaskell & Dumay (2003)
present evidence of competition development in Englishspeaking adults who learn a non-English word that
competes with an English word that lacks neighbors. For
example, “cathedral” has no English neighbors, but listeners
were exposed to the meaningless word-form “cathedruke”
over the course of an experiment. The novel item
immediately leads to facilitatory effects on the English item.
However, after sleeping, subjects’ behavior reflected lexical
competition between the two forms. These results suggest
that new words compete with old words during spoken word
recognition, but they do not bear directly on the time-course
of learning new words. Importantly, Magnuson et al.
(2003), using an artificial lexicon, found no significant
evidence that the native language (English) interfered with
the processing of neighbors from the artificial lexicon, at
least not after only 2 hours of training. Thus, in the early
phase of training, even with 90% or better accuracy in
learning the names for novel objects, adults do not seem to
show between-language neighborhood interference.
Here we describe a study of adult learners using an
artificial lexicon. The rationale for using an artificial
lexicon, as in Magnuson et al. (2003) and Creel et al.
(2006), is that we can carefully control all the parameters of
the lexicon (density, frequency, phoneme inventory,
meaning) that are very difficult to balance using natural
language materials. Our key innovation is creating a
learning paradigm in which adults choose how they listen to
the entire set of novel words. They must map 16 novel
word-forms onto 16 novel visual shapes. Across a series of
learning blocks, subjects sample the sound-object pairs by
selecting a shape on a touch screen and hearing that shape’s
name. A testing phase after each training block assesses the
accuracy and speed of word recognition using the same
touch screen. By varying the neighborhood structure within
the set of 16 words, we can determine whether adult learners
choose to sample from high or low density neighborhoods
during the process of learning novel word-object mappings.

exploration of the lexicon and its relation to how well
subjects have learned the lexicon.

Method
Participants
A total of 41 subjects from the University of Rochester
participated in the study and consented per the guidelines of
the University of Rochester human subjects review board.
Each subject received $10 for one session of approximately
45 minutes. They were told that they would be listening to
words and selecting pictures on a touch screen, to learn the
names of the pictures, and subsequently tested on what they
have learned. All subjects reported normal hearing, normal
or corrected-to-normal vision, and were native speakers of
English.

Stimulus Materials
The lexicon was created to vary in neighborhood density
and type of acoustic/phonetic similarity. It consisted of 16
items in total: a high-density cohort neighborhood (baga,
bagi, bago, bagu), a high-density rhyme neighborhood
(dido, kido, pido, tido) and 8 low-density items (gobu, dupi,
poti, toku, kuba, tupa, gota, puki). Items were recorded as
WAV files by a graduate student with linguistics training.
The speaker read each item at a natural rate, yielding an
average word length of 745 milliseconds. Items were paired
with 16 novel black and white images (Hunt & Aslin, 2009).
Three different list conditions of random pairings of words
and pictures were used, counterbalanced to avoid any item
effects that may have arisen from particular word-image
pairings. Subjects were randomly assigned to conditions.

Environment
The experiment was run on MathWorks Matlab and the
Matlab Psychophysics toolbox (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997)
on a Dell Dimension desktop PC running Windows XP with
an NEC touchscreen monitor.
Images were randomly
presented in a 4x4 grid on the screen., as seen in Figure 1
Subjects listened to words over Sennheiser HD 570
headphones set at a comfortable volume level. The study
was conducted in a sound-attenuated booth.

Overview of Design
The learning environment was simplified by presenting
each subject with an array of 16 novel shapes on a touch
screen display. We selected a touch-screen monitor rather
than a computer mouse because it lends itself to ease of use
for children or other special populations who have limited
mouse experience. Subjects are instructed that they should
learn the names of the shapes by touching them and hearing
that shape’s name. They are told that they can touch shapes
in any order and that they have 64 touches per block. After
each block, they will be tested for their knowledge of shape
names by hearing a name and completing a 16-AFC task.
This alternation of training blocks and testing blocks allows
us to describe any changes in how subjects allocate their

Figure 1: An example screen

365

Task
Training and testing were alternated in a session, with 6
blocks of each, for a total of 12 blocks. Participants were
told to select the items (i.e., touch a shape) in any order they
desired to learn the words that named each of the 16 images
on the screen. They were not told that they would be trained
on the same 16 images and corresponding words in future
blocks. Rather, they were told that each testing block would
correspond to the preceding training block. During each
training block, an on-screen counter marked off the number
of remaining training trials the subject had, from 64 to 0,
until a test block would begin. If the subject had evenly
distributed their touches in a block, they would hear each
word 4 times, which was deemed sufficient for a minimal
level of familiarity but not full mastery after the initial
block. The location of each image was randomized four
times during training blocks: once at the beginning of the
block, then once after each 16 trials. This precluded the
possibility that subjects made associations between item
location and name, rather than the desired effect of item
image (shape) and name.
A test block consisted of two passes through the list of
lexical items, for a total of 32 trials, in random order.
Subjects pressed a GO button image on the screen to start a
test trial, then heard a word corresponding to one of the 16
images on the screen. They were free to select any of the
items present on the screen, in a 16-AFC task. Instructions
specified that they should respond as quickly and accurately
as possible. If they correctly selected an image, the image
turned green. If they selected an incorrect image, the image
turned red; they were not informed of the correct image.
Thus feedback provided the subject with only minimal
information about each decision—whether it was correct—
but not information as to which image was the correct item
if they made an error. Allowing the participant to start each
trial provided the opportunity for short rests as needed
during the testing blocks.

Figure 2: Training selections of high density items
Training sequences were then analyzed for the likelihood
that a subject, having selected an item from a particular
neighborhood, would next select an item from the same
neighborhood. The blue line in Figure 3 shows, across all
subjects, the proportion of item selections that, on the
immediately following trial, were drawn from the same high
density neighborhood. Error bars represent standard errors
of the mean. The pink line represents the eight low-density
items grouped into random pseudo-neighborhoods of four
items, to provide a baseline comparison for the likelihood of
selecting within any group of four items.

Results
Training data
An analysis of variance was performed to determine the
effect of density (high versus low) on overall proportion of
selection of training items; the result was not significant.
Within high density items, a two-factor ANOVA with
replication was performed, comparing the number of
selections of items from the high density cohort
neighborhood to those from the high density rhyme
neighborhood, across blocks. Cohort items were chosen
more frequently than rhyme items, F(1,84) = 15.69, p < .001
(see Figure 2). Block was also a significant factor F(5,420)
= 2.52, p < .05 and
there was an interaction of
neighborhood type and block, F(5, 420) = 3.60, p < .01.

Figure 3: In-neighborhood probability
A two-factor ANOVA with replication was performed.
This revealed a main effect of density, low versus high,
F(1,5) = 37.86, p < .001, and a significant interaction of
density x block, F(1,5) = 5.92, p < .001. Within the highdensity neighborhoods, a single factor ANOVA examined
whether there was an effect of block on probability of
successive same-neighborhood selections. A significant
effect of block was found, F(5,252) = 2.94, p < .05.

366

Test data:
Figure 4 shows that for both high and low density items,
the accuracy of responding on the 16-AFC test blocks rose
rapidly from 50% correct (chance=6.25%) to asymptotic
performance within the 6 testing blocks. A two-factor
ANOVA with replication examining accuracy across test
blocks revealed a significant effect of block F(5,504) =
98.19, p < .001. There was also an effect of density F(1,) =
.10, p < .05, but no interaction of density with block
F(5,504) = .36, p > .05.

Discussion
The present experiment is the first that we know of to
assess how human learners allocate their attention by
selecting novel words for association with novel visual
objects in a word-learning paradigm. By having subsets of
words that share acoustic/phonetic properties (lexical
neighbors), we could ask whether learners seek or avoid
repetitive samples of words from low- or high-density
neighborhoods as they acquire new word-object
associations.

Training data
Throughout the six training blocks, more high density
cohort items were selected than high density rhyme items.
Subjects concentrated their selections on cohort items,
presumably because of the perceived phonological
similarity among these items.
For high density items, there was a significant effect of
block on the likelihood that subjects selected an item from
one neighborhood and then on the subsequent touch selected
an item from the same neighborhood. (This includes
pressing the same item twice in a row.) In the initial trials,
selection was nearly random. As the session continued,
however, the probability that subsequent selections were
within the same neighborhood significantly increased, then
decreased to initial levels as mastery of the items was
achieved and concentrated training on neighbors was no
longer beneficial. When the low density items were
randomly grouped into two groups of four and the selection
data from those were compared to the high density
selections, there was a significant effect of density and an
interaction with blocks. Subjects were more likely to select
two high-density items within a neighborhood (of four), one
after another, than to select any two low-density items out of
a random grouping of four. A regression model (proposed
later) may be informative in further analyses of the
influence of word-sampling behavior within one training
block on the behavior exhibited in subsequent blocks.

Figure 4: Proportion of test trials correct
A single-factor ANOVA of reaction times for correct
trials across test blocks, collapsed across densities, showed a
significant effect of block F(5,252) = 8.03, p < .001.

Testing data
Subjects achieved 51% accuracy within the first testing
block, after hearing each word on average only 4 times; this
is significantly above chance (6.25% correct). This minimal
exposure was sufficient to achieve significant learning, but
performance did not reach asymptotic levels until 5 or 6
blocks of training. Accuracy was affected by density. High
density items were correctly identified less frequently than
low density items until halfway through the experiment.
Their phonological similarity presumably created greater
difficulty for the subjects.
As in previous studies, differences in reaction times also
occurred as a result of density, with low density items being
responded to more rapidly than high density items
consistently until the final block, at which point
performance on the two densities was equivalent.

Figure 5: Reaction times in test
Figure 5 shows reaction times in the initial and final test
blocks, as a function of neighborhood density. A two-factor
ANOVA with replication revealed highly significant effects
of block F(5,492) = 14.50, p < .001 and density F(1,1) =
18.36, p < .001.

367

similarity neighbourhoods in young children’s receptive
vocabularies. Journal of Child Language 22, 727–35.
Coady, J. A., & Aslin, R. N. (2003). Phonological
neighbourhoods in the developing lexicon. Journal of
Child language, 30(02), 441-469.
Creel, S. C., Aslin, R. N., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006).
Acquiring an artificial lexicon: Segment type and order
information in early lexical entries. Journal of Memory
and Language, 54, 1-19.
Dollaghan, C. A. (1994). Children’s phonological
neighbourhoods: half empty or half full ? Journal of
Child Language 21, 257–71.
Gaskell, M. G., & Dumay, N. (2003). Lexical competition
and the acquisition of novel words. Cognition, 89(2),
105-132.
Hunt, R. H., & Aslin, R. N. (2009). Category induction via
distributional analysis: Evidence from a serial reaction
time task. Journal of Memory and Language, 62, 98-112.
Ju, M. & Luce, P. A. (2004). Falling on Sensitive Ears Constraints on Bilingual Lexical Activation.
Psychological Science, 15 (5), 314-318.
Luce, P. A., Pisoni, D. B., & Goldinger, S. D. (1991).
Similarity neighborhoods of spoken words. In G. T. M.
Altmann (Ed.), Cognitive models of speech processing
(pp. 122-147). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Luce, P. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Recognizing spoken
words: The neighborhood activation model. Ear and
Hearing, 19(1), 1-36.
Magnuson, J. S., Tanenhaus, M. K., Aslin, R. N., & Dahan,
D. (2003). The time course of spoken word learning and
recognition: Studies with artificial lexicons. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132(2), 202-227.
Newman, R., Samuelson, L., & Gupta, P. (2008). Learning
Novel Neighbors: Distributed mappings help children
and connectionist models. Paper presented at the
Cognitive Science Society, Washington, DC, USA.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies.
Spatial Vision, 10, 437-442.
Revill, K. P., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Aslin, R. N. (2008).
Context and spoken word recognition in a novel lexicon.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 34(5), 1207-1223.
Spivey, M. J., & Marian, V. (1999). Cross talk between
native and second languages: Partial activation of an
irrelevant lexicon. Psychological Science, 10(3), 281284.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R. N. (2007). Lexical competition in
young children’s word learning. Cognitive Psychology,
54(2), 99-132.

Future studies
Numerous ways of examining the development of
neighborhoods could provide greater insight into the time
course of lexical competition during word learning. One
such study would be to successively reveal subsets of
neighborhoods to the learner in the paradigm described here.
The training sequences would be of particular interest; in
contrast to the present study, a different set of items would
be present during each training block, and so the subject
may adjust training strategies accordingly as overall
neighborhood density is revealed across blocks.
Other statistical analyses, in the form of linear regression
models, may reveal more about the present study and future
designs. One analysis would be whether the performance on
one test block influences training patterns in the
immediately following block, which the current analyses
cannot address well. Finally, our current analyses of withinneighborhood effects of training include pairs of trials in
which one of the four items from the same high-density
neighborhood is selected, including immediate repeats of
the same item. Excluding these identical repeats may be
more relevant to the question of lexical competition during
learning.

Conclusion
It is well established that words in high-density
neighborhoods are more difficult to process than words in
low-density neighborhoods. When adults are given control
over the frequency of exposure to novel words, they quickly
adjust the rate of exposure by over-sampling words in highdensity neighborhoods, particularly cohort neighbors more
so than rhyme neighbors. The difficulty of learning high
density items was revealed in this study as differences in
accuracy and reaction time, which persist for the initial
blocks of test trials. However, subsequent training yields
equivalent learning accuracy for words in high- and lowdensity neighborhoods.
Our paradigm is likely to be useful for addressing a
variety of issues in lexical learning.
Perhaps most
importantly, the method may be useful for teaching children
novel lexical items, either in the laboratory or in the
classroom.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH Grants HD037082 to
RNA and DC005071 to MKT. The authors express gratitude
to Johnny Wen for programming assistance and Dana Subik
and Carrie Miller for recruiting participants.

References
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Charles-Luce, J. & Luce, P. A. (1990). Similarity
neighbourhoods of words in young children’s lexicons.
Journal of Child Language 17, 205–15.
Charles-Luce, J. & Luce, P. A. (1995). An examination of

368

