UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Alignment of Spatial Perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8148n2tf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Andonova, Elena

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Alignment of Spatial Perspective
Elena Andonova (andonova@uni-bremen.de)
SFB/TR8, University of Bremen, Cartesium, 7 Enrique-Schmidt Str.,
Bremen, Germany

Abstract
Most of the experimental research on dialogue that has
provided evidence for interactive alignment focuses on
speakers aligning at the lexical and syntactic levels of
representations and dialogic contributions, i.e., having
converging choices of lexical and syntactic means of referring
to pictured objects and events. Less is known about alignment
at the conceptual level, or situation models. This paper
addresses alignment in spatial perspective (route vs. survey
perspective) between speakers in a confederate experimental
task taking turns in describing routes on schematic maps. The
findings of two experiments show that speakers’ spatial
perspective choices are aligned with those of their partners
both before and after partners switch perspective.
Furthermore, this alignment effect holds both if partners show
consistency adhering to the same perspective for a sequence
of descriptions and when they display inconsistency by
switching spatial perspective for every new description they
provide.
Keywords: spatial perspective; interactive alignment.

Introduction
Imagine asking someone on the phone for directions on how
to go some place while looking at a simple map. Now
imagine being told to go ‘left’ while your current orientation
is facing ‘downward’ on the map. This is potentially a
problem because of the ambiguity inherent in this term. It is
unclear if left is mapped onto your perspective and
orientation at a given time as situated in the environment or
to be interpreted from the external viewpoint of looking at
the map as if from above. Now imagine further that it is
your turn to make a suggestion for a route to the person on
the phone. How likely are you to use the same perspective
your partner used just now vs. another? The inherent
ambiguity of terms such as left and right when produced and
understood within different perspectives and frames of
reference is an excellent testing ground for frameworks of
interaction and coordination in a dialogic situation.
The interactive alignment model (Pickering & Garrod,
2004) posits that much of speech production choices in
dialogic situations can be explained via an automatic
mechanism involving priming at multiple levels of linguistic
representation and percolation between these levels.
Furthermore, alignment of situation models is achieved on
the basis of such lower-level alignment of representations.
While the model also allows for alignment via explicit
reasoning and modeling of the partner’s mental states and
mental model updating, it places a particular emphasis on

these low-level mechanisms. Alternative accounts of
dialogue behavior question the explanatory power of
automatic priming in dialogic convergence and underline
the role of (explicit) modeling of partners and their mental
states of representation. Common conversational ground is
the outcome of a joint effort on behalf of interlocutors who
attend to the degree to which information is mutually shared
(Clark, 1996).
Research on dialogue has addressed how speakers deal
with variability and ambiguity in order to achieve alignment
of situation models. One and the same object or event can
trigger multiple perceptual and conceptual representations.
For example, in a study of goal-directed dialogue (Garrod &
Anderson, 1987), different description schemes were used
by speakers referring to a maze and movement in it (path,
coordinate, line, figural schemes). Similarly, in a study of
how people describe complex multiple-object scenes,
speakers’ choices varied significantly depending on the
nature of the array (Andonova, Coventry, & Tenbrink, in
press).
Multiple perspectives, or ways of speaking about the
world, are reflected on different levels of language but also
in variation at a conceptual level. In spatial reference,
different conceptualizations can be found in the choices of
spatial perspective and frames of reference. In particular,
perspective taking involves abstracting from the visual
scene and organizing and packaging information in
accordance with one or another type of viewpoint. Spatial
perspective varieties can be characterized in different ways.
Here we will adopt a binary distinction which is a simplified
yet common typology. A route or environment can be
described from an embedded (route or egocentric)
perspective, that is, from within the environment, based on
the way-finder, as embedded in the path, or from an external
(survey or allocentric) perspective, that is, a viewpoint
external to the environment, commonly associated with
maps and cardinal directions, the way people would look at
a map or a drawing of a route. For the sake of brevity and
simplicity, here we will refer to these as the route
perspective and the survey perspective. Previous studies
have demonstrated that a number of individual,
environmental, and learning factors are sources of variation
in spatial perspective in verbal descriptions. Mode of
acquisition has been shown to affect perspective choices in
spatial memory; for example, participants who studied maps
gave more accurate responses later in survey perspective
tasks whereas those who were navigating gave more
accurate responses to route perspective tasks (Taylor,
Naylor, & Chechile, 1999). Taylor & Tversky (1996) tested

2506

the influence of four environmental features on spatial
perspective choices and found that although overall most
participants’ descriptions followed a survey or a mixed
perspective, preference for the use of route perspective was
enhanced in environments that contained a single path vs.
multiple paths and environments that contained landmarks
of a single size scale vs. landmarks of varying size.
Bugman, Coventry, and Newstead (2007) found that context
of retrieval (frequency of visitation vs. importance of
activities) can affect spatial perspective choices, too.
Variability in spatial perspective choices is frequently
accompanied with perspective switching behavior–
participants tend to mix perspectives quite regularly, for
example, 27 out of 67 participants in Taylor & Tversky’s
(1996) first experiment and 74 out of 192 participants in
their second experiment mixed perspectives in their
descriptions. There are multiple reasons why a speaker may
switch from one perspective to another, for example,
because of some features of the environment or the task.
However, although most studies have researched spatial
perspective choices in a monologue setting, one important
reason for initial perspective choice and subsequent
switches may be the behavior of the interlocutor
(conversation partner) in a typical dialogue setting of giving
road instructions, for example. Two exceptions to the
dominant monologue settings of spatial perspective research
are a study by Schober (1993) which showed that speakers
set spatial perspectives differently with actual addressees
than with imaginary ones and another by Striegnitz, Tepper,
Lovett, & Cassel (2008) in which there was an increased use
of survey perspective in response to clarification questions
and in re-phrasal of previously given route descriptions.
The variability of spatial perspective and perspective
switching make this phenomenon a suitable testing ground
on coordination of speakers’ choices in dialogue. Thus, two
strands of research and related questions are in the
combined focus of this paper—spatial perspective use and
interactive alignment.
When dialogue partners refer to the same scene, they
select a frame of reference or a perspective for the
description. Thus, in dialogue, perspective use and
perspective switching are part of the overall process of
coordination. Does choice of perspective depend then on the
previous use or preference for a certain perspective shown
by one’s dialogue partner, i.e., do speakers align in their
choices of a spatial descriptive schema? If so, to what extent
can this influence be modulated by the degree of
consistency of partners’ choices? Furthermore, how flexible
is this process of coordination and perspective choice? Does
the first ‘conceptual pact’ one strikes implicitly with one’s
partner remain dominant throughout an interaction, or
alternatively, if the partner switches perspective, is one
more likely to adhere to the previously used perspective, or
to switch along, and re-align?
In the studies presented here, there were two clearly
possible perspectives on the scene and route to be described:
survey and route perspective. Route perspective is by far the

more natural way to describe routes whereas survey
perspective is more typical of location descriptions. In order
to enhance the probability of use of survey perspective and
to bring the two more into balance, the maps to be described
were positioned vertically, which also corresponds to
viewing maps on a screen.
In the first experiment, we ask first whether speakers
align choices of spatial perspective when their partner
follows one perspective consistently in a short sequence of
descriptions (four maps with routes). We also ask whether
spatial perspective alignment persists even when the partner
switches perspectives and offers a subsequent series of
descriptions in an alternative perspective.

Experiment 1
As stated above, this experiment was designed to examine
two related questions. First, whether speakers align on
spatial perspective, and second, if they continue to align
with their partners even when their partners switch
perspective between an early and a later experimental block.
If speakers rely only on a general model of partner
preferences built on the basis of their experience during the
early block, then perspective switch by the confederate
would not reverse speakers’ choices in accordance with the
new spatial perspective bias exhibited in the later block. If
speakers are sensitive not only to initial partner preferences
but they also update their model of their partner (after the
switch), then they should also show a tendency to switch
perspective in a similar way. A third possibility also
exists—the fact that their partners have used both route and
survey perspectives and that they switched between them
may reduce speakers’ preferences for either perspective and
lead them to choose between perspectives more or less
randomly.

Method
The design of the experiment included prime perspective
(route vs. survey) and experimental block (early vs. later) as
independent variables and mean percent choice of route
perspective on each experimental block as the dependent
variable.
Participants 24 participants (3 male) took part in the
experiment. They were university students with a mean age
of 21.08 years (range 19 – 31) who received course credit or
were paid for their participation. All were native German
speakers.
Stimuli Thirty-two simplified map drawings were used in
the study. Six different maps were created and a total of 16
different routes. Stimuli were pseudo-randomized with the
constraints that no two consecutive maps should be the
same, and neither the start nor the end points of the routes
on consecutive maps should be the same. Routes were predrawn on the maps so as to exclude a route planning
component in the task and focus exclusively on choice of
spatial perspective (see Fig.1 for an example). There were

2507

16 experimental trials (8 prime-target pairs) and 16 fillers.
The maps and routes on the experimental prime-target trials
were designed to be compatible with both route and survey
perspective descriptions. Confederates’ descriptions of
routes were either in a route perspective or a survey
perspective. Filler maps and routes were drawn in such a
way as to minimize the use of spatial perspective, for
example, a circular trajectory. Furthermore, confederates’
scripted descriptions on these trials did not contain any
indication of spatial perspective.
Each experimental prime-target pair was preceded by two
filler items. There were two blocks of experimental pairs, an
early and a later one. In accordance with the design of the
experiment, the perspective of the confederate primes was
consistent within each block and was either route or survey.
However, confederates’ scripted descriptions on the two
blocks differed in spatial perspective, i.e., the confederate
switched perspectives between the early and the later block
of trials.

Figure 1: Example of a map and its pre-drawn route. The
triangle indicates the position and orientation at the start.
Procedure Each participant was seated across a desk from
the confederate and a visual barrier was placed between
them and a stack of cards with identical maps and routes
drawn were placed in front of them on a vertical stand.
Cards were positioned vertically to motivate more the use of
the generally weaker and less common survey/gaze
perspective. In addition, the confederate used a list of prescripted descriptions matching their cards in either route or
survey perspective. The scripted responses of the
confederate were not visible. We took special care to
minimize possible suspicions on behalf of the participants
that their partner in the experiment may not be a naïve
participant such as they were, including greetings,
familiarization procedures, instructions, etc. Confederates
were student assistants of the same age and population
generally who were trained to act naïve. Participants and
confederates took turns in describing the routes on these
cards. A red and a green dot marked on the back of each
card were used to indicate whose turn it was to speak.
Confederates were the first to speak, thus ensuring that their
utterances (primes) precede those of the participants on
target trials. Participants were instructed to monitor the

descriptions of their partner for accuracy and to offer a
correction whenever they noted an incorrect description.
Three deliberate errors were built into the script on filler
items. This instruction ensured that participants were
attending to their partners’ descriptions and choice of
perspective. At the end of the experimental session,
participants filled out a questionnaire which included
questions asking participants to say what they thought the
experiment was about and what they thought about their
partner’s behavior. As nobody indicated any suspicions that
their partner may not have been a naïve participant such as
they were, the data of all participants were accepted for
analysis.
This procedural setup is a close replica of the procedure in
Branigan, Pickering, McLean & Cleland (2007) which
studied the effects of participant role on syntactic alignment.

Results
The pre-analysis procedure was identical for the data in
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 and will be described here
jointly. Participants’ responses were classified according to
the spatial perspective used as belonging to one of three
categories: route perspective, survey perspective, or mixed
perspective. Experimental pairs on which the confederate
made a mistake (1.99%) were excluded from the analysis, as
well as those when the participant offered a correction to
their partner’s description of an experimental item
(20.39%). Route perspective was the preferred default
option and in the majority of these cases participants offered
a ‘correction’ of the confederate’s survey perspective
description into a route perspective one. The following are
examples of participant responses to the map and route in
Fig.1 coded as route perspective (a), survey perspective (b),
and mixed perspective (c) in their original German and in
translation:
(a) hier gehst du geradeaus und biegst dann links ab
E. here you go straight and then turn left
(b) hier gehst du erst nach äh links und dann nach unten
E. here you first go uhm left and then down
(c) hier geht‘s geradeaus und dann nach unten
E. here one goes straight and then down
The data for each participant for each block (early and
late) were converted into mean percent use of route
perspective.
The hypothesis that speakers align at the conceptual level
of spatial perspective was tested in a 2 (prime: route vs.
survey) x 2 (block: early vs. later) analysis of variance on
the mean percent use of route perspective. A main effect of
prime perspective was found, F(1, 44)=12.49, p=.001,
ηp2=.22. No effect of experimental block (early vs. later) was
found, and there was no interaction between experimental
block and prime perspective. On the early block, participants
in the survey prime condition described the routes drawn on

2508

their maps in the route perspective only 54.92% of the time
while those in the route perspective condition did so 88.92%
of the time (Table 1). On the later block, following their
partner’s switch, participants primed by the survey
perspective also produced significantly fewer descriptions in
the route perspective than those who were primed by the
route perspective (69.42% vs. 95.17%, respectively).
Table 1: Mean percent use of route perspective before and
after prime perspective switch in Experiment 1.

Prime: Route
Prime: Survey

Early block
(pre-switch)
88.92
54.92

of 21.32 years (range 19 – 28) who received course credit or
were paid for their participation. All were native German
speakers.
Stimuli The same visual stimuli were used as in Experiment
1. However, in this second experiment, the confederate
switched between route and survey perspective on each trial.
The first description they gave was route in one of the
experimental lists and survey in the other. Thus, the
perspective of the confederate primes was inconsistent.
Procedure The procedure was identical to the one used in
Experiment 1.

Later block
(after switch)
95.17
69.42

Results

Experiment 2
The results of the first experiment provided evidence for
speakers’ alignment with their partner at the conceptual
level of spatial perspective both before and after their
partner switched from route to survey perspective or the
other way round. However, within each of the two
experimental blocks, confederates adhered consistently to
one perspective only. Thus, when they switched perspective
on the later block, prime perspective also remained constant
for all four experimental pairs within that block. It is not
clear, however, whether speakers’ alignment on spatial
perspective may have been influenced by this high degree of
consistency within an experimental block. The second
experiment set out to test whether speakers would also show
conceptual alignment of spatial perspective with their
partner even if the partner showed high inconsistency and
switched perspective all the time, that is, between trials
rather than between experimental blocks (as in Experiment
1). Constantly switching perspective may make the
confederate’s choices appear more random and may thus
lead participants to adopt a generally ‘random’ choice
approach themselves. To distinguish between this possible
outcome and systematic alignment with one’s partner even
in the face of the partner’s inconsistency, a second
experiment was conducted in which speakers’ choices were
analysed as a function of the immediately preceding prime
for each target item.

Method
The design of the second experiment was basically the same
with one exception. It included prime perspective (route vs.
survey) and experimental block (early vs. later) as
independent variables and mean percent choice of route
perspective on each experimental block as the dependent
variable. However, prime perspective in this case was
inconsistent, i.e., constantly alternating between trials.
Participants 19 participants (3 male) took part in the
experiment. They were university students with a mean age

Participants’ responses were classified according to the
spatial perspective used as in Experiment 1. The data for
each participant for each block (early and late) and for each
prime condition (survey vs. route) were converted into mean
percent use of route perspective.
A 2 (prime: route vs. survey) x 2 (block: early vs. later)
analysis of variance on the mean percent use of route
perspective revealed a main effect of prime perspective, F(1,
61)=5.47, p=.023, ηp2=.08. No effect of experimental block
(early vs. later) was found, and there was no interaction
between experimental block and prime perspective. On
average across early and later blocks, participants in the
survey prime condition described the routes drawn on their
maps in the route perspective 68.52% of the time while
those in the route prime condition did so 88.16% of the time
(Table 2).
Table 2: Mean percent use of route perspective on the
early and later block in Experiment 2.

Prime: Route
Prime: Survey

Early block

Later block

84.21
73.33

92.11
62.50

Discussion and conclusions
Experiment 1 showed that speakers do align spatial
perspectives with their partners. Those who heard their
partner use a survey perspective consistently on the early
block of four consecutive experimental trials were less
likely to adhere to the otherwise preferred default of route
perspective and used instead survey perspective themselves
or a mix of the two perspectives in their descriptions. The
magnitude of this alignment effect on the early block was
34% and although it was reduced somewhat on the second
block to 26%, it nevertheless occurred on this later block of
four experimental trials as well. What is more, the 8%
reduction was not so considerable as to produce a
statistically significant interaction between prime
perspective and experimental block, i.e., the alignment

2509

tendency appeared to be equally strong across blocks. This
is particularly striking in view of the nature of the second
(later) experimental pairs. During those trials, the
confederate used the alternative perspective to the one he or
she used on the early block, thus displaying a switch from
survey to route perspective or vice versa. In this sense,
although on each set of four consecutive trials the
confederate had made consistent perspective ‘choices’ in
their descriptions, across the two experimental blocks their
behavior appeared inconsistent, and yet, participants had the
same tendency to align with their partners later as well as
earlier during the experimental session. This is notable for
two reasons. First, it shows that spatial perspective is used
flexibly, and that speakers make use of the possibility to
switch perspective with relative ease. Second, it also shows
that speakers were not entrained on the first perspective only
that they heard their partner use but that they updated. In
this sense, this experiment has provided evidence for
speakers’ sensitivity to their partners’ changes in behavior
and preference for a representation scheme.
Participants’ alignment with their partners in spatial
perspective in the first experiment was not significantly
reduced on the later post-switch experimental block.
However, one good reason for this persistence of alignment
even after the switch between experimental blocks may have
been that the behavior of their partners within experimental
blocks remained consistent. Experiment 2 put this
possibility to the test. Here confederates’ pre-scripted
descriptions switched between the two perspectives
constantly, i.e., if their first, third, fifth, etc. utterances were
in a route perspective, then their second, fourth, sixth
descriptions were in survey perspective, and vice versa. The
analysis of the data revealed that participants aligned even
in this case, i.e., they were more likely to use a survey
perspective description after they heard their partner use one
than if they heard their partner use a route perspective
description, an alignment effect of almost 20% difference in
choices. Furthermore, this effect did not interact with
experimental block (early vs. late), that is, the alignment
tendency did not become weaker as time went on. Although
the interaction did not reach statistical significance, it is
worth noting here that numerically the perspective
alignment effect in the later experimental block was much
greater (almost 30%) than in the early block. If nothing else,
the tendency to align appeared to have been enhanced later.
Note that there was no general difference between the early
and the later block in this second experimental design, i.e.,
no sudden change of partner behavior unlike the switch
between blocks in the first experiment. In this sense, the
growing alignment tendency could be interpreted not as
enhanced activation of one of the spatial perspective
schemes but more of a general (perspective non-specific)
convergence across speakers and accumulation of priming.
However, this interpretation can only be offered with a
proviso. As described earlier, items where the participant
objected to the description used by their partner were not
included in data for analysis as priming could not be tested

because of an interruption of direct the prime-target
sequence and possible interference from self-priming by the
alternative ‘correction’ that participants used in both
experiments, although such trials occurred less frequently in
the second experiment. Nevertheless, the important finding
from Experiment 2 was that speakers aligned in spatial
perspective even in cases where their partners exhibited a
highly inconsistent descriptive behavior by constantly
switching between the two perspective schemas. Such
inconsistency by the partner did not lead participants to
view either perspective as equally suitable and then adopt
one of the two as the easy, less effortful strategy. It did not
lead them to make random choices, either. Instead,
participants aligned systematically with their partners, i.e.,
they were prepared to switch perspectives regularly.
Further research into spatial perspective alignment will
help solve more mysteries. A memory task experiment
(Andonova & Coventry, 2009) has revealed spatial
perspective priming. A comparison of the two studies
indicates common underlying mechanisms that need to be
explored further.
The main conclusions of the two experiments described
here are as follows. We found evidence for spatial
perspective alignment across speakers in a route description
task. Perspective alignment was sensitive to consistency of
use by one’s partner in the early stages of the interaction (a
much weaker alignment tendency of approximately 10% on
the early block in Experiment 2 in comparison with the
robust 34% effect in Experiment 1). Perspective alignment
persisted even after a switch in partner behavior, i.e.,
alignment persisted even when perspective did not.

Acknowledgments
Thanks go to the German Science Fund (DFG) for funding
provided to SFB/TR8 Spatial Cognition at the University of
Bremen where this research was conducted, to the research
assistants and confederates, and the research team of I5DiaSpace. The comments and suggestions of the anonymous
reviewers of the manuscript are gratefully acknowledged.

References
Andonova, Coventry, & Tenbrink (in press). Function and
context affect spatial information packaging at multiple
levels. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Andonova, E., & Coventry, K. (2009). Alignment and
Priming of Spatial Perspective. In: Edlund, J., Gustafson,
J., Hjalmarsson, A., & Skantze, G., (Eds.), Proceedings of
Diaholmia, Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics
of Dialogue. Stockholm: KTH.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., McLean, J. F., & Cleland,
A. A. (2007). Syntactic alignment and participant role in
dialogue. Cognition, 104,163–197.
Bugmann, D., Coventry, K.R., & Newstead, S.E. (2007).
Contextual cues and the retrieval of information from
cognitive maps. Memory & Cognition, 35(3), 381-392.

2510

Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Garrod, S.C., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you
mean in dialogue: a study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition. 27, 181–218.
Pickering, M., and Garrod, S. 2004. The Interactive
Alignment Model. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27(2):169-189.
Schober, M.F. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in
conversation. Cognition, 47, 1-24.
Striegnitz, K., Tepper, P., Lovett, A., Cassel, J. (2008).
Knowledge representation for generating locating
gestures in route directions. In: Spatial Language in
Dialogue. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Taylor, H.A., Naylor, S.J., & Chechile, N.A. (1999). Goalspecific influences on the representation of spatial
perspective. Memory & Cognition, 27(2), 309-319.
Taylor, H.A., & Tversky, B. (1996). Perspective in Spatial
Descriptions. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 371391.

2511

