UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Am I a Robot? How Verb Agency and Agent Description Influence Perspective-Taking in
Visual Scenes
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7811d12t
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Greenwood, Michelle D.
Matlock, Teenie
Spivey, Michael J.
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

    Am I a Robot? How Verb Agency and Agent Description Influence
                               Perspective-Taking in Visual Scenes
                                             Michelle D. Greenwood
                                            University of California, Merced
                                                  Teenie Matlock
                                            University of California, Merced
                                                Michael J. Spivey
                                            University of California, Merced
                                               Justin L. Matthews
                                            University of California, Merced
Abstract: People often take an egocentric perspective when describing space. However, they occasionally take an
alternative perspective. When and why? In a series of experiments that followed work on perspective, we explored
this question. In one experiment, participants were given photographs of two objects on a table. Objectively, the
scene could be described from either the perspective of the person viewing the picture or from the opposite perspective
(i.e., facing the viewer). To test which viewpoint would be elicited, we asked participants to describe where an object
was relative to another. In one experiment, a toy humanoid robot (facing the participant) was included in the
scene to determine whether people would take its vantage point when referring to object locations, and how this
inclination might vary according to changes in linguistic context. Results indicate that people can spontaneously
take the perspective of an agent-like toy when describing object locations.
                                                           611

