UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Agent-based Simulation of the Effectiveness of Creative Leadership

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45x1s6kv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Leijnen, Stefan
Gabora, Liane

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reference: Leijnen, S. & Gabora, L. (2010). An agent-based simulation of the effectiveness of creative leadership. Proceedings of the
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, August 11-14, 2010, Portland, Oregon.

An Agent-based Simulation of the Effectiveness of Creative Leadership
Stefan Leijnen (stefan.leijnen@ubc.ca)

Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)

Department of Psychology
University of British Columbia
Okanagan campus, 3333 University Way
Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, Canada

Department of Psychology
University of British Columbia
Okanagan campus, 3333 University Way
Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, Canada

Abstract

artificial society is highest when creators dedicate
themselves fully to invention. However, as the proportion of
creators increases, for optimal results, creators should spend
more time imitating. Creative agents amounted to ‘puncture
points’ in the fabric of society that interfered with the
dissemination of proven effective ideas.
In the current investigation we focused exclusively on the
extent to which creativity is desirable in a leader, where
leadership is equated with having substantial influence over
others. Previous results indicated that the presence of a
leader accelerates convergence on optimal ideas, but does so
at the cost of consistently reducing the diversity of ideas
(Gabora, 2008b,c). In these previous simulations, the leader
was no more nor less creative than the rest of the agents,
referred to here as followers. The goal of the work reported
here was to investigate how creative versus uncreative
leadership affects the group as a whole.

This paper investigates the effectiveness of creative versus
uncreative leadership using EVOC, an agent-based model of
cultural evolution. Each iteration, each agent in the artificial
society invents a new action, or imitates a neighbor’s action.
Only the leader’s actions can be imitated by all other agents,
referred to as followers. Two measures of creativity were
used: (1) invention-to-imitation ratio, iLeader, which measures
how often an agent invents, and (2) rate of conceptual
change, cLeader, which measures how creative an invention is.
High iLeader increased mean fitness of ideas, but only when
creativity of followers was low. High iLeader was associated
with greater diversity of ideas in the early stage of idea
generation only. High cLeader increased mean fitness of ideas
in the early stage of idea generation; in the later stage it
decreased idea fitness. Reasons for these findings and
tentative implications for creative leadership in human society
are discussed.
Keywords: agent based modeling; broadcasting; creativity;
culture; cultural evolution; imitation; leadership.

The Modeling Platform
Our investigation was carried out using an agent-based
simulation referred to as ‘EVOlution of Culture’,
abbreviated EVOC (Gabora, 2008b, 2008c). EVOC is an
elaboration of Meme and Variations, or MAV (Gabora,
1994, 1995), the earliest computer program to model culture
as an evolutionary process in its own right (as opposed to
modeling the interplay of cultural and biological evolution).
The approach was inspired by Holland’s (1975) genetic
algorithm, or GA. The GA is a search technique that finds
solutions to complex problems by generating a ‘population’
of candidate solutions through processes akin to mutation
and recombination, selecting the best, and repeating until a
satisfactory solution is found. The goal here was to distil the
underlying logic of not biological evolution but cultural
evolution, i.e. the process by which ideas adapt and build on
one another in the minds of interacting individuals. EVOC
(as did MAV) uses neural network based agents that could
(1) invent new ideas by modifying previously learned ones,
(2) evaluate ideas, (3) implement ideas as actions, and (4)
imitate ideas implemented by neighbors. Agents do not
evolve in a biological sense—they neither die nor have
offspring—but do in a cultural sense, by generating and
sharing ideas for actions. EVOC (like MAV) successfully
models how ‘descent with modification’ occurs in a cultural
context. The approach can thus be contrasted with computer

Introduction
It is widely assumed that effective leaders are creative
(Basadur, 2004; Bellows, 1959; Puccio, Murdock, &
Mance, 2006; Simon, 1988; Sternberg, Kaufman & Pretz,
2003). Creativity, however, has drawbacks (Cropley,
Cropley, Kaufman, & Runco, 2010). For example, a creative
solution to one problem may generate other problems, and
similarly, a creative solution to one element of a situation
may have unexpected negative consequences with respect to
other elements. Moreover, time spent creatively finding a
solution for oneself is time not spent imitating and passing
on solutions already found by others.
Previous investigations of the pros and cons of creativity
using an agent-based simulation approach addressed the
question: in an ideal society, what proportion of individuals
should be ‘creative types’ (Leijnen & Gabora, 2009;
Gabora, Leijnen & Ghyczy, in press)? The rationale was
that in a group of interacting individuals only a fraction of
them need be creative for the benefits of creativity to be felt
throughout the group. The rest can reap the benefits of the
creator’s ideas by simply copying, using, or admiring them.
After all, few of us know how to build a computer, or write
a symphony or novel, but they are nonetheless ours to use
and enjoy. Numerical simulations showed that if the
proportion of creators is low, the mean fitness of ideas in the

955

models of how individual learning affects biological
evolution (Best, 1999, 2006; Higgs, 2000; Hinton &
Nowlan, 1987; Hutchins & Hazelhurst, 1991).
EVOC consists of an artificial society of neural network
based agents in a two-dimensional grid-cell world. It is
written in Joone, an object oriented programming
environment, using an open source neural network library
written in Java. This section summarizes the key
components of the agents and the world they inhabit.

The Body. If the fitness of an action is evaluated to be
higher than that of any action learned thus far, it is copied
from the input/output nodes of the neural network that
represent concepts of body parts to a six digit array that
contains representations of actual body parts, referred to as
the body. Since it is useful to know how many agents are
doing essentially the same thing, when node activations are
translated into limb movement they are thresholded such
that there are only three possibilities for each limb:
stationary, up, or down. Six limbs with three possible
positions each gives a total of 729 possible actions. Only the
action that is currently implemented by an agent’s body can
be observed and imitated by other agents.

The Agent
Agents consist of (1) a neural network, which encodes ideas
for actions and detects trends in what constitutes a fit action,
and (2) a body, which implements actions.

The Fitness Function

The Neural Network. The core of an agent is an
autoassociative neural network, as shown in Figure 1. It is
composed of six input nodes that represent concepts of body
parts (LEFT ARM, RIGHT ARM, LEFT LEG, RIGHT
LEG, HEAD, and HIPS), six matching output nodes, and
six hidden nodes that represent more abstract concepts
(LEFT, RIGHT, FORELIMB, HINDLIMB, SYMMETRY
and MOVEMENT). Input nodes and output nodes are
connected to hidden nodes of which they are instances (e.g.
RIGHT FORELIMB is connected to RIGHT.) Activation of
any input node activates the MOVEMENT hidden node.
Same-direction activation of symmetrical input nodes (e.g.
positive activation—which represents upward motion—of
both forelimbs) activates the SYMMETRY node.

FROM
NEIGHBOR

Agents evaluate the effectiveness of their actions according
to how well they satisfy needs using a pre-defined equation
referred to as a fitness function. The fitness of an action with
respect to the need to attract mates is calculated as in
(Gabora, 1995). The fitness function rewards actions that
make use of trends detected by the symmetry and movement
hidden nodes and used by knowledge-based operators to
bias the generation of new ideas. It generates actions that are
relatively realistic mating displays, and exhibits a cultural
analog of epistasis. In biological epistasis, the fitness
conferred by the allele at one gene depends on which allele
is present at another gene. In this cognitive context, epistasis
is present when the fitness contributed by movement of one
limb depends on what other limbs are doing.

Head

Head

Symmetry

Left
Forelimb

Movement

Right
Forelimb

Forelimb

Right
Forelimb

TO

Left
Hindlimb

Hindlimb

Left
Hindlimb

BODY

Right
Hindlimb

Right

Right
Hindlimb

Hips

Left

Hips

INPUT
NODES

HIDDEN
NODES

The World

Left
Forelimb

MAV allowed only worlds that were square and toroidal, or
‘wrap-around’ (such that agents at the left border that
attempt to move further left appear on the right border).
Moreover, the world was always maximally densely
populated, with one agent per cell. In EVOC the world can
assume any shape, and be as sparsely or densely populated
as required, with agents placed in any configuration. EVOC
also allows for the creation of complete or semi-permeable
permanent or eroding borders that decrease the probability
of imitation along a frontier (although this was not used in
the experiments reported here).

OUTPUT
NODES

Figure 1. The neural network. See text for details.

Incorporation of Cultural Phenomena
Agents incorporate the following phenomena characteristic
of cultural evolution as parameters that can be turned off or
on (in some cases to varying degrees):
• Imitation. Ideas for how to perform actions spread when
agents copy neighbors’ actions. This enables them to
share effective, or ‘fit’, actions.

The neural network learns ideas for actions. An idea is a
pattern consisting of six elements that dictate the placement
of the six body parts. Learning and training of the neural
network is as per Gabora (1995). During imitation, the input
is the action implemented by a neighbor. During invention,
the pattern of activation on the output nodes is fed back to
the input nodes, and change is biased according to the
activations of the SYMMETRY and MOVEMENT nodes.
In EVOC, the neural network can also be turned off to
compare results with a data structure that cannot detect
trends, and thus invents ideas merely at random.

•

956

Invention. This code enables agents to generate new
actions by modifying their initial action or a previously
invented or imitated action. (See Gabora 1995 for further
details.)

•

other ideas get invented, assessed, implemented as actions,
and spread through imitation. The diversity of actions
initially increases due to the proliferation of new ideas, and
then decreases as agents hone in on the fittest actions.

Knowledge-based Operators. Since a new action (or,
in invention, new idea for an action) is not learned
unless it is fitter than the currently implemented action,
new actions provide valuable information about what
constitutes an effective idea. This information is used by
knowledge-based operators to probabilistically bias
invention such that new ideas are generated strategically
as opposed to randomly. For example, if successful
actions tend to be symmetrical (e.g. left arm moves to
the right and right arm moves to the left), the probability
increases that new actions are symmetrical. Also, if
movement is generally beneficial, the probability
increases that new actions involve movement of more
body parts. (See Gabora 1995 for further details.)

•

Mental simulation. Before committing to implementing
an idea as an action, agents can use the fitness function
to assess how fit the action would be if it were
implemented.

•

Broadcasting. Broadcasting allows the action of a
leader, or broadcaster, to be visible to not just immediate
neighbors, but all agents, thereby simulating the effects
of media such as public performances, television, radio,
or the internet, on patterns of cultural change. Each
agent adds the leader as a possible source of actions it
can imitate. The leader itself is thus the only agent that
can only acquire actions from its immediate neighbors.
The leader can be specified by the user or chosen at
random. Broadcasting can be intermittent, or continued
throughout the duration of a run. It can also be turned off
altogether.

The Graphic User Interface
The graphic user interface (GUI) makes use of the opensource charting project, JFreeChart, enabling variables to be
user defined at run time, and results to become visible as the
computer program runs. The topmost output panel is shown
in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Output panel of GUI. See text for details.
At the upper left one specifies the Invention to Imitation
Ratio. This is the probability that a given agent, on a given
iteration, invents a new idea for an action, versus the
probability that it imitates a neighbor’s action. Below it is
Rate of Conceptual Change, where one specifies the degree
to which a newly invented idea differs from the one it was
based on. Below that is Number of Agents, which allows the
user to specify the size of the artificial society. Below that is
where one specifies Number of Iterations, i.e. the duration
of a run. Agents can be accessed individually by clicking the
appropriate cell in the grid on the upper right. This enables
one to see such details as the action currently implemented
by that agent, or the fitness of that action. The graphs at the
bottom plot the mean idea fitness and diversity of ideas.
Tabs shown at the top give access to other output panels.

A Typical Run
Each iteration, every agent has the opportunity to (1)
acquire an idea for a new action, either by imitation,
copying a neighbor, or by invention, creating one anew, (2)
update the knowledge-based operators, and (3) implement a
new action. To invent a new idea, for each node of the idea
currently represented on the input/output layer of the neural
network, the agent makes a probabilistic decision as to
whether change will take place, and if it does, the direction
of change is stochastically biased by the knowledge-based
operators. If the new idea has a higher fitness than the
currently implemented idea, the agent learns and
implements the action specified by that idea. To acquire an
idea through imitation, an agent randomly chooses one of its
neighbors, and evaluates the fitness of the action the
neighbor is implementing. If its own action is fitter than that
of the neighbor, it chooses another neighbor, until it has
either observed all of its immediate neighbors, or found one
with a fitter action. If no fitter action is found, the agent
does nothing. Otherwise, the neighbor’s action is copied to
the input layer, learned, and implemented.
Fitness of actions starts out low because initially all
agents are immobile. Soon some agent invents an action that
has a higher fitness than doing nothing, and this action gets
imitated, so fitness increases. Fitness increases further as

Experiments
We now present the creative leadership experiments
performed with EVOC. Unless stated otherwise, graphs plot
the average of 100 runs, the world consists of 100 cells, one
agent per cell, a 1:1 invention-to-imitation ratio, and a 1/6
probability of change to any body part during invention
(The rationale behind this is that since, with six body parts,
on average each newly invented action differs from the one
it was based on with respect to one body part.)

957

The current experiments made use of EVOC’s
broadcasting function. As described above, broadcasting
enables the action implemented by a leader to be visible
throughout the artificial society. While experiments reported
elsewhere investigated the impact of varying the number of
leaders on the fitness and diversity of ideas (Gabora, 2008c),
in the experiments reported here, simulated societies consist
of one leader and ninety-nine followers. The leader is
chosen randomly and broadcasts throughout the entire run.

iLeader

Experiment 1a: Effect of Varying Inventiveness (i)
of Leaders and Followers on Fitness of Ideas
The first experiment investigated the effect of varying the
ratio of iterations spent inventing versus imitating, or
invention-to-imitation ratio, abbreviated i, of both the leader
and the followers, on the fitness of ideas produced by the
artificial society. The inventiveness of the leader,
abbreviated iLeader was systematically varied from 0.0 to 1.0.
When iLeader was 1.0, the leader invented a new action every
iteration. When iLeader was 0.0, the leader never invented
new actions; it only imitated its neighbors’ actions. (It was
still the leader because its actions were visible to, and could
be imitated by, all other agents in the society, not just its
immediate neighbors, as was the case for followers).
In the first set of runs, followers only imitated; they never
invented, i.e., iFollowers = 0.0. As shown in Figure 3, with
uncreative followers, the degree of creativity of the leader
matters a lot; the mean fitness of ideas in the artificial
society is positively correlated with creativity of the leader.

Figure 4. Mean fitness of actions with leaders of varying
invention-to-imitation ratios, and followers that invent as
well as imitate (i = 0.05).

Experiment 1b: Effect of Varying Inventiveness (I)
of Leaders and Followers on Diversity of Ideas
The second part of this experiment involved investigating
the effect of varying the invention-to-imitation ratio, i, of
both the leader and the followers on the diversity of ideas
produced by the artificial society. As in experiment 1a,
iLeader was systematically varied from 0.0 to 1.0. The result
obtained with iFollowers = 0.0 is shown in Figure 5.

iLeader
iLeader

Figure 5. Diversity of actions in the artificial society with
leaders of varying invention-to-imitation ratios, and
followers that only imitate (i = 0.0).
Figure 3. Mean fitness of actions with leaders of varying
invention-to-imitation ratios, and followers that only
imitate, i.e. that never invent (e.g. i = 0.0).

In the short run, creative leadership was associated with
increased diversity of actions. However in the long run, no
matter how creative the leader, all agents converged on the
same action, despite that there were seven other equally
optimal actions they could have converged upon. Results
with higher values of iFollowers (not shown) were qualitatively
similar. Action diversity was initially substantially higher,
but it still always eventually converged to 1.

In the second set of runs, shown in Figure 4, followers
were able to invent. More specifically, iFollowers = 0.05; thus
each iteration, each of the 99 followers had a 5% chance of
inventing. Comparing figures 3 and 4 it is clear that while
the degree of creativity of the leader had a large impact
when followers are uncreative, it had almost no impact
when followers were themselves creative. With creative
followers, the mean fitness of ideas generated by the society
increased over the duration of a run at more or less the same
pace no matter how creative the leader was.

Experiment 2: Effect of Varying Leaders’ Rate of
Conceptual Change (c)
There are two ways an agent’s creativity can be manipulated
in EVOC. The first way involves changing i, the invention-

958

to-imitation ratio, as in the first set of experiments. It is
possible to vary not just how frequently an agent invents,
but how creative its newly invented ideas are. This second
measure, referred to as the rate of conceptual change,
abbreviated c, is implemented as follows. Invention occurs
by taking the current action, and modifying it. When c is
low, the newly invented action varies little from the
previous action upon which it was based. When c is high,
the newly invented idea varies dramatically from the
previous idea upon which it was based.
As mentioned previously, the default value of c, the
probability of change to any body part during invention, is
1/6 for any agent that invents, whether it is a leader or a
follower. Previous experiments revealed this to be the rate
that optimizes the rate of increase in mean fitness of actions
(Gabora, 1995). Since ideas are ideas for actions, and since
actions involve at most six body parts, on average, each
newly invented action involves a change to the motion of
one body part. Thus c = 1/6 means that each body part
changes what it is doing with a 1/6 probability, or 17% of
the time. In this second set of experiments, shown in Figure
6, cLeader was systematically varied from 0% to 100%. Since
the followers only imitated, cFollowers = 0. Because that
means there are no new actions for the leader to imitate,
iLeader was set to 1.0.

society. The first experiment looked at the effect of varying
the invention-to-imitation ratio of both leader and followers.
The mean fitness of actions was positively correlated with
the creativity of the leader, but only when the followers
were uncreative. The more creative the followers, the
greater the extent to which the beneficial effect of creative
leadership was washed out. One must be cautious about
extrapolating from a simple simulation such as this to the
real world. For example, real-world creativity is correlated
with emotional instability, affective disorders, and substance
abuse (Andreason, 1987; Flaherty, 2005; Jamieson, 1993)
which presumably would interfere with effective leadership,
and which were not incorporated in these simulations.
However, the result suggests that creativity may be a
relatively unimportant quality for a manager of a creative
team, but an important quality for a manager of an
uncreative team.
The first experiment also investigated the effect of
varying the invention-to-imitation ratio of both leader and
followers on the diversity or number of different of actions
implemented by agents. Previous results with EVOC had
suggested that the beneficial effect of leadership on mean
fitness of ideas is tempered by decreased diversity of ideas,
and this echoed previous simulation findings that leadership
can have adverse effects when agents can communicate
(Gigliotta, Miglino, & Parisi, 2007). We wanted to know
whether the decreased diversity associated with the presence
of a leader was still observed when leaders are highly
creative or highly uncreative compared to followers. We
found that while in the early stages of a run, creative
leadership (as well as the degree of creativity of followers)
was associated with higher diversity, eventually all agents
converged on what the leader was doing no matter how
creative the leader (or how creative the followers). This
suggests that in the long run leadership diminishes cultural
diversity regardless of how creative the leader is. It is worth
noting, however, that in this artificial world, unlike the real
world, agents had only one task to accomplish. Further
experiments will investigate whether these results hold true
when the fitness function varies over time.
The second set of experiments investigated the effect of
not how often the leader invents, but how creative any
particular invention is, referred to as the rate of conceptual
change. We found that early on in the creative process,
when the fitness of the ideas that are getting generated was
still relatively low, it was best if the leader was very creative
(high rate of conceptual change). However, later in the
creative process, once relatively fit ideas were being
generated, a less creative leader was better (low rate of
conceptual change). This result may reflect that the fitness
function used here exhibits the cultural equivalent of the
biological phenomenon of epistasis, wherein what is optimal
for one element of an idea depends on what is going on with
respect to another element. Initially, the higher the rate of
conceptual change, the more quickly fitter actions are found.
However, once relatively fit actions have been found, a high
rate of conceptual change breaks up co-adapted epistatically

cLeader

Figure 6. Mean fitness of actions in the artificial society
with leaders of varying rates of conceptual change, and
followers that only imitate.
Unlike in experiment one, the optimal degree of creative
leadership with respect to this second measure of creativity
depended on what phase of the creative process the society
was at. Early on in a run, a form of leadership that entails
the highest possible rate of conceptual change (100%) was
most beneficial. However, as the run progressed a transition
occurred, after which point a much lower rate of conceptual
change (approximately 40%) was most beneficial.

Discussion
The experiments reported here investigated the impact of
creative versus uncreative leadership on the mean fitness
and diversity of ideas for actions in an agent-based artificial

959

linked elements and thus interferes with convergence toward
optimal actions. In future experiments we will investigate
whether these findings hold true when a different fitness
function is used. However we believe that many real-world
problem solving situations involve this kind of epistasis.
Thus, although once again one must be cautious about
extrapolating from the results of simple simulations such as
this to the real world, our results suggest that a new startup
company benefits most from highly creative leadership,
while a more established company, or one that has stabilized
on an established product line, benefits most from a more
conservative form of leadership.

Gabora, L. (2008b). EVOC: A computer model of cultural
evolution. In V. Sloutsky, B. Love & K. McRae (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Sheridan Publishing.
Gabora, L. (2008c). Modeling cultural dynamics. In
Proceedings of the Association for the Advancement of
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Fall Symposium 1: Adaptive
Agents in a Cultural Context, Menlo Park, CA: AAAI
Press, 18-25.
Gabora, L., Leijnen, S., & von Ghyczy, T. (in press).
Imitation: more than just the greatest compliment.
International Journal of Software and Informatics.
Gigliotta, O. Miglino, O. & Parisi, D. (2007). Groups of
agents with a leader. Journal of Artificial Societies and
Social Simulation, 10(4).
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/10/4/1.html
Higgs, P. G. (2000). The mimetic transition: a simulation
study of the evolution of learning by imitation.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
267(1450), 1355–1361.
Hinton, G. E. & Nowlan, S. J. (1987). How learning can
guide evolution. Complex Systems, 1, 495–502.
Holland, J. K. (1975). Adaptation in Natural and Artificial
Systems. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Hutchins, E. & Hazelhurst, B. (1991). Learning in the
cultural crocess. In Langton, C., Taylor, J., Farmer, D., &
Rasmussen, S. (Eds.) Artificial Life II. Redwood City,
CA: Addison-Wesley.
Jamieson, K. R. (1993). Touched by fire: Manic-depressive
illness and the artistic temperament. New York: Free
Press.
Jeffreys, M. (2000). The meme metaphor. Perspectives in
Biology and Medicine , 43(2), 227–242.
Kaufman, J. C., & Sternberg, R. J. (Eds). (2006). The
international handbook of creativity. Cambridge UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Krasnogor, N. & Gustafson, S. (2004). A study on the use of
“self-generation” in memetic algorithms. Natural
Computing, 3(1), 53–76.
Leijnen, S., & Gabora, L. (2009). How creative should
creators be to optimize the evolution of ideas? A
computational model. Electronic Proceedings in
Theoretical Computer Science, 9, 108-119.
Puccio, G. J., Murdock, M. & Mance, M. (2006). Creative
leadership: skills that drive change. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Simon, H. A. (1986). What we know about the creative
process. In R. Kuhn (Ed.) Frontiers in creativity and
innovative management. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Sternberg, R. J., Kaufman, J. C. & Pretz, J. E. (2003). A
propulsion model of creative leadership. The Leadership
Quarterly, 14(4-5), 455–473.
Wright, S. (1969). Evolution and the genetics of
Populations. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Acknowledgments
This work is funded by grants to the second author from the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada (SSHRC) and the GOA program of the Free
University of Brussels.

References
Andreason, N. C. (1987). Creativity and mental illness;
prevalence rates in writers and their first degree
relatives. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 12881292.
Basadur, M. (2004). Leading others to think innovatively
together: Creative leadership. The Leadership Quarterly,
15(1), 103–121.
Bellows, R. M. (1959). Creative leadership. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Best, M. (1999). How culture can guide evolution: An
inquiry into gene/meme enhancement and opposition.
Adaptive Behavior, 7(3), 289–293.
Best, M. (2006). Adaptive value within natural language
discourse. Interaction Studies, 7(1), 1-15.
Boone, J. L., Smith, E. A. 1998. Is it evolution yet? A
critique
of
evolutionary
archaeology.
Current
Anthropology, 39, S141–73.
Cropley, D. Cropley, A., Kaufman, J. & Runco, M. (2010).
The dark side of creativity. Cambridge UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Fracchia, J. & Lewontin, R. C. (1999). Does culture evolve?
History and Theory, 38(4), 52–78.
Gabora, L. (1994). A computer model of the evolution of
culture. In R. Brooks & P. Maes (Eds.) Proceedings of the
4th International Conference on Artificial Life, July 4-6,
Boston, MA.
Gabora, L. (1995). Meme and Variations: A computer
model of cultural evolution. In L. Nadel & D. Stein (Eds.)
1993 Lectures in Complex Systems, pp. 471−486.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Gabora, L. (2004). Ideas are not replicators but minds are.
Biology & Philosophy, 19(1), 127−143.
Gabora, L. (2008a). The cultural evolution of socially
situated cognition. Cognitive Systems Research, 9(1–2),
104–113.

960

