UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An examination of the ERP correlates of recognition memory using state-trace analysis.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1s42m07n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Freeman, Emily
Dennis, Simon
Dunn, John

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An examination of the ERP correlates of recognition memory using state-trace
analysis.
Emily Freeman (emily.e.freeman@gmail.com)
School of Psychology, The University of Newcastle, NSW, 2308, Australia

Simon Dennis (simon.dennis@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, OH, 43210, USA

John Dunn (john.c.dunn@adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, The University of Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia

experiment, designed to test these underlying assumptions
are presented.

Abstract
There has been much debate in recent years as to whether
recognition memory is best described using a single or dual
process model. State-trace analysis provides an atheoretical
approach to determining the number of underlying psychological
variables, or processes, that mediate the effect of one or more
independent variables on the measured dependent variables.
Recently, state-trace analysis has shown strong support for a
single process interpretation of the behavioral results from
recognition memory experiments. In this paper, we demonstrate,
using state-trace analysis, that both the behavioral and
electrophysiological results from recognition memory
experiments are also supportive of a single process interpretation.
Keywords: recognition memory; event-related potentials; single
process models; dual process models

Models of Recognition Memory
It has long been debated whether recognition memory
decisions are performed on the basis of a single memory
process, referred to as either strength, familiarity, or
matching, or whether a recall-like component is also
involved (Clark, 1999). The first dual process models were
developed in the 1970s (e.g., Atkinson & Juola, 1974), but
were overtaken in popularity when single process, global
memory/matching models, were developed in the 1980s.
Dual process models regained popularity in the early 1990s
and as such the debate as to which type of model best
describes memory is ongoing.

The study of recognition memory aims to determine the
process(es) underlying how one recognizes something, or
someone, as having been previously encountered (Mandler,
1980). In a typical recognition experiment, participants
study a list of items, and at test are asked to discriminate
between both studied (old) and unstudied (new) items.
Two measures are obtained: the hit rate (proportion of old
items correctly identified as being old) and the false alarm
rate (the proportion of new items incorrectly identified as
being old). The hit and false alarm rates can be combined
to indicate an overall level of accuracy1.
A number of mathematical models have been proposed
attempting to describe the basis of recognition memory.
These models can be grouped into two main frameworks:
single and dual process models. This paper will attempt to
assess the validity of these two classes of models by testing
their basic assumptions using electrophysiological data
from a recognition memory experiment. First these two
frameworks will be described as well as some of the
supporting behavioral, imaging and electrophysiological
evidence. Next, an atheoretical method that can be used to
test the basic assumptions of these two classes of models
will be described. Following which, the results from an

Single Process Models
Single process theories are based on the signal detection
framework (Green & Swets, 1967). In its simplest form,
signal detection theory considers two basic aspects of
detection: the underlying representations, which are
interpreted as psychological distributions, and a decision
aspect, which involves the use of decision criteria to arrive
at a response (DeCarlo, 2002). Signal detection theory can
be applied in any task in which participants are required to
discriminate between two or more classes of stimuli
(Stanislaw & Todorov, 1999).
Signal detection memory models assume that when a
participant is presented with a test stimulus it is directly
matched to multiple memory representations in parallel
and the fit of these matches is used to calculate a
familiarity value (Clark, 1999). Familiarity is thought to be
based on associative information and information about
other items in memory, as well as on stored item-specific
information about the test item. In a recognition memory
experiment, stimuli presented in the study phase have
familiarity values drawn from the ‘old’ normal distribution,
while the familiarity values for new items are drawn from
the ‘new’ normal distribution. The mean of the old
distribution is assumed to be higher than the mean for the

1

For example, d’ is calculated by subtracting the ztransformed false alarm rate from the z-transformed hit rate.

97

new distribution. Each old and new condition has its own
response distribution and the criterion is placed at a point
chosen by the participant that determines whether an old or
new response is made.
There are a number of specific single process theories
that have been developed to account for findings in
recognition memory. Although each of these models is
considered to contain a single process, they vary quite
substantially in their focus. For example, AttentionLikelihood Theory (ALT, Glanzer & Adams, 1990) is
based on the idea of feature marking first proposed by
Glanzer and Bowles (1976). Retrieving Effectively from
Memory (REM, Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997) is centered
around item noise, while at the other end of the spectrum,
the Bind Cue Decide Model of Episodic Memory
(BCDMEM, Dennis & Humphreys, 2001) is focused on
context noise.

requires participants to indicate whether their ‘old’
responses in a recognition memory test are based upon
familiarity alone (Know) or whether they recollect seeing
the item in the study list (Remember). Some researchers
(e.g., Gardiner & Java, 1990) have suggested that the mere
finding that participants are able to distinguish between
these two types of responses is evidence that both
familiarity and recollection contribute to the recognition
memory task. However, experiments finding dissociations
between remember and know responses provide much
more compelling arguments. For example, Gardiner (1988)
reported a dissociation between remember and know
responses such that deeper levels of processing at study led
to more remember responses at test, but did not affect
know responses. Since this early finding, numerous studies
have been reported finding dissociations between
remember and know responses (e.g., Gardiner & Java,
1990, 1991; Glanc & Greene, 2007; Joordens & Hockley,
2000; Park, Reder, & Dickison, 2005; Rajaram, 1993).
Although these dissociations between remember and
know responses are often taken as evidence for dual
process models (e.g., Jacoby, Yonelinas, & Jennings,
1997), a number of single process advocates have argued
that remember and know responses are simply
classifications of different levels of confidence, and as
such can also be accounted for by single process models
(e.g., Donaldson, 1996). Dunn (2004) put forward a
compelling argument for remember and know responses
representing higher and lower levels of confidence,
respectively. In an analysis of 72 studies, Dunn showed
that the arguments against remember-know data being
described by a signal detection, single process framework
could not be ruled out, and provided an equally plausible
account of the data.
Since it appears that behavioral data can be well
explained using single process models, researchers have
recently started looking at the neurological basis of
recognition memory, in order to determine if there is any
biological evidence for familiarity and recollection playing
a role in the decision process. Despite evidence that the
remember-know procedure does not necessarily separate
recollection and familiarity, it has been widely used in
imaging and electrophysiological studies. Here the aim is
to find either separate brain regions (in fMRI studies), or
distinct event-related potentials (ERPs) related to
remember and know responses, which are then interpreted
as being related to recollection and familiarity,
respectively.
Recently, Yonelinas, Otten, Shaw and Rugg (2005)
suggested that they had found a neural signature of
recollection that was distinct from familiarity. Because past
researchers (e.g., Dunn, 2004) had suggested that
remember responses simply reflect a subject’s high level of
confidence, Yonelinas et al. had their subjects respond
‘remember’ if they could remember something specific
about the study episode, otherwise they were asked to give

Dual Process Models
Dual process models assume that recognition is based on
two memory processes: familiarity and recollection, which
are assumed to make independent contributions to
recognition (Clark, 1999). Familiarity is assumed to be a
fast process and is equivalent to the signal detection
process described by single process theories. On the other
hand, recollection is assumed to be a slow, deliberate, and
relatively accurate search process whereby information
about the study episode is retrieved (Arndt & Reder, 2002;
Yonelinas, 1999). Generally, dual process theorists
propose that the hit rate in a recognition experiment is
driven by recollection and the false alarm rate is driven by
familiarity (e.g., Joordens & Hockley, 2000).
Yonelinas (2002) presented a high-threshold dual
process model of recognition memory. He proposed that
recollection and familiarity are independent parallel
processes that differ in the type of information they
provide and the extent to which they influence a person’s
confidence. Familiarity reflects the assessment of
quantitative memory strength information in the same
manner as signal detection theory used in single process
theories. The variable strength of familiarity leads to a
wide range of confidence ratings. Recollection reflects a
threshold retrieval process in which qualitative information
about a previous event is retrieved, producing a high level
of confidence.
A number of pieces of evidence have been put forward
in support of the dual process models of recognition
memory. The most dominant of these behavioral, imaging
and electrophysiological findings are presented in the
following section.

Behavioral, Imaging and Electrophysiological
Evidence
The Remember-Know paradigm (Tulving, 1985) has been
used to add support to the claim that recognition memory is
best described using a dual process model. This procedure

98

a confidence rating that the item was studied using a fourpoint scale (sure old / sure new). Yonelinas et al. found
different neural signatures for remember and high
confidence familiar responses, which led them to the
conclusion that recollection and familiarity are two distinct
processes (but see Dunn & Dennis, submitted, for a
conflicting interpretation of these results).
Curran (1999, 2004) and colleagues (e.g., Curran &
Dien, 2003; Curran, DeBuse, Woroch, & Hirshman, 2006;
Curran, Tepe, & Piatt, 2006; Curran, DeBuse, & Leynes,
2007) have focused on differentiating recollection and
familiarity using ERPs. Two time periods of interest have
been identified. The first, occurring 300-500ms after
stimulus onset is commonly referred to as the FN400 as it
is a frontal negative peak. The second, occurring 400800ms after stimulus onset has received numerous names,
but the most common is the LPC, or late positive
component, and is more dominant in the parietal brain
region. Curran et al. have argued that the FN400 is an
old/new decision component related to item familiarity,
while the LPC is related to the recollection process.
Evidence for this distinction also comes from studies using
the remember-know procedure. Studies have shown that
studied items produce a more negative FN400 than
unstudied items, and that ‘remembered’ items produce a
more positive LPC than ‘known’ items (e.g., Rugg et al.,
1998; Rugg & Curran, 2007; Rugg & Yonelinas, 2003).
However, as Finnigan, Humphreys, Dennis, and Geffen
(2002) have demonstrated, these findings can be easily fit
by a single process model whereby the FN400 reflects an
individual’s old/new decision, and the LPC reflects their
confidence.
Obviously there is much controversy as to how both the
behavioral and neurological data should be interpreted. The
following section outlines a technique that can be used to
determine the number of processes that are needed to
account for a given data set, without making any
assumptions about single or dual process models.

confidence) hit rate, a predominately one dimensional
curve was found, suggesting that the remember-know task
is best described by a single process model. Further, when
the z-transform of the state-trace was computed, a straight
line with a slope of one was obtained. This finding is also
in accordance with an unequal variance, signal detection,
or single process model.

Experiment
The aim of the present research is to examine the ERP
correlates of recognition memory. To do this, state-trace
analyses will be applied to behavioral and ERP data
obtained from an experiment that manipulates two
independent variables identified by Yonelinas (2002) to
affect either familiarity or recollection. The behavioral
state-trace will plot the low confidence hit rate (LCHR) as
a function of the high confidence hit rate (HCHR) and the
ERP state-trace will plot the FN400 as a function of the
LPC. If the HCHR/LPC reflects recollection, the statetrace plots should show two lines, separated on the
dimension outlined by Yonelinas to reflect recollection.
However, if the state-trace plots show a one dimensional
curve, this will be indicative of a single process underlying
recognition memory, and will provide strong evidence in
favor of single process models.
Specifically, in our experiment the number of study
repetitions (1/2/4) and attention at study (focused/divided)
were manipulated. According to Yonelinas (2002), the
attention manipulation should affect recollection, but not
familiarity, and the study repetition manipulation should
affect both familiarity and recollection. If the dual process
interpretation of recognition memory is accurate, the statetrace plots should show two monotonic functions,
separated by the attention manipulation. Specifically, the
LCHR/FN400 should become more positive as the number
of study repetitions increases, and the focused attention
condition should be shifted to the right (i.e., a more
positive HCHR/LPC) compared to the divided attention
condition. However, if the resulting state-trace plot is onedimensional, this will indicate that both the number of
study repetitions, and attention at study are related to the
same latent variable, or memory process, indicating that a
single process interpretation of the data is accurate.

State-Trace Analysis
State-trace analysis (Bamber, 1979) is based on the
premise that two dependent variables will covary with each
other to the extent that they are affected by the same
independent variable. By producing a plot of one
dependent variable as a function of another dependent
variable, one can determine the number of intervening
psychological variables, or processes, that mediate the
effect of one or more independent variables on the
measured dependent variables. If the resulting scatter plot
is one dimensional, that is all the data points lie on a single
monotonically increasing (or decreasing) curve, then it can
be assumed that the two dependent variables are functions
of the same latent variable.
Dunn (2008) performed a state-trace analysis on the data
from 37 remember-know studies. When the old/new hit
rate was plotted as a function of the remember (or high

Method
Participants
54 students from the Ohio State University participated in
return for course credit.

Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of 240 high frequency words with a
mean frequency of 155 (ratings taken from the Celex

99

database, Baayen, Piepenbrock, & van Rijn, 1993). Words
were 4-8 letters in length (mean 4.6). Words were
randomly divided into 5 lists for each participant and items
within each list were randomly allocated to old/new,
focused/divided attention, and repetition conditions.

an impedance of less than 50kΩ. The EEG was digitally
low-pass filtered at 40Hz.

Design

Trials were discarded from the analysis if they contained
eye movements (EOG over 70µV), or more than 20% of
channels were bad (average amplitude over 200µV or
transit amplitude over 100ms). Individual bad channels
were replaced on a trial-by-trial basis with a spherical
spline algorithm (Srinivasan, Nunez, Silberstein, Tucker, &
Cadusch, 1996). Consistently bad channels for a given
subject were replaced throughout that subject’s entire
dataset (bad channels per subject: median = mode = 1,
range = 0 - 3). EEG was measured with respect to a vertex
reference (Cz), but an average-reference transformation
was used to minimize the effects of reference-site activity
and accurately estimate the scalp topography of the
measured electrical fields (Dien, 1998; Picton, Lins, &
Scherg, 1995). Average-reference ERPs were computed for
each channel as the voltage difference between that
channel and the average of all channels. The average
reference was corrected for the polar average reference
effect (Junghofer, Elbert, Tucker, & Braun, 1999). ERPs
were baseline-corrected with respect to a 100ms
prestimulus recording interval.
Figure one shows the state-trace plot obtained by
plotting the mean LPC against the mean FN400 for each
attention by repetition condition. Both the FN400 and the
LPC were found to increase (i.e., become more positive)
with increasing study repetitions. Additionally, there is no
significant differentiation between the focused and divided
attention conditions.
The behavioral state-trace plot, also shown in Figure
one, shows that both high and low confidence hit rates
increase with increasing study repetitions. Further, there is
no differentiation between the attention conditions.

Results

The experiment was a 2x3 design, with attention at study
(focused/divided) and number of study repetitions (1/2/4)
manipulated within-subjects.

Procedure
Participants were first briefed on the requirements of the
study, signed a consent form and were fitted with the
Geodesic Electrode Net.
Each study list consisted of 24 words. Half the words
were presented alone on the screen (focused attention
condition) while the other half were presented flanked by
two numbers (divided attention condition). In the divided
attention condition, the flankers appeared for 200ms and
were then covered by a mask. The numbers differed in
both their numerical value, and their font size. After the
target word was removed from the screen, the participants
were asked to report which number (left or right) was
larger in either value or size by pressing the appropriate
key on the keyboard. One third of the study items were
presented once, one third were presented twice, and one
third were presented four times during the study phase to
give a total of 56 study trials. Repeated words were always
repeated within the same attention condition. Words were
presented for three seconds followed by a one second
interstimulus interval (isi). Following the study phase,
participants completed several math problems for a period
of approximately three minutes.
The test lists consisted of 48 words, with an equal
number of old and new items. Each word was presented for
two seconds followed by a response cue, at which time the
participant was required to give their response by pressing
the appropriate key on the keyboard using a six-point
confidence rating scale (sure old/sure new). Participants
were instructed to wait for the cue before responding, to
stay as still as possible, and to minimize eye blinks.
Each study/test cycle took approximately 20 minutes to
complete. After each cycle, the Electrode Net was checked
to ensure that impedances remained below 50kΩ.
Participants completed as many study/test cycles as
possible during the two hour time period, with most
completing an average of four cycles.

Figure 1: State-trace plots of the behavioral (left) and ERP (right)
results for each of the attention by repetition conditions.

EEG Recording
Scalp voltages were collected using a 128-channel
Electrical Geodesics Sensor Net connected to a high
impedance amplifier (300kΩ Net AmpsTM, Electrical
Geodesics Inc, Eugene, OR, USA). Amplified analog
voltages (0.1-100Hz bandpass, -3dB) were digitized at
500Hz. Individual sensors were adjusted until each reached

Discussion
The state-trace plots produced from the analysis of our
experiment are clearly one-dimensional and thus provide
very little evidence in support of the dual process
interpretation of recognition memory. Rather, our findings

100

show strong support for a single process interpretation of
recognition memory.
Numerous previous recognition memory studies looking
at ERPs have assumed that the LPC is reflective of
recollection (e.g. Curran, 2004; Curran, Tepe, & Piatt,
2006). These studies have rejected a single process
interpretation of the FN400 and LPC because it “does not
explain the double-dissociation between mid-frontal and
parietal effects observed by Woodruff et al.” (Rugg &
Curran, 2007, p.264). In the study which Rugg and Curran
(2007) refer to, participants we asked to respond using a
variation of the remember-know procedure, in which they
either made a graded, confidence-based familiarity
judgment on a 4-point scale, or a remember/recollection
response. The authors report differing ERP patterns for the
FN400 and the LPC and suggest that the ordering of the
waveforms (1<2<3<4=R and 1=2=3=4<R, respectively)
are evidence that the FN400 represents familiarity, and the
LPC represents recollection. However, as explained by
Dunn and Kirsner (2003), this is actually a classic nondouble-association. The error is that the authors implicitly
assume that changes in volts (a physical variable) are
linearly related to memory strength (a psychological
variable). If on the other hand, one assumes that this
relationship is at best monotonic and different for frontal
and parietal, the underlying assumption of state-trace
analysis, then there is no dissociation. At both sites, the
underlying pattern of memory strength is 1<2<3<4<R but
mapped onto frontal and parietal volts by different
functions. By using state-trace analysis to interpret our
research findings, we have not only avoided this common
error, but have also shown strong support for a single,
rather than dual, process interpretation of ERP results.
Additionally, the results from our experiment add weight
to the suggestion by Finnigan et al. (2002) that the LPC is
not reflective of recollection. Finnigan et al. suggested that
the LPC may instead be related to confidence. Although
not specifically addressed in this analysis, our research
methods provided an opportunity for testing this idea in the
future.
Yonelinas (2002) suggested that dividing attention at
study would affect recollection at test, such that items in
the focused attention condition would have higher levels of
recollection than items in the divided attention condition.
The analysis of our behavioral data produced a single
monotonic state-trace curve (see also Dunn, Heathcote,
Dennis, & deZubicary, in preparation). Our ERP findings
extend these behavioral findings, supporting a single
process interpretation of recognition memory.
Combined, these findings suggest that not only is the
LPC not reflective of recollection as suggested by Curran
and colleagues, but they also suggest that the notion of
recollection itself may be flawed, further supporting the
predictions of single process models of recognition
memory.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Nayef Ahmar for
his assistance with the analysis. The project was funded by
an Australian Research Council Grant DP0558407.

References
Arndt, J., & Reder, L.M. (2002). Word frequency and
receiver operating characteristic curves in recognition
memory: Evidence for a dual-process interpretation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 28(5), 830-842.
Atkinson, R.C., & Juola, J.F. (1974). Search and decision
processes in recognition memory. In D.H. Krantz, R.C.
Atkinson, R.D. Luce, & P. Suppes (Eds.), Contemporary
developments in mathematical psychology: Vol. 1.
Learning, memory & thinking (pp. 242-293). San
Francisco: Freeman.
Baayen, R.H., Piepenbrock, R. & van Rijn, H. (1993). The
CELEX lexical database [CD-ROM]. Philadelphia, PA:
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Clark, S.E. (1999). Recalling to recognize and recognizing
to recall. In C. Izawa (Ed.) On Human Memory:
Evolution, Progress, and reflections on the 30th
Anniversary of the Atkinson-Shiffrin Model (pp. 215-244).
Mahwah, NJ: Earlbaum.
Curran, T. (1999). The electrophysiology of incidental and
intentional retrieval: ERP old/new effects in lexical
decision and recognition memory. Neuropsychologia, 37,
771-785.
Curran, T. (2004). Effects of attention and confidence on the
hypothesized ERP correlates of recollection and
familiarity. Neuropsychologia, 42, 1088-1106.
Curran, T., DeBuse, C., & Leynes, P.A. (2007). Conflict
and criterion setting in recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 33(1), 2-17.
Curran, T., DeBuse, C., Woroch, B., & Hirshman, E.
(2006). Combined pharmacological and
electrophysiological dissociation of familiarity and
recollection. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26(7), 19791985.
Curran, T., & Dien, J. (2003). Differentiating amodal
familiarity from modality-specific memory processes: An
ERP study. Psychophysiology, 40, 979-988.
Curran, T., Tepe, K.L., & Piatt, C. (2006). Event-related
potential explorations of dual processes in recognition
memory. In H.D. Zimmer, A. Mecklinger, & U.
Linderberger (Eds.), Binding in Human Memory: A
Neurocognitive Approach (pp. 467-492), Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
DeCarlo, L.T. (2002). Signal detection theory with finite
mixture distributions: Theoretical developments with
applications to recognition memory. Psychological
Review, 109, 710-721.

101

Dennis, S. & Humphreys, M.S. (2001). A context noise
model of episodic word recognition. Psychological
Review, 108(2), 452-478.
Dien, J. (1998) Issues in the application of the average
reference: Review, critiques and recommendations.
Behavior Research Methods Instruments & Computers,
30, 34-43.
Donaldson, W. (1996). The role of decision processes in
remembering and knowing. Memory & Cognition, 24,
523-533.
Dunn, J.C. (2004). Remember-Know: A matter of
confidence. Psychological Review, 95, 91-101.
Dunn, J.C. (2008). The dimensionality of the rememberknow task: A state-trace analysis. Psychological Review,
115(2), 426-446.
Dunn, J.C., & Dennis, S. (submitted). Separating the brain
regions involved in recollection and familiarity in
recognition memory: A comment on Yonelinas, Otten,
Shaw & Rugg (2005).
Dunn, J.C., Heathcote, A., Dennis, S., & deZubicary, G. (in
preparation). Single and dual-process models of
recognition memory: A state-trace analysis.
Dunn, J. C. & Kirsner, K. (2003). What can we infer from
double dissociations? Cortex, 39, 1-7.
Finnigan, S., Humphreys, M.S., Dennis, S., & Geffen, G.
(2002). ERP ‘old/new’ effects: Memory strength and
decisional factor(s). Neuropsychologia, 40, 2288-2304.
Gardiner, J.M. (1988). Functional aspects of recollective
experience. Memory & Cognition, 16, 309-313.
Gardiner, J.M., & Java, R.I. (1990). Recollective experience
in word and nonword recognition. Memory & Cognition,
18(1), 23-30.
Gardiner, J.M., & Java, R.I. (1991). Forgetting in
recognition memory with and without recollective
experience. Memory & Cognition, 19(6), 617-623.
Glanc, G.A., & Greene, R.L. (2007). Orthographic
neighborhood size effects in recognition memory.
Memory & Cognition, 35(2), 365-371.
Glanzer, M., & Adams, J.K. (1990). The mirror effect in
recognition memory: Data and theory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16(1), 5-16.
Glanzer, M., & Bowles, N. (1976). Analysis of the wordfrequency effect in recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
2(1), 21-31.
Green, D.M., & Swets, J.A. (1966). Signal detection theory
and psychophysics. New York: Wiley.
Jacoby, L.L., Yonelinas, A.P., & Jennings, J.M. (1997). The
relationship between conscious and unconscious
(automatic) influences: A declaration of independence. In
J. Cohen & J.W. Schooler (Eds.), Scientific approaches to
the question of consciousness (pp. 13-47). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Joordens, S., & Hockley, W.E. (2000). Recollection and
familiarity through the looking glass: When old does not

mirror new. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(6), 1534-1555.
Junghofer, M., Elbert, D., Tucker, T., & Braun, C. (1999).
The polar effect of average reference: A bias in estimating
the head surface integral in EEG recording.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
110, 1149-1155.
Mandler, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment of previous
occurrence. Psychological Review, 87, 252-271.
Park, H., Reder, L.M., & Dickison, D. (2005). The effects of
word frequency and similarity on recognition judgments:
The role of recollection. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 31(3), 567578.
Rajaram, S. (1993). Remembering and knowing: Two
means of access to the personal past. Memory &
Cognition, 21(1), 89-102.
Rugg, M.D., & Curran, T. (2007). Event-related potentials
and recognition memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
11(6), 251-257.
Rugg, M.D., Mark, R.E., Walla, P., Schloerscheidt, A.M.,
Birch, C.S., & Allan, K. (1998). Dissociation of the neural
correlates of implicit and explicit memory. Nature, 392,
595-598.
Rugg, M.D., & Yonelinas, A.P. (2003). Human recognition
memory: A cognitive neuroscience perpective. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7(7), 313-319.
Shiffrin, R.M. & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: REM – retrieving effectively from
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 145-166.
Snodgrass, J.G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to dementia
and amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 117(1), 34-50.
Srinivasan, R., Nunez, P.L., Silberstein, R.B., Tucker, D.M.,
& Cadusch, P.J. (1996). Spatial sampling and filtering of
EEG with spline-Laplacians to estimate cortical
potentials. Brain Topography, 8, 355–366.
Stanislaw, H. & Todorov, N. (1999). Calculation of Signal
Detection Theory Measures. Behaviour Research
Methods, Instruments and Computers, 31, 137-149.
Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and Consciousness. Canadian
Psychology / Psychologie Canadienne, 26(1), 1-12.
Yonelinas, A.P. (1999). The contribution of recollection and
familiarity to recognition and source-memory judgments:
A formal dual-process model and an analysis of receiver
operating characteristics. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Language, 25(2),
1415-1434.
Yonelinas, A.P. (2002). The nature of recollection and
familiarity: A review of 30 years of research. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46, 441-517.
Yonelinas, A.P., Otten, L.J., Shaw, K.N., & Rugg, M.D.
(2005). Separating brain regions involved in recollection
and familiarity in recognition memory. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 25(11), 3002-3008.

102

