UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analysis of the Variability of Three-Dimensional Spatial Relations in Visual Short-Term
Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5hw8k7jx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Winkelholz, Carsten
Kleiber, Michael
Schlick, Christopher Marc

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analysis of the Variability of Three-Dimensional
Spatial Relations in Visual Short-Term Memory
Carsten Winkelholz (carsten.winkelholz@fkie.fraunhofer.de)
FGAN, Neuenahrer Straße 20
53343 Wachtberg-Werthhoven, Germany

Michael Kleiber (michael.kleiber@fkie.fraunhofer.de)
FGAN, Neuenahrer Straße 20
53343 Wachtberg-Werthhoven, Germany

Christopher Marc Schlick (schlick@iaw.rwth-aachen.de)
RWTH Aachen University, Bergdriesch 27
D-52062 Aachen

Abstract
In a laboratory experiment, 13 participants reproduced from
memory the position of a sphere relative to a second landmark
sphere located on the viewing axis of the observer. The
relative location of the second sphere varied both laterally and
in depth. The stimuli were generated on a stereoscopic
display. The paper focuses on the analysis of the structure of
the noise in the reproduced object locations, this structure
reflecting the mental representation of the stored spatial
relations. The results showed that the spatial location of the
landmark sphere affects the variability of the reproduced
object locations. In particular, the variability in the
frontoparallel plane increases with the length of the depth
component of the spatial relation. This finding can be
interpreted in two ways. First, spatial acuity in perception
decreases, or second, participants encode sensory information
by transforming it into a mental spherical coordinate system.
Both interpretations are discussed.

Introduction
McNamara (2003) proposed that locations are memorized in
egocentric and allocentric coordinate systems. Allocentric
coordinate systems define locations with respect to objects
in the environment. We believe that shifts of attention
between several locations in space define the reference axes
and planes of local allocentric coordinate systems within
which the spatial relations are encoded. This assumption is
consistent with the idea that locations are encoded by
intrinsic frames of references (Mou & McNamara 2002;
Schmidt 2004). These intrinsic reference frames would
result naturally from salient landmarks of the scene that
attract attention. The structure of the variability in the
reproduced locations provides essential information about
the nature of the allocentric reference systems and reveals
the dimensions in which attributes of the location had been
encoded. Only a few reports in the literature have provided a
systematic investigation of the dispersion of locations
recalled from memory. The most frequently cited work in
this field is by Huttenlocher, Hedges, and Duncan S. (1993),

who conducted an experiment in which the participants had
to reproduce locations within a circle, the observed
distribution of which was consistent with encoding the
locations relative to the center of the circle in terms of the
distance from the center and the polar angle. Furthermore,
they found systematic distortions of the reproduced polar
angles for locations near the virtual horizontal and vertical
lines that divide the circle into quadrants. The participants
misplaced the locations toward a central location in each
quadrant. Huttenlocher et al. proposed a stochastic model
based on hypothesized probability density functions for the
recall of the locations from memory. Based on these
findings Werner & Diedrichsen (2002) investigated the time
course of the memory distortions for the location of a dot in
relation to two horizontally aligned landmarks. These works
and the work of McNamara (2003) complemented each
another, if the recall of locations from memory is described
by probability density functions according to the dimensions
of the allocentric reference systems.
The aims of the experiment described in this paper are
twofold. First to confirm basic parameters of the noise in the
mental representation reported in the literature, which we
have already used to model phenomena in memorizing
object locations in graphical structures (Winkelholz &
Schlick 2007a) and for symmetry detection (Winkelholz &
Schlick 2007b). Second to gain insight into the structure of
the probability distribution of basic three dimensional
spatial relations reproduced from memory. Especially, we
are interested if subjects encode the stimuli on the basis of
values of the perceived attributes or if they transform the
perceived attributes into a mental coordinate system.

Experiment
Within the experiment participants reproduced random
virtual object locations on three predefined frontoparallel
planes. If the object location is represented mentally by a
distance and a solid angle relative to a landmark location,
then the variability in the lateral coordinates of the

1679

reproduced object locations should increase with their
relative distance in depth from the landmark location. If the
variability is independent of the reproduced location, the
latter’s mental representation might simply be its perceived
projection on the screen and a relative distance in depth that
is perceived by disparity and the visual angle of the
circumference. In general, an increase in the variability of
the lateral coordinates might be just the result of visual
perception. When the visual system focuses on a location in
three-dimensional space through convergence, only the
points contained inside Panum’s fusional area near the
horopter are fused into a single image. Therefore, outside of
Panum’s fusional area oculomotoric sensor information will
additionally be used by the visual system to determine the
spatial relation. Accommodation should have no effect on
spatial acuity, since the stereoscopic stimuli were generated
synthetically on a display at a fixed distance from the
observer.

Method
Participants
Thirteen volunteers (11 male, 2 female, average age 27),
who were recruited from the staff of our institute, took part
in the experiment. All participants had normal or correctedto-normal vision.

Apparatus and Stimuli
The experimental task environment was generated on a
Windows workstation equipped with a NVIDIA Quadro
graphics card. The subjects used a spacemouse and the
standard keyboard to provide input information. The
spacemouse, a three-dimensional interaction device with six
degrees of freedom, contains a controller cap that can be
pushed, pulled and twisted in any direction. The subjects
used the spacemouse to control the spatial movement of the
object during the response stage. The stereoscopic images
were rendered at 120 Hz on a 21″ CRT monitor and a
resolution of 1280×1024 pixels. The images for the left and
right eyes were separated by shutter glasses, which meant
that the frame rate per eye was 60 Hz. The scene was
rendered using antialiasing (16 times provided by the driver)
to increase the visual spatial resolution and thereby enhance
perception of the disparity The monitor screen was located
60 cm in front of the subject. The spheres were displayed
using the user-centric projection method that is commonly
employed in virtual environments such as caves and
workbenches (Cruz-Neira, Sandin & DeFanti 1993). Points
in object space are projected onto the screen according to
the positions of the user’s eyes. Each eye perceives the
points on the surface of a virtual object from the correct
solid angle as if the object was actually present. In other
words, the disparity of the displayed objects on the screen
and the viewing angle of the projected size of the spheres
were the same as if real spheres had been placed at these
coordinates.

y

-z

x

screen

Fig. 1: Illustration of the experimental setup. The lower part
of the figure shows two cross-sections of the display setup,
the first from the side and the second from above.
To accomplish this, subjects were advised to sit in an
appropriate position so that their head was within the range
of the parameters used in the projection model. In the
following, the stimulus parameters are reported in virtual
coordinates according to this user-centric projection model.
All spheres were displayed to appear on one of three virtual
planes. The screen is defined to be at z = −60 cm1. The first
plane was –1.5 cm [z = −58.5 cm] in front of the screen, and
the second and third planes were located 1.5 cm [z =
−61.5 cm] and 4.5 cm [z = −64.5 cm] behind the screen,
respectively. Hence, the disparities shown on the display
were –9.5′ for z = –58.5 cm, 9.1′ for z = –61.5 cm, and 26′
for z = –64.5 cm. The diameter of the spheres was 1 cm and
the corresponding visual angles of the displayed size were
58.8′, 55.9′ and 53.3′, respectively. The landmark sphere
was always displayed on the z axis. The sphere whose
location had to be memorized was positioned at two distinct
distances from the center axis. The radii of the circles were
chosen so that the viewing angle of the distance to the center
was constant across different virtual planes. The visual
angle, α xy = tan −1 ( x 2 + y 2 / z ) , of the lateral distance was
2.9° for the inner circle and 4.8° for the outer circle. The
associated distances of the projected locations on the screen
from the center were 3.0 cm for the inner circle and 5.0 cm
for the outer circle. This procedure was used to ensure that
effects in the xy-component of reproduced spatial relations
did not result simply from different distances on the retina,
which would make reasoning about the effects more
difficult. On the other hand, this procedure makes it more
difficult to analyze the effects in the displayed, virtual,
three-dimensional space. However, variation in the radii of
the test stimuli in virtual space was quite small and only
resulted in additional noise that was identical for each factor
level of ∆z and therefore did not affect the main effects. In
the virtual space, the range of the radii was [2.8 cm, 3.1 cm]
for the inner circle and [4.9 cm, 5.4 cm] for the outer circle.
1

1680

The x, y, and z axes form a right-handed coordinate system.

0.60

0.55

0.55

|ey - e~y |

0.50

|exy - exy |/ cm

0.45

0.45

~

|ei - e~i |i={x,y} /cm

0.50

|e x - e~x |

0.40

0.40
0.35

αxy= 2.9°

0.30

0.35

αxy= 4.8°

0.25

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

|∆z| /cm

|∆z| /cm

Fig. 2: (a) Absolute deviation of ex and ey as functions of |∆z|.
(b) Absolute deviation of exy as a function of |∆z| parameterized by the distance to the center axis.

Procedure
In each experiment the subject’s task was to reproduce the
location of one sphere relative to a second sphere. All
participants performed training sessions to familiarize
themselves with the stereoscopic information display and
the spacemouse. Each experiment used a 3×3×2 withinparticipants design. The first factor was the virtual
frontoparallel plane on which the landmark sphere was
located. The second and third factors indicated the virtual
frontoparallel plane and the eccentricity of the location that
had to be memorized, respectively. The polar angle of the
location on the circle in question was randomized by a
uniform distribution. All object configurations were tested
in a randomized order. At the beginning of each trial, both
spheres were displayed for one second, followed by a blank
screen shown for two seconds. Finally, the landmark sphere
was displayed at its previous location and a second sphere
was shown at the default location, the origin. This second
sphere had to be moved to the memorized location using the
spacemouse. When the subject was confident that the
second sphere was located at its remembered location he/she
confirmed the location by pressing the spacebar on the
keyboard. After a blank screen had been displayed for a
short time, a new trial containing new locations for the
spheres followed. For movement of the sphere, the
translation of the controller cap was modeled as a threedimensional Cartesian vector. Because the controller cap
can be moved along all dimensions simultaneously, this
Cartesian vector can point in any direction and has no
preferred movement along a particular axis. The sphere
moved in the virtual display space in the direction of this
vector with a speed proportional to the vector norm.

Dependent Variables
In the following, the triplet ( x0 , y0 , z 0 ) represents the
coordinates of the landmark location, ( x, y, z ) are the
coordinates of the location that had to be memorized, and
( x′, y ′, z ′) are the coordinates of the location that was
reproduced by a subject. In this study, the relative distances

of the locations to the landmark location are of major
v
v
interest: v = ( x − x0 , y − y0 , z − z0 )T , v ′ = ( x′ − x0 , y ′ − y 0 , z ′ − z 0 )T
To test the hypothesis that relative depth is encoded
independently of relative lateral location, we first
v v v
investigated the response errors, e = v ′ − v , in Cartesian
coordinates. The reliability of the memorized location is
reflected in the variability of the responses. By itself, the
error vector reflects systematic distortions in the mental
representation. Without a systematic component of
distortion in the mental representation, the mean error
equals zero. The variability of the errors is identical to the
variability of the responses. We used the average absolute
deviation to measure variability and the median to measure
central tendency.

Results and Discussion
All trials on which the distance between the reproduced
location and the correct location was larger than the distance
between the correct location and the landmark location were
considered as outliers. Since the exclusion of outliers
resulted in empty cells for two of the participants, their data
were excluded from further analysis. There were 6.9%
outliers in the remaining group of 11 participants.
Cartesian coordinate system
v
For each factor level, the mean response error, e , was
determined. Using these means, the absolute deviations of
each component, x and y, of the response error were
calculated. The absolute deviation was analyzed using a
repeated measures ANOVA with |∆z| = |z – z0| (0 cm, 3 cm,
6 cm), the visual angle of the lateral distance, α xy , (2.9°,
4.8°) and component (horizontal (x), vertical (y)) as the
within-subject factors. The ANOVA results showed that the
absolute deviation varied systematically with |∆z| (F(2,20) =
5.88, p < .01, , ηp2 = .37), its value being smaller for |∆z| =
0 cm (Mean = .36 cm, SEM = .04 cm) than for |∆z| = 3 cm
(Mean = .44 cm, SEM = .03 cm) and |∆z| = 6 cm (Mean =
.47 cm, SEM = .06 cm). No significant difference was found
between |∆z| = 3 cm and |∆z| = 6 cm. The analysis revealed
neither a main effect of the component type (F(1,10) = .60,

1681

p = .46) nor an interaction effect of component type and |∆z|
(F(2,20) = 1.00, p = .38). The absolute deviation of exy,
parameterized with α xy , is plotted in Fig. 2b. The absolute
deviation varied systematically with α xy (F(1,10) = 19.5,
p < .001, ηp2 = .66), and the interaction of |∆z| and α xy was
not significant (p > .5). The absolute deviation was smaller
for α xy = 2.9° (Mean = .37 cm, SEM = .04 cm) than for
α xy = 4.8° (Mean = .48 cm, SEM = .04 cm).
Spherical coordinate system
To analyze the variability of the responses using a spherical
coordinate system, both the length and the zenith angle were
calculated for all spatial relations that had been analyzed.
Since it was assumed that the reference axis points in the
same direction as the spatial relation, the zenith angle only
varied from 0° to 90°. Based on the grouping of these two
values, factor levels were defined for the zenith angle and
the lengths of the tested spatial relation. The defined factor
levels are shown in Fig. 3.

8

d6

6

d4

4

d2

d5
d3

d1
2

0
0°

20°

40°

θ25°

θ42°

60°

θ60°

80°

θ90°

Fig. 3: Factor levels of the stimuli used for the analysis.
The factor levels with different lengths for a single zenith
angle are of special interest. This is the case for θ42° ≈ 42°
and θ90° = 90°. Therefore, if the response errors are
examined in spherical coordinates, the absolute deviations
of the angles should be identical for different lengths of the
spatial relation. To verify this, the absolute deviations of
zenith and azimuth angle for each response were calculated.
A three-way repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted
using Euclidean length and zenith angle of the tested spatial
relation and the angular component of the reproduced
spatial relation as within-subject factors.
There was no significant effect of the length of the tested
spatial relation on the absolute response deviation
(F(1,10) = 1.52, p = .246). Therefore, the absolute deviation
of the reproduced spherical angles was also calculated for
θ25° and θ60°. In Fig. 4a, the absolute deviations of the
reproduced angles are plotted for all zenith angles under
study. The absolute deviations of the reproduced zenith
angles increased for smaller zenith angles of the tested
spatial relation, whereas this dependence seemed to be
weaker for the reproduced azimuth angle.

A two-way repeated-measures ANOVA showed significant
effects for the angular component (F(1,10) = 15.30,
p < .005, ηp2 = .54) and the zenith angle of the tested spatial
relation (F(3,30) = 6.46, p < .01, ηp2 = .39). The interaction
of these two factors was not significant (F(3,30) = 2.13, p =
.12, ηp2 = .18). The increase in the absolute deviation of the
reproduced azimuth angle was smaller (θ90°: Mean = 5.14°,
SEM = .85; θ25°: Mean = 7.12°, SEM = .97) than the increase
in absolute deviation of the reproduced zenith angle (θ90°:
Mean = 9.15°, SEM = .79; θ25°: Mean = 15.53°, SEM =
1.96).The strong dependence of the absolute deviations in
the reproduced zenith angles on the tested zenith angle
contradicts the predictions of a pure spherical geometry for
the mental representation. Therefore, as a next step the
absolute deviation of the reproduced length of the spatial
relation was analyzed. For each defined factor group, the
tested lengths have a given absolute deviation, which need
to be considered in the analysis. For a spherical geometry it
must be expected that the absolute deviations of the
reproduced lengths increase linearly. In contrast, the
analysis showed a disordered picture for the reproduced
lengths, the mean of the reproduced length being smaller for
d5 than for d4 (Fig 4b). A one-way repeated-measures
ANOVA revealed no significant difference for these two
groups (F(1,10) = 2.93, p = .12, ηp2 = .23).
Therefore, the mean of the reproduced length for d5 (Mean =
5.45 cm, SEM = .19 cm) was at least equal to or possibly
smaller than that for d4 (Mean = 5.73 cm, SEM = .13 cm).
However, groups d4 and d5 also differed in zenith angle for
the tested spatial relation. In d4, the mean zenith angle was
42°, whereas for d5 the mean zenith angle was 90°. For d5,
the spatial relation had no depth component, and the
absolute deviations did not increase with the length of the
tested spatial relation.
The absolute deviation for the tested length for d3 was
significantly smaller than that for d2 (F(1,10) = 13.6,
p < .005, ηp2 = .58). Again, both groups also differed in
zenith angle (d2: θ = 20°, d3: θ = 42°), and consequently by
the fraction of the depth component. These findings suggest
an independent analysis of the depth and lateral components
of the length of a spatial relation. Therefore, the data are
grouped by |∆z| and the length of the xy-component of the
tested spatial relations. The absolute deviations increased
with the length of the related length. A one-way repeatedmeasures ANOVA showed that this effect was significant
for the z-component (F(2,20) = 35.1, p < .001, ηp2 = .78)
and the xy-component (F(1,10) = 20.3, p < .001, ηp2 = .67).
Since the absolute deviations from the given spatial
relations also increased itself for the xy-component, an
additional two-way repeated-measures ANOVA was
performed on pooled data from the tested spatial relations
and the reproduced spatial relations. This analysis, which
included reproduced vs. original spatial relations as an
additional factor, revealed a significant interaction between
reproduced vs. original spatial relation and length (F(1,10) =
6.59, p = .028, ηp2 = .39). This interaction indicated that an
additional increase in the absolute deviation results from the

1682

(a)

(b)

20°

~

15°

|d ' – d '|: reproduced
~
|d – d |: original

2.0

d5

1.5

|d (') – d (' )|/cm

~

|i' – i' | i = {ϕ, θ }

~

| θ' – θ' |
~
|ϕ' – ϕ' |

10°

5°

d6

d2

1.0

d4
d1

0.5

d3

0.0

0°
0°

20°

40°

60°

80°

0

2

4

6

8

θ
d (' )/cm
Fig. 4: (a) Absolute deviation of the reproduced spherical angular components as a function of the zenith angle of the tested
spatial relation. The multiple measure points at θ42° and θ90° show the absolute deviations for the corresponding distance groups.
(b) Mean and absolute deviation of the reproduced and tested Euclidean distances as a function of the corresponding mean.
mental representation. Notably, the absolute deviations of
the z-component appeared to increase linearly with |∆z| for
the tested spatial relation but not with the reproduced length.
Furthermore, the z-component shrinks in memory. The
strengths of the growth and shrinkage depended on |∆z|. A
more detailed analysis is out of the scope of this paper

General Discussion
The results of the experiment showed that the variability of
a location reproduced from visual spatial memory is
influenced by the relative distance in depth to a landmark.
With increasing distance in depth, not only did the
variability of the reproduced depth component of the
distance increase, but the variability of the reproduced
lateral location also increased. The effect of landmarks on
locations reproduced from memory generally indicates that
participants include spatial relations between the location
and the landmark in the encoded location. The structure of
the variability of the reproduced locations provides insight
into the mental representation. For an analysis a detailed
model should describe the actual information processing
steps that transform sensory information into a cognitive
representation and then into a reproduction. Such a model
can be greatly simplified if noise contained in the mental
representation is much greater than the noise contained in
visual sensory information. In this case, the noise from
sensory information can be neglected. For two dimensional
stimuli, visual acuity was much higher than the variability
of the reproduced locations. For example, the visual acuity
at an eccentricity of 5° is about 3″. Under the assumption
that the landmark location can be assessed with a resolution
of 1″, the lateral direction of a location relative to the
landmark location should be discriminated by
2·tan(5°/(4″/2)) ≈ 0.08°, which is much lower than the
usually obtained variability of directions reproduced from
memory. Similar arguments apply for the reproduced lateral
distance to the landmark location. The lateral noise
parameter σ ϕ and σ α xy determined from the data can be

compared to values reported in literature. Huttenlocher et al.
(1991) reported σ ϕ = 10°, which is somewhat higher than
the value of σ ϕ = 6.3° found in our data. In contrast, we
found σ ′fα = 0.11 2 for the standard deviation to reproduce
radial distance, which is larger than σ fα = 0.025 , the value
reported by Huttenlocher et al. (1991). This difference may
be caused by the fact that participants in the experiments of
Huttenlocher et al. had to estimate locations within a circle.
To do so, initially they had to estimate the center of the
surrounding circle as the landmark location, which adds
noise to the direction, whereas the radial component could
be estimated more efficiently by using more than one
landmark located on the circumference of the circle. For
three dimensional stimuli, the assessment of sensory acuity
is much more complex than it is for two dimensional
stimuli. There are several sources of sensory information
that can be exploited by the visual system to deduce
information about depth: disparity, accommodation, and
vergence. To the best of our knowledge, the quantity
representing the effect of an increase in disparity on lateral
spatial resolution has not been described in the depth
perception literature. In contrast, the dimensions of Panum’s
fusional area have been well studied (Kenneth & Ogle
1952). Additional studies have focused on the dependence
of the stereo acuity on eccentricity (Rawlings & Shipley
1969) and the effect of object size on stereoscopic spatial
depth acuity (Schlesinger & Yeshurun 1998) A decrease in
spatial acuity in the lateral dimensions due to increasing
disparity is to be expected, because double images are
perceived outside Panum’s fusional area. However, we
believe that the additional noise from disparity is less than
the increase in noise that was found in the data.
Furthermore, because the stimuli had horizontal disparity,
this noise should only affect the horizontal component of the
2
To be compliant to Weber-Fechner-Law the standard deviation of
reproduced eccentricity scales linear with the eccentricity of the
actual memorized visual angle α xy is given by: σ α xy = σ fα α xy

1683

lateral location and not the noise in the vertical component,
which surprisingly increased by similar amounts.
Nevertheless, the analysis of the absolute deviation of the
reproduced distances as a function of the distances
examined in the experiment showed that the depth
component of distance was crucial, since the variability was
much greater in depth than it was in the lateral dimensions.
This is consistent with the findings of Norman et al. (1996),
who observed that participants are highly sensitive to small
differences in the length of lines presented in the
frontoparallel plane, while the sensitivity decreases by an
order of magnitude when the line segments are presented at
random orientations in depth. In case of a mental
representation of the spatial relation in a spherical
coordinate system a model should include this noise in the
perception of depth, while the zenith angle is deduced from
this noisy depth component. The dependence of noise in the
depth component on eccentricity, where landmark location
and the to-be-reproduced location are in the same
frontoparallel plane (θ = 90°), was similar to values reported
in the literature. It is known that stereoscopic acuity is a
decreasing function of eccentricity. Rawlings and Shipley
(1969) reported a stereo acuity of 21″ at the point of focus
and 155″ at an eccentricity of 4°. If 25% is assumed to be
the threshold of the just-noticeable difference, an
interpolation of the data reported in this paper will predict a
stereo acuity of 221″ at an eccentricity of 4°. On the one
hand, this finding does not deliver a new argument that
spatial relations are mentally represented in a spherical
coordinate system, since the additional noise might simply
be the result of the subject’s carelessness when adjusting the
stimulus to the remembered location. Yet on the other hand,
this finding does not contradict the argument that the noise
contained in the mental representation results from noisy
perception. A model assuming a mental representation in a
spherical coordinate system would explain both effects—the
increase in depth variability with eccentricity and the
increase of lateral variability with relative distance in
depth—using only one noise parameter for the zenith angle
σ θ , whereas a model considering independent dimensions
for the depth and the lateral location needed two parameters:
one noise parameter for the lateral projected distance in
dependence on the depth component ( σ fα (∆z ) ), and a
second noise parameter for the noise in the depth component
in dependence on the eccentricity of the spatial relation
( σ ∆z (α xy ) ). In future research the mathematical modeling
of human performance variability using probability density
functions would clarify the underlying assumptions
regarding dependencies between spatial attributes. The
resulting parameterized models could be used to describe
the recollection of locations from memory. The distortions
at categorical boundaries emerged naturally at the
boundaries of the probability density functions.
Furthermore, the results of this study should be generalized.
In the current experiment, the viewing axis was a natural

choice for the polar axis of the spherical coordinate system,
since there was only one landmark sphere present. If there
are two landmark spheres, we suggest that the line
connecting the two spheres serve as the polar axis of the
mental representation.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported in part by the German Research
Foundation DFG under the Cluster of Excellence
"Integrative Production Technology for High-Wage
Countries".

References
Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D.J., & DeFanti, A.T. (1993).
Surround-screen projection-based virtual reality: The
design and implementation of the CAVE. Proceedings of
SIGGRAPH, 93, 135–142.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L.V., & Duncan S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98(3), 352–376.
Kenneth, N., & Ogle, K. N. (1952). Disparity limits of
stereopsis, Archives of Ophthalmology, 48(1), 50–60.
McNamara, T. P. (2007). Commentary: The nature and
development of spatial reference systems. In J. M.
Plumert & J. Spencer (Eds.), The emerging spatial mind
(pp. 104-113). London: Oxford University Press.
Mou, W., & McNamara, T.P. (2002). Intrinsic frames of
reference in spatial memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 162–
170.
Norman, J.F., Todd, J.T., Perotti, V.J., & Tittle, J.S. (1996).
The visual perception of three-dimensional length.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 22(1), 173–186.
Rawlings, S.C., & Shipley, T. (1969). Stereoscopic acuity
and horizontal angular distance from fixation. Journal of
the Optical Society of America, 59(8), 991–993.
Schlesinger, B.Y., & Yeshurun, Y. (1998). Spatial size
limits in stereoscopic vision. Spatial Vision, 11(2), 279–
293.
Schmidt, T. (2004). Spatial distortions in visual short-term
memory: Interplay of intrinsic and extrinsic reference
systems. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 4(4), 313–
336.
Werner, S., & Diedrichsen, J. (2002). The time course of
spatial memory distortions. Memory & Cognition, 2002,
30(5), 718-730.
Winkelholz, C.; & Schlick, C. (2007a). Modeling human
spatial memory within a symbolic architecture of
cognition, In Barkowsky, Th., Knauff, M., Ligozat, G.,
Montello, D.R. (Eds.), Spatial Cognition V: Reasoning,
Action, Interaction, (pp. 229-248), Berlin: Springer.
Winkelholz, C.; & Schlick, C.: (2007b) Bridging
psychophysics and cognitive engineering in visual
perception, Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 07, 25202527.

1684

