UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Arbitrating Between Theory-Theory and Simulation Theory: Evidence from a Think-Aloud
Study of Counterfactual Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5sz300xz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Wilkinson, Meredith
Ball, Linden
Cooper, Rachel

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Arbitrating Between Theory-Theory and Simulation Theory: Evidence from a
Think-Aloud Study of Counterfactual Reasoning
Meredith R. Wilkinson (m.r.wilkinson@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF UK

Linden J. Ball (l.ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF UK

Rachel Cooper (r.v.cooper@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Philosophy, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YG UK
situation (e.g., Mitchell, Currie, & Ziegler, 2009). As we
will demonstrate, this hybrid approach has considerable
appeal, not least because it can capture the way in which
mental state reasoning is sensitive to a multiplicity of factors
associated with the prevailing situation, such as its
familiarity. The factor of interest in the present paper relates
to the protagonist’s capacity to have control over the
outcome associated with a situation.

Abstract
How we engage in mental state reasoning remains a
contentious issue, reflected in the debate between theorytheorists, who argue that we deploy theory-based rules, and
simulation theorists, who argue that such reasoning is
subserved by simulation processes. The present study
examined whether theory-based or simulation-based
reasoning is adopted in regret-oriented counterfactual
scenarios involving mental state inferences. Participants
thought aloud while reasoning through such scenarios from
the perspective of themselves, themselves and another, or two
other individuals. The scenarios also manipulated the
controllability of event outcomes. Results revealed more
theorizing in the uncontrollable than the controllable
scenarios, and more simulation in the controllable than
uncontrollable ones. More theorizing was also observed in the
“other-and-other” than the “self-only” condition. These
findings highlight the value of adopting a hybrid model of
mental state reasoning, where theorizing and simulation are
integrated within a common framework, with such processing
being deployed in a context-sensitive manner.
Keywords: Simulation theory; theory-theory; counterfactual
thinking; regret; think aloud protocols; mental models.

Introduction
The theory-theory (TT) versus simulation theory (ST)
debate focuses on how we understand and reason about our
own and others’ mental states relating to beliefs, desires,
intentions and the like. The TT approach (e.g., Carruthers,
1996) argues that we apply both tacit and non-tacit
“theories” when understanding mental states. In contrast, ST
posits that such understanding is attained either: (i) by
“offline” simulation (e.g., Goldman, 2006), in which we
take our own beliefs and desires offline, input those of
another individual, and run a simulation process; or (ii) by
imagining how we would feel in a given situation and by
assuming that since other individuals are similar to
ourselves then they would feel the same as we do (e.g.,
Gordon, 1986). Recently, a new variety of theorists have
emerged who argue for a hybrid approach, in which both
theory and simulation are adopted, dependent on the

Previous Attempts to Arbitrate Between TT and ST
Since the emergence of the TT/ST debate, psychologists and
philosophers have been keen to find a test case to arbitrate
between these accounts. This pursuit has largely focused on
empirical findings that derive from comparisons between
autistic individuals (who have various deficits in mental
state understanding) and those without autism. The debate
surrounding the correct theoretical interpretation of mental
state reasoning deficits in autism appears to have reached an
impasse (e.g., Carruthers, 1996, has argued that evidence
from autism supports TT, while Goldman, 2006, argues that
it corroborates ST), such that researchers have started to
explore other ways to address the TT/ST debate.
Recent work in this latter vein reported by Kühberger,
Kogler, Hug, and Mösl (2006), examined the TT/ST debate
using the “position effect” (i.e., a bias to select the rightmost
object in an array of identical objects when asked to make a
preference judgment). In Experiment 1, participants
observed a target person viewing a line of pantyhose and
had to imagine viewing the items in the same manner. It was
found that participants could predict the target’s preference
for the rightmost item, which seems to support ST since the
availability of sufficient imaginative input (i.e., reasoning
from the perspective of the target) enabled participants to
predict the position bias. In Experiment 2, participants were
given a verbal description about an actor rather than
observing them, which failed to produce the results of
Experiment 1. In Experiment 3, participants were informed
about the position effect (but what it entailed was not
explained), and were told to ignore it when making their
selection. The fact that most people still demonstrated the

1008

bias was interpreted as indicating deployment of an
incorrect theory.
Although, Kühberger et al. claim their results support ST,
we wonder whether they speak more to a hybrid account in
which TT operates under some conditions and ST under
others (e.g., Experiment 3 suggests an incorrect theory can
be overridden by simulation). We also note a limitation of
the study, which is that it focuses on epistemic mental states
(i.e., beliefs), which are rather divorced from the richness of
everyday mental state understanding. In order for TT and
ST concepts to be useful for examining mental state
reasoning (rather than just the currency of an esoteric
philosophical debate; cf. Ratcliffe, 2007), such concepts
must show general applicability to a wide variety of
everyday mental state reasoning contexts.
In this paper we propose that counterfactual reasoning
about mental states may provide a new test case for
arbitrating between TT and ST. Counterfactual reasoning
involves imagining how events associated with regret or
disappointment could have turned out differently. Such
reasoning is commonplace in everyday life and is vital for
understanding how other people may be feeling in response
to negative outcomes of real-world situations.
Mental Models and Counterfactual Thinking
The conceptual analysis of counterfactual reasoning is
currently dominated by those adopting a mental models
framework (e.g., Byrne, 2002, 2005), where mental models
reflect representations of actual and counterfactual
possibilities. Two particular phenomena in counterfactual
reasoning that have been addressed by mental model
theorists are: (i) the “action effect”, which concerns the
observation that greater regret intensity is elicited by acts of
commission than acts of omission in the short term (e.g.,
Kahneman & Tversky, 1982), with the reverse being evident
in the long term (e.g., Gilovich & Medvec, 1994); and (ii)
the “temporal order effect”, whereby we are more likely to
reason about undoing the final event in a sequence of events
that led to a negative outcome (e.g., Byrne, Segura,
Culhane, Tasso, & Berrocal, 2000).
Atkinson, Bell, and Feeney (2009) explored both effects
in a study using regret-oriented scenarios. To examine the
action effect participants were asked to decide which of two
protagonists would feel more regret, an actor or non-actor.
To investigate the temporal order effect, participants were
asked who would feel worse, the actor who was mentioned
first or second. The study also manipulated the time that
participants had available to register their response: either
they had as long as they wished or they had to answer as
quickly as possible. It was found that there was no effect of
response time on the emergence of the temporal order
effect. However, the action effect was disrupted in the
speeded condition, with the actor being selected
significantly less often than in the delayed condition. The
finding that the action effect and temporal order effect are
differentially influenced by the response-time manipulation
is claimed by Atkinson et al. to be a consequence of

reasoners needing to build complex representations when
displaying the action effect (cf. Feeney & Handley, 2006).
In particular, for the action effect to arise the reasoner has to
compare events associated with both the actor and the nonactor.
We concur with Atkinson et al.’s interpretation, and also
believe that their findings are relevant to understanding the
role of theorizing and simulation in counterfactual
reasoning. The observation that participants readily select
the second actor in the temporal order scenario, regardless
of time constraints, suggests that participants may be
applying a straightforward, theory-based “rule” that the
second actor would feel more regret. For the action effect,
however, we propose that with sufficient time participants
are likely to engage in mental simulation to pursue
comparisons between the levels of regret felt by the actor
and non-actor - in line with Atkinson et al.’s claim that
participants flesh out mental models in these cases.
We illustrate this latter point with reference to a classic
action/inaction scenario (Gilovich & Medvec, 1994):
“Dave and Jim do not know each other but both are
enrolled at the same elite East Coast University. Both
are only moderately satisfied where they are and both
are considering transferring to another prestigious
school. Each agonizes over the decision, going back
and forth between thinking he is going to stay and
thinking he will leave. They ultimately make different
decisions: Dave opts to stay where he is and Jim
decides to transfer. Suppose their decisions turn out
badly for both of them: Dave still doesn’t like it where
he is and wishes he had transferred, and Jim doesn’t
like his new environment and wishes he had stayed”.
When considering the mental models constructed when
reasoning about Dave, Feeney and Handley (2006) argue
that participants construct the actual state of affairs in which
he stayed and was unhappy and the counterfactual state in
which he moved and was happy. However, we propose that
a third possibility may be constructed for the short term of
Dave moving and being unhappy:
Actual: Stays – Unhappy [Regret]
Counterfactual: Moves – Happy [No regret]
Counterfactual: Moves – Unhappy [Regret]
When fleshing out this model set it is apparent that three
possibilities have to be constructed. These would not be
easy to derive from theory-based processing alone, which
underpins our proposal that simulation may be necessary for
participants to imagine options that the protagonist may be
considering - along with their related emotional impact. We
further propose that when individuals are presented with a
counterfactual scenario they will typically evoke a two-stage
reasoning process. The first stage involves bringing to mind
an initial model based on theory-driven processing (e.g., “If
failing to take an action turns out badly then one will feel
regret”). Assuming that a response can be generated at Stage
1 without any perceived need for further processing then
this will be done on the basis of the initial model. However,
if more processing seems to be needed then individuals may

1009

engage in simulation. This Stage 2 process would be more
cognitively effortful than theorizing as well as more
sequential and controlled in nature.
Predictions of the Study
These aforementioned ideas allow us to develop predictions
in relation to the experiment we report below. One focus of
the research concerned the distinction between
“controllable” and “uncontrollable” outcomes within regretoriented counterfactual situations. Scenarios involving
uncontrollable outcomes limit the consideration of how the
outcome could have turned out better. We therefore predict
that such scenarios will be susceptible to reasoning based on
the application of theory-based inferences. For controllable
outcomes, however, although theory-based reasoning is
available as a starting point, there is also the potential for
the reasoner to flesh out possible ways in which events
could have turned out differently. We therefore predict
increased simulation-based reasoning when participants
engage in mental state understanding in the controllable
case relative to the uncontrollable case.
Most philosophers have focused on arbitrating between
TT and ST with reference to situations involving reasoning
about another person. However, it is also interesting to
examine people’s reasoning about their own mental states.
Evidence that there are differences in how we reason about
ourselves compared to others comes from a study by
Girotto, Ferrante, Pighin, and Gonzalaz (2007), who
presented participants with a scenario where they could win
a prize by solving a problem. One key experiment involved
two conditions. In the “actor” condition participants were
presented with two sealed envelopes; one they were told
contained an easy problem, one a difficult one (in fact, both
contained an insoluble problem). In the “reader” condition,
participants read about a protagonist who had to make the
same choice as in the actor condition, with an identical
outcome (i.e., failure to solve the problem). Participants
were either assigned to the actor or reader condition and
were afterwards asked to name one way in which the
outcome could have turned out better. Responses were
coded as either modifying choices (e.g., selecting the other
envelope), or as modifying problem features (e.g., having
more time). Girotto et al. found the actors were more likely
to alter problem features, while readers were more likely to
alter a choice, such as the selection of the envelope.
The finding that participants reason about different
aspects of a scenario in the self/actor versus other/reader
condition suggests that different processes may be
occurring. The increased likelihood of undoing a problem
feature in the actor condition indicates the consideration of
more possibilities than in the reader condition, which tended
to involve just choosing the other envelope. This points to
the idea that more possibilities are considered when
reasoning from the perspective of oneself than that that of
another, with the implication being that more simulation
may arise in the former than the latter situation.

We also note that when people engage in counterfactual
reasoning about another individual then theory-based
reasoning may take precedence as people tend to possess a
wealth of generalized rules concerning how people will feel
in regret-oriented situations (e.g., “A person will be upset if
they miss out on something they desire greatly”). However,
when reasoning about ourselves we may be more likely to
progress onto the simulation stage since we possess more
specialized knowledge concerning ourselves and the
nuances of our own reactions to events. In this way, people
who are engaged in self-oriented reasoning may move away
from the application of generalized folk psychological
theories toward the simulation of multiple eventualities.
In sum, by using regret-oriented counterfactual scenarios
involving mental state reasoning we assumed that we would
gain useful insights to address two issues surrounding the
TT/ST debate. First, such scenarios should usefully inform
whether theory-based or simulation-based reasoning
dominate in mental state understanding, or whether both
forms of reasoning are deployed. Second, the manipulation
of factors such as outcome controllability and the self/other
distinction should clarify whether contextual and
instructional aspects of the presented scenarios determine
whether individuals are more likely to theorize or simulate.

Method
Participants
Participants were 90 individuals at Lancaster University
who received either course credit or payment. None had
prior knowledge of research on reasoning or theory of mind.
Design
A 2 x 3 mixed between-within participants design was
adopted. The between participants factor was the
perspective that participants had to reason from, which had
three levels: self; self-and-other; other-and-other. The within
participants factor was outcome controllability, with two
levels: controllable versus uncontrollable.
Materials and Pre-Test
Participants received two controllable and two
uncontrollable scenarios. Controllable scenarios concerned:
(i) two individuals performing poorly on a University
assignment (assignment scenario); and (ii) individuals
changing or not changing a minor subject to a major at
University and then not enjoying the course and receiving a
poor course grade (course scenario). The uncontrollable
scenarios concerned: (i) losing a game of table football by
scoring an own goal, followed by one’s opponent scoring a
winning goal (football scenario); and (ii) an individual
missing their flight by 5 mins, with the plane having been
delayed, and another individual missing their flight by 30
mins, with the plane leaving on time (plane scenario).
In the self-only and self-and-other conditions the
participant had to take on the role of one of the individuals
within the scenario. In those conditions that involved other
individuals, we presented “personas” (i.e., brief bio-sketches

1010

of the named individuals) in an effort to increase the realism
of the scenarios. For the self-and-other and other-and-other
conditions participants were required to state who they
thought would feel more regret, upset or frustration
(dependent on scenario). For the self-only condition
participants had to state how much regret/upset/frustration
they would feel with essentially equivalent scenarios.
To validate our controllability manipulation we gave 13
participants the scenarios from the self-only condition. After
reading each scenario they had to use a 10-point scale to rate
it for familiarity in their everyday life, and for the
controllability of the outcome. We also included a
mutability question in which participants were asked simply
to list all the ways in which the situation could have turned
out for the better. Using paired samples t-tests we found that
controllable scenarios were rated as significantly more
controllable (M = 6.54) than the uncontrollable scenarios
(mean = 5.31), t(12) = 2.66, p = .02. There was no
difference, however, in ratings of familiarity (means of 5.58
versus 4.88 for controllable vs. uncontrollable), t(12) = 1.17,
p = .26. For the mutability measure there was a mean of
2.38 mutations for controllable scenarios and 2.69 mutations
for uncontrollable scenarios, which was unreliable, t(12) =
1.67, p = .12. Overall, these pre-test data reveal a solid
effect of controllability in the predicted direction, but no
confounding effects of mutability or familiarity.
Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the three
perspective conditions and were given associated
instructions. They were then presented with a booklet
containing the scenarios and were asked to think-aloud
whilst reasoning about each one. Scenario order was
independently randomized for each participant.

Results
Data Coding
To code the data we adopted Ball and Christensen’s (2009)
scheme in which each line was coded as reflecting theorybased or simulation-based reasoning. An “ambiguous” code
was used when: (i) lines were evenly split across categories
(there were 13 instances of these); or (ii) it was difficult to
be certain whether theory-based or simulation-based
reasoning was being adopted. Theory-based reasoning
concerned instances in which the participant adopted tacit or
non-tacit theories to make inferences about their own or
others’ mental states. Such reasoning tended to involve the
participant stating general rules regarding mental states,
typically involving a grammatical construction such as “The
person will feel x because of y”. The following excerpt
illustrates theorizing taking place, with a participant
adopting a tacit rule that captures the notion that action will
elicit greater regret in the short term than inaction:
“I think Mike’s gonna feel the more regret in the short
term coz he’s actually chan- he actually made a bad
decision whereas Timmy’s decided - Timmy’s chosen

not to make the decision, so he doesn’t know whether
or not he’d prefer the other - you can assume he can”.
Simulation occurred when participants took their own
beliefs and desires offline and inputted those of other
individuals (e.g., Goldman, 2006). This simulation process
typically involved the participant running through their own
or another individual’s mental states in relation to the
possibilities arising within the scenario so as to determine
how they or others would feel (cf. Gordon, 1986). The
following excerpt demonstrates such simulation, with the
participant imagining themselves in a given situation and
stating how they would feel and also how the protagonist
might feel, rather than simply stating a rule such as “People
feel upset when they receive a poor grade”:
“I myself am not particularly competitive erm, so I
might be kind of disappointed and think, ‘Oh well,
that’s kind of surprising, I’ll erm, I’ll have to find out
why I went wrong’. But perhaps Jim might be slightly
more likely to think, ‘Oh I should have worked harder I
should have’”.
For each scenario the application of this coding scheme
by the first author resulted in a percentage of theorizing and
simulation for each participant as a function of all coded
lines, including ambiguous ones. An independent coder
checked a 10% sample of transcripts after first being trained
in the application of the coding scheme. Inter-rate reliability
was good, with 74% agreement. All areas of disagreement
were resolved through discussion between the coders.
Theory-Based Reasoning
Table 1 presents the percentage of theory-based reasoning
as a function of controllability and perspective. A 2 x 3
mixed design ANOVA revealed a main effect of
controllability, F(1, 87) = 15.81, MSE = 589.91, p < .001,
ŋp2 = 0.15, with theory-based reasoning being more
prevalent in uncontrollable than controllable scenarios.
There was also a main effect of perspective, F(2, 87) =
11.41, MSE = 1238.82, p < .001, ŋp2 = 0.21, with the otherand-other condition evoking the greatest level of theorizing
and the self-only condition the least. The controllability by
perspective interaction was not reliable, F(2, 87) = 0.75,
MSE = 589.91, p =.48, ŋp2 = 0.02. Post hoc comparisons
showed significant differences between the self-only
condition and the other-and-other and self-and-other
conditions (ps < .01). No difference was found between the
self-and-other and other-and-other conditions (p = .23).

1011

Table 1: Mean percentage of theorizing as a function of
outcome controllability and perspective (SDs in brackets).
Perspective
Self-only
Self-&-other
Other-&-other
M

Outcome Controllability
Controllable
Uncontrollable
33 (33)
46 (40)
49 (29)
69 (23)
65 (25)
75 (28)
49
63

M
40
59
70

Table 2: Mean percentage of simulation as a function of
outcome controllability and perspective (SDs in brackets).
Perspective
Self-only
Self-&-other
Other-&-other
M

Outcome Controllability
Controllable
Uncontrollable
52 (38)
40 (37)
24 (27)
20 (21)
20 (21)
15 (24)
32
25

M
46
22
18

Simulation-Based Reasoning
Table 2 presents the percentage of simulation as a function
of controllability and perspective. A 2 x 3 mixed design
ANOVA revealed a main effect of controllability, F(1, 87) =
3.97, MSE = 555.95, p = .049, ŋp2 = 0.04, with greater
simulation in controllable than uncontrollable scenarios.
There was also a main effect of perspective, F(2, 87) =
12.63, MSE = 1122.86 p < .001, ŋp2 = 0.23, with more
simulation in the self-only condition relative to the otherand-other and self-and-other conditions. No interaction was
observed between perspective and controllability, F(2, 87) =
0.57, MSE = 555.95, p = .57, ŋp2 = 0.01. Post-hoc
comparisons revealed a significant difference between the
self-only condition and the self-and-other other-and-other
conditions (ps < .001), but no difference between the selfand-other and other-and-other conditions (p =.90).

Discussion
To our knowledge this is the first study to examine the
TT/ST debate through the prism of mental state reasoning
with counterfactual scenarios. The results from our protocol
analysis indicate that although theorizing dominated overall,
there were nevertheless differences across conditions when
theorizing and simulation data were analyzed separately.
Looking first at the controllability factor, our results
indicated that theorizing was more prevalent in
uncontrollable than controllable scenarios, with the reverse
being the case for simulation. The observation that people
theorize more and simulate less in uncontrollable scenarios
relative to controllable ones is consistent with the view that
uncontrollable scenarios evoke less consideration and
modeling of alternative possibilities. In essence, participants
appear to be minimizing cognitive effort in these cases. For
the controllable condition, simulation may have been
facilitated because it was possible to consider more
alternatives to reality, thereby provoking a more detailed
examination of how an individual might feel in a situation.
Participants also appeared to be more likely to engage in
reasoning about how they might feel in such scenarios,
using this to infer how the protagonist might feel.
How do these findings concerning the effect of outcome
controllability on mental state reasoning fit in with other
theories? Mitchell et al.’s (2009) hybrid account argues that
simulation is used by default, but in cases where a situation
is familiar they suggest that people might use rule-based
theorizing as a shortcut strategy. However, our controllable
and uncontrollable scenarios were equated for familiarity in

a pre-test. As such, since controllability was not confounded
with familiarity it is not immediately apparent how Mitchell
et al.’s account might address the observed influence of
controllability on rates of theorizing and simulation. It may
be the case, however, that both theorizing and simulation
reflect different strategies for engaging in mental state
understanding, with one or other strategy being elicited by
different factors in the prevailing context, including
familiarity and event controllability - and potentially other
cues (e.g., the emotionality of the situation).
Our study also set out to examine whether differences
arise in how people reason about themselves versus others.
Our analysis showed that the self-only condition elicited
more simulation and less theorizing than the other-and-other
condition, with the self-and-other condition occupying a
middle position on both the theorizing and simulation
measures. One reason for relatively more simulation arising
in the self-only condition may be that it is triggered by
direct emotional engagement with presented scenarios
arising from specific memories of personal experiences.
Overall, our findings indicate that both theorizing and
simulation occur in mental state reasoning about regretoriented counterfactual scenarios. This supports a hybrid
view of mental state understanding along the general lines
espoused by Mitchell et al. (2009), and suggests the
traditional TT/ST debate may be misconceived in its attempt
to emphasize the deployment of a unitary reasoning
approach based purely around either theorizing or
simulation. Our results also have implications for mental
models accounts of counterfactual reasoning. So far these
accounts have been dominated by studies of the action effect
(e.g., Feeney & Handley, 2006), and the temporal order
effect (e.g., Atkinson et al., 2009), with less work examining
issues relating to the controllability of regret outcomes. Our
research suggests that an initial model may be formed by
theory-based reasoning, with subsequent models being
fleshed out through a mental simulation process involving
the identification of multiple alternative possibilities.
Although speculative, these ideas resonate with previous
findings relating to the action effect, and represent a useful
area for future research.
Reflecting on our results more generally, we wonder
whether they also speak to dual-process accounts (e.g.,
Evans, 2003, 2006), which contend that human reasoning
involves the interplay between two distinct reasoning
processes. On the one hand Type 1 or heuristic processes are
fast, automatic, high capacity and involve low cognitive
effort. On the other hand, Type 2 or analytic processes are
slow, controlled, low capacity and involve high cognitive
effort. Under some dual-process accounts, Type 1 processes
act by default to provide an initial response that can be
overturned through the application of Type 2 processes
(e.g., Evans, 2006). We suggest that theory-based reasoning
may map onto Type 1 processing, and simulation-based
reasoning may map onto Type 2 processing. Our findings
suggest that there was little simulation that was not also
driven by an initial phase of theorizing, which implies that

1012

theorizing may be primary, and that if further processing is
required this arises through simulation and may serve either
to confirm or override a theory-based decision.
Evidence for this dual-process view of mental state
reasoning comes from Atkinson et al.’s (2009) study, where
the absence of an influence of speeded responding on the
temporal order effect suggests the rapid and automatic
deployment of a rule-based process, in line with TT
assumptions that we possess a set of folk psychological
theories. Furthermore, Atkinson et al.’s observation that
speeded responding modulated the emergence of the action
effect is indicative of slower, controlled, Type 2 processing
linked to simulation. These dual-process arguments also
resonate with Apperly and Butterfill’s (2009) claims for two
processing systems in mental state reasoning, with the
proposal being that infants possess a cognitively efficient
but inflexible method for tracking belief states that runs
parallel to a later-developing adult system which is more
flexible but cognitively demanding.
We conclude by returning to the two issues mentioned in
our introduction that we hoped our research might address,
that is: (i) whether mental state understanding is based on
either theory-based reasoning or simulation-based reasoning
- or whether both types of processing are deployed; and (ii)
whether the manipulation of factors such as outcome
controllability and the self/other distinction might determine
the propensity for individuals to theorize or simulate. In
relation to the first issue, we have demonstrated by means of
think-aloud protocols and the adoption of counterfactual
thinking scenarios that both theory-driven and simulationdriven reasoning play out in mental state understanding,
with all participants deploying theorizing and simulation to
greater or lesser degrees for many of the scenarios. In
relation to the second issue, we have shown that people are
more likely to engage in simulation when thinking about
themselves rather than when thinking about other
individuals. Furthermore, they are more likely to engage in
simulation when reasoning about controllable than
uncontrollable regret outcomes. Moreover, these two factors
(i.e., perspective and controllability) appear to combine
additively to determine the relative levels of simulation and
theorizing that arise in mental state reasoning.
Standard, unitary TT and ST accounts do not seem to be
able to accommodate our observations that the processes
underpinning mental state understanding are influenced by
content, context and perspective effects. Although these
accounts may be able to develop ways to explain the present
evidence, it remains for the proponents of these theories to
take up this challenge. In contrast, hybrid accounts that
embrace both TT and ST seem better able to deal with our
findings. We suggest that hybrid theories represent an
important new direction in research examining the processes
associated with mental state reasoning.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the ESRC for an interdisciplinary
studentship awarded to the first author.

References
Apperly, I.A., & Butterfill, S.A. (2009). Do humans have
two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states?
Psychological Review, 116, 953-970.
Atkinson, L., Bell, D., & Feeney, A. (2009). The
relationship between counterfactual thinking and
emotional reactions to event outcomes: Does one account
fit all? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 724-728.
Ball, L.J., & Christensen, B.T. (2009). Analogical reasoning
and mental simulation in design: Two strategies linked to
uncertainty resolution. Design Studies, 20, 169-186.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Mental models and counterfactual
thoughts about what might have been. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6, 426-431.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2005). The Rational Imagination: How
People Create Alternatives to Reality. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Byrne, R.M.J., Segura, S., Culhane, R., Tasso, A., &
Berrocal, P. (2000). The temporality effect in
counterfactual thinking about what might have been.
Memory & Cognition, 28, 264-281.
Carruthers, P. (1996). Autism as mind-blindness: An
elaboration and partial defence. In P. Carruthers & P.K.
Smith (Eds.), Theories of Theories of Mind (pp. 257-273),
Cambridge: CUP
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2003). In two minds: Dual-process
accounts of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7,
454-459.
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2006). The heuristic-analytic theory of
reasoning: Extension and evaluation. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 13, 378-395.
Feeney, A., & Handley, S.J. (2006). Comparisons, mental
models, and the action effect in judgments of regret.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 1422-1430.
Gilovich, T., & Medvec, V.H. (1994). The temporal pattern
to the experience of regret. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 67, 357-365.
Girotto, V., Ferrante, D., Pighin, S., & Gonzalez, M. (2007).
Postdecisional counterfactual thinking by actors and
readers. Psychological Science, 18, 510-515.
Goldman, A.I. (2006). Simulating Minds: The Philosophy,
Psychology and Neuroscience of Mindreading. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Gordon, R.M. (1986). Folk psychology as simulation. Mind
& Language, 1, 158-171.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The psychology of
preferences. Scientific American, 246, 160-173.
Kühberger, A., Kogler, C., Hug, A., & Mösl. E. (2006). The
role of the position effect in theory and simulation. Mind
& Language, 21, 610-625.
Mitchell, P., Currie, G., & Ziegler, F. (2009). Two routes to
perspective: Simulation and rule-use as approaches to
mentalizing. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 27, 513-543.
Ratcliffe, M. (2007).Rethinking Commonsense Psychology:
A Critique of Folk Psychology, Theory of Mind and
Simulation. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

1013

