UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attention and cross-modal processing: Evidence from heart rate analyses

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/86z5s84k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Robinson, Chris
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attention and cross-modal processing: Evidence from heart rate analyses
Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
dominance effect” (Lewkowicz, 1988a; 1988b;
Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004; 2007; 2010; Sloutsky &
Napolitano, 2003; Sloutsky & Robinson, 2008).
Although the asymmetry between infant and adult
literatures may reflect genuine developmental
differences, it is also possible that the asymmetry
stems from a lack of appropriate measure of auditory
processing. In particular, most infant studies use
visual fixations to examine auditory and cross-modal
processing. For example, infants in many of the
studies reported above were familiarized or
habituated to an auditory stimulus, visual stimulus, or
to a cross-modal stimulus. Infants in the cross-modal
condition often failed to increase looking to a novel
visual stimulus when it was paired with an old sound,
suggesting that they did not discriminate the visual
stimuli. This finding is noteworthy given that infants
ably discriminated the same visual stimuli when they
were presented unimodally.
In contrast, there were no costs of cross-modal
presentation on auditory processing: infants equally
discriminated auditory stimuli when presented
unimodally and cross-modally. However, auditory
processing was never measured independently of
visual processing (i.e., auditory processing was
assessed by examining infants’ visual fixations). In
the absence of a true measure of auditory processing,
it is possible that visual dominance was missed, with
visual input interfering more with auditory input than
the reverse. The goal of the present research was to
address this issue.
The achievement of this goal requires an amodal
measure of auditory processing. While sucking
procedures and ERP tasks can provide modalityindependent measures of auditory processing (e.g.,
Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk, & Vigorito, 1971; Nelson
& deRegnier, 1992), sucking procedures are not
appropriate for older infants and children and ERP
tasks often require a large amount of trials. The
present study uses infants’ Heart Rate (HR) to

Abstract
The study of cross-modal processing has generated two
seemingly contradictory sets of findings. Studies examining
cross-modal processing in infants often find evidence that
auditory input interferes with visual processing, whereas
studies with adults often find evidence for visual input
interfering with auditory processing. However, in the absence
of amodal measures of auditory processing, it is possible that
visual input also interferes with auditory processing in young
infants. The primary goal of the current study was to examine
this issue by focusing on Heart Rate (HR) to assess
discrimination of unimodal auditory stimuli (Experiment 1),
and to examine how visual stimuli affect auditory
discrimination (Experiment 2). The results indicate that the
presence of visual stimuli facilitated, rather than interfered
with, auditory processing.
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Attention, Heart Rate,
Psychology, Human Experimentation.

Introduction
There are many tasks that require people to integrate
information across sensory modalities (e.g., associating
words with objects and categories, learning the sounds
that objects make, etc.). While simultaneously presenting
information to different sensory modalities can sometimes
facilitate learning, there are also many occasions when
presenting stimuli to one modality interfere with learning
in a different modality (i.e., modality dominance).
Interestingly, the study of modality dominance has
generated seemingly inconsistent findings.
On the one hand, there is more that 30 years of research
on the Colavita effect in adults (Colavita, 1974; Colavita
& Weisberg, 1979; Klein, 1977; Posner, Nissen, & Klein,
1976, see Sinnett, Spence, & Soto-Faraco, 2007 for a
review). The main finding of these studies is that visual
information often interferes with the detection of auditory
input, hence the “visual dominance effect”. On the other
hand, studies with infants and young children often
demonstrate the opposite finding: auditory input often
interferes with visual processing, hence the “auditory

2639

measure auditory and cross-modal processing. HR has
provided researchers with a powerful tool for examining
the dynamics of visual attention. The gist is that HR
decelerates while participants are actively processing
visual input, and combining HR and visual fixations can
delineate various stages of visual attention (Colombo, et.
al., 2004; Courage, Reynolds, & Richards, 2006; Richards
& Casey, 1992). Panneton and Richards (2002) used HR
to assess how 4- to 6-month-old infants attend to auditory,
visual, and cross-modal stimuli. This study demonstrated
that HR decelerates more to dynamic and cross-modal
stimuli than to static and unimodal stimuli. The current
study expands on this research by using HR to examine
the effects of visual input on auditory processing. In
Experiment 1, we presented participants with unimodal
auditory stimuli and measured auditory oddball detection.
In Experiment 2, we examined how visual input affected
the detection of auditory oddballs.

bit stereo wav file. Nonsense words were each 1 s in
duration and were presented to infants at
approximately 68-70 dB. One nonsense word served
as the standard (presented 60% of the time) and the
remaining nonsense words served as oddballs. While
infrequent stimuli were presented for the remaining
40% of the experiment, six different oddballs were
presented throughout the experiment. Thus, across
the entire experiment the same standard was
presented for approximately 60 s, whereas each
individual oddball was only presented for 7 s.
AUD2

*

AUD1

Experiment 1

AUD1

Method

Time
AUD1

Participants Twenty-four 10-month-olds (16 boys and 8
girls, M = 301 days, SD = 49.94 days) participated in this
experiment. A majority of infants were Caucasian and
none of the infants had auditory or visual deficits, as
reported by parents. No infants were excluded from the
final sample.

Unimodal
Auditory
(E1)

Apparatus Infants sat on parents’ laps 100 cm away from
a 52” Sony LCD television. Two Boston Acoustics 380
speakers were 76 cm apart from each other and mounted in
the wall (concealed by black felt). A pan-tilt-zoom camera
was mounted above the television to capture a video stream
of the infant, and a Sony DCR-TRV40 camcorder was
located behind the infant to capture the AV stimulus
presentation. These two video streams were overlaid using
a Kramer PIP 200 picture and picture mixer, and videos
were saved as mpg video files on a Dell Optiplex 755
computer.
In an adjacent room, a Dell Optiplex 745 computer with
E-prime software was used to present stimuli to the infants,
and a Dell Optiplex 755 computer with Mindware software
was used to record electrocardiograms. Two Ag-AgCl
electrodes were placed on the infants’ right collar bone and
left, lower rib, and a reference electrode was placed on the
infants’ right, lower rib. Electrocardiograms were collected
using a BioNex acquisition unit with a BioNex Impedance
Cardiograph and GSC amplifier. Electrocardiograms were
time-locked with stimulus presentation and saved on the
Dell Optiplex 755 computer.

*

AUD2

AUD1

AUD1

AUD1

Multimodal (E2)

Figure 1: Overview of stimulus presentation in
Experiments 1 and 2. Standards were presented five
times in a row, followed by four oddballs. Note: “*”
denotes an example of oddball in both experiments.
Procedure Infants sat on parents’ lap in a quiet,
dimly lit room. A picture of a baby playing with toys
was presented on the LCD television while the
experimenter attached the electrodes to the infant.
The experimenter left the room and started the
experiment by pressing the spacebar on the Dell
Dimension 8200 computer. At this point, the picture
of the baby and toys disappeared and a white screen
was presented throughout the entire experiment.
Infants were presented with alternating standards and
oddballs until the infant either became fussy or until
all of the stimuli were presented (approximately 1.5
minutes). Stimuli were presented in Trials (i.e., Trial
1 = five presentations of standard → four
presentations of oddball 1, Trial 2 = five
presentations of standard → four presentations of
oddball 2, etc.), such that the same standard was
presented throughout the entire experiment and the
oddballs changed on every trial. Auditory stimuli
were presented for 1 s with a 0.75 s ISI. Thus, within
each Trial, the standard was presented for 8.75 s (5 x
1.75 s) and then the oddball was presented for 7 s (4

Stimuli Auditory stimuli were seven nonsense words
(e.g., vika, leru, kuna, etc.) that were recorded by a female
speaker using infant-directed speech. Each nonsense word
was edited in CoolEdit 2000 and saved as a 44.1 kHz, 16-

2640

x 1.75 ms). E-prime sent a pulse to BioNex every time the
stimulus changed. For example, E-prime sent a pulse at
the onset of the first standard presented in Trial 1. The
next pulse was sent at the onset of the first oddball
presented in Trial 1, etc. The experiment was not
contingent on infants’ looking, thus, auditory stimuli were
presented as long as the infant was not fussy or interacting
with the parent.

note that many of infants’ HRs were still decelerated
at the end of the trial. Thus, the value of 5 s
underestimates how long the oddballs actually held
infants’ attention.
In summary, the findings from Experiment 1
demonstrate that HR can serve as a modalityindependent measure of attention to assess auditory
discrimination in a relatively short period of time,
and these discriminations appeared to develop
gradually across the experiment. In addition to
providing time course information across trials,
changes in HR can also provide a measure of speed
of engagement and dwell time of attention within
trials.

Results and Discussion
Analyses focused on changes in infants’ HR to standards
and oddballs across time. Artifacts were corrected using
Mindware software, and HR data were transformed to
Inter-Beat-Interval (IBI). IBI is inversely related to HR. In
particular, as HR slows down, the time between heart
beats (distance between R waves) increases. Thus, longer
IBIs correspond with slower HR. IBIs were computed by
averaging IBIs within a one second bin and baseline
corrected. For example, to determine how HR changed 1
s after stimulus onset, we subtracted baseline IBI (IBI 1 s
pre-stimulus) from IBI at 1 s post stimulus. To examine
how HR changed 2 s after stimulus onset, we subtracted
baseline IBI from IBI at 2 s post stimulus. Thus, values
greater than zero denote that HR slowed down after
stimulus onset and values less than zero denote that HR
sped up after stimulus onset.
To examine discrimination of standards and oddballs,
we compared IBIs to standards and oddballs averaged
across Trials 1-3 (Figure 2a) and averaged across Trials 46 (Figure 2b). Paired-sample t tests were conducted
comparing IBIs to standards and oddballs at each point in
time. Reliable differences between standards and oddballs
are denoted with a “*” on the x axis. For example, Figure
2a shows that IBIs to standards and oddballs only differed
3 s after stimulus onset, p < .05. However, as can be seen
in Figure 2b, these differences became more pronounced
in Trials 4-6. Furthermore, examination of Figure 2b also
shows that the difference between standards and oddballs
was not solely driven by greater deceleration to oddballs.
Rather, HR also accelerated to standards. Examination of
video streams suggests that this acceleration may be
related to increased infant fidgeting rather than from
auditory stimuli startling infants.
To examine how quickly oddballs engaged attention we
identified the point for each infant when two consecutive
IBIs exceeded baseline (zero). Eight of the 24 infants did
not meet this criterion. Averaged across the remaining
infants, it took approximately 2.3 s for HR to decelerate.
Finally, we examined dwell time of attention to the
oddballs (i.e., how long did the oddball hold infants’
attention). For example, one of the infants’ first of two
consecutive IBIs exceeded zero 1 s after stimulus onset
and returned to zero 6 s after stimulus onset. Thus, this
infants’ dwell time of attention was 5 s (HR was
decelerated from 1 s – 5 s). On average infants’ HRs were
decelerated to oddballs for 5 s. However, it is important to

IBI - Baseline IBI (ms)

a.

Trials 1-3

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
0

1

2

3*

4

Oddball
Standard

5

6

7

Time relative to stimulus onset (s)

IBI - Baseline IBI (ms)

b.

Trials 4-6

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
0

1

2

3*

4*

Oddball
Standard

5*

6*

7*

Time relative to stimulus onset (s)

Figure 2: Change in IBI to standards and oddballs in
Trials 1-3 (a) and Trials 4-6 (b). Note: “*” on the x
axis denote means at that point in time were reliably
different, ps < .05 (one-tailed).

Experiment 2
The goal of Experiment 2 was to examine how visual
input affects discrimination of the auditory stimuli
presented in Experiment 1. More specifically, we
examined how pairing an old visual stimulus with a
novel auditory oddball would affect discrimination,
speed of engagement, and dwell time of attention.

2641

unclear if differences between Experiments 1 and 2
would have emerged if infants would have been
given more time for HR to return to baseline levels.
In summary, Experiment 2 demonstrates that visual
stimuli did not attenuate discrimination of auditory
input or slow down the speed in which auditory
oddballs engaged attention. Rather, cross-modal
presentation in the current experiment actually
facilitated auditory processing. Recall that infants in
the current experiment (but not in Experiment 1)
reliably discriminated standards from oddballs in
Trials 1-3. Furthermore, these effects were much
stronger in Experiment 2, with reliable discrimination
occurring with a sample size of only eight infants.
Finally, it is worth noting that all data reported in
Experiment 2 came from trials when infants were
looking throughout the entire trial. Therefore,
analysis of looking data would suggest no
discrimination of standards and oddballs, whereas
HR data clearly demonstrate that infants
discriminated these stimuli.

Method
Participants Eight 10-month-olds (3 boys and 5 girls, M
= 309 days, SE = 56 days) participated in this experiment.
Demographics were identical to Experiment 1. Five
infants were tested but were not included in the final
sample due to fussiness (n=3) and experimenter error (n =
2).
Stimuli and Procedure The auditory stimuli were
identical to Experiment 1, however, in the current
experiment, auditory stimuli were paired with a visual
stimulus (see Figure 1). The visual stimulus consisted of a
novel creature that was created in PowerPoint and saved
as a 400 x 400 pixel jpg. The visual stimulus was
presented on the 52” Sony LCD and pulsated at the same
rate as the auditory stimulus (1 s stimulus duration with a
0.75 s ISI). The procedure also differed from Experiment
1 in one important way. In the current experiment, the
procedure paused and the screen darkened when infants
looked away. The experiment started back up again when
the infant looked to the darkened screen. This
manipulation was important because we were interested
in how the presence of an old visual stimulus affected
auditory processing. Therefore, we only examined
discrimination of auditory stimuli on those trials where
the infants were looking to the visual stimulus. Trials
where the infant looked away were discarded.

IBI - Baseline IBI (ms)

a.

Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 1, we examined discrimination of
standards and oddballs in Trials 1-3 (Figure 3a) and in
Trials 4-6 (Figure 3b). Paired-sample t tests (one-tailed)
were conducted to compare discrimination of standards
and oddballs at each point in time. In contrast to
Experiment 1, infants reliably discriminated auditory
standards and oddballs in Trials 1-3 (see asterisks on the x
axis to determine which means reliably differed from each
other). This suggests that the presence of the visual
stimulus actually facilitated auditory discrimination, with
infants discriminating oddballs and standards early in the
course of processing. Discrimination was also robust in
the last three trials of the experiment (see Figure 3b).
As in Experiment 1, we also examined how quickly
oddballs engaged attention and how long oddballs held
attention. Two of the 8 infants never had two consecutive
IBIs exceed zero. Averaged across the remaining infants,
it took approximately 1.1 s for the oddballs to engage
attention. Recall that infants in Experiment 1 took
approximately 2.3 seconds. Therefore, the old visual
stimulus did not appear to slow down the detection of the
auditory oddballs. Furthermore, infants’ HR in the current
experiment was decelerated to oddballs for approximately
5.8 s, which was slightly longer than in Experiment 1.
However, as in Experiment 1, many infants’ HRs were
still decelerated at the end of the trial. Therefore, it is

Trials 1-3

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
0

1*

2*

3*

4*

Oddball
Standard

5*

6

7

Time relative to stimulus onset (s)

IBI - Baseline IBI (ms)

b.

Trials 4-6

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
0

1

2

3*

4

Oddball
Standard

5*

6*

7

Time relative to stimulus onset (s)

Figure 3: Change in IBI to standards and oddballs in
Trials 1-3 (a) and Trials 4-6 (b). Note: “*” on the x
axis denotes mean at that point in time were reliably
different, ps < .05 (one-tailed).

2642

Klein, R. M. (1977). Attention and visual dominance:
A chronometric analysis. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 3,
365-378.
Lewkowicz, D. J. (1988a). Sensory dominance in
infants: 1. Six-month-old infants’ response to
auditory-visual compounds. Developmental
Psychology, 24, 155-171.
Lewkowicz, D. J. (1988b). Sensory dominance in
infants: 2. Ten-month-old infants’ response to
auditory-visual
compounds.
Developmental
Psychology, 24, 172-182.
Nelson, C.A., & deRegnier, R.A. (1992). Neural
correlates of attention and memory in the first year
of life. Developmental Neuropsychology, 8, 119–
134.
Pannenton, R., & Richards, J.E. (2002). Differential
heart-rate activity in infants to uni- and
multimodal events. Society for Psychophysiological
Research, Washington, D.C.
Posner, M. I., Nissen, M. J., & Klein, R. M. (1976).
Visual dominance: An information-processing
account of its origins and significance.
Psychological Review, 83, 157-171.
Richards, J. E., & Casey, B. J. (1992). Development
of sustained visual attention in the human infant. In
B. A. Campbell, H. Hayne, & R. Richarson (Eds.),
Attention and information processing in infants
and adults, pp. 30-60. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004).
Auditory dominance and its change in the course of
development. Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2007).
Linguistic labels and categorization in infancy: Do
labels facilitate or hinder?. Infancy, 11, 233-253.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2010).
Development of Cross-modal Processing. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1,
135-141.
Sinnett, S., Spence, C., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2007).
Visual dominance and attention: Revisiting the
Colavita effect. Perception & Psychophysics, 69,
673–686.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a
picture worth a thousand words? Preference for
auditory modality in young children. Child
Development, 74, 822-833.

General Discussion
The current study reveals several important findings.
First, Experiment 1 demonstrates that HR can provide a
powerful tool for examining auditory processing. In
particular, changes in HR to frequent and infrequent
stimuli can provide a measure of auditory discrimination.
Furthermore, speed of engagement and dwell time of
attention can also be estimated by examining when HR
decelerates compared to pre-stimulus levels and by
examining how long HR remains decelerated. More
importantly, Experiment 2 demonstrates that visual input
facilitated, rather than interfered with, auditory
processing.
These findings suggest that the differences in
modality dominance between infants and adults do not
stem from an underestimation of visual interference with
auditory processing in infants. Rather, these findings
suggest that the difference may actually reflect a real
developmental phenomenon, with allocation of attention
to multimodal stimuli changing in the course of
development.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the NSF
(BCS-0720135), NIH (R01HD056105) and from the US
Department
of
Education
(R305H050125
and
R305B070407) to Vladimir Sloutsky and from NIH
(RO3HD055527) to Chris Robinson.

References
Colavita, F. B. (1974). Human sensory dominance.
Perception & Psychophysics, 16, 409-412.
Colavita, F. B., & Weisberg, D. (1979). A further
investigation of visual dominance. Perception &
Psychophysics, 25, 345–347.
Colombo, J., Shaddy, D. J., Richman, W. A., Maikrantz,
J. M., & Blaga, O. (2004). The developmental course of
habituation in infancy and preschool outcome, Infancy,
5, 1-38.
Courage, M.L., Reynolds, G.D., & Richards, J.E. (2006).
Infants' visual attention to patterned stimuli:
Developmental change and individual differences from
3- to 12-months of age. Child Development, 77, 680695.
Eimas, P.D., Siqeuland, E.R., Jusczyk, P., & Vigorito, V.
(1971). Speech perception in infants. Science, 171, 303306.

2643

