UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attentional Control and Early Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72d42693

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Yoshida, Hanako
Tran, Duc
Benitez, Viridiana
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attentional Control and Early Word Learning
Hanako Yoshida (yoshida@uh.edu)
Duc N. Tran (crystalxlite@yahoo.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204-5022 USA
Viridiana Benitez (vlbenite@indiana.edu)
Megumi Kuwabara (mekuwaba@indiana.edu)
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract
There has been increasing interest in the role of early
attention in the context of word learning. There has also
been growing interest in attentional differences between
bilinguals and monolinguals. The present study
examined the relationship between mutual exclusivity
and attentional control by comparing bilingual children
whose attentional control is relatively advanced to agematched monolingual children. The novel adjective
learning paradigm was the word-learning measure and
the Attention Network Test was the measure of
attentional control. Three-year-old monolingual and
bilingual children with similar vocabulary development
participated. The results replicate earlier work on
advanced attentional control among bilingual children
and suggest that better performances in novel adjective
learning by bilingual children might be due to attentional
control. These findings support the importance of
attention in early word mapping. The results add to a
growing body of literature on the potential relevance of
bilingualism in early word learning.
Keywords: Attentional learning; early word learning;
adjective learning paradigm; mutual exclusivity;
selective attention

Attentional Shifting and Word Learning
A growing body of experimental literature (mostly
concerning adults) indicates that effective attentional
control optimizes learning, especially in complex
scenes (e.g., Cowan, Fristoe, Elliot, Brunner, & Saults,
2006). In the developmental literature, there has been
interest in the role of effective attention shifting in
learning, particularly in the domain of word learning.
Because different kinds of words refer to different kinds
of properties (e.g., nouns to shapes or whole objects,
adjectives to properties such as color or texture), being
able to shift attention seems an important aspect of
word learning (Au, 1990). Indeed, a number of studies
have documented that by the time children are 2 years
old, they shift attention to different kinds of properties
for different kinds of entities and in the context of
different kinds of words (Graham, Williams, & Huber,

1999; Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988, 1998; Soja, 1992;
Soja Carey, & Spelke, 1991; Yoshida & Smith, 2003,
2005).
Some accounts of this effective attentional shifting
refer to mapping principles for learning words (e.g.,
Bloom, 2000; Carey, 1978; Markman, 1989). One such
principle is mutual exclusivity (Markman & Wachtel,
1988): In the context of a known word and referent, a
novel word shifts attention to a novel referent. Mutual
exclusivity is pervasive in early word learning, helping
the learning of new nouns, but it has also been
suggested as a reason why young word learners have
difficulty learning adjectives (e.g., Carey, 1978;
Markman, 1989; Regier, 1996). For example, young
learners who know that a horse is called “horse” might
reject the label “brown” being applied to it. This one
label–one object constraint has long been considered a
positive constraint on early word learning that promotes
the learning of nouns. Also, it may help more advanced
word learners learn adjectives. Older children, when
challenged with two labels for a single object, will
effectively shift attention to a nonshape property (if
“horse” means HORSE, then “brown” must mean
something about the horse; see Waxman, 2001;
Waxman & Klibanof, 2000). Although the earlier view
saw these constraints as lexically specific and possibly
innate (Markman, 1989), more recent work suggests
that the effect is related to learning through competitive
attentional processes (Halberda, 2009; Hollich, HirshPasek, Tucker, & Golinkoff, 2000; Plunkett, 1998;
Smith, 2000; Yoshida & Hanania, 2007).
If mutual exclusivity emerges because of competitive
processes among words and referents that arise in online comprehension, then these processes—and their
relation to effective attentional control in word
learning—should be related to the learner’s history of
experiences in resolving competitions among words and
referents. This, in turn, suggests that the development
of mutual exclusivity may benefit from bilingualism
and attentional control more generally.

2627

Executive Control
Bilingual children have been characterized as
developing
cognitive
flexibility
earlier
than
monolingual children and demonstrating more robust
self-control, including attentional control, throughout
their lives (e.g., Bialystok, 1992, 1999; Bialystok &
Martin, 2004; Bialystok & Senman 2004; Carlson &
Meltzoff, 2008). Such positive effects are seen most
profoundly in what are known as executive-function (or
self-control) tasks. These are tasks that require the
individual to inhibit preferred or prepotent patterns of
responding (e.g., not jump up when one should be
sitting, not take the candy when told not to, do a task in
a new way not an old way; see Beaver & Wright, 2007;
Kochanska, Murray, & Harlan, 2000; Luria, 1966;
Luria, Pribram, & Homskaya, 1964; Mischel, Shoda, &
Rodriguez, 1989; Zelazo & Frye, 1998). A number of
recent studies have shown that these effects are also
evident in executive function relevant to controlling
attention and in the suppression and separation of
languages to avoid interference. Indeed, the current
consensus is that the bilingual advantage in executive
control derives from the history of switching between
languages (i.e., Costa, Hernandez, & Sebastian-Galles,
2008; Martin & Bialystok, 2003; Mezzacappa, 2004).
The idea that bilinguals are able to control the choice
of their speech via well-developed processes of
executive control is supported by their better
performance in attentional tasks such as the Attention
Network Test (ANT), which was developed by Fan,
McCandliss, Sommer, Raz, and Posner (2002). This test
was designed to measure the functionality of the
attentional network: alerting, orienting, and executive
control. Children are asked to find a fish facing a
certain direction among other fishes on a computer
screen. The direction the fish faces does not change
throughout the task, but the facing direction of other
fish does change and thus the task requires effective
attention control. The response time for searching is
often used to measure the attentional control. Costa et
al. (2008) reported that bilinguals performed this task
faster and more efficiently than monolinguals.
Furthermore, when the task was broken down into the
attentional network components, bilinguals performed
significantly better in the alerting and executive control
components. The bilingual advantage has also been
reported in studies of bilingual children who have
significantly lower English proficiency than the group
of comparison English monolinguals (using ANT;
Yang, 2004). This is an intriguing finding with a
potentially widespread impact: Children who speak
more than one language seem to show developmentally
advanced attentional control.
What is not known is the extent of the advantage in
attentional control or the role it plays in language

learning. If this advantage emerges in young bilingual
children as a consequence of learning two languages,
then it seems its core function might be to support
language learning itself. The experiment reported here
seeks to link differences in attentional control between
monolingual and bilingual children to attention shifting
in word learning, and more specifically to mutual
exclusivity in the context of learning a novel adjective.

Experiment
Method
Participants
Participants were 20 monolingual English learners with
a mean age of 36.66 months (range: 29.47 to 43.16) and
20 bilingual learners (e.g., English–Spanish, English–
Bengali, English–Chinese, English–Russian, English–
Urdu, English–Vietnamese) with a mean age of 38.86
months (range: 30 to 45.53). The criteria of bilingual
status was determined by a demographic questionnaire.
A bilingual questionnaire was used to ensure that the
language spoken at home was primarily not English.
Stimulus Materials
Vocabulary Assessment (MCDI) Eight sections from the
MacArthur–Bates
Communicative
Development
Inventories (MCDI) were selected and used to measure
productive vocabulary. For English monolingual
children, the English version was used, and for
bilingual learners, their dominant language (if reported
by their parents) was measured. We also used the
Spanish MCDI. Adaptations of the MCDI in Chinese
and Vietnamese were used when possible. Monolingual
children’s total vocabulary was measured as the number
of words parents reported in their productive
vocabulary in English; bilingual children’s total
vocabulary was measured as the number of words
parents reported in their dominant language (i.e., the
language used most often by parent report).
MacArthur Socioeconomic Status Parents were asked to
fill out a demographic questionnaire to control for the
influence of socioeconomic status (SES) in bilingual
and monolingual participants. All participants were
matched and came from the same SES background.
Novel Adjective Learning Task Each of the eight trials
in this task used three objects (one exemplar, two test
objects); the objects in each trial were unique. All were
instances of familiar animate objects (e.g., ducks) and
inanimate objects (e.g., trucks) with distinctive colors.
As shown in Figure 1, each exemplar was presented
with a property that was highly novel (sticky). The two
test objects for each trial had the same shape as the
exemplar, but different colors. One test object presented

2628

a target property match of the novel texture (e.g., red
sticky duck), and one presented a non-propertymatching texture (e.g., red bumpy duck). Within all
trials, all objects—exemplars and test objects (property
matching and non-property-matching)—had the same
shape.
Familiar Adjective Learning Task The same threedimensional object form was used for exemplars and
test objects (e.g., ducks, trucks). The properties,
familiar and likely to be receptively known by the
children (e.g., bumpy, spotted, shiny, holey), can be
seen in Figure 2. Two types of test objects were
presented: one with a property match of a
familiar/known texture (e.g., red bumpy duck), and one
with a nonmatching property where texture did not
match the exemplar (e.g., red shiny duck).
All objects were approximately 10 cm3. Textures—
the intended target property—were chosen to be highly
novel and included a stringy pattern, a wire pipecleaner surface, a sponge-like surface, and a Velcro
surface. These properties were named by novel labels
such as blickish, dakish, talish, and wuggish,
respectively. For familiar textures, stimuli were holey,
shiny, bumpy, and spotted.
Attention Network Test (ANT) We used the original
"child
version"
of
Dr.
Jin
Fan’s
ANT
(http://www.sacklerinstitute.org/users/jin.fan/).
The
children were asked to watch a computer screen where
five fish lined up horizontally. The task was to point to
the mouth of the “hungry fish,” which was defined as
the fish always in the middle. The direction the hungry
fish faced changed throughout the task, but the facing
direction of other fishes changed. Children were
required to shift their attention effectively to detect the
direction of the hungry fish’s mouth. We used a touchscreen laptop to measure accuracy in this task.
Procedure
All children participated in the Novel Adjective
Learning Task, Familiar Adjective Learning Task
(control), and the ANT (in randomized order) in their
dominant language; the task order was counterbalanced.
Caregivers were asked to fill out the SES and MCDI
forms. Parents of bilingual children were asked to fill
out two MCDI forms, one in English and one in their
second language. Parents were asked to go through the
list and specify all the words they had heard their
children use. The Novel Adjective Learning Task,
Familiar Adjective Learning Task, and ANT trials were
administered in a quiet, controlled room (both at the
laboratory and at daycare centers) by trained research
assistants fluent in the child’s dominant language.
Novel Adjective Learning Task Participants were
presented with an exemplar and told the name along

with a novel adjective (e.g., “See this? This is a blickish
duck!”). After the exemplar was removed from view,
the participants were then presented with two test
objects. They were asked to give the experimenter the
one to which the novel adjective could apply (e.g.,
“Now, can you give me a duck that is blickish?). The
order of the trials was randomized and the children’s
selection of the test object—whether a propertymatching object or a non-property-matching object—
was recorded for all trials for later analysis.
Familiar Adjective Learning Task The same procedure
was administered, only now the adjectives presented
were familiar/known and not novel (e.g., “See this?
This is a bumpy duck!” “Now, can you give me a duck
that is bumpy?”).
Attention Network Test (ANT) The ANT trials were
administered using E-Prime software on a 15" touchscreen laptop computer. The children sat at a
comfortable distance from the screen and used their
index finger to touch the fish displayed on the screen.
The children were instructed to help feed the hungry
(target) fish as fast as they could by touching the mouth
of the fish on the screen, according to which direction
the hungry fish was oriented. They were told that
sometimes the fish would appear alone, and other times
it would swim together with other fish. In all cases, they
were instructed to concentrate on the one fish in the
middle—the hungry fish. They were also asked to keep
their eyes on the fixation point during the task. The
completion time was approximately 10 min. Their
accuracy (percent correct) and reaction times (RTs)
were recorded for later analysis.

Results
All bilingual and monolingual participants came from
the same SES background (i.e., middle class) and were
matched on vocabulary production through parental
reports. Table 1 shows vocabulary size, dominant
language, and age.
Novel Adjective Learning Task
As can be seen in Figure 3, bilingual children
performed better than monolingual children,
t(19)=3.92, p<.05, in the Novel Adjective Learning
Task, selecting property-matching objects with high
accuracy, whereas the monolingual children performed
at chance.
Familiar Adjective Learning Task
In terms of overall accuracy on the Familiar Adjective
Learning Task, bilingual and monolingual children
performed similarly and above chance, t(19)=2.75,
p<.05, and t(19)=3.18, p<.05, in selecting propertymatching objects (see Figure 3). These results indicate

2629

that the participants were able to comprehend the task
at hand and that bilinguals had no special advantage in
this task. Thus the advantage observed in the Novel
Adjective Learning Task must be due to mapping novel
adjectives to the novel properties of known things.
Attention Network Test
Bilingual children performed better than monolingual
children on the ANT, t(19)=3.74, p<.05, (Figure 4).
More critically for the present hypothesis, children’s
success in the Novel Adjective Learning Task was
significantly correlated with scores from attentional
control (r=.480, p<.05).

General Discussion
These results replicate the bilingual advantage in
attentional control tasks that has been reported by
others and tie this effect to attentional strategies in word
learning. The findings promise new insights about the
cognitive consequences of learning and speaking two
languages and the role of attention in using and learning
language. Attention is a process that changes itself
through its own activity, a fact that has far-reaching
importance for understanding the learning of words and
referents by both monolingual and bilingual children.
The Consequences of Bilingualism
The default assumption in the study of bilingual
children has been that their cognitive systems are no
different than those of monolingual children, and thus
speaking two languages has often been viewed as a
source of developmental delays (e.g., Doyle,
Champagne, & Segaloqitz, 1978). However, we now
know there are significant positive consequences that
extend beyond language itself and appear to involve
executive control processes across many domains—
from not taking candy, to sitting still when one should,
to—in the present study—shifting attention to novel
words and properties of well-known objects. In this
way the present study connects the bilingual advantage
in executive control to language learning—the context
in which that advantage emerged in the first place.

information. The present results highlight the
importance of studying the codevelopment of these
processes with word-referent learning in both
monolingual and bilingual children. In brief, we may be
able to mechanistically ground word-learning strategies
in more general attentional processes.
There are certainly intriguing indications that there is
still much to be learned from taking this approach. For
example, whereas the present task asked children to
learn a property label for a known category—and
bilingual children showed an advantage—other studies
have asked whether bilingual and monolingual children
differ in their ability to learn two different names for
the same thing. Depending on how one conceptualizes
the task, bilingual children either show an advantage at
learning two names or exhibit weaker mutual
exclusivity constraint in this context (Au & Glusman,
1990; Davidson, Jergovic, Imami, & Theodos, 1997;
Davidson & Tell, 2005; Merriman & Kutlesic, 1993).
Much of the previous work on this “two names for one
thing” task used labels from different languages with
different phonological properties. This provides a
potentially useful way to understand the microprocesses
and context cues that elicit and resolve competitions
within and across languages.
In sum, the present work supports the importance of
attention in word learning and its link to general
processes of attentional switching and executive
control. Systematic comparisons of monolingual and
bilingual children in both word learning and attentional
control tasks offer a new window on these fundamental
processes, their development, and their relation to word
learning.
Table 1: Productive vocabulary of dominant language
based on the MCD.
group
monolingual
bilingual

age
36.7
38.9

noun
177.9
178.6

verb
81.6
83.7

adjective
48.5
45.9

Figures

Attention in Word Learning
By tying the bilingual advantage in executive control to
attention shifting in the learning of novel adjectives, the
results also suggest that the competitive and attentional
processes that are studied in early word learning (in
monolinguals as well as bilinguals) may be
fundamentally linked to general processes of executive
and attentional control. There is a large body of
literature in this domain (Diamond, 1990) showing—in
monolingual children—incremental advances from late
infancy to the school-age years in the ability to switch
attention and inhibit prepotent but irrelevant

2630

Exemplar
Test Objects

Figure 1: A set of stimulus objects used in the Novel
Adjective Learning Task.

Total
308.0
308.2

References
Exemplar

Test Objects
Figure 2: A set of stimulus objects used in the Familiar
Adjective Learning Task.

Figure 3: Monolingual and bilingual children’s percent
correct on mapping novel labels to novel properties
(left) and familiar labels to familiar properties (right) in
adjective learning tasks.

Figure 4: Monolingual and bilingual children’s percent
correct on the Attention Network Test.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported in part by a National
Institutes of Health grant (R01 HD058620), the
Foundation for Child Development, and University of
Houston’s Grants to Enhance and Advance Research
(GEAR) program. We thank the children and parents
who participated in this study.

Au, T. K. (1990). Children’s use of information in word
learning. Journal of Child Language, 17, 393–416.
Au, T. K., & Glusman, M. (1990). The principle of
mutual exclusivity in word learning: To honor or not
to honor? Child development, 61, 1474–1490.
Beaver, K. M., & Wright, J. (2007). The stability of low
self-control from kindergarten through first grade, 63,
86.
Bialystok, E. (1992). Selective attention in cognitive
processing: The bilingual edge. In R. J. Harris (Ed.),
Cognitive processing in bilinguals. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science.
Bialystok, E. (1999). Cognitive complexity and
attentional control in the bilingual mind. Child
Development, 70, 636–644.
Bialystok, E., & Martin, M. M. (2004). Attention and
inhibition in bilingual children: Evidence from the
dimensional change card sort task. Developmental
Science, 7, 325–339.
Bialystok, E., & Senman, L. (2004). Executive
processes in appearance-reality tasks: The role of
inhibition of attention and symbolic representation.
Child Development, 75, 562–579.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S. (1978). The child as word learner. In M.
Halle, J. Bresnan, & G. A. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic
theory and psychological reality. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Carlson, S. M., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Bilingual
experience and executive functioning in young
children. Developmental Science, 11, 282–298.
Costa, A., Hernández, M., & Sebastián-Gallés, N.
(2008). Bilingualism aids conflict resolution:
Evidence from the ANT task. Cognition, 106, 59–
86.
Cowan, N., Fristoe, N. M., Elliot, E. M., Brunner, R. P.,
& Saults, S. (2006). Scope of attention, control of
attention, and intelligence in children and adults.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 1754–1768.
Davidson, D., Jergovic, D., Imami, Z., & Theodos, V.
(1997). Monolingual and bilingual children’s use of
the mutual exclusivity constraint. Journal of Child
Language, 24, 3–24.
Davidson, D., & Tell, D. (2005). Monolingual and
bilingual children’s use of mutual exclusivity in the
naming of whole objects. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 92, 25–45.
Diamond, A. (1990). Developmental time course in
human infants and infant monkeys, and the neural
bases of inhibitory control in reaching. Development
and Neural Bases of Higher Cognitive Functions,
608, 637–676.
Doyle, A., Champagne, M., & Segalowitz, N. (1978).

2631

Some issues in the assessment of linguistic
consequences of early bilingualism. In M. Paradis
(Ed.), Aspects of bilingualism. Columbia, Hornbeam
Press.
Fan, J., McCandliss, B. D., Sommer, T., Raz, A., &
Posner, M. I. (2002). Testing the efficiency and
independence of attentional networks. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 340–347.
Graham, S. A., Williams, L. D., & Huber, J. F. (1999).
Preschoolers’ and adults’ reliance on object shape
and object function for lexical extension. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 74, 128–151.
Halberda, J. (2009, April). Mutual exclusivity as logical
inference: Evidence for domain general disjunctive
syllogism in 2-3 year olds. Talk presented at the
Society for Research in Child Development, Denver,
CO.
Hollich, G., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Tucker, M. L., &
Golinkoff, R. M. (2000). A change is afoot:
Emergentist thinking in language acquisition. In P.
Anderson, C. Emmeche, N. O. Finnemann, & P. V.
Christiansen (Eds.), Downward causation. Oxford,
England: Aarhus University
Kochanska, G., Murray, K. T., & Harlan, E. (2000).
Effortful control in early childhood: Continuity and
change, antecedents, and implications for social
development. Developmental Psychology, 36, 220–
232.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning.
Cognitive Development, 3, 299–321.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. (1998). Object
perception and object naming in early development.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 19–24.
Luria, A. R. (1966). Higher cortical functions in man.
New York: Basic Books.
Luria A. R., Pribram K. H., & Komskaya E. D. (1964).
An experimental analysis of the behavioral
disturbance produced by a left frontal arachnoidal
endotheliomia (meningioma). Neuropsychologia, 2,
257–280.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: problems of induction. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s
use of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings
of words. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121–157.
Martin, M. M., & Bialystok, E. (2003, October). The
development of two kinds of inhibition in
monolingual and bilingual children: Simon vs.
Stroop. Poster presented at the meeting of the
Cognitive Development Society, Park City, Utah.
Merriman, W. E., & Kutlesic, V. (1993). Bilingual and
monolingual children’s use of two lexical acquisition
heuristics. Applied Psycholinguistics, 14, 229–249.

Mezzacappa, E. (2004). Alerting, orienting, and
executive attention: Developmental properties and
sociodemographic correlates in an epidemiological
sample of young, urban children. Child Development,
75, 1373–1386.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989).
Delay of gratification in children. Science, 244, 933–
938.
Plunkett, K. (1998). Language acquisition and
connectionism. Language and Cognitive Processes,
13, 97–104.
Regier, T. (1996). The human semantic potential:
Spatial language and constrained connectionism.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Soja, N. (1992). Inferences about the meanings of
nouns: The relationship between perception and
syntax. Cognitive Development, 7, 29–46.
Soja, N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meanings: Object terms and substance terms.
Cognition, 38, 179–211.
Smith, L. B. (2000). Learning how to learn words: An
associative crane. In Golinkoff, K. Hirsh-Pasek, L.
Bloom, L.B. Smith, A.L.. Woodward, N. Akhtar, et
al. (Eds) Becoming a word learner. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Waxman, S. R. (2001). Word extension: A key to early
word learning and domain-specificity. Commentary
on P. Bloom. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24,
1121–1122.
Waxman, S. R., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2000). The role of
comparison in the extension of novel adjectives.
Developmental Psychology, 36, 571–581.
Yang, S. (2004). Testing bilingual children's cognitive
advantages in executive attention. Unpublished
master’s thesis, Cornell University.
Yoshida, H., & Hanania, R. (2007). Attentional
highlighting as a mechanism behind early word
learning. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science
Society. Nashville, TN: Cognitive Science Society.
Yoshida, H., & Smith, L. B. (2003). Shifting
ontological boundaries: How Japanese- and Englishspeaking children generalize names for animals and
artifacts. Developmental Science, 6, 1–34.
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L. B. (2005). Linguistic cues
enhance the learning of perceptual cues.
Psychological Science, 16 (2), 90–95.
Zelazo, P. D., & Frye, D. (1998). II. Cognitive
complexity and control: The development of
executive
function.
Current
Directions
in
Psychological Science, 7, 121–126.

2632

