UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Statistics Change our Minds? The Role of Causal Explanation in Accommodation of Base
Rate Statistics
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2nr9312w
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Munncih, Edward
Khan, Saera
Latham, Melissa
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

 Can Statistics Change our Minds? The Role of Causal Explanation in
                             Accommodation of Base Rate Statistics
                                                  Edward Munnich
                                                University of San Francisco
                                                      Saera Khan
                                                University of San Francisco
                                                   Melissa Latham
                                                University of San Francisco
                                                   Michelle Brewer
                                                University of San Francisco
                                                       Valesia Ho
                                                University of San Francisco
                                                    Sierra Walton
                                                University of San Francisco
Abstract: Can statistics change our minds? Base rate statistics are taken into account when they are causally
relevant (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1980). However, evidence is mixed on whether causally-relevant statistics can
drive revision of existing beliefs: Hagmayer and Sloman (2009) found that those providing direct causal explanations
for statistical patterns were more likely to recommend action than those providing incidental explanations. By
contrast, Hewstone et al. (1988) found that the causal relevance of statistics only affected assignment of guilt when
consistent with one’s prejudices. To examine the extent to which beliefs can be revised due to statistics, we asked
participants about statistics before and after feedback. Specifically, participants estimated quantities (e.g., U.S.
traffic fatalities), provided explanations for trends in those statistics, and indicated what action they would take. We
then provided actual statistics, and either a direct or incidental causal explanation for trends—and observed changes
in actions participants would take.
                                                            675

