UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can mirror-reading reverse the flow of time?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xt744x6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Casasanto, Daniel
Bottini, Roberto

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can mirror-reading reverse the flow of time?
1

Daniel Casasanto1,2

Roberto Bottini1,3

(daniel.casasanto@mpi.nl)

(roberto.bottini@unibg.it)

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Neurobiology of Language Group, Nijmegen, NL
2
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
3
University of Bergamo, Department of Human Sciences, Bergamo, IT
Abstract

Across cultures, people conceptualize time as if it flows along
a horizontal timeline, but the direction of this implicit
timeline is culture-specific: in cultures with left-to-right
orthography (e.g., English-speaking cultures) time appears to
flow rightward, but in cultures with right-to-left orthography
(e.g., Arabic-speaking cultures) time flows leftward. Can
orthography influence implicit time representations
independent of other cultural and linguistic factors? Native
Dutch speakers performed a space-time congruity task with
the instructions and stimuli written in either standard Dutch or
mirror-reversed Dutch. Participants in the Standard Dutch
condition were fastest to judge past-oriented phrases by
pressing the left button and future-oriented phrases by
pressing the right button. Participants in the Mirror-Reversed
Dutch condition showed the opposite pattern of reaction
times, consistent with results found previously in native
Arabic and Hebrew speakers. These results demonstrate a
causal role for writing direction in shaping implicit mental
representations of time.
Keywords: Culture, Metaphor, Orthography, Space, Time

Introduction
Space and time are intertwined in the human mind, as they
are in the physical world. The theory that people use spatial
representations to think about time, first inspired by patterns
in metaphorical language (Clark, 1973; Lakoff & Johnson,
1980), is now supported by numerous behavioral and
neuroscientific experiments (e.g., Basso, et al., 1996;
Boroditsky, 2000; Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008; Torralbo
et al., 2007; Weger & Pratt, 2008).
Yet, the way people use space to talk about time is not
necessarily the same way they use space to think about it. In
English and many other languages, metaphors suggest that
time flows along the sagittal (front-back) axis: deadlines lie
ahead of us or behind us; we can look forward to our golden
years or look back on our salad days. Other languages also
make use of the vertical axis to talk about time. In Mandarin
Chinese, ‘the up month’ means a month earlier and ‘the
down month’ a month later (Boroditsky, 2001). Yet, no
known spoken language uses the lateral (left-right) axis to
talk about time conventionally, and invented left-right
metaphors for time sound nonsensical: Monday comes
before Tuesday, not to the left of Tuesday (Cienki, 1998).
Despite the total absence of left-right metaphors in
spoken language, there is strong evidence that people
implicitly associate time with left-right space. Furthermore,
the direction in which time flows along people’s imaginary
timeline varies systematically across cultures. In one study,

Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter (1991) asked children and
adults to place stickers on a page to indicate where breakfast
and dinner should appear relative to the lunch sticker, in the
middle of the page. Whereas English speakers placed
breakfast on the left and dinner on the right of lunch, Arabic
speakers preferred the opposite arrangement. Fuhrman and
Boroditsky (2007) showed a similar pattern in a reaction
time (RT) task. English- and Hebrew-speaking participants
judged whether the second of two pictures showed an earlier
or later stage of an unfolding event. English speakers’
judgments were fastest when earlier was mapped to the left
button and later to the right, but Hebrew speakers showed
the opposite pattern. Ouellet, et al. (in press) asked Spanish
and Hebrew speakers to judge auditorily presented words
referring to the past or future with either their left or right
hand, and found a similar reversal of the lateral space-time
mapping across groups.
These experimental data reflect patterns that can be
found in spontaneous behavior, as well. When English
speakers produce co-speech gestures they tend to use the
lateral axis for time, much more often than the sagittal axis
(Casasanto, 2009a; see also Boroditsky, 2008; Cienki, 1998;
Cooperrider & Nunez, 2009). Earlier times are on the left
and later times on the right of body-centered space.
Preliminary data from our lab suggests that Spanish
speakers’ gestures follow a similar pattern, but Arabic
speakers’ spontaneous gestures show the reverse mapping
(Romàn, Casasanto, Jasmin, & Santiago, in prep).
Across cultures, the direction in which time flows along
the mental timeline varies predictably with the orthography
of the dominant language: time flows rightward in cultures
whose literate members use a left-to-right orthography and
leftward in cultures that use a right-to-left orthography. Yet,
despite this clear correlation, it is not known to what extent
reading and writing direction is a cause or an effect of crosscultural variation in implicit space-time mappings.
In principle, a culture’s writing system could emerge
with one directionality or another as a consequence of
culture-specific conceptions of time -- not the other way
around. This seems especially plausible for cultures where
literacy (or mass-literacy) is a recent development.
Alternatively, directionality in both orthography and in
thought could arise due to cultural bootstrapping from
material artifacts like calendars (whether a grid on a piece of
paper, knots on a string, notches on a branch, etc.) or other
devices for keeping track of time (e.g., a solar clock) or
number (e.g., a horizontal abacus; Dehaene, 1999). Cultural
practices tend to covary: groups who write from left to right

1342

often spatialize time on calendars and numbers on graphs
from left to right, as well. Based on the correlational data
reviewed above, it is not possible to determine whether
experience reading or writing plays any causal role in fixing
the direction of implicit space-time mappings.
Here we performed an experimental intervention to
determine whether experience with reading a left-to-right or
right-to-left orthography is sufficient to determine the
direction of people’s implicit associations from space to
time. Native Dutch speakers were assigned to perform one
of two space-time congruity tasks. In one task (Experiment
1), participants saw past-oriented phrases (e.g. a year
earlier) and future-oriented phrases (e.g. a decade later)
appear on the screen one at a time, in standard Dutch
orthography. As soon as each phrase appeared, they pressed
a button (located on the left or right of a keyboard) to
indicate the temporal reference of the phrase (past or
future). Each participant performed two blocks: in one block
the left-right key mapping required responses that were
congruent with a left-to-right flow of time, and in the other
responses were congruent with a right-to-left mapping. The
order of blocks was counterbalanced across participants. We
predicted that, on average, participants would show an RT
advantage for responses consistent with standard Dutch
orthography (left-to-right).
The other task (Experiment 2) was identical to the first,
with one exception: all instructions and stimuli were
presented in mirror-reversed text. Reading requires scanning
the page in a particular direction: normally for Dutch
speakers reading each line of a text requires moving the
eyes gradually from the left to the right side of the page or
the computer screen. As such, moving rightward in space is
tightly coupled with ‘moving’ later in time. We reasoned
that if the habit of reading from left-to-right contributes to
an implicit left-to-right mapping of time in readers’ minds,
then practice reading in the opposite direction should
weaken and eventually reverse this mapping.

Experiment 1: Standard Orthography
In Experiment 1, all instructions and stimuli were presented
in standard Dutch orthography. We conducted Experiment 1
to validate the use of this space-time congruity paradigm in
native Dutch speakers, and to provide a comparison group
for the mirror-reading group.

Methods
Participants Native Dutch speakers (N=32) performed
Experiment 1 in exchange for payment.
Stimuli Temporal phrases were constructed in Dutch, each
with 3 words. The first word was an indefinite article, the
second word a temporal interval, (tr., second, moment,
minute, hour, day, week, month, season, year, decade,
century, millennium), and the third word a temporal
modifier (tr., before, after, earlier, later). The twelve
temporal intervals were fully crossed with the four temporal
modifiers to produce 48 temporal phrases (e.g., a day

before; a century after; a year earlier; a week later). Half of
the phrases referred to an earlier (past-oriented) interval of
time (i.e., if the modifier was earlier or before), and the
other half referred to a later (future-oriented) interval (i.e., if
the modifier was later or after). Two of the modifiers were
spatial terms used metaphorically (before, after), and the
other two were purely temporal terms with similar meanings
(earlier, later). Phrases were presented in the center of a
Macintosh laptop screen (resolution=1024x768), in black
48-point Arial font, on a white background.
Apparatus Participants were seated at a desk. Two A4
Xerox paper boxes were stacked on the desk, and a laptop
computer was secured on top of them, to raise the screen to
approximately the participants’ eye-level. A standard USB
keyboard was mounted horizontally on the side of the upper
box, with the keys facing the participant, at about shoulder
level. The keyboard was covered with a sheet of black
plastic with holes that exposed only the three keys needed
for responses: the “A” key on the left, the “apostrophe” key
on the right, and the “H” hey in the middle. The middle key
was aligned with the center of the laptop screen, and the left
and right keys were equidistant from it. The left key was
covered with a blue sticker and the right key a red sticker, or
vice versa, with the key colors counterbalanced across
subjects.
Procedure The experiment consisted of two blocks. In each
block, each of the 48 temporal phrases was presented once,
for a total of 96 trials. Written instructions appeared on the
screen before each block. In one of the blocks, participants
were instructed that as soon as each phrase appeared, they
should press the blue button if the phrase referred to an
interval of time in the past (e.g., a week earlier) and the red
button if it referred to an interval of time in the future (e.g.,
a week later). In the other block, the mapping between the
red/blue keys and pastward/futureward phrases was
reversed. To ensure that participants remembered the correct
color-time mapping, after reading the instructions they were
required to rehearse the correct color-time mapping aloud 5
times, before each block (e.g., “past=blue, past=blue,
past=blue, etc.; future=red, future=red, future=red, etc.)
At the beginning of each trial the word ‘ready’ appeared
in the center of the screen and remained there until the
participant pressed the middle white button. ‘Ready’ was
then replaced by a fixation cross. Participants were
instructed to hold down the white button for as long as the
fixation was shown. Its duration was varied randomly from
300-450 ms, in 50 ms increments, to make its duration
unpredictable and discourage anticipatory movements. The
fixation was then replaced by one of the 48 temporal
phrases. Participants were instructed to press the colored
button corresponding to the temporal reference of the phrase
as quickly and accurately as possible. The phrase remained
on the screen until the participant responded, at which time
it was replaced by the ‘ready’ message to begin the next
trial.

1343

Participants pressed buttons with the index finger of the
dominant (writing) hand. To ensure they would used the
same hand for both rightward and leftward responses,
participants were required to sit on their non-dominant hand.
The spatial direction of responses was never mentioned,
but one colored button was on the right and the other on the
left of the middle white button. Therefore, in one block
pressing the correctly colored button called for a movement
that was congruent with the space-time mapping encoded in
standard Dutch orthography (e.g., pressing the blue button
for a pastward phrase when the blue button was on the left);
in the other block pressing the correctly colored button
called for an incongruent movement (e.g., pressing the blue
button for a futureward phrase when the blue button was on
the left). The order of congruent-movement and
incongruent-movement blocks was counterbalanced across
participants. The space-time congruity effect was computed
for each subject by comparing response times during
Congruent and Incongruent responses (between-blocks,
within-items). Testing lasted about 10 minutes.

Results and Discussion
Participants pressed the correct button on 96% of trials.
Only accurate responses were analyzed. This resulted in the
removal of 4% of the data. Responses greater than 5000 ms
were also excluded, which resulted in the removal of 0.2%
of the accurate trials trials.
A 2 X 2 ANOVA was conducted with Congruity of
Movement Direction (Congruent with Time flowing
leftward, Congruent with time flowing rightward) and Block
(Block 1, Block 2) as within-subject and within-item
factors. There was a highly significant main effect of
Congruity (F1(1,15)=30.56, p=.0001; F2(1,47)=119.38,
p=.0001). There was no main effect of Block
(F1(1,15)=0.75, ns; F2(1,47)=2.99, ns). The Congruity X
Block interaction was significant by items but not by
subjects (F1(1,15)=1.41, ns; F2(1,47)=6.27, p=.02).
Congruity of Movement was then compared within each
block (Block 1: F1(1,30)=9.62, p=.004; F2(1,47)=116.31,
p=.0001; Block 2: F1(1,30)=3.64, p=.07; F2(1,47)=32.55,
p=.0001). Mean RTs are shown in figure 1.
Overall, there was a strong effect of Congruity.
Participants responded faster when the mapping between the
color of the buttons and the temporal reference of the
phrases required leftward movements for past-oriented
phrases and rightward movements future-oriented phrases.
This space-time congruity effect is similar to effects found
previously in English and Spanish speakers (e.g., Torralbo,
et al., 2006; Weger & Pratt, 2008). We are not aware of
previous studies showing this effect in Dutch speakers, but
given the correlation between writing direction and the
direction of the space-time mappings across cultures, we
had no reason to expect that Dutch speakers should perform
differently from speakers of other languages that use a
Roman alphabet.
For our present purposes, it is important that this
paradigm produced a congruity effect in the same direction

for both blocks. Having shown that this task provides clear
evidence for the implicit space-time mapping typically
found in left-to-right reading cultures, we can proceed to
test effects of exposure to an orthography in which
‘progress’ along a spatio-temporal continuum proceeds in
the opposite direction.

Figure 1.
s.e.m.

Results of Experiment 1. Error bars indicate

Experiment 2: Mirror-Reversed Orthography
To test for a causal role of orthography in the mental
representation of temporal order, we replicated Experiment
1 in a new group of participants using stimuli and
instructions presented in mirror-reversed font.

Methods
Participants A new sample of native Dutch speakers
(N=32) performed Experiment 2 in exchange for payment.
Materials and Procedure
Materials and procedures were identical to Experiment 1,
with one exception. All instructions and stimuli were
presented mirror-reversed. Testing lasted about 15 minutes.

Results and Discussion
Accuracy
Participants pressed the correct button on 97% of trials.
Only accurate responses were analyzed. This resulted in the
removal of 3% of the data. Responses greater than 5000 ms
were also excluded, which resulted in the removal of 4% of
the accurate trials trials.
A 2 X 2 ANOVA was conducted with Congruity of
Movement Direction (Congruent with Time flowing
leftward, Congruent with time flowing rightward) and Block
(Block 1, Block 2) as within-subject and within-item
factors. There was no main effect of Congruity
(F1(1,15)=.79, ns; F2(1,47)= 2.29, ns). There was a highly
significant effect of Block (F1(1,15)= 66.37, p=.0001;
F2(1,47)= 321.81, p=.0001), and crucially, a highly
significant Congruity X Block interaction (F1(1,15)= 31.89,
p=.0001; F2(1,47)= 206.56, p=.0001).

1344

Congruity of Movement was then compared within each
block (Block 1: F1(1,30)=5.00, p=.03; F2(1,47)=98.36,
p=.0001; Block 2: F1(1,30)= 3.02, p.=.09; F2(1,47)= 125.21,
p=.0001). Mean RTs are shown in figure 2.

Figure 2. Results of Experiment 2. Error bars show s.e.m.
Finally, we compared the congruity effects found in
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 using a 2 X 2 X 2 ANOVA
with Congruity and Block as within-subject/within-item
factors and Orthography (Standard orthography, Mirrorreversed orthography) as a within-subject/within-item
factor. Consistent with the prediction that orthography can
influence mental representations of time, we find a highly
significant 3-way interaction (F1(1,30)= 22.71, p=.0001;
F2(1,94)=125.38, p=.0001). By subtracting the RTs during
trials where movements were congruent with the leftward
flow of time from RTs during trials where movements were
congruent with the rightward flow of time (RT_rightward RT_leftward), this 3-way interaction can be simplified, and
conceptualized as a 2-way interaction of Block X
Orthography (see figure 3).

Figure 3. Congruity effects across blocks for Experiment 1
(left) and Experiment 2 (right). Error bars indicate s.e.m.

As is evident from figure 3, the absolute values (ABS) of
the congruity effects in both blocks of Experiment 2 are
greater than the ABS of the effects in Experiment 1. This
was not expected, and although it is not relevant to our
experimental hypothesis, it bears further investigation. On
one possible explanation, congruity effects result from a
failure of cognitive control; that is, they may result from
participants’ inability to ignore the irrelevant spatial
dimension of their responses when judging the temporal
reference of the stimuli. The cross-dimensional effect of
space on time judgments may have been greater in
Experiment 2 because cognitive control resources were
taxed by reading backwards, contrary to habit.
Although the dominant space-time mapping in Dutch
culture continued to influence RTs during the first block of
Experiment 2, by the second block exposure to mirrorreversed writing was sufficient to reverse the congruity
effect. Since this is the first experiment to test for a causal
influence of writing direction on time representation, we did
not have any a priori prediction about how much experience
with reversed orthography would be needed to produce a
significant change in the congruity effect, nor could we
predict whether the congruity effect would be reversed or
merely diminished. To support our hypothesis, it would
have been sufficient to show a reduction in the left-to-right
congruity effect from Block 1 to Block 2 that was greater in
Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1. However, the fact that
the congruity effect completely reversed here provides a
particularly clear demonstration that even brief experience
with one orthography or another can influence people’s
implicit spatial representations of time. (For compatible
evidence of the flexibility of space-time metaphors in
language and thought, see Boroditsky, 2000; 2001;
Casasanto, 2008; Clark, 1973; Evans, 2004; Torralbo, et al.,
2006).

General Discussion
It is now well established that people activate implicit
associations between space and time when processing
temporal language, and that the specifics of these
associations vary systematically across cultures (Fuhrman &
Boroditsky, 2007; Ouellet, et al. in press; Tverksy,
Kugelmass, & Winter, 1991). Since time is not associated
with left-right space in any known linguistic metaphors, it is
unlikely that these culture-specific mappings are learned
through experience with spoken language.1 Here we tested
whether orthography can play a causal role in fixing the
direction in which time flows along the imaginary mental
timeline. Experiment 1 showed that, when exposed to
temporal phrases presented in standard left-to right
orthography, Dutch speakers implicitly associated earlier
time intervals with leftward movements and later time
intervals with rightward movements, consistent with
previous findings in members of other cultures that use the
Roman writing system.
1

Although spoken languages do not use the lateral axis for time,
some signed languages do (see Emmorey, 2001).

1345

However, when exposed to several minutes of mirrorreversed writing, Dutch participants began to show spacetime congruity effects that revealed a reversal of their
normally dominant implicit space-time mapping. By the
second time they were judging each of the 48 temporal
phrases (Block 2 of Experiment 2), participants were faster
to make responses when key presses associated earlier
events with rightward movements and later events with
leftward movements -- a pattern observed previously in
speakers of Hebrew, which is written from right to left. It
appears that experience reading a right-to-left orthography
(which requires the reader to ‘progress’ leftward across the
screen with his/her eyes) is sufficient to reverse the flow of
time in the reader’s mind, at least transiently.
Although this rapid retraining of a space-time
association stored in long-term memory may seem
surprising, it is not unprecedented. In one study, Boroditsky
(2001) found that horizontal spatial primes facilitated
English speakers’ judgments of temporal sentences (e.g.,
April comes earlier than May) more than vertical primes
did, but found the opposite pattern in Mandarin speakers,
consistent with the difference between these languages in
the prevalence of horizontal and vertical metaphors for time.
To test whether linguistic experience could affect these
mappings, she trained a new group of English speakers to
use Mandarin-like vertical spatial metaphors for time. After
brief training, English speakers showed a pattern of priming
similar to native Mandarin speakers.
In a test of a different set of space-time metaphors
Casasanto (2008) and colleagues showed that when English
and Greek speakers perform non-linguistic duration
reproduction tasks, they show language-specific patterns of
cross-dimensional interference from space. Whereas English
speakers have a harder time screening out interference from
(1-dimensional) spatial distance, Greek speakers have more
difficulty screening out interference of (3-dimensional)
volume. This pattern was predicted based on the relative
prevalence and productivity of distance and volume
metaphors for duration across languages (e.g., a long time
(like a long rope); a large amount of time (like a large
amount of water)). To find out whether using volume
metaphors could cause the volume-interference found in
Greeks, US English speakers were trained to use Greek-like
volume metaphors for time. Results showed that after one
brief (but concentrated) training session, English
participants showed a pattern of cross-dimensional
interference from volume in a low-level psychophysical task
that was statistically indistinguishable from the pattern seen
in native Greek speakers.
Time is not the only domain that appears to be mentally
represented, in part, through spatial metaphors (which may
or may not correspond to linguistic metaphors). Emotional
valence is also spatialized on a left-right axis: whereas righthanders tend to associate the right hand and the right side of
space with positive things and the left with bad, left-handers
show the opposite set of implicit associations (Casasanto,
2009b). It was proposed that this mapping arises due to

asymmetries in motor fluency: people like things on their
dominant side better because they can interact with things
on that side more easily. To test this proposal, Casasanto
(2009c) asked right-handers to perform a 2-part training
task. In the first part, they arranged dominoes according to a
symmetrical pattern on a tabletop, standing them on end,
moving both hands in synchrony. The challenge was that
they were randomly assigned to wear a bulky ski glove one
hand or the other while performing the task, which either
enhanced their natural right-handedness or made them
temporarily more skillful with their left hand.
After 12 minutes of this asymmetric motor experience,
participants were taken to a different room by a different
experimenter for some ostensibly unrelated questionnaire
studies, one of which tested implicit associations between
space and valence. This questionnaire was shown previously
to produce distinctive patterns of judgments in right- and
left-handers (Casasanto, 2009b). Participants whose training
experience preserved their natural dominance showed the
typical right-handers’ pattern. But participants who had
worn the skiglove on their right hand during training,
becoming transiently left-handed, produced a pattern of
responses that was indistinguishable from natural lefties’.
We are aware of one training study that manipulated
writing direction in order to test a role for orthography in the
spatial representation of gender and agency. Several studies
suggest that males (seen as more agentive) tend to be
represented to the left of females in the minds of people who
speak left-to-right languages like English, but not for
speakers of right-to-left languages like Arabic (Suitner,
2009). Yet, Suitner (2009) showed that this spatial bias can
be nullified in speakers of Italian who are trained to perform
a leftward writing exercise, reversing not only their habitual
writing direction but also their habitual associations of
gender, agency, and space.
How enduring are these training effects? Presumably,
without further reinforcement of the new habits, participants
who show rapid training effects will also revert to their
long-term habits rapidly. Exactly how soon remains a
question for further research. Depending on the goal of the
training exercise, the durability of the behavioral change
may matter more or less. In the present study the goal was to
test the sufficiency of a proposed cause of cross-cultural
differences. The total reversal of the congruity effect as a
function of reading experience demonstrates that
orthography can, indeed, influence the implicit spatial
representation of time. This simple demonstration would
serve its theoretical goal even if the effect were quickly
reversed when participants resumed normal reading habits.
How best to characterize the learning mechanisms that
afford this representational plasticity remains another open
question. It may be fruitful to consider the changes
participants undergo in Experiment 2 in terms of a
hierarchical Bayesian model (Kemp et al., 2007). To sketch
this suggestion briefly, people’s associations between space
and time could be characterized as intuitive hypotheses.
Based on ordinary reading experience, Dutch speakers form

1346

the hypothesis that by default events unfold from left to
right. Yet after training, they appear to entertain the
hypothesis that events unfold from right to left.
To explain how participants can switch from one
hypothesis to a contradictory hypothesis (and presumably
switch back) so quickly, it may help to posit that they also
entertain a more enduring overhypothesis, of which both the
‘Dutch-like’ and ‘Arabic-like’ space-time associations are
specific instances. The overhypothesis could be that time is
associated with motion along a linear path. Such a belief
would be well supported by observable correlations in the
physical world: spatial succession is a reliable index of
temporal succession.
Consistent with this proposal, we suggest that if
orthography is responsible for determining the direction in
which time flows along people’s left-right mental timelines,
this directional mapping likely builds upon a prior lessspecific space-time association, which arises (either in
developmental or evolutionary time) from space-time
correlations that have no particular directionality: on any
trajectory, it is the case that as a moving object travels
farther, more time passes. The hierarchical model can help
to explain how ‘mental metaphors’ linking space-time can
be universal at one level of level of description but culturespecific at another.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Max Planck
Gesellschaft and by an NRSA fellowship (#F32MH072502)
and by a grant from the Spanish Ministry of Education and
Science (#SEJ2006-04732/PSIC, DGI) to DC.

References
Basso, G. et al. (1996). Time perception in a neglected
space. Neuroreport 7, 2111 – 2114.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Casasanto, D. (2008). Who's afraid of the Big Bad Whorf?
Cross-linguistic differences in temporal language and
thought. Language Learning, 58(1), 63-79.
Casasanto, D. (2009a). When is a linguistic metaphor a
conceptual metaphor? In V. Evans & S. Pourcel (Eds.),
127-145, New Directions in Cognitive Linguistics.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Casasanto, D. (2009b). Embodiment of Abstract Concepts:
Good and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General. 138(3), 351-367.
Casasanto, D. (2009c). Motor experience shapes abstract
concepts. Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the
Psychonomic Society. Boston, MA.
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the Mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106, 579-593.
Cienki, Alan (1998). Metaphoric gestures and some of their

relations to verbal metaphoric expressions. In Jean-Pierre
Koening (Ed.), Discourse and cognition: Bridging the
gap (pp. 189-204). Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics and the child. In
Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of Language,
T. E. Moore (ed.), 27–63. New York: Academic Press.
Cooperrider, K and Nunez, R. (2009). Across time, across
the body Transversal temporal gestures. Gesture, Vol. 9,
pp. 181-206.
Dehaene, S., (1999). The number sense. Oxford University
Press, Penguin press, New York, Cambridge (UK).
Emmorey, K. (2001). Space on hand: The exploitation of
signing space to illustrate abstract thought. In M. Gattis
(Ed), Spatial schemas and abstract thought, pp. 147 —
174, The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Evans, V. (2004) The structure of time: Language, meaning
and temporal cognition. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Mental time-lines
follow writing direction: Comparing English and Hebrew
speakers. Proceedings of 29th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Nashville, TN.
Kemp, C, Perfors, A. & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2007). Learning
ovehypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian models.
Developmental Science, 10 (3), 307-321.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live by.
Chicago: The Chicago University Press.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (in press).
Is the future the right time? Experimental Psychology.
Suitner, C. (2009). Where to place social targets?
Stereotyping and Spatial Agency Bias. Doctoral
dissertation, Department of Psychology, University of
Padova.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupiáñez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of
reference. Cognitive Science, 30, 749–757.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991). Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Weger, U. W., & Pratt, J. (2008). Time flies like an arrow:
Space-time compatibility effects suggest the use of a
mental time-line. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15,
426-430.

1347

