UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorisation, Deference and Cognitive Style

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8d25j50f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Braisby, Nick
Hanlon, Sharon

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorisation, Deference and Cognitive Style
Nick Braisby (Nick.Braisby@winchester.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Winchester, Winchester, SO22 4NR, UK

Sharon Hanlon (S.Hanlon@winchester.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Winchester, Winchester, SO22 4NR, UK
Abstract

be a bird still, even though they felt it was more similar to
an insect. Keil reported the results of similar studies with
children. For example, transformations included making a
raccoon look and behave like a skunk through being painted
and implanted with an odour sac. While younger children
tended to categorise this as a skunk, older children
considered it still to be a raccoon. Moreover, even younger
children are disposed to categorise objects according to
presumed essences (Gelman, 2000). Gelman & Wellman
(1991) showed that 4 and 5 year old children appear to
believe that an apple seed will grow into an apple tree,
regardless of the environment in which this happens.
Apparently children believe something inside the seed, and
not contingent features of the environment, is causally
responsible for the properties it later acquires.
Though largely developed to explain natural kind
categorisation, the apparent explanatory success of
psychological essentialism has led other researchers to seek
to apply it in other domains, most notably to artefacts
(Bloom, 1996; 1998; though see Malt & Sloman, 2007) and
social categories (e.g., Haslam, Rothschild & Ernst, 2000,
2002; Haslam & Whelan, 2008; Rothbart & Taylor, 1992).
Of course, there have been criticisms of essentialism.
Malt (1994) showed that categorisation of instances of water
is not fully explained by the proportion of H2O people
believe the instances contain. Braisby, Franks & Hampton
(1996) showed that categorisation is at odds with
predictions suggested by Putnam and Kripke’s articulation
of essentialism. There has also been discussion of whether
essentialism is required to explain the empirical evidence
cited in its favour (Ahn et al., 2001; Strevens, 2000).

Despite the importance of psychological essentialism as an
account of categorisation, it is unclear what import findings of
individual difference have. The present study is designed to
investigate individual differences in relation to deference, a
key indicator of essentialist thought. This replicates previous
findings of individual differences in deference, and
demonstrates a strong association between deference and field
dependence (Witkin et al., 1962). In spite of the status of
field dependence as a cognitive style, this study finds it has
highly localised influences in relation only to categorisations
and categorisation-related actions that are partly social in
nature. Implications for essentialism are discussed.
Keywords: categorization, deference, essentialism, cognitive
style

Introduction
Categorisation research has largely adopted a core
methodological assumption of cognitive science that adults
are sufficiently alike that it makes sense to talk of a ‘typical’
cognizer, and to pursue generalisations that disregard
individual differences (von Eckardt, 1993). Yet from the
earliest days of categorisation research, important individual
differences have been found. Moreover, in recent years,
studies have uncovered individual differences with regard to
psychological essentialism. However, with the exception of
research conducted in the middle of the last century, there
have been only few studies of the basis for such individual
differences, and whether their scope is restricted to or
extends beyond categorisation itself. This paper reports a
study designed to evaluate individual differences in relation
to deference and essentialism in the categorisation of natural
kinds.
Psychological essentialism represents an important and
popular theoretical account of categorisation.
According
to psychological essentialism people believe, and act as if,
category membership is determined by the possession of an
essence (Medin & Ortony, 1989). People are deemed to
believe that objects have essences, that essences are causally
responsible for other properties such as appearance, and that
essences are responsible for category or kind membership.
Findings that have been argued to support psychological
essentialism include those of Keil (1986, 1989) and Rips
(1989). Rips described a transformation in which a bird-like
animal came to appear more like an insect as a consequence
of exposure to radiation. Participants judged the animal to

Deference and Individual Differences
Braisby (2001, 2004) also examined the further implication
of essentialism that people should defer in their
categorisations to appropriate experts, an implication
developed by Putnam (1975) in a thesis he labelled the
Division of Linguistic Labour (see also Kripke, 1980).
Since, according to essentialism, categorisation is
determined by micro-structural (e.g., genetic) properties,
then scientists expert in the appropriate domain are likely to
have more category-relevant information than lay-people. If
lay people are psychological essentialists then they should
rationally defer to people with more knowledge of the
relevant properties, e.g., expert scientists. However, in a
series of studies examining deference for biological and

393

chemical categories, Braisby found that participants
deferred in only approximately one-third of cases for
biological categories, and only slightly more than this for
chemical categories. Braisby's conclusion was that the data
concerning deference did not support essentialism but could
be explained by a perspectival or similarity-based account
of categorisation.
However, Braisby also found significant individual
differences in the propensity to defer. Whereas many
participants consistently switched their categorisation
judgments to conform to those of experts, still others
consistently maintained their categorisation judgments
regardless of expert opinion. Therefore, an alternative
explanation of these data is that some participants were
psychological essentialists, while the judgments of others
were similarity-based. Hampton, Estes & Simmons (2007)
also found evidence of individual differences in
essentialism. In an examination of Rips's (1989)
transformation study, they found that some participants
steadfastly maintained their categorisation both before and
after the transformation. Only a minority of participants
fitted the pattern reported by Rips.
An important question to resolve is whether such
individual differences reflect deeper differences in the way
that people cognize, or whether people flexibly deploy
information and beliefs in making categorisation judgment
depending on the task and context. Surprisingly, there is
relatively little evidence to bear on this question.
There have nevertheless been demonstrations of
individual differences relating to categorisation. Lewellen,
Goldinger, Pisoni & Greene (1993) found that participants
who scored higher on measures of lexical familiarity were
more successful in rejecting foils in a semantic
categorisation task. There have been a number of individual
differences reported in relation to category learning. For
example, McKinley and Nosofsky (1995) found individual
differences both in the time course of learning, and also in
the final categories learned. DeCaro, Thomas & Beilock
(2008) also found that working memory influences category
learning. Rule-based categories were learned more quickly
by participants with a greater working memory capacity,
and what they called information-integration categories
were learned more quickly by participants with a smaller
working memory capacity. Kalénine & Bonthoux (2006)
showed that individual differences in 3-4 year olds'
preferences for thematic or taxonomic matches affected
their choice of superordinate categories – children showing
greatest sensitivity to taxonomic relations showing superior
performance in categorising living things.
While the above studies show how individual differences
in cognitive processes impact categorisation, there is also a
body of work which suggests that individual differences in
categorisation arise from more global differences in
cognitive style.
Lee, Kagan, & Rabson (1963) found that participants who
adopted an analytic strategy when pairing visual stimuli
(e.g., on the basis of a shared feature) learned analytic

concepts (e.g., objects with a missing leg) more quickly
than relational concepts (e.g., objects related to school).
Participants who did not adopt this strategy when pairing
visual stimuli, however, learned analytic concepts more
slowly than relational ones. Interestingly, Lee et al. related
their use of the term analytic to 'field dependence' – the
phrase earlier coined by Witkin, Dyk, Faterson,
Goodenough & Karp (1962). Norenzayan, Smith, Kim &
Nisbett (2002) found that a similar distinction – between
analytic and holistic processing affected category learning
and similarity judgments.

Cognitive Style
According to Witkin, Oltman, Raskin, & Karp (1971),
cognitive styles are “the characteristic, self-consistent
modes of functioning which individuals show in their
perceptual and intellectual activities" (p. 3). One such style,
field dependence, is a construct intended to capture an
individual's characteristic mode of perception (Witkin,
1975). It was initially tested using the body-adjustment test
and the rod-and-frame test to assess perception of the true
vertical, in a visual or postural field that may present
misleading information. Typically, some people – fieldindependent – will accurately judge the true vertical
regardless of the contents of the visual field, while others –
field-dependent – would fail to do so, presumably being
misled by the visual field. Witkin et al. (1962) developed
other measures of field-dependence. The embedded figures
test and group embedded figures test have since become
commonly used. The group embedded figures test (see
Figure 1) involves asking participants to find a simple
geometric figure (e.g., the triangle labeled X at the top)
within a more complex visual object (e.g., the geometric
shape at the bottom).

Figure 1.Sample image from the group
embedded figures test
Differences in field dependence have been linked to other
socio-psychological differences including, for example,
identity, awareness of self and locus of control.
Developmental research has suggested that children tend to

394

become more differentiated in their field dependence as they
develop. Witkin, Oltman, Raskin & Karp (1971) suggest
that field dependence in children is initially relatively fluid,
but begins to crystallise around the age of ten and then
appears stable during adulthood. Not surprisingly, there has
been much interest in the distinction within research on
education (Sternberg & Grigoernko, 1997).
Reflecting its possible status as a more global reflection of
an individual's cognitive style, field-dependenceindependence has sometimes been described as a distinction
between global and articulated processing. However, the
precise nature of the distinction remains unclear. There
have been suggestions that field dependence is closely tied
to underlying spatial ability (Sternberg & Grigoernko,
1997).
There have also been arguments that field
dependence reflects sensitivity to social information. In a
complex design, Mausner & Graham (1970) asked pairs of
participants to rate the speed of a flickering light, and then
do so again when given information about the performance
of the other member of their pair. Such reinforcement had
no effect on the performance of field-independent
participants. However, reinforcement led to a dramatic shift
in the performance of field-dependent participants. Most
strikingly, field-dependent participants who were told their
estimates of speed were incorrect, but that their partner's
estimates were correct, shifted uniformly and almost
completely toward their partner's judgments.
This finding suggests one explanation for individual
differences in relation to deference (and essentialism). Field
dependent participants, sensitive to social information,
including the views of others, may be more likely to shift
their judgments towards those of experts. Field independent
participants may be more reluctant to do so. If this is the
case, then this relative difference in propensity to defer may
give rise to considerable variability in the extent to which
people's judgments conform with essentialism.

Polarity (Yes, No) of expert judgment being within-subject,
and Field Dependence (Field dependent, Field independent)
being a between-subject factor.

Participants
40 participants volunteered to participate, 20 of whom were
undergraduate students from the University of Winchester.
20 participants were drawn from the immediate residential
neighbourhood, all of whom were in employment.

Materials
Following Braisby (2001), categories were four natural
(living) kinds : apple, potato, salmon, chicken. These were
chosen also to be food-stuffs so that they, and the prospect
of their genetic modification, would be relatively familiar to
the participants. Within these constraints, the kinds were
chosen to be as typical as possible of their immediate superordinate categories (i.e., fruit, vegetable, fish, bird).
For each category, two scenarios were developed, one of
which contained a positive categorisation judgment from
scientific experts (biologists) and one of which contained a
negative judgment.
All scenarios conformed to the
following pattern: “You have just bought a(n) X from a
reputable retailer. On examining its packaging closely you
find that it has been genetically modified. You also
discover that according to most biologists the object you
have bought [is/is not], in fact, an X. The object looks,
feels, smells and tastes just like a X.”
The group embedded figures test is a timed test and
comprises a test booklet containing instructions, a practice
section, and two test sections. In these two sections, 18
complex geometric shapes are provided and participants
must identify in each a given simple shape.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually.
Half of the
participants were presented with the GEFT first and the
categorization scenarios second; the remaining participants
received the categorization scenarios and then the GEFT.
When presented with the GEFT, participants were first
asked to read through instructions and complete the practice
section. They then completed sections 2 and 3 of the GEFT,
being given a limit of 5 minutes for each section.
The 8 categorisation scenarios were untimed and
presented in one of two orders. Half of the participants
were presented with the scenarios in random order, and the
remaining participants were presented with the scenarios in
the reverse of this order. On reading each scenario,
participants were asked to answer six questions, including a
categorization question, as follows.

Experiment
The experiment was therefore designed with a number of
aims in mind. First, it was important to replicate the
findings of Braisby (2001) concerning individual
differences in deference, and so determine whether such
differences are robust. Second, and in order to better
understand such differences, it was decided to take measures
of participants' field dependence. Third, although the focus
of the study is categorisation, in order to determine the
scope of individual differences, a number of other
judgments were also sought from participants. As in
Braisby (2001), the experiment examined the extent to
which lay-people defer in their categorisation of biological
natural kinds to experts, as predicted by essentialism.

Categorisation: Is the object that you have bought a(n)
X?
Superordinate categorisation: Is the object that you
have bought a(n) [Superordinate]?
Eat: Would you eat the object you have bought (either as
is or prepared)?

Method
Design
The experiment adopted a mixed design with the factor of

395

Serve: Would you serve the object you have bought at a
dinner party for your friends (either as it is or prepared)?
Buy: Would you continue to buy this kind of object?
Eat if served: Would you eat the same kind of object as
the one you have bought (either as it is or prepared) if a
friend served it to you at a dinner party?

judgments (mean = 2.94) than Field independents (mean =
2.32).
Obdurate

Mixed

Deferrers

100%

As the categorisation question was the most central to the
analysis, and to minimise any interference from other
questions, this question was always presented first.
Participants were required to answer Yes or No to each
question. Lastly, participants were asked to rate how
difficult they found making their judgments on a scale of 17, 1 being very easy and 7 being very difficult.

90%

Results

40%

Participants responses to the six Questions were recoded to
express agreement with the expert judgments, and
aggregated across the four categories. A median split was
employed to divide participants into Field Dependent and
Field Independent groups. The overall mean difficulty rating
was 3.64, and this did not differ by Field Dependence.
A two-way ANOVA was conducted for each Question
with Polarity (Yes, No) as within-, and Field Dependence
(Dependent, Independent) as between-subject factors.

30%

80%
70%
60%
50%

20%
10%
0%
Field Independents

Field Dependents

Figure 2.Proportions of participants by Deferring Style
and Field Dependence

Categorisation

Buy

Agreement with biologists' judgments was influenced by
Polarity (F(1,38) = 5.87, ήp2 = 0.13, p < 0.05), with
participant's agreeing more when biologists' judgments were
reported as affirmative (mean = 3.68) than when they were
reported as negative (mean = 2.80). There was a significant
effect of Field Dependence (F(1,38) = 22.81, ήp2 = 0.34, p <
0.0005), with Field dependents showing much higher levels
of agreement (mean = 3.78) than Field independents (mean
= 2.71). Polarity and Field Dependence did not interact.

There were no effects of Polarity or Field Dependence, nor
an interaction between them.

Eat if served
There was a significant effect of Polarity (F(1,38) = 13.86,
ήp2 = 0.27, p < 0.005), but no interaction with Field
Dependence, nor an interaction between them. Regardless
of Field Dependence, more participants agreed with the
biologists' judgment when this was in the affirmative (mean
= 3.13) than in the negative (1.29).

Superordinate categorisation
Agreement with biologists' judgments was strongly
influenced by Polarity (F(1,38) = 47.81, ήp2 = 0.56, p <
0.0005), with participant's agreeing the superordinate
categorisation when biologists' judgments were reported as
affirmative (mean = 3.89) but largely disagreeing when
those judgments were negative (mean = 1.73). There was
no effect of Field Dependence nor did Polarity and Field
Dependence interact.

Individual Differences
Lastly, each participant was classified according to their
responses to the Categorisation question. Participants who
consistently deferred to biologists' judgments in all eight
scenarios were classified as Switchers; those who
consistently did not switch their categorisations for any
category were classified as obdurate; remaining participants
were classified as mixed. This factor of Deferring Style was
entered with Field Dependence in a log-linear analysis.
This revealed a significant interaction between Deferring
Style and Field Dependence (Chi-square (2) = 20.52, p <
0.0005) as shown in Figure 2.

Eat
There were no effects of Polarity or Field Dependence, nor
an interaction between them.

Serve

Discussion

There were no effects of Polarity nor an interaction with
Field Dependence, but there was a main effect of Field
Dependence (F(1,38) = 6.95, ήp2 = 0.16, p < 0.05) with Field
dependents showing greater agreement with biologists'

The first key aim of this experiment was to replicate the
findings of Braisby (2001) in order to examine whether
individual differences in deference are robust. Overall, 53%

396

of participants consistently deferred to expert judgment,
35% were consistently obdurate, and just 13% showed a
mixed pattern (of deferring with some categories and being
obdurate with others). Experiment 2 of Braisby (2001)
obtained similar proportions: 62%, 31% and 7%,
respectively. Thus, these data strongly support the view that
the evidence for deference with regard to biological natural
kinds is both mixed, and susceptible to substantial
individual difference.
The second aim was to investigate the relationship
between deference and field dependence. The data confirm
that there is such a relationship and it is a strong one, with
34% of the variance in responses to the categorisation
question being explained by this dichotomous factor. In this
study, substantially more field dependent participants defer
to expert judgment (89%) than field independents (23%).
Considerably more field independent participants are
obdurate when categorising in the light of expert judgment
(55%) than field dependents (11%). These striking contrasts
not only suggest the effect of field dependence is strong,
they suggest reasons for individual differences in
essentialism. Field dependents, willing to seek external
frames of reference for making their categorisation
judgments, appear more susceptible to externally provided
information about the presence, role or value of essential
properties. Field independents may by contrast tend to rely
more on internally generated judgments of category
membership which, given the hidden and/or unknown
nature of essences, are likely to be based on a more
superficial similarity judgment.
Lastly, by including other questions concerning the
transformed natural kinds, it is possible to gauge the scope
of these individual differences. Were field dependence to
impact all measures, for example, it could be argued that it
is not intimately related to categorisation, and perhaps that
the influence of field dependence masks more subtle and
interesting categorisation effects. However, there was no
effect of field dependence on three of the five other
questions asked. Indeed, only the questions concerning
serving food to others, and eating it if it were served by
others, showed an influence of field dependence. It is
noteworthy that these two questions also involve a social
dimension, while the other three questions arguably do not.
Far from field dependence showing an over-powering or
global impact on these results, it appears as though this
factor bears only on those aspects of categorisation and
categorisation-related actions that are social in nature.
Indeed, when one recalls that Putnam (1975) called his
Division of Linguistic Labour a socio-linguistic hypothesis,
it seems hardly surprising that the quite particular feature of
deference should be influenced by field dependence.
Another interpretation is that field dependence influences
how participants understood the scenarios. Elements that
are vague, such as the quantifier ‘most’, or open to different
interpretation, such as the reputability of the supplier, may
be particularly susceptible to different interpretations that
perhaps align with field dependence. Likewise field

dependence may alter whether people judge that genetically
modified exemplars continue to be members of their
original categories. These are intriguing possibilities, and
the current data do not rule them out. However, there are
reasons to doubt these could be the whole story. First,
though the literature on field dependence is considerable,
the authors are not aware of evidence for an influence on
language understanding. Second, the data actually suggest
these possibilities are unlikely. It would be hard, for
instance, to reconcile the claim that field dependent and
independent people derive different understandings of the
scenarios, with the evidence that, when questioned, only
certain highly specific questions show such an influence. In
fact, it is only those questions which have an explicitly
social element that reveal an effect of field dependence.
This pattern is more consistent with field dependence
having a highly specific influence, related to the
informational demands of the task, rather than a global
influence relating to people’s understanding.
Some notes of caution are in order however. This initial
study, while promising, remains exploratory, and much
more needs to be done to confirm the impact of cognitive
style on categorisation in general. Though these data are
suggestive as to the meaning of individual differences in
essentialism, it is unclear whether the same relationship
would be found in different domains. Of particular interest
would be social domains such as sexual orientation (cf.
Haslam, Rothschild & Ernst, 2000; Braisby & Hodges,
2009) where claims for essentialism are already contested.
However, these data are illuminating in that they appear
to confirm of an important social dimension to
psychological essentialism, and one which can lead people
to different categorisations. What is less clear is whether
these data might shed light on field dependence itself.
While such an aim is beyond the scope of this paper, it
seems clear that field dependence is more than a spatial
ability. It appears to involve a sensitivity to social
information and as such implies less of a gap between
cognitive science and the social world than one might at
first imagine.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Ian Hodges for comments on this
paper.

References
Ahn, W. K., Kalish, C., Gelman, S. A., Medin, D. L.,
Luhmann, C., Atran, S., et al. (2001). Why essences are
essential in the psychology of concepts. Cognition, 82(1),
59-69.
Bloom, P. (1996). Intention, history, and artifact concepts.
Cognition, 60, 1–29.
Bloom, P. (1998). Theories of artifact categorization.
Cognition, 66, 87–93.
Braisby, N. R. (2001). Deference in categorisation:
Evidence for essentialism. In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual

397

Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Braisby, N. R. (2004). Deference and Essentialism in the
Categorization of Chemical Kinds. In, Alterman R., &
Kirsch, D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.: Mahwah, NJ.
Braisby, N., Franks, B., & Hampton, J. (1996).
Essentialism, word use, and concepts. Cognition, 59, 247274.
Braisby, N. & Hodges, I. (2009). Categorisation of sexual
orientation: A test of essentialism. In N. A. Taatgen & H.
van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 29562961). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
DeCaro M. S., Thomas R. D., & Beilock S. L. (2008).
Individual differences in category learning: Sometimes
less working memory capacity is better than more.
Cognition, 107, 284–294.
Gelman, S. A. (2004). Psychological essentialism in
children. Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(9), 404-9.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and
essences: Early understandings of the nonobvious.
Cognition, 38, 213-244.
Hampton, J. A., Estes, Z., & Simmons, S. (2007).
Metamorphosis: Essence, appearance and behavior in the
categorization of natural kinds. Memory & Cognition, 35,
1785–1800.
Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2000). Essentialist
beliefs about social categories. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 39, 113–127.
Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2002). Are
essentialist beliefs associated with prejudice? British
Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 87–100.
Haslam, N. & Whelan, J. (2008).
Human natures:
Psychological essentialism in thinking about differences
between people. Social and Personality Psychology
Compass, 2/3, 1297-1312.
Kalénine, S. & Bonthoux, F. (2006). The Formation of
Living and Non-Living Superordinate Concepts as a
Function of Individual Differences. Current Psychology
Letters: Behaviour, Brain and Cognition [Online], 19(2),
online since 14 décembre 2006, connection on 06 février
2010. URL : http://cpl.revues.org/index1066.html.
Keil, F. (1986). Conceptual development and category
structure. In U. Neisser (Ed.), Concepts and conceptual
development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and necessity. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Lee, L. C., Kagan, J., & Rabson, A. (1963). Influence of a
Preference for Analytic Categorization upon Concept
Acquisition. Child Development, 34 (2), 433-442.
Lewellen M. J., Goldinger S. D., Pisoni D. B., & Greene B.
G. (1993). Lexical familiarity and processing efficiency:
individual differences in naming, lexical decision, and

semantic categorization. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology: General, 122(3), 316-330.
Malt, B. C. (1994). Water is not H2O. Cognitive
Psychology, 27, 41-70.
Malt, B. C. & Sloman, S. A. (2007). Category essence or
essentially pragmatic? Creator’s intention in naming and
what’s really what. Cognition, 105(3), 615-648.
Mausner, B. & Graham, J. (1970). Field Dependence and
Prior Reinforcement as Determinants of Social Interaction
in Judgement. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 16 (3), 486-492.
McKinley, S. C. & Nosofsky, R. M. (1995). Investigations
of exemplar and decision bound models in large, illdefined category structures. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 21, 128–
148.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Norenzayan, A., Smith, E.E., Kim, B. J. & Nisbett, R. E.
(2002). Cultural preferences for formal versus intuitive
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 26, 653-684.
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of ‘meaning.’ In H.
Putnam, Mind, language, and reality: Philosophical
papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Rothbart, M., & Taylor, M. (1992). Category labels and
social reality: Do we view social categories as natural
kinds? In G. R. Semin & K. Fiedler (Eds.), Language and
Social Cognition (pp. 11–36). London, UK: Sage.
Sternberg, R. J. & Grigorenko, E. L. (1997). Are Cognitive
Styles Still in Style? American Psychologist, 52 (7), 700712.
Strevens, M. (2000). The essentialist aspect of naive
theories. Cognition, 74(2), 149-175.
von Eckardt, B. (1993). What is cognitive science?
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Witkin, H. A. (1975). Some Implications of Research on
Cognitive Style for Problem of Education. In J. M.
Whitehead (Ed.), Personality and Learning 1, pp. 288314. London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Witkin, H. A., Dyk., R. B., Faterson., H.F., Goodenough, D.
R. & Karp., S. A. (1962). Psychological Differentiation:
Studies of Development. New York: John Wiley and Sons,
Inc.
Witkin, H. A., Oltman, P. K., Raskin, E. & Karp, S. A.
(1971). A Manual for the Embedded Figure Test.
Consulting Psychology Press.

398

