UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Category Learning and Adaptive Benefits of Aging

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3j16030j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Merritt, Angela
Karlsson, Linnea
Cokely, Edward

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Category Learning and Adaptive Benefits of Aging
Angela Merritt (merri242@umn.edu)
University of Minnesota

Linnea Karlsson (karlsson@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development

Edward T. Cokely (cokely@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development &
Michigan Technological University
employing integration of dimensions at a “predecisional” stage. Moreover, it is suggested that
there exists a rule-bias—a new learning endeavor
will start off with the explicit learning system but
compete with, and possibly lose against, the implicit
system for determining the response.

Abstract
We examined effects of normal aging on category learning, comparing performance and strategy choice on two
learning tasks: one where a one-dimensional rule governed category membership and one where a multidimensional rule defined category structure. Paradoxically, we demonstrated that older adults can outperform
younger adults in some types of complex category learning. In the current task—which required that multiple
dimensions be integrated—simpler integration rules
enabled more rapid achievement of reasonable levels of
performance. As cognitive aging is associated with a
reduction in working memory resources, older adults
tended to adopt these simpler decision rules more often,
facilitating complex category learning. Results provide
some unique evidence highlighting potential adaptive
benefits of cognitive aging. Implications are discussed.

Introduction
The learning of new categories is an important task
throughout one’s life span. While the literature investigating younger adults’ category learning skill is
vast, less is known about older adults’ category learning competencies. In the current investigation, we
sought to demonstrate that normal cognitive aging
can confer cognitive performance benefits as older
adults may favor simpler cognitive strategies known
to facilitate learning and decision performance.

The results with regard to older adults’ learning in
these tasks are mixed. Ashby, Nobel, Filoteo, Waldron and Ell (2003) demonstrated that older adults
reached the learning criterion (10 correct consecutive
responses, CCR) later than young adults in both a
rule-based and an information-integration task. However, they did not investigate the cognitive processes
used to guide categorization. Filoteo and Maddox
(2004) compared younger and older adults on two
versions of an information-integration task—one with
a linear and one with a non-linear combination rule.
Older adults were impaired compared to young adults
on both versions. Via computational modeling the
authors provided evidence suggesting that the agerelated differences were less marked among individuals using simple one- or two-dimensional rules.
In contrast, in a study comparing young and old
adults on a probabilistic category learning task (the
weather prediction task; Gluck & Bower, 1988) and
an information integration task, age-related differences were only found in the probabilistic but not in
the information integration task (Price, 2005).

Previous research investigating aging and feedback-based category learning often draws the general
framework of Ashby and colleagues (e.g. Ashby,
Alfonso-Reese, Turken, & Waldron 1998). The
framework involves contrasting two different task
types that are assumed to be best solved by two distinct learning systems. The most basic difference
between the tasks, as typically stated, is whether one
or several dimensions of the probe determine category membership. In the so-called rule-based tasks,
only one dimension of the probe determines category
membership and these tasks are believed to rely on an
explicit learning system capitalizing on simple verbalizable rules. In information-integration tasks, the
values of several dimensions determines membership
via a complicated combination rule. In these tasks,
simple one-dimensional rules will not suffice for
error-free performance. Learning in these tasks is
thus said to be guided by an implicit learning system

Individual differences in working memory are
known to influence cognitive task strategies and
decision making performance (Cokely & Kelley,
2009; Cokely, Kelley, & Gilchrist, 2006). Furthermore, considerable evidence has documented declines and metacognitive changes associated with
working memory during normal aging (e.g. Baltes,
Staudinger, & Lindenberger, 1999; Herzog, Dixion,
Hultsch, & MacDonald, 2003). Interestingly, individual differences in working memory have been shown
to be a factor on success rates in category learning
(DeCaro, Thomas, & Beilock, 2008). DeCaro et al.
hypothesized that individuals with high working
memory abilities should outperform individuals with
low working memory abilities in rule-based tasks. In
information-integration tasks it was hypothesized that
low-capacity individuals would have a benefit: they
may have less capacity to engage the explicit system
in extensive hypothesis testing of the complex com-

Keywords: category learning, aging, rule-based, information-integration

405

bination rule. Thus low ability individuals might
switch to the implicit system earlier than high-ability
individuals and show faster learning. DeCaro et al.
showed that high-ability individuals reached the
learning criterion faster than low-ability individuals
in a rule-based task. In contrast, in an informationintegration task, low-ability individuals reached the
learning criterion faster—a benefit assumed to stem
from an earlier switch to the implicit system. Of note,
however, Tharp and Pickering (2009) demonstrated
that the learning criterion used by DeCaro et al (i.e. 8
CCR) were insufficient for capturing learning of the
information-integration combination rule and thus
reaching that criterion is likely not a reliable indicator
that implicit learning has taken place. Tharp and
Pickering demonstrated that considerably fewer participants in an information-integration task were able
to sustain performance long enough to reach the
stricter criterion of 16 CCR. Further, the responses
from around 40% of the individuals reaching the 8
CCR criterion could be well captured by onedimensional categorization models, suggesting that it
is possible to reach 8 CCR with explicit memory and
simple one-dimensional rules. DeCaro, Carlson,
Thomas and Beilock (2009) subsequently tested lowvs. high ability individuals again, using the stricter 16
CCR, and the interaction between tasks and abilities
disappeared. Moreover, when assessing learning
strategies in the two tasks for the two groups DeCaro
et al found evidence suggesting that the low-ability
individuals primarily used one-dimensional rules.

Experiment
In the following experiment we tested younger
adults and older adults on a categorization task. The
stimuli consisted of pictorial drawings with four
binary cues and the task was to learn to categorize the
stimuli into two different categories with guidance by
outcome-feedback. The task exactly followed DeCaro et al. (2008).
Method
Participants
Fifty eight participants were tested. Twenty nine of
the participants were younger, aged 20-32 (m = 25.1,
SD = 3.1), and the other 29 participants, were older,
aged 64-79 (m = 69.9, SD = 3.3). Participants were
recruited from the participant pool of the Max Planck
Institute for Human Development, Berlin. All were
compensated 10 € for participation.
Procedure
Participants completed a computer-based category
learning experiment adapted from DeCaro, Thomas
& Beilock (2008). During the experiment, the participant was shown colored geometric figures on a
computer screen and asked to place each one into
either category “A” or category “B” by pressing
buttons on a keyboard. Immediate feedback was
given after each trial. After 200 of such trials, the
participant was informed that a new set was to begin
and the rules had changed, but were not informed by
which rule to sort. Participants completed 4 sets of
200 trials. There were two different sets of rule-based
tasks and two sets of information integration tasks,
rotated across participants in four different orders. In
the rule-based tasks one dimension decided category
membership (in one set it was symbol color and in
the other set symbol shape). There were also two
different sets of information-integration tasks. Three
of the four dimensions were regarded as relevant
(with background color respectively number of embedded symbols being irrelevant). The correct combination rule was given by assigning each binary
value of the dimensions with 1 or -1 and then linearly
combining those values:

Might older adults also benefit from the use of
simpler processes in the tasks used by DeCaro et al
and Tharp and Pickering? Previous research suggests
it is unlikely that that older adults would be able to
proceed in learning the information integration task
with the implicit learning system (see also Filoteo &
Maddox, 2004). Previous research also suggests that
in tasks similar to implicit category learning (i.e.,
implicit learning of new associations) age-related
decline in performance is to be expected (Curran,
1997; Harrington & Haaland, 1992; Howard & Howard, 1997, 2001). Moreover, there is evidence that
older adults prefer simpler strategies over complex
strategies in various tasks, for example in mental
arithmetic (Geary, Frensch & Wiley, 1993), in memory (Dunlosky & Hertzog, 1998, 2000) and decision
making (Chen & Sun, 2003; Johnson, 1990; Mata,
Schooler & Rieskamp, 2007). Thus, this leaves us
with two nested hypotheses for the current study: (1)
older adults will not address the information integration task with the implicit system, and (2) advantages
demonstrated by older adults in an informationintegration task will stem from older adults’ use of
simple, verbalizable rules, in contrast to a larger
portion of younger adults who might attempt futile
hypothesis testing with more complex rules.

If value (X) + value (Y) + value (Z) > 0 respond
A, otherwise B.
In addition, participants completed a battery of
cognitive ability measures. These results are not
reported as they are beyond the scope the current
paper.
Results
As a first step, to statistically investigate the extent
to which we replicated DeCaro et al (2008), our initial analyses followed DeCaro et al. First, we logtransformed the number of trials to reach the criterion

406

of 8 CCR, as the variable was positively skewed.
Second, for the set of analyses directly aiming at
comparing the results with DeCaro et al (2008) we
only included participants who reached the criterion
on all four task rules (two rule-based and two information-integration, of 200 trials each), and who were
not higher than 2 SD above the mean in trials to criterion in each block.

Young
Old

First, we analyzed whether performance on any of
the two different rules within each task differed and
interacted with age. We performed one repeated
measurement ANOVA per task, with rule type as
within factor and age as between factor. In the rulebased task one rule was easier to learn than the other
(F(1,41) = 5.17; p = .03) but this did not interact with
age (F(1,41) = .12; p = .73). In the informationintegration task rules did not differ in difficulty
(F(1,41) = .001; p = .97) and there was no interaction
with age (F(1,41) = .26; p = .62). Therefore, we averaged data across both rule types within each task.

Rule-based

Information-integration

Figure 1. Average trials to reach the 8 CCR criterion as a factor of age group and task. Error bars
represent +/- 1 SE.
Table 1. Rule-based task: number of learners and
mean trials-to-criterion (TTC) as a function of age
and criterion

Second, we investigated whether there was an effect of age on the ability to reach the 8 CCR criterion
and if this interacted with task. We performed a repeated measurement ANOVA with task (rule-based
vs. information-integration) as within-subjects factor
and age as between-subjects factor. Overall, the age
groups did not differ on the number of trials they
took to reach the criterion (F(1,41) = .07; p = .80).
The criterion was reached faster in the rule-based
than the information-integration task (F(1,41) = 9.96;
p = .003). Most importantly, there was a significant
interaction between age and performance in the two
tasks (Figure 1; F(1,41) = 4.69; p = .04). While the
younger adults’ ability to reach the criterion deteriorated significantly in the information-integration
compared to the rule-based task (F(1,15) = 28.05; p <
0.001) the older adults reached it about equally fast
across tasks (F(1,15) = .25; p = .62).

CCR

Number of learners
(max 29 per group)
Young
Old

8

28

22

10

28

19

16

26

14

Mean TTC (SD)
Young

Old

25.9
(16.1)
32.0
(19.0)
44.8
(25.1)

45.0
(33.1)
48.2
(35.2)
52.7
(30.4)

Table 2. Information-integration task: number of
learners and mean trials-to-criterion (TTC) as a function of age and criterion

Following Ashby et al. (2003),
DeCaro et
al.(2008, 2009), and Tharp and Pickering (2009), and
to further investigate the learning trajectories in the
two tasks we next looked at the number of participants reaching the three different criteria used in
those studies (8, 10 and 16 CCR) and the mean number of trials it took to reach the criterion (Table 1 and
2). All subsequent analyses included all participants.

CCR

It is evident that in the rule-based task most
younger adults reached all three criteria while about
1/3 of the old adults did not reach the strictest criterion (Table 1). In the information-integration task on
the other hand (Table 2), fewer older adults reached
all criteria, but the number of learners dropped off
proportionally in both age-groups as a function of
how strict the criterion was. Critically, the older
adults required fewer trials to criterion than the
younger adults only when considering 8 CCR.

Number of learners
(max 29 per group)
Young
Old

8

27

19

10

21

15

16

4

2

Mean TTC (SD)
Young

Old

53.9
(32.2)
69.0
(25.1)
91.0
(21.6)

47.5
(31.3)
77.9
(33.8)
155.8
(2.48)

To provide a more transparent impression of performance in the two tasks we next examined the
proportion of correct responses as a function of task
and age (Figure 2). First, performance on the two
rule-types of each task did not interact with age, so
we averaged the data across rule-types. In a repeated
measurement ANOVA there were two main effects

407

participants responses when they had reached the 8
CCR criterion (and not what different strategies were
at play early during learning), we used the responses
containing the 8 CCR as well as the subsequent 8 x 3
responses and compared them to the different strategies’ predictions (in total 32 trials). We reasoned that
at that point the response strategy should be more
stable than during the beginning of the task when the
participants presumably tried out different ways of
responding. The model comparison was done separately for each of the two different rule-types of the
information-integration task. Next, we looked at
which model had the lowest deviation between responses and model predictions for each individual
and each rule-type of the information-integration
task. We did not count individuals where there was a
tie between two or more strategies (separately for the
two rule-types of the task). This resulted in a total of
40 valid strategy assessments for the young adults
and 30 for the old adults. We contrasted multidimensional with one-dimensional strategies and
counted the number of times (max 2 per person since
there were two versions of the task) where a onedimensional model or a multi-dimensional model had
the lowest deviation. The results (Figure 3) suggest
that for younger adults about equally many of the
information-integration tasks were best described by
a one-dimensional strategy (52.5 %) as by a multidimensional strategy (47.5 %). However, for the
older adults more were better described by a onedimensional strategy (76.7 vs 23.3 %).

and one interaction. The younger adults performed
better overall than the older adults (F(1,56) = 14.74;
p < 0.001), and performance was better in the rulebased than in the information-integration task
(F(1,56) = 124.4; p < 0.001). The interaction suggests
that the impact of age on performance was different
depending on the task (F(1,56) = 4.04; p =.049). The
difference between the age groups was larger in the
rule-based task (myoung = 91.2% vs. mold = 78.8%)
than in the information-integration task (myoung =
71.3% vs. mold 65.0%).

Young
Old

Figure 2. Proportion correct as a function of task and
age-group. Error bars are SE +/- 1.
Next, to investigate whether the observed interaction reflected differences in the use of strategies we
performed a rough strategy assessment for the information-integration task. The present task is limited
when it comes to allowing reliable estimates of what
model explains the data best and we thus refrain from
sophisticated quantitative model assessments including parameter estimation. Indeed, several different
models, including exemplar-models (e.g. Juslin,
Olsson, & Olsson, 2003; Nosofsky & Johansen,
2000) and rule-plus-exception models (Nosofsky,
Palmeri, & McKinley, 1994) are likely to give rise to
a set of similar responses as one-dimensional and
multi-dimensional rules under some values of the
parameters. However, for the purpose of the present
paper we were primarily interested in whether the
age group differed in how many dimensions they
utilized. A simplified means of assessing the correspondence between data and predictions from a
model is to count the number of trials for which the
data and the model gives the same answer (e.g. DeCaro et al., 2009). We defined the same set of 10
different strategies as DeCaro and colleagues (2009),
including the correct three-dimensional rule, three
different one-dimensional rules, and six different
multi-dimensional rules (all of which could potentially be easily verbally described). Because we
wanted to investigate what strategy accounted for

Discussion
With this study we sought to demonstrate potential
adaptive benefits of aging. In a task where category
membership was governed by the integration of several dimensions (in the present paradigm denoted an
information-integration task) younger adults performed better than older adults overall (Figure 2).
Importantly, however, older adults were able to produce reasonable levels of performance (i.e. to reach
the 8 CCR criterion) somewhat faster than young
adults (Figure 1). To investigate one potential mechanism underlying this advantage we did a simplified strategy assessment in the informationintegration task. For the younger adults about equally
many were best fit by one-dimensional as by multidimensional strategies. In contrast, for the older
adults the larger proportion were best fit by onedimensional strategies (Figure 3).
The results are intriguing in that they imply two
important facets of age-related effects on the ability
to acquire new categories. First, we find no evidence
that the older adults engage an implicit learning system when trying to master the informationintegration task. Had that been the case we should
have observed sustained levels of performance inde-

408

they involve binary stimuli dimensions). Rather, it
has been suggested that the more complex Gabor
patches are better for that purpose (e.g. Maddox,
Ashby, & Bohill, 2003).

pendent of the learning criterion. Instead we observed the opposite (Table 2). Further, we ascribe the
reasonable levels of performance produced by the
older adults in the information-integration task mainly to their adoption of simple, one-dimensional rules.
For this particular task, such rules are able to lead to
performance well above chance. Thus, while the
younger adults presumably tried different versions of
multi-dimensional rules, performance might have
suffered initially from erroneous responses, while in
the meantime the older adults could sustain reasonable performance by not doing that.

A number of interesting follow-up studies would
help in clarifying some questions. First of all, it
would be interesting to replicate the same experiment
as reported here with the Gabor patch stimuli in order
to investigate whether the ability to learn the tasks as
well as the best performing strategies reveals the
same pattern as reported here, even though the stimuli are more complex. Furthermore, follow-up experiments specifically designed for reliable quantitative model comparisons could provide a more detailed picture regarding the cognitive processes at
play. Such experiments could for example aim at
contrasting predictions by one- two- and threedimensional rules with predictions by exemplarmodels and rule-plus-exception models.

Multi - correct
Multi - incorrect
Uni

Young

Results provide some new and unique data on potential benefits of cognitive aging. A large body of
research has converged to reveal the benefits of simple decision strategies - in some cases “less can be
more” (e.g. Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC Research
Group, 1999). To the extent that cognitive aging
biases older adults toward the use of simpler decision
processes, there may be many benefits of cognitive
aging that are currently underappreciated.

Old

Figure 3. The proportion of informationintegration tasks (with two different rule types) per
age group where responses were best captured by a
multi-dimensional (correct) multi-dimensional (incorrect) or a one-dimensional strategy.

Authors’ Note
We thank Gregor Caregnato and Paula Parpart for
assistance in data collection. We thank DeCaro and
colleagues for their experiment materials.
References
Ashby, F.G., Alfonso-Reese, L.A., Turken, U. &
Waldron, E.M. (1998). A neuropsychological
theory of multiple systems in category learning.
Psychological Review, 105, 442-481.
Ashby, F.G., Noble, S., Filoteo, J. V., Waldron, E.M.
& Ell, S.W. (2003). Category learning deficits in
Parkinson's disease. Neuropsychology,17,115124.
Baltes, P.B., Staudinger, U.M., & Lindenberger, U.
(1999). Lifespan psychology: Theory and application to intellectual functioning. Annual Review of
Psychology, 50, 471-507.
Cokely, E.T., & Kelley, C.M. (2009). Cognitive
abilities and superior decision making under risk:
A protocol analysis and process model evaluation.
Judgment and Decision Making, 4, 20-33.
Cokely, E.T., Kelley, C.M., & Gilchrist, A.H. (2006).
Sources of individual differences in working
memory: Contributions of strategy to capacity.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 991-997.

The data presented in the current study replicates
and extends the performance differences reported by
Ashby et al (2003) who used the 10 CCR criterion.
Our contribution extends the data presented by Ashby
et al (2003) by demonstrating that older adults adopt
one-dimensional rules to a larger extent than younger
adults. Moreover, on the assumption that older adults
represent a population with lower working memory
capacities than younger adults we replicate DeCaro et
al (2008, 2009), providing converging evidence on
the influence of individual differences on the ability
to acquire new categories.
Nevertheless, the data does not allow us to claim
that younger adults engaged the implicit system in
the information integration task. Performance
dropped off as a function of learning criterion (Table
2). Further, nothing in the fit of a multi-dimensional
strategy per se can tell us whether it was executed by
an explicit or an implicit system. Unfortunately, there
is some debate regarding whether the present set of
stimuli are most suitable for studying the implicit
system, as they may not be sufficiently complex (i.e.

409

Johnson, M. M. S. (1990). Age-Differences in Decision-Making - a Process Methodology for Examining Strategic Information-Processing. Journals
of Gerontology, 45, P75-P78.
Juslin, P., Olsson, H., & Olsson, A. C. (2003). Exemplar effects in categorization and multiple-cue
judgment. Journal of Experimental PsychologyGeneral, 132, 133-156.
Maddox, W. T., Ashby, F. G., & Bohil, C. J. (2003).
Delayed feedback effects on rule-based and information-integration category learning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory
and Cognition, 29, 650-662.
Mata, R., Schooler, L.J., & Rieskamp, J. (2007). The
aging decision maker: Cognitive aging and the
adaptive selection of decision strategies. Psychology and Aging, 22, 796-810.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Johansen, M. K. (2000). Exemplar-based accounts of "multiple-system" phenomena in perceptual categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 375-402.
Nosofsky, R. M., Palmeri, T. J., & McKinley, S. C.
(1994). Rule-Plus-Exception Model of Classification Learning. Psychological Review, 101, 53-79.
Price, A. L. (2005). Cortico-striatal contributions to
category learning: dissociating the verbal and implicit systems. Behavioral Neuroscience, 119,
1438-1447.
Tharp, I. J., & Pickering, A. D. (2009). A note on
DeCaro, Thomas, and Beilock (2008): Further data demonstrate complexities in the assessment of
information-integration category learning. Cognition, 111, 410-414.

Chen, Y. W., & Sun, Y. L. (2003). Age differences in
financial decision-making: Using simple heuristics. Educational Gerontology, 29, 627-635.
Curran, T. (1997). Effects of aging on implicit sequence learning: Accounting for sequence structure and explicit knowledge. Psychological Research-Psychologische Forschung, 60, 24-41.
DeCaro, M.S., Thomas, R.D., & Beilock, S.L.
(2008). Individual differences in category learning: Sometimes less working memory capacity is
more. Cognition, 107, 284-294.
DeCaro, M.S., Carlson, K. D., Thomas, R.D., &
Beilock, S.L. (2009). When and how less is more:
a reply to Tharp and Pickering. Cognition, 111,
415-421.
Dunlosky, J., & Hertzog, C. (1998). Aging and deficits in associative memory: What is the role of
strategy production? Psychology and Aging, 13,
597-607.
Dunlosky, J., & Hertzog, C. (2000). Updating knowl
edge about encoding strategies: A componential
analysis of learning about strategy effectiveness
from task experience. Psychology and Aging, 15,
462-474.
Filoteo, J. V., & Maddox, W. T. (2004). A quantitative model-based approach to examining aging effects on information-integration category learning. Psychology and Aging, 19, 171-182.
Geary, D. C., Frensch, P. A., & Wiley, J. G. (1993).
Simple and Complex Mental Subtraction - Strategy Choice and Speed-of-Processing Differences
in Younger and Older Adults. Psychology and
Aging, 8, 242-256.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research
Group (1999). Simple heuristics that make us
smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gluck, M. A., & Bower, G. H. (1988). From Conditioning to Category Learning - an Adaptive Network Model. Journal of Experimental Psychology-General, 117, 227-247.
Harrington, D. L., & Haaland, K. Y. (1992). Skill
Learning in the Elderly - Diminished Implicit and
Explicit Memory for a Motor Sequence. Psychology and Aging, 7, 425-434.
Herzog, C., Dixion, R.A., Hultsch, D.F. & MacDonald, S.W.S. (2003). Latent change models of
adult cognition: Are changes in processing speed
and working memory associated with changes in
episodic memory? Psychology and Aging, 18,
755-769.
Howard, D. V., & Howard, J. H. (2001). When it
does hurt to try: Adult age differences in the effects of instructions on implicit pattern learning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 798-805.
Howard, J. H., & Howard, D. V. (1997). Age differences in implicit learning of higher order dependencies in serial patterns. Psychology and Aging,
12, 634-656.

410

