UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal Learning in Joint Activity: Comparing Collaborative, Active, and Passive Contexts
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9543r0g1
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Young, Andrew G.
Alibail, Martha W.
Kalish, Charles W.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                      University of California

  Causal Learning in Joint Activity: Comparing Collaborative, Active,
                                         and Passive Contexts
                                              Andrew G. Young
                                         University of Wisconsin - Madison
                                              Martha W. Alibali
                                         University of Wisconsin - Madison
                                              Charles W. Kalish
                                         University of Wisconsin - Madison
Abstract: Children’s causal learning from intentional actions (i.e., interventions) can be dramatically affected
by the psychological and social circumstances in which they are produced. A context fundamental to children’s
learning across many domains is joint activity; however little is known about children’s causal learning with others.
Collaborative settings with shared goals and action plans might facilitate children’s learning from their own and
a partner’s coordinated actions (Sommerville & Hammond, 2007). Alternatively, children’s own interventions may
be more informative than those produced by a partner (Kushnir, Wellman, & Gelman, 2009). To address these
issues, young children learned about simple causal systems via interventions performed: 1) by themselves, 2) by an
experimenter, or 3) jointly with an experimenter. Children’s subsequent causal knowledge, source-memory, and free
play are compared across these collaborative contexts. Findings may provide guidance about structuring learning
environments.
                                                        628

