UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cohesion, Coherence, and Expert Evaluations of Writing Proficiency

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6n5908qx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Crossley, Scott
McNamara, Danielle

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cohesion, Coherence, and Expert Evaluations of Writing Proficiency
Scott A. Crossley (sc544@msstate.edu)
Department of English, Mississippi State University
MS, 39762 USA

Danielle S. McNamara (dsmcnamara1@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Institute for Intelligent Systems, The University of Memphis
Memphis TN 38152 USA
Abstract

may be more or less coherent depending on a number of
factors, such as prior knowledge and reading skill
(McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996; O’Reilly &
McNamara, 2007).
There is a strongly held sense that essay quality is highly
related to the cohesion and coherence of the essay. This is
reflected in the literature about writing (e.g., Collins, 1998;
DeVillez, 2003), as well as textbooks that teach students
how to write (Golightly & Sanders, 1990). However, there
are few studies that have empirically investigated the role of
cohesion cues and by consequence, coherence, in essays.
Whereas there is a strong assumption that coherence is an
important aspect of writing, few studies have documented
this assumption or tied the notion of coherence to explicit
linguistic features of the essay. Indeed, our own
examinations of linguistic features of good and poor essays
have turned up no evidence that cohesion cues are positively
related to essay quality for either first language writers
(McNamara, Crossley, & McCarthy, 2010) or writers for
whom English is their second language (Crossley &
McNamara, in press). Therefore, the question of whether
coherence or cohesion play important roles in essay writing
and judgments of essay quality remains open.
In contrast, the role of cohesion in text comprehension is
much better understood and there are numerous empirical
studies on the topic (for a recent review, see McNamara,
Louwerse, McCarthy, & Graesser, 2010). These studies
show that increasing the cohesion of a text facilitates and
improves text comprehension for many readers
(Gernsbacher, 1990) and is particularly crucial for lowknowledge readers (McNamara et al., 1996).
From this literature on text comprehension, we glean two
competing hypotheses for the effects of cohesion on
estimates of essay quality (i.e., the coherence of the essay in
the mind of the essay rater). On the one hand, cohesion
underlies coherence, and thus should be important. On the
other hand, the effects of cohesion on comprehension
depend on the knowledge and reading skill of the reader.
Indeed, a reverse cohesion effect, or an advantage for low
cohesion text, can occur for high knowledge readers
(McNamara, 2001; McNamara et al., 1996; O’Reilly &
McNamara, 2007). High-knowledge readers, unlike lowknowledge readers, can successfully make the inferences
needed to bridge the conceptual gaps that are in lowcohesion text. In fact, high-knowledge readers may benefit
from low cohesion texts because gaps in cohesion force the
reader to make connections in text that are not explicitly

This study investigates the roles of cohesion and coherence in
evaluations of essay quality. Cohesion generally has a
facilitative effect on text comprehension and is assumed to be
related to essay coherence. By contrast, recent studies of
essay writing have demonstrated that computational indices of
cohesion are not predictive of evaluations of writing quality.
This study investigates expert ratings of individual text
features, including coherence, in order to examine their
relation to evaluations of holistic essay quality. The results
suggest that coherence is an important attribute of overall
essay quality, but that expert raters evaluate coherence based
on the absence of cohesive cues in the essays rather than their
presence. This finding has important implications for text
understanding and the role of coherence in writing quality.
Keywords: Coherence; Writing Quality;
Linguistics, Computational Algorithms, Models.

Cohesion,

Introduction
Writing affords the opportunity to thoroughly articulate
ideas and synthesize a variety of perspectives allowing for
persuasive communication that transcends both time and
space (Crowhurst, 1990). As such, the ability to convey
meaning proficiently in written texts is a critical skill for
academic and professional success. Indeed, college
freshmen’ writing skills are among the best predictors of
academic success (Geiser & Studley, 2001), and even
outside of academia, writing skills continue to be important
and are an important attribute of professional competence
(Light 2001). As such, developing a better understanding of
good and poor writing is an important objective, both for
theoretical and applied reasons.
The overarching objective of this study is on the
identification of essay features that are predictive of overall
writing quality. Our goal is to better understand and model
writing proficiency. We are particularly interested in the
roles that cohesion and coherence play in writing quality.
Cohesion refers to the presence or absence of explicit cues
in the text that allow the reader to make connections
between the ideas in the text. For example, overlapping
words and concepts between sentences indicate that the
same ideas are being referred to across sentences. Likewise,
connectives such as because, therefore, and consequently,
inform the reader that there are relationships between ideas
and the nature of those relationships. Whereas cohesion
refers to the explicit cues in the text, coherence refers to the
understanding that the reader derives from the text, which

984

available (McNamara, 2001; O’Reilly & McNamara, 2007).
Hence, when the material covered in a text is familiar to the
reader (as is often the case for narratives), cohesion cues
may be unnecessary, and perhaps even distracting. Overall,
text comprehension literature leads to the conclusion that
cohesion may play an important role in facilitating
coherence if the rater of the essay has less knowledge about
the topic, but cohesion cues may be inversely related to
essay scores if the rater has more knowledge about the topic.
We recently explored this topic by examining the effects
of cohesion devices on human evaluations of writing
quality. McNamara et al (2010) used linguistic indices of
cohesion and language sophistication provided by the
computational tool Coh-Metrix (Graesser, McNamara,
Louwerse, & Cai, 2004) to analyze a corpus of 120
argumentative essays written by college undergraduate and
scored by expert raters using a holistic rubric. The essays
were scored on a 1-6 scaled SAT rubric and then
categorized into two groups: essays judged as low versus
high quality. The results indicated that there were no
differences between these two groups according to indices
of cohesion (e.g., word overlap, causality, connectives). By
contrast, indices related to language sophistication (lexical
diversity, word frequency, and syntactic complexity)
showed significant differences between the groups. A
follow-up discriminant function analysis (DFA) showed that
these indices successfully classified the essays into their
respective groups at a level well above chance. The results
of the McNamara et al. study provide initial indications that
text cohesion may not be indicative of essay quality.
Instead, expert raters in the McNamara et al. study judged
essays as higher quality when they were more difficult to
process (less familiar words, more complex syntax).
While McNamara et al. (2010) showed that cohesion cues
were not related to the overall scores assigned by essay
raters, it did not investigate the role of the raters’ judgments
of the coherence or cohesion of the essay, nor did it
investigate whether cohesion cues are related to raters’
judgments of coherence and cohesion. Hence the purpose of
the current study is two-fold. First, we examine the
assumption that judgments of essay coherence are predictive
of the overall score for an essay. While this is a commonly
held belief, we are aware of no empirical support for this
assumption provided in the literature. Second, we examine
whether cohesion cues as measured by Coh-Metrix are
related to raters’ estimates of an essay’s coherence. Whereas
McNamara et al. (2010) did not find a relation between
indices of cohesion and the overall essay scores, it remains
an open question as to whether cohesion indices might be
related to more direct ratings of an essay’s coherence.

(2010), we do not rely solely on computational indices to
model overall essay quality, but instead concentrate on the
evaluation of human judgments of individual text features in
relation to overall text quality. Included in the individual
text features evaluated by human experts are two measures
of coherence. If the ratings of coherence are predictive of
overall essay quality, we will also use computational indices
of cohesion to model these human ratings. We can, thus,
examine the importance of cohesion and coherence in
writing quality and examine which cohesive devises may be
predictive of human ratings of coherence Such an analysis
will also afford the opportunity to examine whether indices
of cohesion correlate with human ratings of coherence,
providing us with an opportunity to gain a better
understanding of the role cohesion plays in high-knowledge
readers (i.e., the expert raters in our study).

Corpus
As in McNamara et al. (2010), our analyses were conducted
using a corpus of essays collected from undergraduate
students at Mississippi State University (MSU). The MSU
corpus was designed to account for learner variables such as
age (adult students) and learning context (freshman college
composition class). The corpus was also designed to
consider task variables such as medium (writing), first
language (English), genre (argumentative essays), essay
length (between 500 and 1,000 words), and topics (3
prompts on equality, television, and creativity). The final
corpus consisted of 184 essays. The essays were untimed
and written outside of the classroom. Thus, referencing of
outside sources was allowed, but was not required. Students
were allowed to select the essay prompt. Therefore, there
are an unequal number of essays per prompt. Although 100
of the essays used in our current analysis were also used in
the McNamara et al. study, these 100 essays were evaluated
by different raters in the current study. The raters used both
an atomistic and holistic survey instrument.

Rating Rubric
The essay-rating rubric used in this analysis was designed to
parallel the rubric used initially by Breetvelt, van den Bergh,
and Rijlaarsdam (1994) and later adapted with a focus on
structure and argumentation by Sanders and Schilperoord
(2006). Three experts in language processing with Ph.D.s in
either linguistics or cognitive psychology developed the
rubric. It was then subjected to usability tests by expert
raters with at least three years experience in essay scoring.
The final version of the survey instrument has three
subsections: structure, content, and conclusion. The
structure subsection contains questions related to essay
structure and continuity. The content subsection contains
questions related to the introduction, thesis, coherence, topic
and evidential sentences, relevance, register use, and
mechanics. The conclusion subsection contained questions
related to the conclusion type, conclusion summary, and
closing. In addition, the survey instrument included a
holistic grading scale based on a standardized rubric

Method
Our method of inquiry involves an analysis of
argumentative essays by expert scorers on atomistic features
of essay quality (i.e., introductions, thesis statement, topic
sentences, relevance, coherence) as well as a holistic
evaluation of essay quality. Thus, unlike McNamara et al.

985

commonly used in assessing Scholastic Achievement Test
(SAT) essays. This holistic scale was the same scale used by
McNamara and colleagues (2010). The holistic scale and all
of the rubric items had a minimum score of 1 and a
maximum score of 6. The atomistic rubric ratings included
the following:

1. The raters had the lowest correlations for judgments of
continuity and the highest correlations for essay structure.
Table 1: Pearson Correlations between Raters
Item
r
Structure
0.647
Continuity
0.307
Introduction
0.330
Thesis Statement
0.513
Reader Orientation
0.367
Topic Sentences
0.510
Evidential Sentences
0.404
Relevance
0.306
Appropriate Registers
0.394
Grammar, Spelling, Punctuation
0.599
Conclusion
0.596
Conclusion Type
0.355
Conclusion Summary
0.525
Closing
0.445
Holistic Score
0.533

Structure: Clarity of division into introductions,
argumentation, and conclusion.
Continuity: Strength of connection of ideas and themes
within and between the essays’ paragraphs (cohesion).
Introduction: Presence of a clear, introductory sentence.
Thesis Statement: Strength of the thesis statement and its
attached arguments.
Reader Orientation: Overall coherence and ease of
understanding.
Topic Sentences: Presence of identifiable topic sentences in
argumentative paragraphs.
Evidential Sentences: Use of evidential sentences in the
argumentative paragraphs that support the topic sentence or
paragraph purpose.
Relevance: Degree to which argumentation in the paper
contained only relevant information.
Appropriate Registers: Degree to which the vocabulary in
the essays followed the expected register.
Grammar, Spelling, and Punctuation: Accuracy of
grammar, spelling, and punctuation.
Conclusion: Clarity of the conclusion.
Conclusion Type: Identifiable conclusion type.
Conclusion Summary: Presence of summary within the
conclusion including arguments and the thesis of the essay.
Closing. Clarity of closing statements within the essay.

Results
We used a multiple regression analysis to examine the
predictive strength of the atomistic writing features in
explaining the scoring variance in the holistic scores
assigned to the essays. We used a training set to generate a
model to examine the amount of variance explained by each
writing feature. The model was then applied to a test set to
calculate the accuracy of the analysis. Accordingly, we
randomly divided the corpus into two sets: a training set (n
= 123) and a test set (n = 61). The training set was used to
identify which of the atomistic features most highly
correlated with the holistic scores assigned to the essays.
These features were later used to predict the holistic scores
in the training and test sets using the generated model.
We controlled the number of variables included in the
regression analysis in order to reduce the likelihood that the
model was over-fitted. If too many variables are used, the
model fits not only the signal of the predictors, but also the
unwanted noise. The model may, thus, lack accuracy when
applied to a new data set. We selected a ratio of 15
observations to 1 predictor, which is standard for analyses
of this kind (Field, 2005). Given that the training set
contained 123 essays, we determined that we could include
eight features in our regression analysis.

Essay Evaluation
Two expert raters with master’s degrees in English and at
least 3 years experience teaching composition classes at a
large university rated the 184 essays from the corpus using
the rubric. The raters were informed that the distance
between each score was equal. Accordingly, a score of 5 is
as far above a score of 4 as a score of 2 is above a score of
1. The raters were first trained to use the rubric with 20
essays. A Pearson correlation for each rubric evaluation was
conducted between the raters’ responses. If the correlations
between the raters did not exceed r = .50 (which was
significant at p < .05) on all items, the ratings were
reexamined until scores reached the r = .50 threshold.
Raters followed similar protocol for the holistic score, but
were expected to reach an r >= .70.
After the raters had reached an inter-rater reliability of at
least r = .50 (r = .70 for the holistic score), each rater then
evaluated the 184 essays that comprise the corpus used in
this study. Once final ratings were collected, differences
between the raters were calculated. If the difference in
ratings on survey feature were less than 2, an average score
was computed. If the difference was greater than 2, a third
expert rater adjudicated the final rating. Correlations
between the raters (before adjudication) are located in Table

Pearson Correlations
All features on the rubric correlated significantly with the
holistic scores assigned to the essays in the training set. The
strongest correlations were for Reader Orientation
(coherence), Relevance, and Continuity (cohesion). The
weakest correlations were for Thesis, Conclusion, and
Introduction. All the features along with their r values are
presented in Table 2 (all p < .001).

986

Variable

r value

Reader Orientation

0.803

Relevance

0.710

Continuity

0.650

Conclusion Type

0.640

Structure

0.633

Evidential Sentences

0.629

Grammar, Spelling, & Punctuation

0.590

Appropriate Registers

0.589

Topic Sentences

0.583

Closing

0.578

Conclusion Summary

0.551

Thesis Statement

0.548

Conclusion

0.526

model data did not suffer from multicollinearity (Field,
2005).
Five variables were significant predictors in the
regression: Reader Orientation (t = 6.668, p < .001)
Conclusion Types (t = 5.068, p < .001), Evidential
Sentences (t = 3.495, p < .001), Topic Sentences (t = 3.180,
p < .010), and Appropriate Registers (t = -1.419, p < .050).
Three variables were not significant predictors: Relevance (t
= 1.841, p > .050), Continuity (t = 1.760, p > .050), and
Grammar, Spelling, & Punctuation (t = 1.486, p > .050).
The latter variables were left out of the subsequent analysis.
The linear regression using the eight variables yielded a
significant model, F(5, 117) = 89.693, p < .001, r = .891, r2
= .793, demonstrating that the combination of the five
variables accounts for 79% of the variance in the human
evaluations essay quality for the 123 essays examined in the
training set. All the features retained in the regression
analysis along with their r values, r2 values, unstandardized
Beta weights, standardized Beta weights, and standard
errors are presented in Table 3.

Introduction

0.389

Test Set Model

Table 2: Pearson Correlations Atomistic to Holistic Scores

To further support the results from the multiple regression
conducted on the training set, we used the B weights and the
constant from the training set multiple regression analysis to
estimate how well the model would function on an
independent data set (the 61 essays and their holistic scores
held back in the test set). The model produced an estimated
value for each writing sample in the test set. We used this
correlation along with its r2 to demonstrate the strength of
the model on an independent data set. The model for the
test set yielded r = .922, r2 = .850. The results from the test
set model demonstrate that the combination of the five
variables accounted for 85% of the variance in the
evaluation of the 61 essays comprising the test set.

Collinearity
The features Structure and Conclusion were both highly
correlated (> .70) with the feature Conclusion Type.
Because both of these features had lower correlations with
the holistic score as compared to Conclusion Type, the
Structure and Conclusion variables were dropped from the
multiple regression analysis. Thus only the variables Reader
Orientation, Relevance, Continuity, Conclusion Type,
Evidential Sentences, Grammar, Spelling, & Punctuation,
Appropriate Registers, and Topic Sentences were included
in the regression.

Multiple Regression Training Set

Linguistic Features Analysis

A linear regression analysis (stepwise) was conducted
including the eight variables. These eight variables were
regressed onto the raters’ holistic evaluations for the 123
writing samples in the training set. The variables were
checked for outliers and multicollinearity. Coefficients were
checked for both variance inflation factors (VIF) values and
tolerance. All VIF values were at about 1 and all tolerance
levels were well beyond the .2 threshold, indicating that the

Our regression analysis demonstrated that text coherence is
an important predictor of human judgments of essay quality.
Our subsequent goal was to identify which linguistic
features are attributable to the coherence construct used by
the human raters.

Table 3: Linear Regression Analysis to Predict Essay Ratings Training Set
R

R2

B

B

SE

Reader Orientation

0.803

0.645

0.458

0.413

0.069

Entry 2

Conclusion Type

0.850

0.723

0.296

0.257

0.058

Entry 3

Evidential Sentences

0.871

0.758

0.271

0.182

0.078

Entry 4

Topic Sentences

0.882

0.778

0.222

0.160

0.070

Entry 5

Registers

0.891

0.793

0.201

0.152

0.069

Entry

Variable Added

Entry 1

Notes: Estimated Constant Term is 23.79; B is unstandardized Beta; B is standardized Beta; SE is standard error

987

Discussion

To accomplish this goal, we conducted an analysis of the
Reader Orientation scores using computational indices
provided by Coh-Metrix that have theoretical correlates with
cohesion features. Our goal in this second analysis is to
examine if computational indices related to cohesion can
successfully model the human coherence ratings from our
essay analysis. We used the same corpus as the principle
study, but concentrated solely on the human ratings for the
Reader Orientation item (i.e., the coherence feature that was
predictive of overall essay quality).
We selected a range of measures related to cohesion from
the Coh-Metrix tool. The constructs measured included
semantic coreference (LSA indices), causal cohesion, spatial
cohesion, temporal cohesion, connectives and logical
operators, anaphoric resolution, word overlap, and lexical
diversity (see Crossley & McNamara, 2009; Graesser et al.,
2004, for an overview of the cohesion indices in CohMetrix). Each construct was measured using multiple CohMetrix indices.
We first divided the corpus into a training (N = 123) and
test set (N= 61). We then conducted Pearson correlations to
relationships between the Coh-Metrix Indices and the
human ratings of coherence.

This study has demonstrated that human ratings of
coherence are an important indicator of holistic evaluations
of essay proficiency. However, how human raters construct
a coherent mental representation of a text seems opposed to
many intuitive notions of coherence. For instance, we might
expect that cohesive devices such as word overlap, causal
particles and verbs, resolved anaphors, and positive
temporal connectives would help the rater to develop a more
coherent textual representation. However, in the case of the
expert raters used in this study, the opposite was true. The
absence of cohesive devices was associated with a more
coherent mental representation of the text.
Our results indicate that coherence is an important
element of human judgments of essay quality. In fact,
overall text coherence is the most predictive feature of
holistic essay scores. The coherence of a text (and by
extension its understandability) was more predictive of
writing quality than conclusion types, the use of evidential
sentences, the use of topic sentences, and the use of
appropriate registers. The overall coherence of a text was
also the primary predictor of essay quality and explained
65% of the variance in the human ratings of writing quality.
Human ratings of cohesion (continuity), although not
retained in our regression analysis, also significantly
correlated with essay quality.
However, our analysis using cohesion indices provided by
Coh-Metrix demonstrated that our human judgments of
coherence were not positively related to indices related to
text cohesion indicating that cohesive devices may not
underlie
the
development
of
coherent
textual
representations. Indeed, the majority of cohesive devices
negatively correlated with human judgments of coherence.
The exception is the use of subordinating conjunctions,
which were positively correlated with human ratings of
coherence. Yet, subordinating conjunctions also play a
syntactic role and, by their nature, create more complex
syntactic structures that result in a greater number of words
before the main verb. Thus, it is likely that the subordinating
conjunction index is actually detecting syntactic complexity,
which does positively correlate with estimates of essay
quality (McNamara et al., 2010).
So the question becomes: What factors are informing
expert raters’ mental representations of the text? One
conclusion that the results of this study support is that
factors important in text comprehension may have similarly
important roles when raters evaluate the quality of essays.
Specifically, the background knowledge of expert raters
may influence text coherence in assessments of essay
quality. Expert essay raters tend to be highly educated with
advanced degrees and with experience in grading essays and
other types of writing. The prompts used in the current
study as well as prompts commonly used in essay writing
assessments generally deal with topics that are relatively
familiar to most educated individuals. As such, we can
assume that essay raters will not tend to be low knowledge
readers. Low knowledge readers lack sufficient knowledge

Pearson Correlations. Among the selected cohesion
constructs, only a few reported multiple indices that
demonstrated significant correlations with the human ratings
of coherence. The constructs that reported multiple
significant indices included anaphoric reference (i.e., the
proportion of anaphoric references between sentences),
causal cohesion (i.e., the incidence of causal verbs and
particles), incidence of connectives (i.e., positive temporal
connectives,
subordinating
conjunctions,
causative
subordinators), and overlap measures (the overlap nouns,
stems, and arguments between sentences). However, these
correlations were negative (with the exception of
Subordinating Conjunctions; i.e. until, though, since).
Measures for semantic coreference, logical operators,
lexical diversity, spatial cohesion, and temporal cohesion
did not report significant indices. The indices with the
highest correlations from the significant measures are
presented in Table 3 along with their r and p values. The
negative correlations indicate that the essays rated high in
coherence included fewer cohesion cues.
Table 4: Correlations Coh-Metrix Indices to Raters’
Coherence Scores
Variable
r value
p value
Anaphoric reference
-0.349
< .001
Ratio of causal particles and
-0.259
< .010
verbs
Incidence of positive temporal
connectives
-0.237
< .010
Subordinating conjunctions
0.240
< .010
Causative subordinators
-0.211
< .050
Content word overlap
-0.187
< .050

988

to generate inferences to bridge conceptual gaps in text, and,
as a result, they tend to benefit from explicit text cohesion
(i.e., word overlap, resolved anaphors, causal cohesion,
connectives). By contrast, high knowledge readers benefit
from texts low in cohesion because the cohesion gaps in the
texts induce them to generate appropriate inferences to fill
in the conceptual gaps. High knowledge readers can do this
successfully because they have sufficient background
knowledge to make appropriate inferences. When successful
inferences are generated, the coherence of the mental
representation can increase due to connections between the
new information and their prior knowledge (McNamara,
2001; McNamara & McDaniel, 2004; O’Reilly &
McNamara, 2007). Thus, more cohesive devices in essays
may produce a less coherent mental representation in expert
raters.

Crowhurst, M. (1990). Reading/writing relationships: An
intervention study. Canadian Journal of Education, 15,
155-172.
DeVillez, R. (2003). Writing: Step by step. Dubuque, IO:
Kendall Hunt.
Field, A. (2005). Discovering statistics using SPSS. London,
English: Sage Publications.
Gernsbacher, M.A. (1990). Language comprehension as
structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum.
Geiser, S. & Studley, R. (2001). UC and SAT: Predictive
validity and differential impact of the SAT I and SAT II at
the University of California. Oakland, CA: University of
California.
Golightly, K. B., & Sanders, G. (2000). Writing and reading
in the disciplines (2nd Ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Custom
Publishing.
Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S., & Louwerse, M.M.
(2003). What do readers need to learn in order to process
coherence relations in narrative and expository text. In A.
P. Sweet & C. E. Snow (Eds.), Rethinking reading
comprehension (pp. 82-98). New York, NY: Guilford
Publications.
Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S., Louwerse, M.M., & Cai,
Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and
language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 36, 193–202.
Light, R. (2001). Making the most of college. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
McNamara, D.S. (2001). Reading both high and low
coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and prior
knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55, 51-62.
McNamara, D.S., Crossley, S.A., & McCarthy, P.M. (2010).
Linguistic features of writing quality. Written
Communication, 27, 57-86.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Butler-Songer, N., &
Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better?
Interactions of text coherence, background knowledge,
and levels of understanding in learning from text.
Cognition and Instruction, 14, 1-43.
McNamara, D.S., Louwerse, M.M., McCarthy, P.M., &
Graesser, A.C. (2010). Coh-Metrix: Capturing linguistic
features of cohesion. Discourse Processes, 47, 292-330.
O’Reilly, T. & McNamara, D.S. (2007). The impact of
science knowledge, reading skill, and reading strategy
knowledge on more traditional “high-stakes” measures of
high school students’ science achievement. American
Educational Research Journal, 44, 161–196.
O’Reilly, T., & McNamara, D. S. (2007). Reversing the
reverse cohesion effect: Good texts can be better for
strategic, high-knowledge readers. Discourse Processes,
43, 121–152.
Sanders, T., & Schilperoord, J. (2006). Text structure as a
window on the cognition of writing. In C. A. MacArthur,
S. Graham & J. Fitzgerald (Eds.), The handbook of
writing research (pp. 386 - 402). NY: Guilford
Publications.

Conclusion
We conclude that coherence is an important attribute of
writing quality. Essay raters’ evaluations of coherence were
highly related to their overall holistic scores for the essays.
Nonetheless, we have found here that coherence is not
necessarily defined through the use cohesion devices, and in
fact may be inversely related to the presence of cohesion
cues. Thus, the question becomes: What textual features of
an essay lead to higher versus lower estimates of essay
coherence? Our results demonstrate that the indices
currently available from which to measure cohesion are not
strongly linked to human judgments of coherence. However,
it is highly unlikely that textual features do not affect
coherence. Thus, our task becomes the identification of
these features and the derivation of computational
algorithms that accurately model them.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Institute for
Education Sciences (IES R305A080589 and IES
R305G20018-02). Ideas expressed in this material are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
IES. The authors would like to thank Brad Campbell and
Daniel White for their help in scoring the corpus of essays.

References
Breetvelt, I., Van den Bergh, H., & Rijlaarsdam, G. (1994).
Relations between writing processes and text quality:
when and how? Cognition and Instruction, 12(2), 103123.
Collins, J.L. (1998). Strategies for struggling writers. New
York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Crossley, S.A. & McNamara, D.S. (2009). Computationally
assessing lexical differences in L1 and L2 writing.
Journal of Second Language Writing, 18, 119-135.
Crossley, S. A., & McNamara, D. S. (in press). Predicting
second language writing proficiency: The role of
cohesion, readability, and lexical difficulty. Journal of
Research in Reading

989

