UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Collaborative Sensemaking in the Blogosphere

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vs4m9mk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Alterman, Richard
Larusson, Johann

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Collaborative Sensemaking in the Blogosphere
Richard Alterman (alterman@cs.brandeis.edu)
Johann Larusson (johann@cs.brandeis.edu)
Computer Science Department, Volen Center for Complex Systems
Brandeis University
Abstract
This paper presents a case study of a class of students coblogging throughout the semester. The students collaboratively made sense of the course material. The class blogosphere became a repository of interpretations, reflections,
opinions, monologues and dialogues about the course content.
Over the course of the semester there was an aggregation of
“sense made” that was “mined” by the students throughout the
semester. The data shows that students leverage the contributions of other students when authoring their own posts and later
when they write papers.
Keywords: Collaborative sensemaking; Online discourse
communities; Co-blogging; Education; Case Study; Field
study; Ethnography

Introduction
In a class it is not enough just to remember or retain the information that is presented, it must be “digested” or understood
(Dewey, 1964: p. 249): “Of course intellectual learning includes the amassing and retention of information. But information is an undigested burden unless it is understood. It is
knowledge only as its material is comprehended. And understanding, comprehension, means that the various parts of
the information acquired are grasped in their relations to one
another – a result that is attained only when acquisition is accompanied by constant reflection upon the meaning of what
is studied. ”
The in-class lecture and discussion provides an explanation of key concepts within the course content and a causal
story about how the parts are connected. A student begins
to learn the background knowledge, a foundation and framework for understanding the course material. The acquisition
of this kind of background knowledge prepares the student
for being able to produce causal explanations of key ideas,
the relations between issues, and the connections between
conclusions drawn from different evidences. Acquiring the
background knowledge is a good part of what any course is
about.
In itself, the in-class lecture and discussion is not enough
to achieve a deeper understanding of the material. Other activities, including carefully reading the course texts, doing
homework, and studying for exams, are exercises that help
students “digest” material. Finding venues for students to cooperatively verbalize, explain, and discuss undoubtedly has
positive educational value. However, finding a time and place
for students to meet is a significant barrier for creating collaborative sensemaking opportunities.
This paper explores the value of online co-blogging as a
discourse community that provides an arena for the students
to work together and collaboratively make sense of the ideas

and concepts taught in the class. The blogosphere is a play
space for students to work at “understanding” the course material, even though the students work at different times and
in different locations. Activity in the blogosphere is an opportunity to reflect, verbalize, get feedback, read alternate interpretations of the same material, and discuss: the students
collectively make sense of the course material. There is a
clear boundary between those items which are jointly made
sense of in the blogosphere and those that are not.
This paper will present a case study of an interdisciplinary
class on Internet & Society where the students co-blogged
throughout the semester. The blogosphere provided an intersubjective space in which the students collaboratively worked
at making sense of the lecture and course texts. In the blogosphere, the students created common and background knowledge (Lee, 2001). The data shows that the students drew on
the sensemaking of other students that aggregated during the
semester in support of their own individual sensemaking.

Co-Blogging
In a student co-blogging community, each student has a blog.
The blog is composed of multiple posts written by the blog
owner. Blog posts can summarize the key content of a text
that was read for class, or develop an argument on some
issue that was discussed during lecture. Students can read
each other’s blog posts and comment on them. A discussion
emerges when a blog attracts a lot of commentary from other
students. Blogging on the course material is a learning activity that invites reflection and self-explanation and improves
learning. Reading and commenting on each other’s blog posts
provides students with other interpretations of the course material and the opportunity to discuss the content of the readings, which also helps learning.
In-class discussions have significant time constraints. Online, students can converse – and (co-)reflect – at their leisure,
when they are prepared. Because co-blogging is a text-based
community, literal quoting of the text is easier to do: the data
shows that in many cases, students literally copied, or paraphrased, a small portion of an assigned reading in order to
focus their blog post. Perhaps these kinds of activities occur
in an in-class discussion, but since face-to-face discussions
are serial there are fewer opportunities for students to present
different quotations from the text or alternative viewpoints on
the same quote.
The co-blogging community is social and student-owned
(Oravec, 2002). Because each student has her own blog, she
has full control over the content and can establish personal
and intellectual ownership of her work (Fredig & Trammell,

1661

2004). Because co-blogging is Web 2.0 technology, the “buyin” for students is fairly cheap (Glogoff, 2005; Duffy 2008).
Because co-blogging occurs outside the bounds of class time
and it is an asynchronous learning activity that does not require the student be collocated, it expands the opportunities
for co-reflection and fruitful discussion.
In contrast to discussion forums, in a co-blogging learning activity, students develop individual identities: each student has her own blog. In a discussion forum each discussion
has a deep tree structure, and in the blogosphere, the range
of discussion is broader with multiple viewpoints, and conversations, emerging. In a discussion forum, because of “the
branching structure, the large proportion of messages that terminated branches, and the abstracted nature of student interaction demonstrate an overall incoherence in online discussion. ... Leads to poorly interrelated monologues.” (Thomas,
2002). In the blogosphere discussions develop as smaller
chunks of interaction. Where the comments of an individual
student can be buried in an extended discussion in a discussion forum, in the blogosphere every student blog attracts a
significant amount of attention (Larusson & Alterman, 2009).
When a student writes a blog post she has the opportunity to practice producing a narrative about the significant
elements of the course material, making sense of the causal
relations among the different elements of the course content
(Williams & Jacobs, 2004). Co-blogging creates opportunities to exchange, explore, and present alternate viewpoints
(Fredig & Trammell, 2004). It potentially exposes students
to alternate ways of “seeing” and “constructing” what is significant and why (Oravec, 2002; Fredig & Trammell, 2004).
When a blog post attracts commentary, it serves to coordinate the students’ work at aligning their views. In this manner, the students can work “through” (Bødker, 1990) a post
or discussion together, working at different times in different places to reach a common understanding. Discussions
on issues related to the course material naturally emerge, enabling students to collaboratively work through the arguments
and trade-offs, weighing and comparing different explanations and justifications (Okada & Simon, 1997), which positively impacts learning (Andriessen, 2006).
The discussions that emerge among the students create a
dimension of interactivity. Some students comment (interact) more frequently than others (Rafaeli & Sudweeks,1998).
Each comment can be classified by its level of interactivity. Comments on posts can either elaborate or negotiate
(Thomas, 2002). Comments can either be reactive, refer to
a prior point in the emerging discussion, or they can be interactive, i.e. “recount the relatedness of earlier messages”
(Beuchot & Bullen, 2005; Rafaeli & Sudweeks,1998).

Case Study
In the Internet & Society course taught in Fall 2008, 25
students collectively blogged throughout the semester. The
course was an introductory course. Students in the class were
from a variety of disciplines. There were 8 females and 17

males. All of the students were undergraduates. There were
3 science majors and 1 science minor in the class. There were
12 students majoring in the social sciences and 8 minoring in
the social sciences. The remainder of the class was either in
the humanities or fine arts.
The focus of the analysis presented in this paper is on the
co-blogging work that the students did during the time the
class read two of the books that were required reading. The
students wrote a short paper on each of these books.

Methods
All of the students’ online work was automatically recorded
in a transcript, which enabled both quantitative and qualitative analyzes. The transcripts can be treated as an event log
file and accessed using database queries. Additional tools
enable a larger variety of alternate analysis methods, including discourse, conversation, or interaction analysis. One tool
replays the transcripts just as if one was viewing a videotape showing the evolution of the blogosphere. Another tool
makes it easy for an analyst to systematically annotate, and
tag each of the posts and all of the discussions that emerged.
If a student used a newsletter to navigate to the blogosphere, it was possible to determine that the student read
the newsletter and also which conversation or post was their
destination. If a student’s email client automatically viewed
emails in a HTML format, it was possible to track whether
a student opened a newsletter even if they did not navigate
from the newsletter to the blogosphere. It was not possible to
determine which parts of the newsletter were read.
At the end of the semester we distributed a survey, questions were on a 6-point Likert scale (from 1, not useful, to 6,
very useful). The survey provided some data on the students’
perception of the academic value of the learning exercise and
the functionality and practicality of the collaborative technology. The survey also included open-ended questions.

Metrics
Lectures were presented using slides that summarized the key
points of the presentation. At the beginning of each lecture,
hard copies of the slides were handed out to support student
note taking. PDF versions of the slides were downloadable
from the class website.
The lecture slides were used as a basis for identifying the
inputs to the blogosphere. For each set of slides, the instructor
identified a set of key topics that were covered by the lecture.
For each topic a tag was created that was organized into a taxonomy and treated as the potential input to the blogosphere.
All posts and comments in the blogosphere were tagged using
these topic/tags; this roughly identified the content of each
contribution. When the students post on these topics they are
reflecting on important course content. One way to measure
the impact of a given post is to count the number of comments
or reads that it accrued.

1662

Procedure

the post or conversation in a daily newsletter. Secondary and
tertiary participation are more peripheral kinds of participation.

At the beginning of the semester, an in-class tour and exercise
introduced the students to the important features of the coblogging environment. The students were required to blog at
the pace of one post per lecture: there were two lectures per
week. A typical post was 1 or 2 paragraphs in length. The
students were also required to read and comment on other
contributions to the blogosphere. The co-blogging work of
each student counted for 35% of his or her grade. Students
had the option to opt-out of the study. No student opted-out
of the study.
During the semester the students read four books. The students wrote short papers on two of these books. The focus
of the analysis presented in this paper is on the co-blogging
work that the students did during the time the class read the
two books for which they wrote papers.

Evaluation

The Co-Blogging Environment
The co-blogging environment has been developed over a
number of years in several different courses following the
design-based research methodology (Barab, 2006). It is implemented using the Wiki Design Platform (WDP), which
is a wiki-based educational platform that supports a variety
of collaborative learning activities (Larusson & Alterman,
2009).
In the co-blogging environment, each student has a blog.
Each blog post shows a picture of the author, a title, and tag
that relates the post to a lecture given in class. At the bottom of a post there is a list of people who read the post. Any
threaded discussion that emerges is shown below the relevant
post. As a student writes her blog, she can read another student’s post on the same topic with a click of the mouse. At
the “front entrance” to the blogosphere, there is a list of the
ten most recent posts or comments on posts. Each item in the
list displays the name of the author of the post or comment
and a short excerpt from the contribution. Students can also
access the blogs via a word cloud or by searching the content
in the blogosphere using keyword(s) or tag(s).
Students receive daily email newsletters that summarize
the online co-blogging activity of the class in the previous
24 hours. The newsletter lists the title, author, and first line
of all the newly created blog posts, and a list of similar information for any new comment. Students can use the links on
the newsletter to directly navigate to any post or comment on
the blog site that is of interest.
In the blogosphere there are two ways to be a primary participant: author a blog or act as a discussant on another student’s blog (Alterman & Larusson, 2009). Secondary participation occurs when a student reads either a post or a discussion that has emerged online. A tertiary participant reads a
brief description of a recent post or a new comment on a post
in a newsletter. The students can assume different participant
roles at different times. A student can be the author of a post,
a contributor to a conversation initiated by a post, a reader of
a post or conversation, or an interested party who reads about

Responses to the survey were positive. When the students
were asked to rate the value of their online co-blogging work
as a means of giving them first-hand experience with online
collaborative learning, the average response was 5.6. In response to the question of whether the students felt the coblogging community was useful, the average response was
5.3. When queried about the usefulness of the blogosphere
for writing papers, the average response was 4.5. When
asked as a yes/no question whether re-reading and reusing
the blogging text helped the students write their papers, 67%
answered in the affirmative.
There were a total of 155 blog posts, 113 comments, and
1010 reading events on the two books that are the focus of this
study. There were 31 conversations of length 2, 15 of length
3, 7 of length 4, and 7 of length 5. The average conversation
length was 2.85. The length of a conversation is defined as the
number of contributions that were made to the discussion. For
example, a post that receives one comment is a conversation
of length 2.
There was no correlation between the number of tags on a
given post and how often it was read; many of the best posts
were thoughtful commentaries on a single topic. There was
no correlation between the length of a conversation and the
number of tags garnered in the conversation. There was, however, a strong positive correlation between the length of a conversation and the number of read events (r(151) = .061, p <
.01).

Participating in the blogosphere
Students made two kinds of contributions to the blogosphere.
As a blogger, each student produced an open journal, a monologue about the course content. As a discussant each student
participated in a dialogue about the content of one or another
post.
As a blogger, a student posted her reflections on some part
of the course material. A blog post could refer to the text or
quote the text; this occurred 75 times during the time the students co-blogged on the two books (roughly 48%). A post
could refer to the lecture, an issue that was discussed in class,
another blog, or to an outside article, site, or book (26 times;
roughly 17% of the time for the two books). Frequently students included personal experiences or anecdotes as part of
their post throughout the entire semester (73 times; roughly
14% of the time), and less frequently during the time they
co-blogged on the two books (8 times; roughly 5%). Each of
these were ways to initiate reflection.
Within the blogosphere, the monologues of the students
were published and broadcast to the rest of the class, emerging in an open space, giving students exposure to multiple
viewpoints and voices. Students viewed the same material

1663

differently. Their different articulations complemented, regulated, or clashed with one another. All voices could “be
heard”. The ratio, the balance, of these voices potentially
gave a student a textured view of the course material. By
means of perspective-taking an intersubjective space emerged
(Tomasello et al, 1993).
In addition to authoring posts, students acted as discussants on each other’s posts. Much of the commentary was
either an agreement with, or an expatiation of, another student’s point (49 times during co-blogging on the two books;
roughly, 43% of the comments). These sorts of confirmations
moved the students towards creating a common understanding of a particular interpretation of some portion of a text or
lecture. Sometimes a student posed a question or asked for
a clarification in her blog or comment, which was answered
later by the comment from another student (10 times; roughly,
9% of the comments on posts for the two books). Other responses were more discursive: students frequently disagreed,
espousing different viewpoints on the same topic (52 times;
49% of the comments). Comments were linked to other posts
(2 times; roughly 2%). Comments either referred to the initial
post (102 times; roughly, 90%) or another student’s comment
on the post (14 times; roughly, 12%).

Intersubjective space
Participation in the creation and use of information in the blogosphere results in learning and the production of common
knowledge. The students work together to “digest” the information that is presented during lecture or in the course texts.
The total number of additions to the blogosphere is a rough
measure of the amount of information “digested” by the class
while participating in the co-blogging exercise during the
semester. One of the topics in the Internet & Society class was
the advantages and disadvantages of “working home alone”
as opposed to working in an office with your collaborators.
Let x1 , x2 ... represent the advantages and disadvantages of
working home alone. Table 1 shows an idealized representative example sequence of events in the blogosphere that are
ordered in time. At times t1 , t2 , t3 , and t4 interpretations of
content presented in the text or lecture are aggregated: x1 , x2 ,
x3 , and x4 are added to the blogosphere.
Table 1: A sequence of events in the blogosphere.
Time
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
t6
t7

Event
Joe posts a blog on “working home alone”, x1 .
Mary reads Joe’s post x1 and posts comment x2 .
Mary posts a blog on “working home alone”, x3 .
Joe reads Mary’s comment on his post and replies. x4 .
Ed reads the conversation between Mary and Joe.
Ed reads Mary’s post on “collocation”.
Mary reads Joe’s reply to her comment on x1 .

What each student learns, how much each student learns,
and to what degree the students learn the same things, is all
variable. The extent to which students converge on a set of
agreed upon factors and arguments concerning some key concept is an open question. The degree to which the students
share their beliefs is not clear either.

Common ground is defined in terms of a belief about some
proposition p: p is a part of common ground for a set of actors
if they all believe p and they believe that the other actors also
believe p and that those other actors believe that they believe
p and so on (Clark, 1996; Clark & Brennan, 1991). For the
sequence shown in Table 1, at no point does it appear that
Mary and Joe have attained common ground on x1 (common
ground: Clark & Brennan, 1991). At time t4 , Joe knows Mary
read his post. At which point he may or may not believe that
she understood his contribution. Suppose Joe believes Mary
understood his contribution, he still does not know if Mary
believes that he believes she understood his contribution. At
time t7 , were Mary reads Joe’s reply to her comment, even if
Mary believes Joe believes she understood his contribution,
Joe will not know that.
Lee (2001) makes a distinction between common, shared,
and mutual knowledge. Each of these are distinguished by the
certainty of sharedness. Common knowledge between two
individuals is assumed to be held commonly by those individuals because that knowledge is considered to be general
background knowledge within a community of which they are
both a part. “Shared knowledge, on the other hand, is that
information which has been established as shared as a result
of interaction and discussion.” Mutual knowledge requires
an infinite regress of mutual belief, the certainty of sharedness is 100%. In the case of the sequence of events shown
in Table 1, is common or shared or mutual knowledge established?
Lectures and student activity in the blogosphere are good
venues for establishing common knowledge (background
knowledge). Key points in an assigned reading or a lecture
are likely to be common knowledge for the students; only
likely because not all students read the assigned material or
attend, or listen closely to, lectures. Sharing of knowledge
within the blogosphere is asymmetric. When a student writes
a post in the blogosphere and another student reads it, the
second student believes she has shared knowledge with the
first but not vise versa. So, for the sequence of events in Table 1, at time t2 , Mary believes she shares knowledge of
x1 with Joe, but Joe does not believe he shares knowledge
of x1 with Mary until time t4 . At time t5 , Ed may believe he
shares knowledge of x1 , x2 , and x4 with Joe and Mary, but
neither share that with him. And so on.
In a face-to-face interaction, beliefs are grounded from
a sequential interaction. In an online community, because
all the students are not always together at the same time in
the same place, common and shared knowledge emerges intermittently and non-uniformly; it is not clear that mutual
knowledge ever emerges from the blogosphere alone. Many
of the things the students learn/know as a result of their participation in the blogosphere are beliefs that may be held in
common and shared but they are not mutually known.

During the co-blogging activity
Table 2 shows that on average 57% of the topics a student
“considered” in the blogosphere were those the student wrote

1664

about in one or another of her posts. On average, the other
43% of the topics that a given student “considered” occurred
as a result of commenting or reading in the blogosphere. The
variance is high for these numbers because there were a few
students who were not very active at all.
Table 2: Learning from other students.
Average Median Stdev
Blogging
57%
55%
22%
Commenting
12%
8%
15%
31%
28%
20%
Reading
These numbers do not reflect the fact that many of the students took advantage of a feature of the blogosphere environment that made it easy for a student writing a blog post to read
other posts on the same topic. Over the entire semester, there
were 13, 408 reading events, 4, 693 of them occurred while
students were authoring blog posts (roughly 35%). Thus students were able to “mine” other interpretations of the same
content even while they were authoring blogs.

While writing papers
Figure 1 shows how activity within the blogosphere exposed
students to topics that were later included in one of the two
papers they wrote.
1. The y-axis compares the number of topics/tags assigned
to each student’s posts and comments (primary participation) to that number for the same student’s topics/tags in
his or her paper. A positive number means that more of
a student’s paper was composed of topics they contributed
initially in the blogosphere. A negative number means that
a majority of the content in a student’s paper did not originate in contributions to the blogosphere.
2. The x-axis computes a similar number for reads (secondary participation). A positive number means that more
of a student’s paper was composed of topics they read
about in blogosphere prior to writing their paper. A negative number means that a majority of the content in a student’s paper did not originate from reading in the blogosphere.

Figure 1: Influence on paper writing.
Consider each of the four quadrants of the graph starting in
the upper left-hand quadrant:

Q1: Primary participation provided preparation for writing
papers.
Q2: Primary and secondary participation provided preparation for writing papers.
Q3: Secondary participation provided preparation for writing papers.
Q4: Primary and secondary participation provided some
help, but most of these papers were derived from work
that was not influenced by a student’s activity in the blogosphere.
For 16 of the 25 students, their work in the blogosphere provided background for the majority of the concepts that appeared in their two papers (their data is either positive on the
x-axis or y-axis). The largest group of students (Q3) benefited
most from the reading. The next largest group (Q2) benefited
significantly from both primary and secondary participation
in the blogosphere. These data confirm that students were
“mining” the blogosphere to support their understanding of
the material.
Figure 2 shows the correlations between the preparation for
writing papers provided by reading, posting blogs, commenting, or doing all three. The trend line for all three activities
combined is significant and positive (r(23) = 0.485, p < .05).
The trend lines for reading (r(23) = 0.402, p < .05) and posting (r(23) = 0.419, p < .05) are also significant and positive.
The trend line for commenting was not significant.

Discussion
Think of the blogosphere as a play space for students to work
at “understanding” the course material. The blogosphere is
an opportunity to reflect, verbalize, get feedback, read alternate interpretations of the same material, and discuss. The
students are collectively making sense of the course material. The students leverage the aggregate online collaborative
sensemaking throughout the semester.
The students produce multiple interpretations of the course
material. The students reflect on the meanings of the assigned readings or a lecture given by the instructor in class.
Frequently, posts include personal experiences or anecdotes.
Comments on posts agreed with, or expatiated upon, another student’s contribution; they also took contrasting views.
The students are many working minds collaboratively making
sense and creating common and shared knowledge; enabling
many minds to work together is a significant outcome of Internet technology (Sunstein, 2006).
The blogosphere became a repository of interpretations, reflections, monologues and dialogues about the course content. At various points in the semester the students chose to
mine the aggregated sensemaking. Because posts and discussions, once created, persist and can be re-considered at a later
time, students can increase their common and shared knowledge throughout the semester.
On many occasions, as students composed their own posts,
they first sampled another student’s interpretation of the same
lecture point or text. Right before a paper deadline, the students did heavy reading in the blogosphere in order to access

1665

Figure 2: How different kinds of participation affect each student’s preparation for writing a paper.
and review ideas, arguments, examples that were relevant to
the paper they were writing, reproducing, in their own words,
the content of relevant posts and discussions found in the blogosphere.

Concluding Remarks
During the semester, common and background knowledge is
created by collaborative work in the blogosphere. The individual contribution of each student is an investment, the return on their investment is increased by the collective work of
the class. The collective work of the class in the blogosphere
produces multiple reflections on the course material. Students
enrich their understanding by reading or commenting on the
blogs and comments of other students.
The quantitative data from the case study shows that
the students mine the blogosphere throughout the semester.
When students write blog posts, 35% of the time they read
other related contributions to the blogosphere first. On average 43% of the topics that a given student wrote about in
an assigned paper was presaged by their participation in the
blogosphere. The data also shows that for 16 out of the 25 students, the majority of the topics that appeared in their papers
were first “played with” in the blogosphere as either a primary or secondary participation; the largest group of students
benefited most from reading in the blogosphere. Finally, the
data shows that there is a significant positive correlation between preparation for writing papers and a student’s reading
and posting activities in the blogosphere.

References
Alterman, R., & Larusson, J. (2009). Modeling Participation within a Community. In Proceedings of the third annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1680–
1685).
Andriessen, J. (2006). Arguing to learn. In R. Sawyer (Ed.),
The cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Barab, S. (2006). Design-based research: A methodological
toolkit for the learning scientist. The Cambridge handbook
of the learning sciences, 169.
Beuchot, A., & Bullen, M. (2005). Interaction and interpersonality in online discussion forums. Distance Education,
26(1), 67–87.
Bodker, S. (1990). Through the interface: A human activity
approach to user interface design. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.

Clark, H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. Perspectives on socially shared cognition, 127–149.
Dewey, J. (1964). John Dewey on education: Selected writings (R. Archambault, Ed.). Modern Library.
Duffy, P. (2008). Engaging the YouTube Google-Eyed Generation: Strategies for Using Web 2.0 in Teaching and Learning. The Electronic Journal e-Learning volume 6(2), 119130.
Ferdig, R., & Trammell, K. (2004). Content Delivery in
the’Blogosphere’. The Journal (Technological Horizons In
Education), 31(7), 12–16.
Glogoff, S. (2005). Instructional blogging: Promoting interactivity, student-centered learning, and peer input. Innovate. Journal of Online Education, 1(5).
Larusson, J., & Alterman, R. (2009). Wikis to support the
collaborative part of collaborative learning. International
Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,
4(4), 371–402.
Lee, B. (2001). Mutual knowledge, background knowledge
and shared beliefs: Their roles in establishing common
ground. Journal of Pragmatics, 33(1), 21–44.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a
scientific domain. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary
Journal, 21(2), 109–146.
Oravec, J. (2002). Bookmarking the World: Weblog Applications in Education. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy,
45(7), 616–21.
Rafaeli, S., & Sudweeks, F. (1998). Interactivity on the Nets.
Network and netplay: Virtual groups on the Internet, 173–
90.
Sunstein, C. (2006). Infotopia: How many minds produce
knowledge. Oxford University Press, USA.
Thomas, M. (2002). Learning within incoherent structures:
the space of online discussion forums. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning, 18(3), 351–366.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A., & Ratner, H. (1993). Cultural
learning. Behavioral and brain sciences, 16, 495–495.
Williams, J., & Jacobs, J. (2004). Exploring the use of blogs
as learning spaces in the higher education sector. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 20(2), 232–
247.

1666

