UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comprehending Negated Sentences With Binary States and Locations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5929p10q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Anderson, Sarah
Huette, Stephanie
Matlock, Teenie
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comprehending Negated Sentences With Binary States and Locations

1

Sarah E. Anderson (sec57@cornell.edu)1,
Stephanie Huette (shuette@ucmerced.edu)2,
Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@ucmerced.edu)2,
and Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)2

Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Uris Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA 95344 USA

2

Abstract
Language theorists have argued that processing negated
statements (“The eagle is not in the sky,”) differs from
affirmative propositions. However, evidence for these claims
comes from studies that did not control for the possibility of
numerous states (e.g., the eagle is perched on a branch or on
the ground). Here, we explore whether constraining this
number of possibilities provides more information about
processing negation. In Experiment 1, the stimuli described
binary states. For example, a coin can be either heads up or
tails up; if it is not heads up it is necessarily tails up. In
Experiment 2, preceding contexts constrained the number of
possible locations of a negated proposition. The results,
consistent with earlier evidence for negation’s increased
complexity, offer new data suggesting that perceptual
simulation of negated proposition may be experimentally
detected when the states or locations are sufficiently
constrained, using binary states or contextual descriptions.
Keywords: Language Processing;
Cognition; Perceptual Simulation

Negation;

Embodied

Negation is a fundamental part of everyday communication.
Throughout the course of a typical day, people frequently
have to report where things are not located, for instance,
“Your keys are not on the table” or “My car is not in the
garage.” They must also describe events that are not
happening, such as, “The Patriots are not playing tonight” or
“Your car will not start.” Despite the ubiquity of negated
statements, surprisingly little is known about how they are
processed and what their conceptual structure is.
One of the earliest and most reliable findings about
negation is that people are slower to read negated sentences
than they are to read affirmative sentences, due to their
increased complexity (see Barres & Johnson, 2003;
Carpenter & Just, 1975; Chase & Clark, 1972; Mayo, Schul,
& Burnstein, 2004). Such findings have provided invaluable
insights into sentence processing, but many important
questions about processing negation remain. In particular,
how do negated statements influence everyday cognition?
Are negated sentences comprehended differently than
affirmative sentences? The goal here is to further consider
negation’s influence on sentence comprehension.
Negation has been of interest to philosophers and language
theorists for centuries (for review, see Gilbert, 1991), but
only recently has its processing received close attention.
Early cognitive work on processing suggested that negated
statements about spatial relations are processed differently
from similar affirmative statements. For instance, participants

in Clark and Chase (1972) were presented with sentences
followed by pictures and then asked whether the sentence
was true or false of a corresponding picture. For example, a
“true” trial might consist of the sentence, “The star is above
the cross,” followed by a picture with a star above a cross,
accurately depicting the relationship expressed by the
sentence. Participants responded true or false more quickly to
a picture following the sentence, “The star is above the
cross,” than to the sentence, “The star is not above the cross.”
These differences suggested that affirmative and negated
statements are processed differently, but the nature of this
difference was unclear. One possibility is that the increased
processing time associated with negation is the result of
evaluating the core proposition and then applying a negation
marker to this proposition.
More recent evidence also supports the hypothesis that
negating or affirming a statement involves subtly different
processes. McKinstry, Dale, and Spivey (2008) presented
participants with questions of varying truth-values and asked
them to answer “yes” or “no” using a mouse to click on a
corresponding, visually presented box on the computer
screen. A sentence’s truth-value was defined as the
proportion of participants who agreed the statement was true
in an on-line survey. Therefore, the question, “Should you
brush your teeth every day?” had a truth-value of 1.0, and the
question, “Is murder sometimes justifiable?” had a truth
value of .6. In addition to recording the end response and
reaction time, the trajectory of the mouse as it moved across
the computer screen to click on the appropriate answer was
also recorded. These mouse-movement trajectories provide a
continuous motor response that has been used to illustrate
competition between alternatives in a number of cognitive
tasks (Dale, Kehoe, & Spivey, 2007; Farmer, Anderson, &
Spivey, 2007; Spivey, Grosjean, & Knoblich, 2005).
McKinstry and colleagues’ findings were consistent with
those of Clark & Chase (1972) in that participants had more
difficulty in evaluating a false statement than a corresponding
true statement. Participants were also slower to respond
negatively to a statement, and the “no” response trajectories
showed more competition than the “yes” response
trajectories. Similar effects also arise in research exploring
the influence of negation on memory (Fiedler, Walther,
Armbruster, Fay, & Naumann, 1996), supporting a general
cognitive bias towards affirmative propositions.
Similarly, negated and affirmative sentences seem to be
handled differently in language comprehension (e.g., Hasson
& Glucksberg, 2006; Kaup, 2001; MacDonald & Just, 1989),
and this may be due to differences in their corresponding

1192

perceptual simulations. Recent experimental evidence
suggests that understanding a single word embedded in a
sentence is associated with the way people would actually
perceive the noun they are asked to identify. Zwaan,
Stanfield, and Yaxley (2002) asked participants to read
sentences and to decide whether or not a subsequent picture
was mentioned in the sentence they had just read. When a
sentence such as, “The eagle was in the sky,” was presented,
participants were quicker to respond that a picture of an eagle
with outstretched wings had been mentioned in the preceding
sentence than when they saw a picture of an eagle with
folded wings. These results support claims that participants
construct an image to represent the sentences they read; this
in turn makes that image more accessible, leading to faster
subsequent responses to that image. Such images, constructed
through the partial activation of the neurons used to actually
perceive or interact with the objects, are called perceptual
simulations (see Barsalou, 1999; Barsalou, Simmons,
Barbey, & Wilson, 2003, for a more complete overview).
When the test picture matched the image that had been
mentally created, reaction times were faster than if the test
picture did not match the state of the object described in the
text. These data provide evidence that comprehending
language may be grounded in perceptual representations.
Perceptual simulations seem able to explain the
comprehension of affirmative sentences (Zwaan, Stanfield,
and Yaxley, 2002), yet recent experimental results suggest
that negated sentences are processed differently. Kaup,
Yaxley, Madden, Zwaan, and Lüdtke, (2006b) presented
participants with sentences like, “The eagle was not in the
sky,” and asked participants to judge whether a subsequently
presented picture was mentioned in the sentence they had
read. If participants perceptually simulate negation in the
same way they simulate affirmative sentences, they should be
quicker to respond “yes” to pictures that match the sentence
(e.g., an eagle with its wings folded). The experimenters
found that when participants read negated sentences,
response times to a picture that matched the affirmative
version of the proposition (eagle with wings spread) were
faster than pictures that actually matched the negated
sentence, suggesting that a perceptual simulation of the
affirmative proposition was created in response to negated
sentences. This suggested that negation is handled differently
from other aspects of sentence processing, and specifically
not through perceptual simulation.
Another possibility is that the experimental materials were
not able to capture the perceptual simulation of the negation,
similar to on-line research in verbal aspect. Madden and
Zwaan (2003) examined potential differences produced by
processing different verbal aspectual forms in narrative
reading. In these experiments, participants were quicker to
respond to pictures showing completed action after they had
read a sentence containing a simple past verb than when they
had read a sentence containing a past progressive verb,
because simple past verbs emphasize the completion of a
verb’s action. Conversely, no such latency differences were
found when participants read sentences containing past

progressive verbs and then saw pictures of intermediate
action. Like affirmative and negated sentences, these results
suggest that perhaps one form of aspect is comprehended
through perceptual simulations and that the other is
comprehended via another mechanism.
However, the authors suggest that the past progressive’s
lack of effect was due to readers representing the ongoing
action at different stages of completion. Simple past verbs
place emphasis on the end state of the action, which typically
corresponds to only a single state, while past progressive
verbs place emphasis on the ongoing nature of the verb. After
reading narratives containing past progressive verbs,
participants may simulate a number of locations. In other
words, past progressive aspect produces a diffuse number of
possible stages of intermediate action that are un-captured by
the task. Therefore, even though past progressive verbs, like
simple past verbs, may be comprehended via perceptual
simulations, the static images used in the task simply do not
match the particular point in the action they are simulating.
Similarly, it may be that when participants read a negated
sentence, they do create a perceptual simulation of the
negation, but the pictures they are asked to respond to do not
capture the simulation. Whereas an affirmative sentence
identifies a particular state or location for the noun that is
responded to more quickly when presented visually, the
negated sentences do not. For example, when “the eagle is in
the air,” its wings are necessarily open to accommodate
flying. However, when “the eagle is not in the air,” there are
many states it could be in other than sitting with it wings
folded. Thus, when hearing a negated sentence of this sort,
participants may appear to simulate the eagle in the air not
because perceptual simulations are incapable of negation but
instead because the alternative simulations are too numerous
and too diffuse. If this is the case, then constraining the
possible simulations to only two for a given object, one
corresponding to the affirmative proposition and one to the
negated proposition, should further inform this research.
Here, we wanted to explore this in sentence
comprehension by constraining the possible states and
locations of the event. In general, we hypothesized that
binary states would allow us to capture the simulation of
negation in sentences. Similarly, we hypothesized that
creating contexts to limit the possible locations to only two
options would allow us to observe and further extend results
on processing negated sentences.

Experiment 1: Binary States
Evidence from recent research in sentence comprehension
suggests that creating targets that themselves refer to binary
states is promising for investigating the role of perceptual
simulation in negation processing. Kaup, Ludtke, & Zwaan
(2006a) investigated the way participants perceptually
simulate sentences like those used in the earlier negation
research (Kaup, et al., 2006b), but created materials that were
binary, or had contradictory predicates. In Kaup, et al.,
(2006a), participants read binary sentences in the self-paced
reading paradigm, and then after an SOA of either 750ms or

1193

1500ms, they saw a picture of an object that they had to name
as quickly as possible. At the 750ms SOA, responses to
pictures that matched the non-negated state of affairs, even
when the target sentence was negated, were significantly
faster than pictures depicting the negated state of affairs. In
other words, for the sentence “The door was not closed,”
reaction times to a picture of a closed door (matching the
proposition of the sentence) were significantly faster than to
pictures of an open door. At the 1500ms SOA, when the
target sentence was negated, responses to pictures matching
the negated state of affairs were significantly faster than
pictures depicting the proposition.
Here, we wanted to further expand these findings. In
Experiment 1, we used the picture verification task used in
the earlier negation (Kaup, et al., 2006b) and perceptual
simulation (Zwaan, et al., 2002) research. We anticipated that
this method might be more robust and allow for a full
statistical interaction to emerge from the data. Additionally,
we used an intermediate SOA of 1000ms, in order to provide
data on processing at this intermediate point.

Method
Participants. A total of 32 Cornell University
undergraduates participated in the experiment for extra
course credit. All participants were right-handed, born in the
United States, and native English speakers.
Materials. Sixteen target sentence frames were constructed.
These frames were manipulated in order to produce two
versions of each: a negated (The coin is not heads up) and an
affirmative (The coin is heads up) version. The sentences
were created such that they described a proposition that was
true only in one way and untrue only in one way, thereby
making the materials binary. Sixteen filler sentences, half of
which were affirmative and half of which were negated, were
also constructed. The target sentences contained binary state
objects similar to the examples provided above, while the
filler sentences did not contain binary objects.
Two pictures were created for each target frame: a picture
matching the proposition of the sentence, and a picture
matching the negation of that proposition. For example, for
the sentence frame, “The coin is (not) heads up,” the picture
corresponding to the proposition would be a heads up coin
(see Figure 1a) and the picture corresponding to the negation
of the proposition would be a tails up coin (see Figure 1b).
The correct response for either the negated or affirmative
sentence and either picture is “yes,” because the sentence is
about a coin and the picture depicts a coin. Filler sentences
also had corresponding pictures, although these pictures did
not match anything in the sentence. All of the images were
black and white ink drawings, created by a senior art major,
with as much simplicity and as few lines as possible; this was
done in order to make sure all pictures were as similar as
possible. All the pictures were scanned into the computer in
the same size to control for discrepancies between the
objects.

Figure 1: Example Visual Stimuli for Experiment 1

1a) Picture Matches Proposition
1b) Picture Matches Negated Proposition
Procedure. Participants were seated at the computer and
asked to make themselves comfortable. They read a page of
instructions where they were informed that it was important
for them to make decisions about the picture as quickly and
accurately as possible. During the task, participants first read
a sentence located in the center of the screen, pressing the
spacebar when they had understood the sentence. A fixation
cross appeared in the center of the screen for 1000ms and
then a picture appeared. Participants indicated whether the
pictured object had been mentioned in the previous sentence
by pressing the f-key, covered with a “yes” sticker, or the jkey, covered with a “no” sticker. The correct response to all
target trials was yes, and the correct response to all the filler
trials was no. Half of the trials were followed by
comprehension questions, in order to insure participants were
paying attention. On these trials (half of the filler sentences,
and half of the target sentences), a question regarding the
sentence was presented next. Participants were asked to
respond to the question as accurately as possible by clicking
on the appropriate “yes” or “no” key. Participants were not
given feedback on any of their responses. They were first
given two practice trials before beginning the task (similar in
construction to the filler items), and the task lasted
approximately 10 minutes.

Results and Discussion
Incorrect trials (trials on which a participant responded “no,”
and the pictured object was not in the sentence they had just
read) were removed before analyzing reaction time. Data
from two participants were excluded from the analysis
because they incorrectly answered one block of trials. In
addition, the incorrect responses to 18 items from 9 different
participants were discarded prior to the analysis.
There was a significant interaction of Sentence and
Picture, F(1,29)= 4.308, p<.047. See Figure 2 below.
Affirmative sentences that were followed by propositional
pictures (“The coin was heads up” before a picture of a heads
up coin) were responded to more quickly, M = 1245.12, SD =
84.98, than affirmative sentences that were followed by
negated-propositional pictures (“The coin was heads up”
before a picture of a tails up coin), M = 1467.02, SD =
113.05. These results are consistent with earlier perceptual
simulation research (Zwaan, et al. 2002). Additionally,
negated sentences followed by negated propositional pictures
(“The coin is not heads up” followed by a picture of a tails up
coin) were responded to more quickly, M = 1550.17, SD =

1194

99.81, than were negated sentences followed by propositional
pictures (“The coin is not heads up” followed by a picture of
a heads up coin), M =1828.79, SD = 255.49. These results
moderately extend the results obtained in Kaup et al. (2006a)
by providing support that perceptual simulation does seem to
operate for comprehending negated sentences whenever the
experimental conditions are sufficiently constrained to
capture it at an intermediate SOA.
Figure 2: Binary states reaction times per condition

In examining the main effects, the affirmative sentences,
M = 1467.02, SD = 619.18, were responded to significantly
faster, t(29) = 2.08, p<.05, than negated sentences, M =
1245.12, SD = 465.47. These results are consistent with
earlier research, like that of Clark and Chase (1972) and
McKinstry et al. (2008), suggesting that there is a bias in
favor of affirmative sentences over negated sentences. Also,
there was no main effect of picture type, implying that the
type of picture did not impact comprehension.
Finally, in examining accuracy, there was a main effect of
picture type within the affirmative sentences, F(1,29) =
6.916, p<.014. When the sentence was affirmative,
participants were less accurate when responding to pictures
that did not match. Accuracy did not differ for the two
picture conditions in the negative sentence condition. This
implies that the effects that have been described so far are not
to the result of a speed accuracy trade off in the negated
sentence condition.

Experiment 2: Binary Locations
Using the picture verification task of other perceptual
simulation research (Kaup, et al., 2006b; Zwaan, et al.,
2002), Experiment 1 converges with other negation research
(Kaup, et al., 2006a): When the possible states of the items
themselves are constrained to only two possibilities,
perceptual simulations underlie the processing of these
sentences at the intermediate 1000ms SOA. However, the
materials that were used in Experiment 1 relied on binary
state objects, leaving many questions regarding the
processing of negation unanswered. Here, we sought to
further extend these findings to investigate the role of context
in the creation of binary locations. In Experiment 2, we again
used the picture verification task was employed in the earlier

negation (Kaup, et al., 2006b) and perceptual simulation
(Zwaan, et al., 2002) research as well as the intermediate
1000ms SOA. Rather than relying on binary states, context
sentences describing two possible locations for an item were
created.

Method
Participants. A total of 62 Cornell University
undergraduates participated in the experiment for extra
course credit. All participants were right-handed, born in the
United States, and native English speakers.
Materials. Thirty-two target sentence frames were
constructed. Each frame consisted of a context sentence,
describing two possible locations for an item (i.e., The apple
is either on the plate or on the cutting board), and a target
sentence, identifying the location of the item. The context
sentences were designed such that they limited the possible
locations to only two; therefore, they could be true only in
one way and untrue only in one way. The target sentences
were manipulated in order to produce four versions of each:
an affirmative version identifying the first location mentioned
in the context sentence (The apple is on the plate); an
affirmative version identifying the second location mentioned
in the context sentence (The apple is on the cutting board); a
negated version identifying the first location mentioned in the
context sentence (The apple is not on the plate); and a
negated version identifying the second location mentioned in
the context sentence (The apple is not on the cutting board).
Thirty-two filler sentences, one quarter of which
corresponded to each of the four conditions described above,
were also created.
Two pictures were created for each target frame: a picture
matching the proposition of the sentence, and a picture
matching the negation of that proposition. For example, for
the target sentence frame, “The apple is (not) on the cutting
board,” the picture corresponding to the proposition would
show an apple on a cutting board (see Figure 3a) and the
picture corresponding to the negation of the proposition
would show an apple on a plate (see Figure 3b). Pictures
were also constructed for the filler items, although these
pictures did not match anything in the sentence. All of the
images were taken from clip art. The target item (i.e., the
apple) was spliced into the different locations to maintain
similarity in the pictures.
Eight lists were constructed such that each participant
would respond to all of the conditions but only one version of
each sentence frame and picture. Conditions were created as
follows: 1) affirmative target, identifying first location of
context, picture matching proposition; 2) affirmative target,
identifying first location, picture matching negated

1195

Figure 3: Example Visual Stimuli for Experiment 2

by negated propositional pictures (a picture of the apple on
the cutting board as in Figure 3a), M = 1258.295, SD =
539.869. These data further extend the results of Kaup et al.
(2006a), providing support that perceptual simulations
operate in comprehending negated sentences when contextual
descriptions constrain possible locations to only two.
Figure 4: Reaction time for Sentence by Picture interaction

3a) Picture matches proposition for “The apple is (not) on
the cutting board.”
3b) Picture matches negated proposition for “The apple is
(not) on the cutting board.”
Pictures match final prepositional phrase of target regardless
of the target’s negation status.
proposition; 3) affirmative target, identifying the second
location, picture matching proposition; 4) affirmative target,
identifying the second location, picture matching negated
proposition; 5) negated target, identifying the first location,
picture matching proposition; 6) negated target, identifying
first location, picture matching negated proposition; 7)
negated target, identifying second location, picture matching
proposition; and 8) negated target, identifying second
location, picture matching negated proposition.
Procedure. The procedure of Experiment 2 was the same as
that of Experiment 1, except it did not include
comprehension questions and lasted 20 minutes.

Results and Discussion
Incorrect target trials (or trials on which a participant
responded “no,” the pictured object was not in the sentence
they had just read) were removed before analyzing reaction
time. Two hundred fifty-four trials, 12% of the data, were
excluded from the reaction time analysis, resulting in the loss
of fourteen participants. Each participant had at least one trial
excluded from the reaction time analysis due to these criteria.
There was no significant three-way interaction of
Sentence, Picture, and Context, p > .28. Also, the main effect
of context was not significant, p >.7. Therefore, the order of
the items in the context sentence did not significantly impact
the results. However, there was a significant interaction of
Sentence and Picture, F(1,47)= 6.343, p<.015. See Figure 4.
Affirmative sentences (“The apple is either on the plate or on
the cutting board. The apple is on the plate”) followed by
propositional pictures (a picture of the apple on the plate as in
Figure 3b) were responded to faster, M = 1155.497, SD =
413.419, than affirmative sentences followed by negated
propositional pictures (a picture of the apple on the cutting
board as in Figure 3a), M = 1365.495, SD = 701.461.
Similarly, negated sentences (“The apple is either on the
plate or on the cutting board. The apple is not on the plate”)
followed by propositional pictures (a picture of the apple on
the plate as in Figure 3b) were responded to slower, M =
1335.8032, SD =690.602, than negated sentences followed

In examining the main effects, responses to negated
sentences were not significantly slower than responses to
affirmative sentences, p >.8. Also, there was a main effect of
picture type, F (1,61) = 7.67, p <.01, such that pictures of the
proposition were responded to faster, M =1221.829, SD =
563.79, than pictures of the negated proposition, M =
1300.929, SD = 622.402. These results, combined with the
percentage of incorrect responses, suggest that the
complexity of the task may have caused problems or that
some subjects employed strategies. For instance, it may have
been possible to read the context sentence and respond to the
pictures based on this information alone. Future work will
further refine these preliminary data by using auditory files,
rather than written text, in such a picture verification task.
Such auditory presentation of the stimuli is less strategy
prone than text presentation.
Finally, in examining accuracy, there was an interaction of
negation and picture, F(1,61) = 17.8 p<.001. Participants
responded more accurately when the target sentence matched
the picture. Hence, participants responded more accurately to
negated sentences when the picture matched the negated
proposition than when the picture matched the proposition.
Similarly, participants responded more accurately to
affirmative sentences when the picture matched the
proposition than when the picture matched the negated
proposition. None of the other main effects were significant,
p’s >.2. This implies the effects described so far are not due
to a speed accuracy trade off in the either sentence condition.

General Discussion
The materials of Experiment 1 were designed to reflect
binary state propositions, such that affirmative and negated
forms each referred to only one possibility. The interaction of
picture and sentence types at the intermediate SOA of 1000
ms supports the hypothesis that appropriate perceptual
simulations (of the negated proposition) may be used for

1196

comprehending negated sentences. Further, Experiment 2
demonstrated that extrasentential context can constrain the
possible perceptual simulations to reflect binary locations.
Again, the interaction of picture and sentence types supports
the hypothesis that perceptual simulations may be used in
comprehending both affirmative and negated sentences.
While the experiments here used the intermediate SOA of
1000 ms, future planned research, specifically in eyetracking, will further investigate the time course of
processing negated sentences.
The results reported here are promising, but future research
is needed to further explore the mechanisms of negation. The
exact mechanism underlying perceptual simulations in
negation has not been thoroughly explored, and its
explication is likely to require computational modeling. To
this end, we have begun some preliminary explorations with
a simple recurrent network (Elman, 1990). In addition to the
word-prediction relation between 91 input word-nodes to 91
output word-nodes, this model includes 63 perceptual
features on the output layer that are prominent properties of
the relevant perceptual simulations (see also, Howell,
Jankowicz, & Becker, 2005). Thus, combined with its
learning to predict the next word in a sentence, this network
also learns to activate the appropriate set of features for the
perceptual simulation associated with the sentence
(Anderson, Huette, Matlock, & Spivey, in press). In this
network model, the only difference between an affirmative
sentence and a negated sentence is that the input from the
negated sentence has the word “not” immediately preceding
its critical adjective (e.g., flying, not flying, heads-up, not
heads-up). Thus, without a specialized logical operation of
negation, this network can nonetheless reverse its perceptual
simulation as a result of the presence or absence of the word
“not” in the sentence. Current extensions of this model are
exploring ways to include some temporal dynamics that may
simulate the experimental results with different SOAs.

References
Anderson, S.E., Huette, S., Matlock, T., & Spivey, M.J.(in
press). On the temporal dynamics of negated perceptual
simulations. In F. Parrill, V. Tobin, & M. Turner (Eds.),
Meaning, form, & body, (pp. 1-20). Stanford, CSLI.
Barres, P.E., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2003). On imagining
what is true. Thinking and Reasoning, 9, 1-42.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Language comprehension: Archival
memory or preparation for situated action? Discourse
Processes, 28, 61-80.
Barsalou, L., Simmons, W., Barbey, A.,, & Wilson, C.
(2003). Grounding conceptual knowledge in modalityspecific systems. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 84-91.
Carpenter, P.A. & Just, M.A. (1975). Sentence
comprehension: A psycholinguistic processing model of
verification. Psychological Review, 82, 45-73.
Clark, H.H., & Chase, W.G. (1972). On the process of
comparing sentences against pictures. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 472-517.

Dale, R., Kehoe, C., & Spivey, M. (2007). Graded motor
responses in the time course of categorizing atypical
exemplars. Memory and Cognition, 35, 15-28.
Elman, J. L. 1990. Finding structure in time. Cognitive
science, 14(2), 179-211.
Farmer, T.A., Anderson, S.E., & Spivey, M.J. (2007).
Gradiency and visual context in syntactic garden-paths.
Journal of Memory & Language, 57, 570-595.
Fiedler, K., Walther, E., Armbruster, T., Fay, D., &
Naumann, U. (1996). Do you really know what you have
seen? Intrusion errors and presuppositions effects on
constructive memory. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 32, 484-511.
Gilbert, D. T. (1991). How mental systems believe. American
Psychologist, 46, 107-119.
Hasson U., & Glucksberg, S. (2006). Does understanding
negation entail affirmation? An examination of negated
metaphors. Journal of Pragmatics, 38, 1015-1032.
Howell, S. R., Jankowicz, D., & Becker, S. 2005. A model of
grounded language acquisition: Sensorimotor features
improve lexical and grammatical learning. Journal of
Memory and Language, 53(2), 258-276.
Kaup, B. (2001). Negation and its impact on the accessibility
of text information. Memory & Cognition, 29, 960-967.
Kaup, B., Lüdtke, J., & Zwaan, R.A. (2006a). Processing
negated sentences with contradictory predicates: Is a door
that is not open mentally closed? Journal of Pragmatics,
38, 1033-1050.
Kaup, B., Yaxley, R.H., Madden, C.J., Zwaan, R.A., &
Lüdtke, J. (2006b). Experiential simulations of negated text
information. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60, 976-990.
MacDonald, M.C., & Just, M.A. (1989). Changes in
activation levels with negation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 15, 633-642.
Madden, C.J. & Zwaan, R.A. (2003). How does verb aspect
constrain event representations? Memory &
Cognition,
31, 663-672.
Mayo, R., Schul, Y., & Burnstein, E. (2004). “I am not
guilty” vs “I am innocent”: Successful negation may
depend on the schema used for its encoding. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 433-449.
McKinstry, C., Dale, R., & Spivey, M.J. (2008). Action
dynamics reveal parallel competition in decision making.
Psychological Science, 19, 22-24.
Spivey, M.J., Grosjean, M. & Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102,
10393-10398.
Zwaan, R.A., Stanfield, R.A., & Yaxley R.H. (2002).
Language comprehenders mentally represent the shape of
objects. Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.

1197

