UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comprehension and a Complex Task: A construction-integration study of individual
performance in a non-routine task situation
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38p4d7hr
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Ladny, Paul
McGuire, Jordan
Brou, Randy J.
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

Comprehension and a Complex Task: A construction-integration study
            of individual performance in a non-routine task situation
                                                     Paul Ladny
                                              Mississippi State University
                                                 Jordan McGuire
                                              Mississippi State University
                                                  Randy J. Brou
                                 Navy Personnel Research, Studies, and Technology
                                               Stephanie M. Doane
                                              Mississippi State University
Abstract: Comprehension is the ability to relate background knowledge to incoming information to build a ”situation
model” (Kintsch, 1998). The ConstructionIntegration (C/I) architecture of comprehension has been shown to predict
individual performance on complex but routine tasks (e.g., Doane & Sohn, 2000). This study tests the ability of the
architecture to explain and predict nonroutine (unexpected) instrument flight performance in aviation piloting. The
behavioral results indicate significant differences in individual pilot ability to detect and recover from unexpected
instrument failures as a function of piloting expertise. However, expertise is not the sole predictor of performance.
The computational experiments indicate that the C/I architecture explains and predicts a significant amount of
individual pilot performance. Overall the findings suggest that comprehensionbased processes play a significant role
in understanding human performance in unexpected situations.
                                                           582

