UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Confidence without Competence in the Evaluation of Scientific Claims

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1rg673m5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Shtulman, Andrew

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Confidence without Competence in the Evaluation of Scientific Claims
Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Department of Psychology, Occidental College
1600 Campus Rd., Los Angeles, CA 91106

evidential support (e.g., only scientific explanations are
supported by observation and experimentation), yet, from
the perspective of how scientific explanations are learned,
these criteria are not particularly salient. Students of science
are not, after all, practitioners of science, and it is thus
unlikely that most students appreciate differences in the
derivation of scientific and supernatural explanations when
simply presented with the explanations themselves.
Indeed, the products of science and religion – i.e.,
concepts, theories, explanations, and assertions – share
many commonalities even if the practices of science and
religion do not (McCauley, 2000). Both provide frameworks
for interpreting everyday observations and experiences.
Both posit unobservable entities as the causes of various
observable phenomena. And both extend, or even defy,
early-developing intuitions about the kinds of entities that
exist and the kinds of interactions those entities engage in.
Given such similarities, it is unclear how well students
differentiate the epistemic status of scientific claims from
that of supernatural claims. Although no studies have
addressed this question directly, extensive research on
students’ understanding of scientific inquiry provides reason
to suppose that most students are not equipped to make such
a differentiation (Lederman, Abd-El-Khalick, Bell, &
Schwartz, 2002; Schauble, Glaser, Duschl, Schulze, & John,
1995; Smith, Maclin, Houghton, & Hennessey, 2000). This
research has shown that students typically conceive of
science as problem solving, rather than inquiry, and
typically conceive of experiments as means of confirming,
rather than testing, one’s ideas. Even individuals who hold
doctorates in the humanities tend to believe (a) that
scientists abide by a single, deterministic method of inquiry,
(b) that scientists conduct experiments in order to prove
(rather than support) their ideas, (c) that scientists deduce
(rather than infer) their ideas from the data at hand, and (d)
that scientists who study the same data will inevitably arrive
at the same conclusions (Lederman et al., 2002).
The present study attempted to extend this literature by
exploring students’ epistemic commitments regarding the
products of science, rather than its methods. These
commitments were assessed in relation to commitments
regarding beliefs with ostensibly inferior evidential support
– i.e., supernatural beliefs. Four dimensions of students’
epistemic commitments were measured: (1) confidence in
the validity of one’s beliefs, (2) perceived consensus
surrounding the endorsement of one’s beliefs, (3) means of
justifying one’s beliefs, and (4) openness to revising one’s
beliefs. Of primary interest was the extent to which the first
dimension (confidence) was related to the other three
(consensus, justification, and revision).

Abstract
Scientific entities like X-rays and black holes defy firsthand
observation and everyday intuition, yet most people outside the
scientific community still believe in their existence. Upon what
kind of epistemic foundations do such beliefs rest? The present
study explored this question by comparing students’ scientific
beliefs to their supernatural beliefs along four dimensions of
epistemic import: confidence, perceived consensus, means of
justification, and openness to revision. Participants’ scientific
beliefs were strongly differentiated from their supernatural
beliefs along the dimensions of confidence and consensus but
only weakly differentiated along the dimensions of justification
and revision. Moreover, participants’ confidence in both types
of beliefs was predicted by their consensus estimates but not
their ability to cite evidence in support of, or potentially in
conflict with, those beliefs. These findings imply that students’
scientific beliefs are no more epistemologically sound than their
supernatural beliefs, despite self perceptions to the contrary.
Keywords: Belief; testimony; naïve epistemology; intuitive
theories; science education; conceptual development

Introduction
Research in cognitive science has informed the goals and
methods of science education in a number of ways.
Research on intuitive theories, for example, has clarified the
nature of students’ pre-instructional conceptions and the
process by which those conceptions may be replaced by
more accurate, scientific ones (Carey, 2009; Vosniadou,
1994). Research on knowledge representation has
highlighted strategies effective at promoting conceptual
change in the science classroom (Ohlsson, 2009; Slotta &
Chi, 2006). And research on causal inference has shed light
on how our theoretical commitments influence, and are
influenced by, the interpretation of empirical data (Chinn &
Brewer, 2001; Schulz, Goodman, Tenenbaum, & Jenkins,
2008).
To date, such research has focused mainly on the
understanding of scientific claims, yet an equally important
issue in the realm of science education is the acceptance of
such claims as true. What, for instance, leads a student to
accept the existence of electrons given that electrons are
neither observable (with the naked eye) nor intuitive (with
respect to our everyday conceptions of matter)? This issue is
particularly important in domains where scientific
explanations compete with supernatural explanations of the
same phenomena, like explanations for the origin of species
or explanations for the origin of the universe.
Various attempts to articulate the difference between
scientific explanations and supernatural explanations have
focused on differences in evidential structure (e.g., only
scientific explanations generate testable hypotheses) or

302

Method

Results

Participants

Existence Judgments

One-hundred and forty college undergraduates participated
in the study for course credit in an introductory psychology
class. Approximately half were recruited from a large, urban
university in the Northeastern US and half from a small,
urban college in the Southwestern US. Preliminary analyses
revealed no significant differences between the two groups
on any of the findings reported below, so they were pooled.
In the course of the study, participants rated their belief in
the existence of six scientific entities and twelve
supernatural entities. Although all participants endorsed the
existence of at least three scientific entities, 31 participants
did not endorse the existence of at least three supernatural
entities. Those 31 were excluded from the analyses
presented below, as they provided no internal metric against
which to compare their scientific beliefs. The final sample
thus consisted of 106 participants who endorsed the
existence of supernatural entities at a frequency similar to
the general public (Moore, 2005; Winseman, 2004).

The first question participants answered about each entity
was whether or not they believed in its existence. “Yes”
responses were assigned 1 point, and “No” responses were
assigned 0 points. Participants’ mean existence judgments
are displayed in Table 1. On average, participants endorsed
the existence of 5.9 scientific items (or 98%) and 7.6
supernatural items (or 63%). Item for item, these judgments
were highly similar to those obtained in national surveys of
supernatural belief (e.g., Moore, 2005; Winseman, 2004).
It should be noted that subsequent analyses were
conducted only on responses connected with entities judged
existent by the responder. Responses connected with entities
judged nonexistent were excluded from the dataset, as they
were not directly relevant to the question of how the
acceptance of scientific claims compares to the acceptance
of supernatural claims. Thus, the mean confidence ratings
and mean consensus estimates reported in Table 1 represent
only those participants who judged the target entity existent.

Procedure

Table 1: Mean existence judgments (range = 0 to 1),
confidence ratings (range = 1 to 7), and consensus estimates
(range = 1 to 7) for the six scientific entities (top) and
twelve supernatural entities (bottom).

Participants completed a questionnaire that probed their
beliefs about black holes, electrons, evolution, fluoride,
genes, X-rays, angels, fate, ghosts, God, Heaven, Hell,
karma, precognition, reincarnation, Satan, souls, and
telepathy. Pilot data confirmed that, given this selection,
college students tended to endorse an equal number of
scientific and supernatural entities (i.e., all six scientific
entities and around six of the twelve supernatural ones).
For each entity, participants were asked five questions:
(1) whether they currently believed in the entity’s existence;
(2) how confident they were of that belief (on a scale from 1
to 7); (3) how many other Americans (out of 7) hold the
same belief; (4) why they believed the entity exists; and (5)
what evidence might persuade them to change their mind.
Responses to these questions will henceforth be referred to
as “existence judgments,” “consensus estimates,” “belief
justifications,” and “belief refutations,” respectively.
Participants’ belief justifications and belief refutations
were analyzed using coded schemes described below. These
schemes were constructed via a bottom-up process in which
one-third of the data were sorted into numerous, finegrained categories closely resembling the data themselves.
Those categories were then collapsed into eight “basiclevel” categories, which, in turn, were collapsed into three
“superordinate” categories. These coding schemes were then
applied to the entire dataset by two independent coders: the
author, who created the coding schemes, and a research
assistant, who was instructed on how to apply the coding
schemes but was not involved in their creation. Among
basic-level categories, agreement between coders was 90%
for belief justifications and 89% for belief refutations.
Among superordinate categories, agreement was 95% for
belief justifications and 94% for belief refutations.
Disagreements were resolved through discussion.

Item
X-rays
Genes
Electrons
Fluoride
Evolution
Black holes
Souls
God
Karma
Heaven
Angels
Fate
Ghosts
Hell
Precognition
Telepathy
Satan
Reincarnation

Existence
1.00
.99
.99
.98
.95
.94
.97
.83
.78
.75
.66
.66
.56
.52
.51
.44
.41
.40

Confidence
6.9
6.8
6.4
6.7
6.3
5.7
6.0
5.9
5.6
5.6
5.4
5.4
4.6
5.1
4.9
4.7
5.8
4.9

Consensus
6.4
6.4
5.9
6.3
4.7
5.1
5.4
5.2
4.0
5.2
3.9
4.5
3.6
4.7
3.0
3.0
4.5
3.0

Confidence Ratings
Participants rated their confidence in the existence of each
entity on a scale from 1 (“no confidence”) to 7 (“100%
confident”). Participants tended to be highly confident,
selecting “7” significantly more than any other rating (33%
of all selections, binomial p < 0.001). They also exhibited
greater confidence in their existence judgments for scientific
items than those for supernatural items, as shown in Table 1.
Not only was the mean rating for the scientific items

303

significantly greater than that for the supernatural items
when averaged across entities (M = 6.5 vs. M = 5.3, t(108) =
11.30, p < 0.001), but the mean ratings for individual
scientific items were almost always greater than the mean
ratings for individual supernatural items. Interestingly, the
more often an entity was judged existent by the group, as a
whole, the more confident any individual participant was in
his/her judgment. Indeed, the correlation between mean
existence judgments and mean confidence ratings (i.e.,
columns 2 and 3 of Table 1) was highly significant (r(18) =
0.85, p < 0.001), implying that participants’ confidence in
their existence judgments may have been influenced by their
perception of how frequently others would agree with them.

Deferential Justifications These justifications referenced
the source of one’s belief without referencing any factual or
conceptual considerations relevant to the legitimacy of that
source. These justifications came in three forms: appeals to
unspecified evidence, appeals to authority or instruction,
and appeals to a preexisting worldview or commitment
(which accounted for 15%, 13%, and 23% of all
justifications, respectively). Appeals to unspecified
evidence differed from appeals to direct or indirect evidence
in that they lacked any description of the evidence itself
(e.g., X-rays must exist because “there is scientific evidence
proving their existence;” souls must exist because “aspects
of the concept have been sort of proven”). Appeals to
authority/instruction referenced a trusted source of
information without providing any details regarding the
content of that information (e.g., black holes must exist
because “I trust my physics teacher Mr. Murray;” Hell must
exist because “it’s in the Bible”). Finally, appeals to a
worldview/commitment referenced some preexisting
philosophy or creed consistent with the existence of the
entity in question (e.g., fluoride must exist because “I’m a
chemistry major;” angels must exist because “I’m Muslim;
angels exist by default”). Like appeals to authority/
instruction, appeals to a worldview/commitment contained
no factual information from which the belief could be
inferred by someone who did not share the participant’s
same cultural or educational background.

Consensus Estimates
After selecting a confidence rating, participants estimated
the number of Americans who would agree with their
existence judgment on a scale from 1 (“1 out of 7”) to 7 (“7
out of 7”). Mean consensus estimates for each entity are
displayed in Table 1. Similar to the confidence ratings,
consensus estimates for the scientific items were, on the
whole, significantly greater than those for the supernatural
items (M = 5.8 vs. M = 4.3, t(108) = 16.80, p < 0.001).
Participants’ mean consensus estimates were also correlated
with their mean existence judgments, when compared on an
item-by-item basis (r(18) = 0.84, p < 0.001), indicating that
their estimates were at least partly veridical.

Subjective Justifications These justifications referenced
considerations predicated on a participants’ own experience
or point of view. They included appeals to intuition or
volition, appeals to a personal experience or encounter, and
appeals to definitions or clarifications (which accounted for
15%, 11%, and 6% of all justifications, respectively).
Appeals to intuition/volition referenced the sensibility,
plausibility, or desirability of the target entity without
referencing considerations that actually bear upon its
existence (e.g., electrons must exist because “they make
rational sense;” Heaven must exist because “I like to think
that my loved ones are going there”). Appeals to experience/
encounters took the form of autobiographical events whose
interpretation presupposed the existence of the entity in
question (e.g., fluoride must exist because “it has been used
on my teeth;” telepathy must exist because “my sister and I
used to have it a lot when we played 21 questions”). Finally,
appeals to definitions/clarifications were intended to refine
the scope or certainty of one’s belief, which, like the other
two subtypes, provided no objectively persuasive reasons
for belief (e.g., “I believe that organisms adapt to their
environment, but not that we all come from one common
being;” “I believe in the presence of those who have passed
away, and I suppose this is what you would call an angel”).

Belief Justifications
Participants provided a total of 1458 justifications for their
existence judgments (639 for scientific items and 819 for
supernatural items). These responses were sorted into the
various categories and subcategories described below.
Evidential Justifications These justifications referenced
objectively verifiable facts that support the existence of the
entity in question. Evidential justifications came in two
forms: appeals to direct evidence and appeals to indirect
evidence (which accounted for 4% and 13% of all
justifications, respectively). Appeals to direct evidence
described an observable property or causal effect of the
target entity (e.g., evolution must exist because “there are
fossils for past species that have similar characteristics to
present day animals;” genes must exist because “they can be
sequenced and manipulated”). Appeals to indirect evidence
referenced facts about the world consistent with the
existence of the target entity but not inconsistent with other
explanations (e.g., genes must exist because “children look
like their parents;” God must exist because “some force
must explain the Universe”). It should be noted that while it
was not possible for participants to cite direct evidence of
supernatural entities, it was possible for them to cite indirect
evidence, and many did. It should also be noted that
evidential justifications were the only justifications that
could be considered epistemologically sound, as they were
the only justifications that provided a warrant for belief
rather than merely a reason for belief.

Justifications Frequencies by Domain The proportion of
justifications that fell into each of the above categories are
displayed in Table 2. Paired-samples t tests revealed that
participants provided significantly more deferential

304

justifications for scientific items than for supernatural items
(t(108) = 2.61, p < 0.05) and significantly more subjective
justifications for supernatural items than for scientific items
(t(108) = 8.02, p < 0.001). Participants also provided
significantly more evidential justifications for scientific
items than for supernatural items (t(108) = 6.75, p < 0.001),
but the magnitude of this difference was small (0.16),
especially considering the fact that one subtype of evidential
justifications – appeals to direct evidence – could be
provided only for scientific items.
In sum, participants provided similar, yet non-identical,
justification profiles across the two domains of belief.
Although participants provided significantly more evidential
justifications for their scientific beliefs than for their
supernatural beliefs, they provided relatively few evidential
justifications overall. Instead, they relied predominantly on
deferential justifications in both domains, appealing to a
trusted source of information (e.g., “my teacher,” “my
textbook,” “my religion,” “scientists,” “the Bible”) rather
than the information itself.

Deferential Refutations These refutations fell into the
same categories as deferential justifications: appeals to
unspecified evidence, appeals to authority or instruction,
and appeals to a preexisting worldview or commitment
(which accounted for 22%, 6%, and 3% of all refutations,
respectively).
Appeals
to
unspecified
evidence
acknowledged that one’s belief was revisable in light of new
evidence but did not specify the content of that evidence
(e.g., one’s belief in genes would be challenged by
“scientific evidence that can prove genes do not exist;”
one’s belief in precognition would be challenged by “proof
that
it’s
genuinely
impossible”).
Appeals
to
testimony/education cited an informant, or group of
informants, whose change of mind was sufficient to incite a
personal change of mind (e.g., one’s belief in X-rays would
be challenged “if a bunch of scientists got together and
proved they didn’t exist;” one’s belief in Satan would be
challenged “if the Church said it did not exist”). Finally,
appeals to a worldview/commitment cited the possibility of
changing a fundamental belief, or system of beliefs, that
would result in a change to the specific belief at hand (e.g.,
one’s belief in evolution would be challenged by “becoming
extremely religious;” one’s belief in reincarnation would be
challenged by “more exposure to alternative beliefs”). All
three categories cohered in their privileging of information
sources over the information itself.

Table 2: Mean proportion of justifications in each domain
representative of each justification type (+ SE).
Justification type
Evidential
Deferential
Subjective

Scientific
.28 (.02)
.54 (.02)
.18 (.01)

Supernatural
.11 (.02)
.47 (.03)
.42 (.03)

Subjective Refutations These refutations referenced
considerations relevant only to the participant. They
included appeals to a personal experience or encounter,
appeals to ignorance or uncertainty, and denials of the
premise itself (which accounted for 9%, 10%, and 30% of
all refutations, respectively). Participants who appealed to a
personal experience/encounter described hypothetical events
that, if experienced, would call the target entity’s existence
into question (e.g., one’s belief in X-rays would be
challenged “if I found out all the X-rays I underwent were
staged;” one’s belief in Hell would be challenged “if I died
and wasn’t punished for all my sins”). Participants who
appealed to ignorance/uncertainty explicitly claimed not to
know what would constitute counterevidence to the entity’s
existence (e.g., “I don’t know if you could ever prove it or
disprove it;” “it is a personal belief, so I am not sure”).
Finally, some participants denied the premise that their
mind could be changed altogether, asserting that target
entity’s existence was irrefutable (e.g., “there is no evidence
that could effect my belief in fate;” “Nothing at this point
can dissuade me from the idea of evolution”). While
denying the possibility of counterevidence is, of course,
different from identifying counterevidence contingent on
one’s own experience, such responses were still
fundamentally subjective in that they focused on personal
predilections rather than external information (evidential
refutations) or information sources (deferential refutations).

Belief Refutations
The final question participants answered for each entity was
what evidence would persuade them to change their mind
about its existence. These responses are described below.
Evidential Refutations Refutations of this nature cited
substantive facts or ideas that challenged the belief in
question. Two subtypes were observed: anomalous data and
alternative explanation (which accounted for 7% and 13%
of all refutations). Participants who cited anomalous data
described findings or phenomena that, if discovered, would
be inconsistent with the target entity’s existence (e.g., one’s
belief in electrons would be challenged “if an atom was
found without them;” one’s belief in karma would be
challenged “if bad people started experiencing good
things”). Participants who cited alternative explanations
described situations in which the target entity would no
longer be needed to explain the phenomena it was intended
to explain (e.g., one’s belief in fluoride would be challenged
“if a new scientific model was heavily endorsed that could
explain the building blocks of life without using the
elements in the periodic table;” one’s belief in souls would
be challenged “if science could find a way to explain why
there is life at all and how individuality is created in terms
of thinking and feeling”). Just as evidential justifications
were the only epistemologically sound type of justification,
evidential refutations were the only epistemologically sound
type of refutation.

Refutation Frequencies by Domain Table 3 displays the
mean proportion of evidential, deferential, and subjective

305

justifications to total justifications in each domain. Similar
to the findings regarding belief justifications, participants
provided significantly more deferential refutations for
scientific items than for supernatural items (t(108) = 4.80, p
< 0.001) but provided significantly more subjective
refutations for supernatural items than for scientific items
(t(108) = 8.06, p < 0.001). Participants also provided
significantly more evidential refutations for scientific items
than for supernatural items (t(108) = 4.38, p < 0.001), but
the magnitude of this differences was, once again, quite
small (0.11). Thus, just as participants tended to cite nonevidential considerations in justifying their scientific beliefs,
they tended to cite non-evidential considerations when
contemplating the revisability of those beliefs.

explained a significant amount of the variance in
participants’ confidence ratings (R2 = 0.12; F-change
(1,637) = 89.63, p < 0.001), the second model did not (R2 =
0.13; F-change (2,635) = 1.75, ns). Thus, participants’
confidence in their scientific beliefs was linked to their
perception of how widely those beliefs are shared but was
not linked to their ability to support those beliefs with
evidence.
Third, the ability to provide evidential justifications and
evidential refutations was not widespread. Only 13
participants (or 12%) provided evidential justifications as
their modal justification type, and only 19 participants (or
17%) provided evidential refutations as their modal
refutation type. Moreover, participants’ tendency to provide
evidential justifications was significantly correlated with
their tendency to provide evidential refutations, as shown in
Table 4. These tendencies were linked not only within the
same domain but across domains as well, implying that they
represent a domain-general disposition to reflect upon the
validity of one’s beliefs, similar to those documented in the
domains of argumentative reasoning (Kuhn, 1991),
inferential reasoning (Stanovich & West, 1998), and modal
reasoning (Shtulman, 2009).

Table 3: Mean proportion of refutations in each domain
representative of each refutation type (+ SE).
Refutation type
Evidential
Deferential
Subjective

Scientific
.29 (.02)
.39 (.03)
.32 (.02)

Supernatural
.19 (.02)
.21 (.02)
.59 (.03)

Interrelations among the Four Indices of Belief
Table 4: Correlations between evidential justifications
(JUS) and evidential refutations (REF) for both scientific
items (SCI) and supernatural items (SUP).

The analyses presented thus far indicate that the epistemic
foundations of participants’ scientific beliefs are not
identical to those of their supernatural beliefs. As a group,
participants (a) exhibited greater confidence in their
scientific beliefs; (b) perceived greater consensus
surrounding their scientific beliefs; (c) cited more evidence
in support of their scientific beliefs; and (d) identified more
counterevidence to their scientific beliefs. This pattern of
results appears, on its surface, to imply that participants’
scientific beliefs were more epistemologically sound than
their supernatural beliefs. Nevertheless, three additional
findings militate against this interpretation.
First, the degree of differentiation between participants’
scientific and supernatural beliefs was much greater along
some dimensions than others. Cohen’s d for the difference
between scientific and supernatural beliefs was 1.41 for the
confidence ratings and 1.64 for the consensus estimates, but
was only 0.61 for participants’ tendency to provide
evidential justifications and 0.36 for participants’ tendency
to provide evidential refutations. Apparently, participants’
sensitivity to differences between scientific and supernatural
beliefs influenced their appraisals of confidence and
consensus much more than it influenced their ability (or
proclivity) to cite evidential considerations relevant to those
beliefs.
Second, differences in confidence were not warranted by
differences in the quality of participants’ justifications or
refutations. This finding emerged from a hierarchical
regression analysis in which participants’ confidence ratings
for the scientific items were first regressed against their
consensus estimates (Model 1) and then regressed against
their tendency to provide (a) evidential justifications and (b)
evidential refutations (Model 2). While the first model

Measure
JUS_SCI
JUS_SUP
REF_SCI
REF_SUP

JUS_SCI JUS_SUP REF_SCI REF_SUP
1.0
.26**
.44**
.25*
1.0
.20*
.23*
1.0
.43**
1.0

Discussion
The evidential support for scientific claims is
quantitatively and qualitatively superior to that for
supernatural claims, yet it is unclear whether students
appreciate this difference in light of the fact that both types
of claims are conveyed in similar ways (through testimony)
and perform similar functions (explaining observed
phenomena in terms of unobservable entities). The present
study addressed this issue by comparing students’ scientific
beliefs to their supernatural beliefs along four dimensions of
epistemic import: confidence, consensus, means of
justification, and openness to revision. Although
participants were almost always more confident in their
scientific beliefs than their supernatural beliefs, they were
rarely able to identify evidence that might bear on the
validity of those beliefs, either in the form of justification or
refutation. Moreover, participants’ confidence was related
to their perception of how likely other people would agree
with their beliefs but was not related to their ability to cite
evidential considerations relevant to those beliefs.
Two features of the data were particularly notable. First,
participants’ modal form of justification was deference to
the opinions and conclusions of others. That is, participants

306

were more likely to reference the proximal source of their
beliefs (i.e., the testimony of an accepted authority or the
tenets of an accepted worldview) than to reference its distal
source (i.e., reasons for accepting the testimony/tenets as
true), both for scientific beliefs and supernatural beliefs.
Although it could be argued that deference to “more
knowledgeable others” is a generally rational course of
action (Keil, Stein, Webb, Billings, & Rozenblit, 2008), this
claim is undermined, at least in the present study, by the fact
that participants deferred to unsubstantiated sources of
information (i.e., those propounding supernatural claims) as
often as they deferred to substantiated ones (i.e. those
propounding scientific claims). Moreover, participants who
provided deferential justifications for their scientific beliefs,
rather than evidential ones, also tended to claim that these
beliefs were indefeasible, which clearly indicates a nonrational view of the nature of science. Indeed, the majority
of participants (55%) denied that anything could dissuade
them of the existence of at least one scientific entity.
Second, the findings obtained here with adults who had
had multiple years of science instruction strongly mirror
those obtained by Harris, Pasquini, Duke, Asscher, & Pons
(2006) with individuals who had had little to no science
instruction: 5- to 6-year-old children. In that study, children
not only endorsed the existence of scientific entities, like
germs and oxygen, more often than they endorsed the
existence of supernatural entities, like God and the Tooth
Fairy, but also claimed that more people, in general, believe
in the existence of the former than the latter. They did not,
however, provide different types of justifications for their
judgments. Instead, they tended to appeal to generalizations
that presupposed the target entity’s existence in both cases
(e.g., germs exist because “animals can have germs;” the
Tooth Fairy exists because “she visits you when you lose a
tooth”). While it is unclear how the justification categories
used in Harris et al. (2006) relate to those used in the
present study, it is telling that even young children appear to
be more sensitive to the amount of consensus surrounding
various extraordinary claims than to the conceptual and/or
evidential status of those claims.
Taken together, these findings imply that students’
understanding of science as a body of knowledge is not
much better than their understanding of science as a method
of inquiry (Lederman et al., 2002; Schauble et al., 1995;
Smith et al., 2000). Just as students conceive of science as
problem solving rather than inquiry, they justify their
scientific beliefs with appeals to intuition and authority
rather than evidence. And just as students think that
scientists are in the business of “proving their ideas true,”
they think that certain scientific entities have been proven to
exist beyond a shadow of doubt. These findings not only
complement existing findings on students’ scientific
epistemologies but also point to the possibility that
misconceptions about the process of science may actually
be responsible for misconceptions about the products of
science. Still, the question of whether, and how, such
misconceptions are related awaits further research.

References
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (2001). Models of data: A
theory of how people evaluate data. Cognition and
Instruction, 19, 323-393.
Harris, P. L., Pasquini, E., Duke, S., Asscher, J., & Pons, F.
(2006). Germs and angels: The role of testimony in young
children’s ontology. Developmental Science, 9, 76-96.
Keil, F. C., Stein, C., Webb, L., Billings, V. D., &
Rozenblit, L. (2008). Discerning the division of cognitive
labor: An emerging understanding of how knowledge is
clustered in other minds. Cognitive Science, 32, 259-300.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Lederman, N. G., Abd-El-Khalick, F., Bell, R. L., &
Schwartz, R. S. (2002). Views of nature of science
questionnaire: Toward valid and meaningful assessment
of learners’ conceptions of nature of science. Journal or
Research in Science Teaching, 39, 497-521.
McCauley, R. N. (2000). The naturalness of religion and the
unnaturalness of science. In F. Keil & R. Wilson (Eds.),
Explanation and Cognition, Cambridge: MIT Press, 6185.
Moore, D. W. (2005). Three in four Americans believe in
paranormal. Princeton, NJ: The Gallup Organization.
Ohlsson, S. (2009). Resubsumption: A possible mechanism
for conceptual change and belief revision. Educational
Psychologist, 44, 20-40.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A., Schulze, S., & John,
J. (1995). Students’ understanding of the objectives and
procedures of experimentation in the science classroom.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4, 131-166.
Schulz, L. E., Goodman, N., Tenenbaum, J., & Jenkins, A.
(2008). Going beyond the evidence: Preschoolers’
inferences about abstract laws and anomalous data.
Cognition, 109, 211-223.
Shtulman, A. (2009). The development of possibility
judgment within and across domains. Cognitive
Development, 24, 293-309.
Slotta, J. D., & Chi, M. T. H. (2006). Helping students
understand challenging topics in science through ontology
training. Cognition and Instruction, 24(2), 261-289.
Smith, C. L., Maclin, D., Houghton, C., & Hennessey, M.
G. (2000). Sixth-grade students’ epistemologies of
science: The impact of school science experiences on
epistemological development. Cognition and Instruction,
18, 349-422.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998). Individual
differences in rational thought. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127, 161-188.
Vosniadou, S. (1994). Capturing and modeling the process
of conceptual change. Learning and Instruction, 4, 45-69.
Winseman, A. L. (2004). Eternal destinations: Americans
believe in Heaven, Hell. Princeton, NJ: The Gallup
Organization.

307

