UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constructing Typing-Time Corpora: A New Way to Answer Old Questions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9d68886q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Priva, Uriel Cohen

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constructing Typing-Time Corpora: A New Way to Answer Old
Questions
Uriel Cohen Priva (urielc@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 450 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
questions at hand. The creation of even a small-scale
corpus is an expensive and time-consuming project, and
therefore, there is much gain in finding a simpler alternative. In this paper, we propose a solution to this
problem. We show that by wedding two methodological advancements, tracking typing speed and collection
of data over the web, we can create an alternative both
to experiments which require phonetic labeling and to
phonetically-labeled corpora, typing-time corpora — corpora of typed data in which each letter and word is annotated with the time it took to type.

Abstract
Many current studies in linguistics and psycholinguistics
require the use of phonetically labeled speech data. Collecting and annotating such data is expensive and slow.
An alternative approach makes use of pre-labeled speech
corpora, but these are available for very few languages,
might not contain the desired linguistic environment,
and the construction of new ones is still expensive and
time-consuming. We present a fast and cost-efficient
method for constructing a new type of corpus which
retains many of the advantages of phonetically labeled
speech, typing-time corpora. In this paper we show that
an English typing-time corpus collected over the web is
sufficient to replicate word frequency and neighborhood
density effects. We then demonstrate the transferability
of this method to less studied languages and to different
orthographies. We show that a smaller Hebrew typing
corpus collected over the web can be used to find lengthening effects in infrequent Hebrew words.

A number of studies (Weingarten, Nottbusch, & Will,
2004; Zesiger, Orliaguet, Boë, & Mounoud, 1994 among
others) demonstrate that typing is sensitive to languagebased effects. Weingarten et al. (2004) show that typing
is sensitive to phonological and morphological properties of the words being typed. Zesiger et al. (1994) show
that actual words are typed faster than pseudo-words
and that frequent words are typed faster than infrequent
words. These effects demonstrate that even though a
typing task is different from spoken speech production,
it does exhibit linguistic effects that are normally associated with speech.

Keywords: Typing-time; Corpora; Frequency; Neighborhood density; Amazon Mechanical Turk

Introduction
Many studies in linguistics and psycholinguistic require
either the precise annotation of durations and latencies
for speech data gathered in carefully controlled experiments, or the availability of phonetically labeled corpora. For example, evidence for neighborhood density
in production depends on measuring speech production
latencies (Vitevitch, 2002). The study of production difficulties relies on measuring the lengthening of words
in a difficult context (Fox Tree & Clark, 1997). Studies of frequency and predictability-dependent phonetic
reduction (Van Son & Van Santen, 2005; Pluymaekers, Ernestus, & Baayen, 2005; Aylett & Turk, 2006;
Bell, Brenier, Gregory, Girand, & Jurafsky, 2009) make
use of corpora containing exact word and phone durations, such as the Switchboard Corpus (Godfrey &
Holliman, 1997) and Buckeye Corpus of Conversational
Speech (Pitt et al., 2007) for English, the Spoken Dutch
Corpus (Oostdijk, 2000) and the Kiel Corpus of Spontaneous Speech (Kohler, Pätzold, & Simpson, 1995) for
German.
However, neither the experimental approach nor the
corpus-based one may be a feasible option when trying
to address the problem of data availability in less studied languages. Subjects may not always be available on
the one hand, and Switchboard-like corpora do not exist for most languages on the other hand. In addition,
even when a corpus is accessible, it might not contain
the relevant linguistic environments for addressing the

Not only does typing time provides a window to linguistic performance, but it also holds a big advantage,
as it allows the automatic gathering of large amounts
of data through the web. A simple way to utilize this
is by using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), a virtual work marketplace created by Amazon.com. On
AMT, requesters can upload work requests in the form
of HTML pages, which workers can access online. Several researchers in the natural language processing community (Callison-Burch, 2009; Colowick & Pool, 2007;
Snow, O’Connor, Jurafsky, & Ng, 2008 among others)
make use of AMT to construct corpora for which humanlabeled data is not available, or to annotate new data
sets. In this paper, we demonstrate that extending the
use of AMT to the construction of typing-time corpora
provides an easy and cost-efficient alternative to laboratory experiments and extant corpora. We show evidence
that supports the applicability of this methodology by
constructing a typing time corpus for English, and using
it to replicate two well known effects on language production: word frequency (Bell et al., 2009) and neighborhood density (Coltheart, Davelaar, Jonasson, & Besner,
1977; Vitevitch, 2002; Adelman & Brown, 2007). We
then extend these results to a less studied language. We

43

show the effect of word frequency on typing time in a
smaller Hebrew corpus, exemplifying that the paradigm
holds even for relatively small typing-time corpora, and
for different languages with varying orthographies.1

Much current work in linguistics stresses the importance
of word-frequency in the minute modulations in the duration of words, morphemes, syllables and phones in various contexts. These durations are taken from corpora
of spontaneous or read speech in which phone durations
were hand-labeled by linguists. Bell et al. (2009) show
that frequent English words tend to reduce more than
infrequent words. Pluymaekers et al. (2005) show the
reduction of Dutch morphemes in predictable contexts.
Aylett and Turk (2006) show reduction in predictable
English syllables. Van Son and Van Santen (2005) show
that some contextually predictable consonants are more
likely to reduce.

presuppose rather ideal experimental settings: a laboratory with accurate recording equipments, access to relevant human subjects in the proximity of that laboratory,
sufficient time to label large amounts of data, and ample
funds. The often easier alternative of using a pre-labeled
speech corpus is not available when the linguistic environment being studied is not present in the corpus, or
when no such corpus is present, as is in fact the case with
most languages. Therefore, there would be much to benefit from a new methodology for investigating language
production.
The following two sections describe the components
of the solution we propose for this problem: an experimental approach to the collection of typing-time data,
and the collection of large amounts of data over the web.
By combining these methodologies we can create typingtime corpora, which provide an answer to the problem we
presented above; they do not require any special equipment, subjects from remote locations can provide experimental data over the web, and no further labeling is
required.

Neighborhood effects

Online data collection

A wide range of studies has shown language users
to be sensitive to the effects of neighborhood-density
(Coltheart et al., 1977; Vitevitch, 2002; Adelman &
Brown, 2007; Peereman & Content, 1997). Coltheart
et al. (1977) defines the neighborhood density of a given
word as “the number of words that can be produced
by changing just one of the letters in the string to another letter, preserving letter positions.” Two different
definitions of neighborhood density follow naturally from
this one: Coltheart’s original spelling-based definition, in
which the substitutions are of single orthographic characters, and a phonological definition, in which the substitution is based on phonemes. Peereman and Content
(1997) argue that the best approximation of neighborhood density is phonographic, that is, the cases in which
the spelling neighbor is also the phonological neighbor.
Furthermore, neighborhood density has been shown to
have different consequences in production and comprehension. For English, Vitevitch (2002) shows that a
dense neighborhood facilitates spoken word production,
whereas Vitevitch and Luce (1998) show that a dense
neighborhood inhibits word comprehension.

Even basic web technology allows the collection of data
through the web. Every search request on the web involves sending data to some webserver, which can collect the data it receives. However, utilizing web technology for data collection requires finding enough workers
to perform the specific task. Amazon Mechanical Turk
(AMT) provides a simple platform to do so. AMT is a
virtual marketplace in which requests and workers can
interact. The requester uploads tasks in the form of
HTML pages to the website and proposes to pay a given
price for the completion of each task. Workers can choose
among available tasks, perform them, and submit the results through AMT. The requester can then review and
approve the results, which leads to the transfer of the
proposed sum of money from his account to the workers’
accounts. AMT handles the overhead involving all other
aspects of the interaction: the exchange of money and
the collection of the results.
Several recent studies have already made use of
AMT (Callison-Burch, 2009; Colowick & Pool, 2007).
Colowick and Pool (2007) use AMT to find preferences
for semantic scope ambiguity, and Callison-Burch (2009)
uses AMT to evaluate the quality of automatic translations.
One possible concern with data collected this way is
whether it can be as accurate as data collected under
controlled conditions. However, Snow et al. (2008) compare the performance of AMT annotators with that of
professional annotators, and they find that by increasing
the number of annotators, untrained annotators over the
web can match the performance of expert annotators.
Increasing the number of data points per observation
type is a key concept in handling noisy data collected

Previous production studies
Frequency effects

Motivating typing-time corpora
The studies cited above demonstrate the benefit of investigating slight modulations of durations and latencies
in spoken language production. However, many of them
1
The typing time approach is, of course, limited to languages that have a letter-based written standard (unlike, e.g.,
Chinese). While not all languages have such a written form,
or any kind of written form at all, the proposed methodology
would still allow access to a large number of currently less
studied languages.

44

over the web. Since the gathering of data over the web
is fast and inexpensive, enough data points can be collected to ensure that noisy data would be as sensitive as a
smaller amount of data collected under ideal conditions.

type in the keyboard keys below the digits 1–6 in order
to identify the keyboard layout, and to fill in the first two
languages they speak, following an example in which the
first language is not the language we want to investigate.
In order to reduce the variance, submissions from anyone
who is left-handed, looks at the keyboard, is not using
the most common keyboard layout (QWERTY in the
case of English) or did not fill in the language we want
to investigate were not included in the analysis (but were
still accepted and paid).

Typing time experiments
Several studies have demonstrated that typing speed is
affected by linguistic factors. Gentner (1982) shows that
a sequence of keystrokes is more predictive of the time
it would take to strike one key if the sequence does not
span word boundaries. Gentner, Larochelle, and Grudin
(1988) show that the same four-key sequence is typed
faster in frequent words than in infrequent words of comparable length. Weingarten et al. (2004) show that typing is sensitive to morphological-syllabic boundaries, by
comparing the lag between typing two specific keys, held
constant across conditions, and varying between syllable
and morpheme boundaries.
Since typing requires moving the hands and fingers to
different locations on the keyboard, the baseline lag between the typing of a given key and the preceding key
varies dramatically based on the preceding and possibly
the following keystrokes. Gentner (1982) shows that almost 50% of the variability is controlled for if we control
for the immediately preceding keystroke. He also shows
that adding up to one more key to the preceding context of the target key, and up to one following key, can
account for most of the location-based variability.
While typing time studies clearly show the potential
of using typing time as a segue to assessing linguistic
performance, the factorial methods used in Gentner et
al. (1988) and Weingarten et al. (2004) are not always
replicable in further languages. Weingarten et al. (2004),
who investigate lexical access effects in German, keep the
same two-key sequences while varying the morphological and syllabic environment. However, many languages
would not necessarily allow the same two-key sequence
to appear in every condition, making a factorial design
impossible. It would be beneficial to see such effects even
if only some of the conditions exist for each two-key environment. Gentner et al. (1988) uses identical four-key
sequences embedded in words of varying frequencies, but
in orthographic systems in which vowels are not assigned
a separate letter (e.g. Arabic or Hebrew), words that
contain identical four-key sequences would usually belong to the same stem or the same neighborhood. These
issues can be remedied by the proposed methodology of
constructing a typing-time corpus.

After the basic details are collected, the subjects move
to ten open text fields. After they choose the field, text
appears to the right (and in right-to-left languages, to
the left) of the open text field, and the subjects are instructed to copy it. Once they move to the next field,
the field they leave is locked, and they are no longer able
to change it. While they type, a javascript program running in the web page collects the exact time of each key
press.
The output of the collected data is then parsed and
assigned additional attributes. Each keystroke is associated with the word it belongs to and the key typed in
that word. Corrected text is recorded as corrected, and
words that contain it are marked as corrected. Words
that do not match the target text are recorded as wrong.
Keystrokes that took more than 500ms to type are considered a break, and words that contain breaks past the
first characters are considered interrupted. When a word
is marked as interrupted, corrected or wrong, all the
keystrokes that comprise it are marked as having a interrupted, corrected or wrong attribute, respectively.
Several tests can be performed on the collected corpus.
It is possible to check in which contexts we find typing errors, which environment cause significant lags in typing
time, etc. This paper concentrates on the modulation of
inter-key duration, which we will call lags. The distribution of lags is not normal, leading us to use percentiles
and medians rather than means and standard deviations.
We first exclude all data from AMT workers that submitted more than five tasks, all keys that originate in
interrupted, corrected or wrong words, all word-initial
keys, and the top and bottom five percentiles of remaining lags. Following Gentner (1982) we build on the fact
that the variance of keystrokes is reduced when preceding and following keys are taken into account as context.
Like Weingarten et al. (2004) we use the preceding key
for small corpora, but we also include the following key
if at least ninety percent of every three-key sequences
appear in the corpus at least five times. The median of
each set of keys sequences is used as the expected lag of
the the target key in that context. Our predicted value
is the ratio between the actual lag and the expected lag,
rather than the actual size of each lag. In this way, we
can compare lag modulation across different words, and
not limit ourselves to a specific key sequences. For ex-

Building typing-time corpora
We construct the typing-time corpus in the following
manner. AMT workers (or other web users) are presented with an HTML form in which they first fill in some
basic details. We request our subjects to say whether
they are left- or right-handed, and whether they look at
the keyboard while typing. They are also requested to

45

ample, if the lag for the letter ‘e’ in the context ‘rea’ has
an expected baseline of 220ms (based on all occurrences
of the ‘rea’ in the corpus), but in a specific instance of
the word ‘great’ we measure it to be 140ms long, we
would like to explain why that particular ‘e’ is shorter,
the value to predict being 140:220 (figure 1). Since the
predicted value is the ratio, we can compare the ratios
of different keystrokes, in different contexts.
key
actual lag
expected lag
ratio

g

←→
100
210
0.48

r

←→
140
220
0.64

e

←→
30
100
0.30

a

←→
90
150
0.61

five thousand most frequent words in Gigaword-NYT.
No sentence had conjunctions or WH-words. Pronouns,
if they appeared at all, occurred only before the verb.
Each sentence had a verb and a noun following it. A
total of 190 AMT tasks were collected, and each took
about two minutes to perform. No worker had to type
the same sentence twice within the same hour.

Methods and materials
We investigate the effects of neighborhood density and
frequency on the modulation of inter-key typing lag.
A linear regression was used to estimate the predicted
value, which was defined as the log ratio between a lag
and its expected value. Only lags from the first section of
the English typing-time corpus (words in isolation) were
estimated. The key’s position in the word, the predicted
lag, AMT workers’ typing rate across all items, their
typing rate in the corresponding item and the logged
predicted lag time were used as controls. The word frequencies used were the corresponding word counts in the
NYT section of English Gigaword Third Edition (Graff
et al., 2007): Gigaword-NYT. Two frequency measurement were tested. The first was the negative log unigram probability of that word: − log Pr(word). The
second word frequency measurement was based on the
word lemmas: − log Pr(lemma), calculated using WordNet (Miller, 1995).2
Neighborhood density was calculated using the CMU
dictionary. We tested three variants of neighborhood
density: the number of spelling neighbors (substitution
of one letter), the number of phonological neighbors
(substitution of one segment) and the number phonographic neighbors (substitution of one letter and one
segment).
The linear regression model was selected using R’s (R
Development Core Team, 2010) step() function which
uses AIC (Akaike, 1974) for model selection. The model
was also re-evaluated using a mixed-effect model with
worker and word as random effects. No significant
changes to the significance and direction of the reported
coefficients were found.

t

Figure 1: sample actual:expected ratios

Study 1: Lexical frequency and
neighborhood density in English
In the first study, we construct a typing time corpus for
English, and use it to investigate the effects of neighborhood density and frequency on the typing-time. We
predict a facilitatory effect of word frequency on its typing time. Additionally, we expect to find an effect of
neighborhood density.

Constructing an English typing-time corpus
The English typing-time corpus was built using AMT,
using the procedure described above. Each AMT task
was unique, but workers could participate in the study
up to five times.
In order to choose the stimuli words to be typed,
each word in the CMU Pronunciation Dictionary (Weide,
1998) was matched with its frequency and its most common letter case in the New York Times section of English
Gigaword Third Edition (Graff, Kong, Chen, & Maeda,
2007): Gigaword-NYT. The corpus has two sections,
which correspond to data collected using two different
kinds of stimuli. Both tasks were used in order to calculate the expected lag of each keystroke in the context of
one preceding and one following keystrokes.
In the first data collection task, AMT workers were
requested to type in four randomly chosen words in each
item. The words were independent from one another.
Each word was in one of the top ten thousand lowercase
words in Gigaword-NYT. A total of 475 AMT tasks were
collected, and each took about two minutes to perform.
No worker had to type the same word twice within the
same hour.
The second data collection task required AMT workers to type in five words that form a coherent sentence,
which was sampled from Gigaword-NYT. All sentences
were exclusively in lowercase in the original corpus except for the first character, which was also changed into
lowercase for the construction of the stimuli. The sentences were comprised only of words that are in the top

Results and discussion
Both word and lemma frequency alone have a significant facilitatory effect on typing speed (words which are
frequent or whose lemma is frequent are typed faster).
However, in the final model only the frequency of lemma
remained significant, as it masks the effect of the frequency of the word. The lemma unigram frequency has
a significant (p < 10−7 ) facilitatory effect and is significantly superior to word probability (p < 0.02).
All three neighborhood density measurements have a
significant facilitatory effect on typing speed (words with
a dense neighborhood are typed faster). However, in the
2
If a word was ambiguous between two parts of speech,
the shorter lemma was associated with the word.

46

final model only phonological density remains significant
(p < 0.001). Phonological neighborhood density is not
significantly better than spelling neighborhood density
(p = 0.097) or phonographic neighborhood density (p =
0.13). The adjusted R2 is 0.237
These results show that typing-time corpora are indeed sensitive to the well known effects of word frequency and neighborhood density. The fact that it is
the frequency of lemmas rather than words suggests
that lexicon access is active during typing, as shown
in Weingarten et al. (2004). The fact that neighborhood density has a facilitatory effect is of particular
importance, since it has been shown that in English a
dense neighborhood facilitates productions whereas it
inhibits comprehension (Vitevitch, 2002; Vitevitch &
Luce, 1998). Therefore, although the typing task arguably involves both production and comprehension, the
results suggest that this method is indeed tapping into
the effects of production.

words in each item. The words were independent from
one another. Each word was in one of the top five thousand in Haaretz. A total of 72 web tasks were collected,
and each took about two minutes to perform. No worker
had to type the same word twice.

Methods and materials
We investigate the effects of frequency on the modulation of inter-key typing lag. As in study 1, a linear regression was used to estimate the predicted value,
which was defined as the log ratio between a lag and
its expected value. Once again, the key’s position in
the word, the predicted lag, the subjects’ typing rate
across all items, their typing rate in the corresponding
item and the logged predicted lag time were used as controls. We limited ourselves to words that had no clitics. The word frequencies used were the corresponding
word counts Haaretz. Two frequency measurement were
tested. The first was the negative log unigram probability of that word including its clitics when they occur,
− log Pr(clitics + word). The second word frequency
measurement was based on the stemmed words (which
still include morphological inflections, but not adjoining
clitics) − log Pr(word).
The linear regression model was evaluated as in Study
1. The linear regression model was selected using R’s (R
Development Core Team, 2010) step() function (Hastie
& Pregibon, 1992) which uses AIC (Akaike, 1974) for
model selection. The model was also re-evaluated using
a mixed-effect model with worker and word as random
effects. No significant changes to the significance and
direction of the reported coefficients were found.

Study 2: Lexical frequency in Hebrew
In the second study, we construct a typing time corpus
for Hebrew. We use it to demonstrate that this paradigm
is extensible to other languages, and can be collected
outside AMT. We show that Hebrew demonstrates word
frequency effects on typing-time.

Constructing a Hebrew typing-time corpus
Hebrew orthography is different from that of English in
several crucial aspects. It is written from right to left, it
has no uppercase-lowercase distinction, and most importantly it does not incorporate most vowels. Furthermore,
norms regarding the use of space are different — several
very frequently occurring clitics (such as ve ’and’) are
glommed to the following word.
The Hebrew typing-time corpus was built using an
online form, the results of which were collected by a
web server.3 One hundred unique tasks were generated,
and each task was performed no more than three times,
by different subjects. Subjects could participate in the
study up to five times.
In order to choose the stimuli words to be typed, we
collected 1300 articles from the Haaretz, a Hebrew news
website. We calculated the frequency of each word and
used Hspell (Har’El & Kenigsberg, 2006) to stem it from
possible adjoining clitics. Word-frequencies were estimated using the same data from Haaretz. We calculated
the expected lag of each keystroke in the context of one
preceding keystroke.4
The data collection task was similar to the isolated
word section of the English corpus described in study
1. Subjects were asked to type in five randomly chosen

Results and Discussion
Of the two word-frequency measurements, only the frequency of the word form that included its clitics came up
significant p < 0.05. The frequency of the bare form did
not come up significant even when we excluded the frequency of the cliticized form. The adjusted R2 is 0.1462.
These results show that even with a much smaller
typing-time corpus, frequency effects can be seen.

General Discussion
The experimental results shown in both studies provide
strong support of our proposal that typing time corpora
can provide a simple method to investigate linguistic performance. Further investigation is required to assess the
many different ways in which production is similar or
different across the typed and spoken modalities.
Study 1 shows that the reduction of frequent words,
an effect shown by both laboratory experiments and phonetically tagged corpora, has a corollary in typing time
which can be replicated using our corpus. It also shows
that a facilitatory effect of neighborhood density can be
observed using our corpus, which shows that it patterns
with production rather than comprehension.

3
We did not use AMT because there are currently not
enough native speakers of Hebrew in AMT
4
There was not enough data to use the following key as
well.

47

Study 2 demonstrates that this methodology can be
easily extended to other, less studied languages. The
results show a shortening of typing lag in more frequent
words in Hebrew, as was shown for English in Study 1.
This demonstrates that the method is applicable to new
languages, even those with non-Roman orthographies.

Hastie, T. J., & Pregibon, D. (1992). Generalized linear
models. In J. M. Chambers & T. J. Hastie (Eds.),
Statistical models in S (chap. 6). Pacific Grove, CA:
Wadsworth and Brooks / Cole.
Kohler, K., Pätzold, M., & Simpson, A. (1995). From
scenario to segment: the controlled elicitation, transcription, segmentation and labelling of spontaneous
speech. AIPUK 29. Kiel: IPDS.
Miller, G. A. (1995). Wordnet: a lexical database for
english. Commun. ACM , 38 (11), 39–41.
Oostdijk, N. (2000). The spoken dutch corpus project.
ELRA newsletter (5), 4–8.
Peereman, R., & Content, A. (1997). Orthographic
and phonological neighborhoods in naming: Not all
neighbors are equally influential in orthographic space.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37 (3), 382–410.
Pitt, M. A., Dilley, L., Johnson, K., Kiesling, S., Raymond, W., Hume, E., et al. (2007). Buckeye corpus
of conversational speech, 2nd release. Department of
Psychology, Ohio State University.
Pluymaekers, M., Ernestus, M., & Baayen, R. H. (2005).
Articulatory planning is continuous and sensitive to
informational redundancy. Phonetica, 62 , 146–159.
R Development Core Team. (2010). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing [Computer software manual]. Available from http://www.R-project
.org
Snow, R., O’Connor, B., Jurafsky, D., & Ng, A. Y.
(2008). Cheap and fast—but is it good?: evaluating
non-expert annotations for natural language tasks. In
Proceedings of EMNLP 2008 (pp. 254–263).
Van Son, R. J. J. H., & Van Santen, J. P. (2005). Duration and spectral balance of intervocalic consonants:
A case for efficient communication. Speech Communication, 47 , 100–123.
Vitevitch, M. S. (2002). The influence of phonological
similarity neighborhoods on speech production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28 (4), 735–747.
Vitevitch, M. S., & Luce, P. A. (1998). When words
compete: Levels of processing in perception of spoken
words. Psychological Science, 9 (4), 325.
Weide, R. (1998). The CMU pronunciation dictionary,
release 0.6. (Carnegie Mellon University)
Weingarten, R., Nottbusch, G., & Will, U. (2004). Morphemes, syllables and graphemes in written word production. In T. Pechmann & C. Habel (Eds.), Multidisciplinary approaches to language production (Vol. 157,
pp. 529–572). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Zesiger, P., Orliaguet, J., Boë, L., & Mounoud, P.
(1994). The influence of syllabic structure in handwriting and typing production. In C. Faure, P. Keuss,
G. Lorette, & A. Vinter (Eds.), Advances in handwriting and drawing: a multidisplinary approach (pp. 389–
401). Paris: Europia.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by the NSF via
award IIS-0624345. Special thanks to Dan Jurafsky,
Roey Gafter, Chigusa Kurumada, Victor Kuperman,
Matthew Adams and Meghan Sumner.

References
Adelman, J. S., & Brown, G. D. A. (2007). Phonographic neighbors, not orthographic neighbors, determine word naming latencies. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review , 14 (3), 455–459.
Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model
identification. Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions
on, 19 (6), 716–723.
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2006). Language redundancy
predicts syllabic duration and the spectral characteristics of vocalic syllable nuclei. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 119 , 3048–3058.
Bell, A., Brenier, J. M., Gregory, M., Girand, C., & Jurafsky, D. (2009). Predictability effects on durations of
content and function words in conversational english.
Journal of Memory and Language, 60 (1), 92–111.
Callison-Burch, C. (2009). Fast, cheap, and creative:
Evaluating translation quality using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2009.
Colowick, S. M., & Pool, J. (2007). Disambiguating
for the web: a test of two methods. In Proceedings of
K-CAP ’07 (pp. 173–174). ACM.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T., & Besner,
D. (1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic
(Ed.), Attention and performance VI (pp. 535–555).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fox Tree, J. E., & Clark, H. H. (1997). Pronouncing the
as thee to signal problems in speaking. Cognition, 62 ,
151–167.
Gentner, D. R. (1982). Evidence against a central control model of timing in typing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
8 (6), 793–810.
Gentner, D. R., Larochelle, S., & Grudin, J. (1988). Lexical, sublexical, and peripheral effects in skilled typewriting. Cognitive Psychology, 20 (4), 524–548.
Godfrey, J. J., & Holliman, E. (1997). Switchboard-1,
Release 2. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia.
Graff, D., Kong, J., Chen, K., & Maeda, K. (2007).
English gigaword third edition. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia.
Har’El, N., & Kenigsberg, D. (2006). Hspell. http://
hspell.ivrix.org.il/.

48

