the nature of tasks, namely, tasks with and without external
representations are completely different from users’ point of
view (see Zhang & Norman, 1994; Scaife & Rogers, 1996).
The efﬁcacy of logic diagrams has been investigated in the
context of the studies of logic teaching method (Stenning,
1999; 2002; Dobson, 1999). In these studies, subjects are
provided with substantial training in ways of manipulating
diagrams. In contrast to this, our interest is in the question
whether diagrams can be useful for those who are not trained
in rules or strategies of diagrammatic deductive reasoning.
This question is important because, in contrast to logical formulas in symbolic logic, logic diagrams in general have been
expected to be much more intuitive and effective for novices’
reasoning, not for experts’ nor for machine reasoning. In view
of the complexities of solving processes of deductive reasoning (e.g. Levesque, 1988), it is interesting to ask whether
logic diagrams can have this surprising property.
Logic diagrams have also been studied in the ﬁeld of formal diagrammatic logic since the 1990s (e.g. Shin, 1994;
Howse, Stapleton & Taylor, 2005), and inference systems for
various diagrams such as Euler and Venn diagrams have been
developed. Currently, however, there are few empirical researches to investigate their cognitive foundations. Our study
is also intended to provide a bridge between logical and cognitive studies of diagrammatic reasoning.

Cognitive model for reasoning with diagrams
Typical examples of deductive reasoning problems with external logic diagrams are shown in Figure 2.
All B are A.
All C are B.

A
B
B
C

(Therefore, All C are A)

All B are A.
All C are B.
(Therefore, All C are A)

Figure 2: Examples of syllogistic reasoning tasks with diagrams
Here a syllogism is presented with logic diagrams (Euler and
Venn diagrams). How can such diagrams contribute to checking the validity of a deductive argument? Let us ﬁrst hypothesize a cognitive model of deductive problem solving with
diagrams. The model is shown in Figure 3. This model highlights two roles of diagrams in deductive reasoning.
Regarding sentential reasoning, we assume a standard twostaged framework in natural language semantics (see, e.g.
Blackburn & Bos, 2005), according to which sentences are
ﬁrst associated with semantic information, and then the validity of the argument is checked using some inferential mechanisms (such as model-theoretical or proof-theoretical ones).
The details and precise nature of such linguistic comprehension and inference are not our concern here.
Diagrams are also associated with semantic information,
but at the same time they are syntactic objects to be manipulated in reasoning processes. We distinguish two ways in
which diagrams can be effective in deductive reasoning.

Figure 3: Cognitive model for diagrammatic reasoning
Interpretational efﬁcacy Firstly, diagrams can help ﬁx the
correct interpretations of sentences and thereby avoid deductive reasoning errors due to misinterpretation. For example, a
sentence “All A are B” is sometimes misinterpreted as equivalent to “All B are A”. This is known as illicit conversion error
in the literature (e.g. Newstead & Griggs, 1983). Subjects
presented with diagrams such as the ones in Figure 2 could
immediately see that the diagrams corresponding to these two
sentences are topologically different, and hence deliver different semantic information. In our model, such processes
are formulated as processes of matching the semantic information obtained from diagrams with the one obtained from
sentences. In this case, the validity of an argument is checked
based on the same kind of process as the one in linguistic reasoning. Here diagrams are used in a static way, merely as a
record of information (Barwise & Etchemendy, 1991).
Inferential efﬁcacy Secondly, and more importantly, diagrams can play a crucial role in reasoning processes themselves. More speciﬁcally, the solving processes of deductive
reasoning tasks can be replaced with internal manipulations
of diagrams. In other words, one can check the validity of
a deductive argument by means of constructions of diagrammatic proofs. The above model assumes that such constructions are conducted through a proof-theoretical component of
diagrammatic reasoning. If a task of constructing diagrammatic proofs consists of simple and intuitive steps, it is expected to be more tractable than usual linguistic inferences.
It seems to be generally agreed that logic diagrams have interpretational efﬁcacy. For example, Stenning (2002) argues
that (a)symmetricity of diagrams can aid processing of the
meaning of quantiﬁed sentences in syllogisms. Mineshima,
Okada, Sato, and Takemura (2008) presented experimental
evidence for such interpretational effects, based on a comparison of the performances of syllogistic solving tasks with
and without Euler diagrams. In what follows, we assume that
logic diagrams can have interpretational efﬁcacy, and investigate whether they can have inferential efﬁcacy as well.

General Hypothesis
Based on the above model, we propose the following general
hypothesis: (1) logic diagrams can have inferential efﬁcacy,
that is, internal constructions of diagrammatic proofs occurs

2669

in deductive reasoning with external logic diagrams, and (2)
certain diagrams would naturally trigger such constructions
so that even users without explicit prior knowledge of inference rules or strategies could correctly manipulate diagrams.
One way to test our hypothesis is to compare performances
of deductive problem solving with several distinct diagrams
which are equivalent in semantic information but are of different forms, namely, ones that have a form suitable for diagrammatic proof constructions and ones that do not. A basic
assumption here is that the existence of internal constructions
depends on the forms of diagrams given, and on the simplicity or naturalness of the required diagrammatic proofs. If subjects’ performance with diagrams of a form suitable for diagrammatic proof constructions would be signiﬁcantly better,
it could count as evidence for the existence of such constructions in subjects’ reasoning.
To test the claim in (2), subjects in our experiments were
presented with instructions on the meaning of categorical
sentences and diagrams used, but not with any instruction
on rules or strategies of constructing diagrammatic proofs.
We expect that if certain diagrams have inferential efﬁcacy,
it would be exploitable based on their natural properties or
constraints, rather than extra conventions. In other words,
processes of constructing diagrammatic proofs as postulated
in our cognitive model could be conducted without explicit
knowledge of the underlying rule or strategies; such internal
constructions could be naturally triggered based on the correct understanding of the meaning of diagrams.

Task Analysis
Conventional devices in Euler and Venn diagrams

A

B

A

A
B

B
D5

D4

A
x

B

D6

D7

Figure 5: The diagrams corresponding to “Some A are not B” in
traditional Euler system (D4 , D5 and D6 ) and the one in our Euler
representation system (D7 )

In Venn diagrams, every circle partially overlaps each other,
as in D2 and D3 in Figure 4 and D5 in Figure 5. Such diagrams do not convey any speciﬁc information about circles,
hence are subject to the convention of crossing. Meaningful relations among circles are then expressed using a novel
device, shading, by the convention that a shaded region denotes an empty set. For example, the statement “All A are B”
is represented as D2 or D3 in Figure 4. Note that the same
information can also be conveyed by the Euler diagram D1 .
Furthermore, 3-Venn diagrams use a link to connect points,
which represent the disjunctive information about a point (see
Dv4 and Dv5 in Figure 7 below).

Constructions of diagrammatic proofs
We compare syllogism solving tasks using these three types
of diagrams in terms of difﬁculties in constructing the corresponding diagrammatic proofs. Deductive reasoning generally requires combining information in premises. Such a task
could naturally be replaced by a task of combining presented
diagrams. We expect that an inference process of combining
diagrams is relatively easy to access, and accordingly, that
an internal construction of a diagrammatic proof is naturally
triggered if it consists only of such combining processes.
Reasoning with Euler diagrams As an illustration, consider a syllogism All B are A, Some C are B; therefore Some
C are A. A solving process of this syllogism using Euler diagrams is shown in Figure 6.

In our experiment, we use the following three types of diagrams: Euler diagrams, Venn diagrams having two circles,
which we call “2-Venn diagrams”, and Venn diagrams having three circles, which we call “3-Venn diagrams”. Typical
examples are shown in Figure 4.

All B are A.

Some C are B.
C

B
A
D1

All B are A.
D2

D3

Some C are B.

A
B

Figure 4: Representations of All A are B in Euler diagram (D1 ),
2-Venn diagram (D2 ), and 3-Venn diagram (D3 ).

De1

Euler diagrams used in our experiment are the ones introduced in Mineshima et al. (2008). Our system has the following features: (i) it uses a named point ‘x’ to indicate the
existence of objects; (ii) it adopts a convention of crossing,
according to which two circles which are indeterminate with
respect of their relationship are put to partially overlap each
other. Consequently, a single categorical statement can be
represented by just a single diagram (see D7 in Figure 5).
This contrasts with another version of Euler system, which requires more than one diagrams to represent some categorical
sentences, and hence has the well-known problem of combinatorial complexities (see chapter 4 of Johnson-Laird, 1983).

C

Uniﬁcation

s

+

x

addition
?

Dv2
A

B

x x

B

C
De2

A
C x B
De3

Dv1
addition ?

B

x

Dv3

superposition

s

+

Dv4

Dv5

Some C are A.

Some C are A.

Figure 6: A proof of syllo-

Figure 7: A proof of syllogism

gism using Euler diagrams.

using Venn diagrams.

In general, a diagrammatic proof of a syllogism with Euler
diagrams consists of a step of combining premise diagrams,
which we call a uniﬁcation step. It is expected that uniﬁcation
steps are relatively easy to access, so that such constructions
of diagrammatic proofs are naturally triggered.

2670

Reasoning with 2-Venn diagrams A solving process in 2Venn diagrams is illustrated in Figure 7, where the premise
All B are A is represented by Dv1 , and the premise Some C are
B by Dv2 . Since these two diagrams contain a different circle, in order to combining them while preserving the syntax
of Venn diagrams, one needs to accommodate their circles. In
this case, circle C is added to Dv1 , and A to Dv2 . Then, by superposing the shaded region of Dv3 on Dv4 , one obtains diagram
Dv5 , from which the conclusion “Some C are A” can correctly
be read off. Here we can see that a solving process in 2-Venn
diagrams consists of two steps, which we call addition and
superposition. Note that a process of combining Euler diagrams, namely uniﬁcation, can exploit the movements of circles as in Figure 6, whereas a process of combining Venn diagrams, namely superposition, operates on premise diagrams
with the same number of circles, and hence does not involve
any movement of circles.
Reasoning with 3-Venn diagrams If we start the proof
with the 3-Venn diagrams Dv3 and Dv4 in Figure 7, we can
skip the steps of adding a circle as required in the case of
2-Venn diagrams. The only step needed is the superposition
step, which is expected to be relatively easy to access.

tomatically triggered even for subjects without explicit prior
knowledge of inferential rules or strategies. Then, our
hypothesis amounts to saying that in syllogistic reasoning
tasks, Euler diagrams and 3-Venn diagrams are self-guiding,
whereas 2-Venn diagrams are not.
Based on these considerations, we predict that the performance in syllogism solving would be better when subjects use
Euler diagrams or 3-Venn diagrams than when they use symbolic (set-theoretical) representations. We also predict that
there would be little difference between the performance with
2-Venn diagrams and with the symbolic representations.

Method
Subjects are provided with instructions on the meanings of diagrams and then required to solve syllogistic reasoning tasks
with diagrams. We conducted a pretest to check whether subjects understood the instructions correctly. The pretest was
designed mainly to see whether subjects correctly understood
the conventional devices of each diagram, in particular, the
convention of crossing in both Euler and Venn diagrams and
shading and linking in Venn diagrams.

Participants

Predictions
Intuitively, 2-Venn diagrams seem to be relatively difﬁcult to
handle in solving syllogisms. For in order to construct diagrammatic proofs from 2-Venn diagrams, one has to know
the relevant inference rules and strategies in advance. More
speciﬁcally one has to know the successive processes of
adding a circle and superposing two diagrams, as indicated
in Figure 7. We expect that those who are ignorant of such
a solving strategy could not appeal to concrete manipulations
of the diagrams. They seem to have to draw a conclusion
solely based on usual linguistic inference, with the help of
semantic information obtained from 2-Venn diagrams.
To test this point, we introduce set-theoretical expressions
corresponding to Venn diagrams, such as A ∩ B = 0/ for “All
A are B” and A ∩ B 6= 0/ for “Some A are B”, as a control condition. We assume that they could only contribute to interpreting premises of syllogisms. Thus, they are used to check
whether the effects of Euler, 3-Venn, and 2-Venn diagrams
are interpretational or not.
In contrast to 2-Venn diagrams, both Euler diagrams and
3-Venn diagrams seem to be relatively easy to handle even
for those users who are not trained to manipulate them in syllogism solving. The essential steps involved are uniﬁcation
and superposition steps. Given the fact that deductive reasoning generally requires combining the information in premises,
these processes seem to be natural enough so that they would
be immediately accessible to users. We expect that users
could exploit natural constraints of diagrams and extract the
right rules to draw a conclusion from Euler diagrams and 3Venn diagrams themselves.
We will say that diagrammatic representations are selfguiding if the constructions of diagrammatic proofs are au-

365 undergraduates (mean age 19.78 ± 2.69 SD) in six introductive philosophy classes took part in the experiments. They
gave a consent to their cooperation in the experiments, and
were given small reward after the experiments. The subjects
were native speakers of Japanese. The sentences and instructions were given in Japanese. The subjects were divided into
four groups: Symbolic, 2-Venn, 3-Venn, and Euler groups.
The four groups in this order consisted of 90, 95, 114, and
66 students, respectively. From each we excluded 26, 27, 35,
3 students (those who gave up before the end), respectively.
It is notable that fewer students in the Euler group gave up
compared to the other three groups.

Materials
The experiment was conducted in the booklet form.
Pretest The subjects of all groups were presented with ten
representations (ten diagrams or ten set-theoretical expressions). They were asked to choose, from a list of ﬁve possibilities, all sentences which correspond to a given representation. The highest possible score on the pretest of the Symbolic group was ten and the cutoff point was set to be ﬁve.
The highest possible score on the pretests of the 2-Venn, 3Venn, and Euler groups was twelve, because there were two
correct answers in two of the ten problems. Their cutoff point
was set to be eight. These cutoff points were chosen carefully, based upon the results of our pilot experiments. The total time in Symbolic, 2-Venn and Euler groups was 5 minutes.
The total time in the 3-Venn group was 6 minutes, since the
instruction was longer than those of the other three groups.
Before the pretest, the subjects in each group were presented
with three examples.

2671

Syllogistic reasoning tasks The subjects in the Symbolic
group were given syllogisms with set-theoretical representations (such as the one in Figure 8). The subjects in the 2-Venn
group were given syllogisms with Venn diagrams having two
circles in premises (such as the one in Figure 9). The subjects in the 3-Venn group were given syllogisms with Venn
diagrams having three circles in premises (such as the one in
Figure 10). The subjects in the Euler group were given syllogisms with Euler diagrams (such as the one in Figure 11).
We gave 31 syllogisms in total, out of which 14 syllogisms
had a valid conclusion and 17 syllogisms had no valid conclusion. The subjects were presented with two premises and
were asked to choose, from a list of ﬁve possibilities, a sentence corresponding to the valid conclusion. The list consists
of All-, No-, Some-, Some-not, and NoValid. The subjectpredicate order of each conclusion was CA. The test was a
20-minute power test, and each task was presented in random
order (10 patterns were prepared). Before the test, the examples in Figure 8, 9, 10, and 11 were presented to each group.
All B are A.

B ∩ A = 0/

All B are A.

All C are B.

C ∩ B = 0/

All C are B.

minute 30 seconds to read two pages instructions, in which
the subjects were warned to choose only one sentence as answer and not to take a note. These time limits were set based
upon the results of our pilot experiments.

Results and Discussion
Pretest
In the Symbolic group, 39 students scored less than 5 on the
pretest. In the 2-Venn group, 38 students scored less than 8
on the pretest. In the 3-Venn group, 41 students scored less
than 8 on the pretest. In the Euler group, 18 students scored
less than 8 on the pretest. These students are excluded from
the following analysis.

Syllogistic reasoning tasks
Figure 12 shows the average accuracy rates of the total 31
syllogisms in each group. The rate for the Euler group was
85.2%, the rate for the 3-Venn group was 75.2%, the rate for
the Venn group was 66.6%, and the rate for the Symbolic
group was 58.7%.
****
****

Figure 9: Example of reasoning task of 2-Venn group

n.s.
50
30
10

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

All B are A.

All B are A.

A
B

All C are B.

All C are B.

B
C

All C are A.
No C are A.
Some C are A.
Some C are not A.
None of them.

Correct answer: 1

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

soning task of 3-Venn group

soning task of Euler group

**** p<.001

Symbolic, 2-Venn, 3-Venn, and Euler groups (error-bar refers to SD).

Correct answer: 1

Figure 11: Example of rea-

* p<.05
*** p<.005

Figure 12: The average accuracy rates of 31 total syllogisms in the

All C are A.
No C are A.
Some C are A.
Some C are not A.
None of them.

Figure 10: Example of rea-

*

n.s.

70

Euler

ing task of Symbolic group

Correct answer: 1

90

3-Venn

Figure 8: Example of reason-

All C are A.
No C are A.
Some C are A.
Some C are not A.
None of them.

2-Venn

Correct answer: 1

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

(control)

All C are A.
No C are A.
Some C are A.
Some C are not A.
None of them.

Symbolic

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Accuracy rates of syllogisms (%)

***

Procedure
All four groups were ﬁrst given 1 minute 30 seconds to read
one page instructions on the meaning of categorical sentences. In addition, the Symbolic group was given 2 minutes to read two pages instructions on the meaning of settheoretical representations. The 2-Venn and Euler groups
were given 2 minutes to read two pages instructions on the
meaning of diagrams. The 3-Venn group was given 3 minutes
to read two pages instructions on the meaning of diagrams.
Before the pretest, all groups were given 1 minute 30 seconds
to read two pages instructions on the pretest. Finally, before
the syllogistic reasoning test, all four groups were given 1

These data were subjected to a one-way Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA). There was a signiﬁcant main effect, F (3, 134) =
13.680. p < .001. Multiple comparison tests by Ryan’s procedure yield the following results: (i) There was a signiﬁcant
difference between the Symbolic group and the Euler group,
F (1, 68) = 5.935, p < .001. (ii) There was a signiﬁcant difference between the Symbolic group and the 3-Venn group,
F (1, 61) = 3.578, p < .005. (iii) There was no signiﬁcant difference between the Symbolic group and the 2-Venn group.
(iv) There was a signiﬁcant difference between the 2-Venn
group and the Euler group, F (1, 68) = 4.397, p < .001. (v)
There was no signiﬁcant difference between the 2-Venn group
and the 3-Venn group. (vi) There was a signiﬁcant difference
between the 3-Venn group and the Euler group, F (1, 81) =
2.537, p < .05. It should be noted that if we include those
subjects who failed the pretest, we still obtain similar results
in each comparison: for (i), (iv) and (v), there were significant differences, p < .001; for (ii), there was a signiﬁcant
difference, p < .01; for (iii) and (v), there were no signiﬁcant
differences.

2672

The results show that the performances of the Euler group
and the 3-Venn group were better than that of the Symbolic
group. This provides evidence for our hypothesis that Euler
and 3-Venn diagrams have inferential efﬁcacy and are selfguiding in the sense speciﬁed above. This means that as far
as these diagrams are concerned, the internal constructions
of diagrammatic proofs exist, and they can be naturally triggered for subjects without prior knowledge of inference rules
or strategies. By contrast, there was little difference between
the performance of the 2-Venn group and that of the Symbolic
group. This suggests that 2-Venn diagrams have only interpretational efﬁcacy, and are not self-guiding in our sense.
The results shown in Figure 12 indicate that the performance of Euler group was better than that of 3-Venn group. In
particular, there was a signiﬁcant difference with respect to a
particular type of syllogism, namely, invalid syllogisms having an existential sentence as one of their premises. The data
was subjected to a 4 × 2 ANOVA. As a main result, (i) there
was a signiﬁcant difference between this type of syllogisms
in the 3-Venn group (57.8%) and the other types in the same
group (83.4%), F (1, 134) = 29.434. p < .001. (ii) there was
a signiﬁcant difference between this type of syllogism in the
3-Venn group (57.8%) and that in the Euler group (84.2%), F
(1, 81) = 4.926. p < .005. (iii) there was no signiﬁcant difference between this type of syllogisms in the 3-Venn group
(57.8%) and that in the Symbolic group (48.8%).
The relative difﬁculty in syllogism solving with 3-Venn diagrams could seem to be attributed to the difﬁculty in the process of drawing a conclusion from an internally constructed
diagram. Such a process of extracting information may be
formulated as a process of deletion. A deletion step in an Euler diagrammatic proof (as illustrated to the left in Figure 13)
is simple in that it only requires to remove a circle without
adjusting any other part of the diagram.

D1

A
C x B

D3

Deletion
?

A

A
D2

C x

Some C are A.

D5

Deletion
?
x

D4

C

Some C are A.

Deletion
?

A
D6

x x

C

No Valid.

Figure 13: Deletion steps in Euler and Venn diagrams.
By contrast, deletion steps in 3-Venn diagrammatic proofs are
somewhat complicated. Especially, in the step from D5 to D6
in Figure 13, which is an instance of invalid syllogisms having an existential sentence as one of its premise, one has to
remove a circle and shading and to leave a linking point at the
same region. Such complexities in deletion steps seem to reﬂect complexities of the processes of observing conclusions,
and hence cause the difﬁculty in this type of syllogisms.
If our analysis is correct, the complexity of diagrams could
make difﬁcult the processes of extracting information. On the
other hand, our results of the total 31 syllogisms suggest that
3-Venn diagrams have inferential efﬁcacy, while 2-Venn diagrams do not. This in turn suggests that conventional devices

such as shading and linking points could facilitate the processes of combining information by means of superposition
of two diagrams. Thus, we could say that the availability of
the process of combining information in diagrams depends on
the complexity of the inference processes involved, whereas
the availability of the process of extracting information in diagrams depends on the complexity of the conventional devices
involved. Stenning and Oberlander (1995) point out that efﬁcacy of diagrams can be ascribed to “speciﬁcity” of diagrammatic representations, and argue that diagrams could be effective because of their limited expressive power, in particular of
the inability to express indeterminate or disjunctive information. In view of this, our ﬁndings are particularly interesting
since they show that conventional devices to deal with indeterminacy sometimes facilitate internal manipulations of diagrams, hence contribute to their efﬁcacy.

References
Allwein, G. & Barwise, J. (Eds.). (1996). Logical Reasoning with
Diagrams. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Barwise, J., & Etchemendy, J.(1991). Visual information and valid
reasoning. In G. Allwein & J. Barwise (Eds). Logical Reasoning
with Diagrams (pp.3-26). New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Bauer, M. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1993). How diagrams can improve reasoning. Psychology Science, 4(6), 372-378.
Blackburm, P. & Bos, J. (2005). Representation and Inference for
Natural Language. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Dobson, M. (1999). Information enforcement and learning with interactive graphical systems. Learning and Instruction, 9, 365-390.
Glasgow, J., Narayanan, N.H., & Chandrasekaran, B. (Eds.). (1995).
Diagrammatic Reasoning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Howse, J., Stapleton, G., & Taylor, J. (2005). Spider diagrams. LMS
Journal of Computation and Mathematics, 8, 145-194.
Levesque, H.J. (1988) Logic and the complexity of reasoning. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 17, 335-389.
Larkin, J. & Simon, H. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth
10,000 words. Cognitive Science, 11, 65-99.
Mineshima, K., Okada, M., Sato, Y & Takemura, R. (2008). Diagrammatic reasoning system with Euler circles: theory and experiment design. In G. Stapleton et al. (Eds.), The Proceedings of
Diagrams 2008, LNAI 5223 (pp.188-205), Heidelberg: Springer.
Newstead, S. & Griggs, R. (1983). Drawing inferences from quantiﬁed statements J. Verbal learning & verbal behavior, 22, 535-546.
Scaife, M. & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies. 45, 185-213.
Schwartz, D.L. (1995). Reasoning about the referent of a picture
versus reasoning about the picture as the referent: an effect of
visual realism. Memory and Cognition, 23(6), 709-722.
Shimojima, A. (1996). On the Efﬁcacy of Representation. PhD thesis, Indiana University.
Shimojima, A. & Fukaya, T. (2003). Do we really reason about a
picture the referent. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1076-1081).
Shimojima, A. & Katagiri, Y. (2008). Hypothetical drawing in embodied spatial reasoning. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2247-2252).
Shin, S.-J.(1994). The Logical Status of Diagrams. Cambridge U.P.
Stenning, K. (1999). The cognitive consequences of modality assignment for educational communication: the picture in logic
teaching. Learning and Instruction, 9, 391-410.
Stenning, K. (2002). Seeing Reason. Oxford Univ. Press.
Stenning, K., & Oberlander, J. (1995). A cognitive theory of graphical and linguistic reasoning. Cognitive Science, 19, 97-140.
Trafton, J.G. & Trickett, S.B. (2001). A new model of graph and
visualization usage. Proceedings of the 23th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1048-1053).
Zhang, J., & Norman, D.A. (1994). Representations in distributed
cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18(1), 87-122.

2673

