UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Coordination dynamics in speech and lexical semantics
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9pk3c44g
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Kello, Christopher
Rhodes, Theo
Hollis, Geoff
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

              Coordination dynamics in speech and lexical semantics
                                                 Christopher Kello
                                            University of California, Merced
                                                    Theo Rhodes
                                            University of California, Merced
                                                     Geoff Hollis
                                                University of Cincinnati
                                                   Bryan Kerster
                                            University of California, Merced
Abstract: Variations in individual human behavior are intrinsically long-range correlated (i.e. 1/f noise). These
correlations may reflect interdependence (i.e. coordination) among components at various scales of structure and
dynamics (e.g., neurons, cortical columns, brain areas, brain-body interactions). Two experiments tested whether
long-range correlations emerge when two people interact. In experiment 1, perceptual-motor coordination was
invoked by instructing participant pairs to coordinate uttering the word ”mom” in alternation with key taps. In
experiment 2, semantic coordination was invoked by alternating free word associations (e.g. one says ”cat”, the
other says ”dog”, first says ”collar”, second says ”shirt”, and so on). Fluctuations in series of mom-tap intervals were
long-range correlated. Long-range correlations were also found in semantics fluctuations of free word associations,
the latter being weaker and derived from lexical co-occurrence statistics. Results indicate that common principles of
coordination apply across individual and dyadic scales of perceptual-motor and cognitive performances.
                                                            655

