UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross Cultural Differences in Implicit Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0c98t8p9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kiyokawa, Sachiko
Dienes, Zoltan
Tanaka, Daisuke
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross Cultural Differences in Implicit Learning
Sachiko Kiyokawa (kiyo@isc.chubu.ac.jp)
Department of Psychology, Chubu University
1200 Matsumoto-cho
Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501 Japan

Zoltán Dienes (dienes@sussex.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Sussex
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QH, UK

Daisuke Tanaka (tanaka@rstu.jp)
Faculty of Regional Sciences, Tottori University
Koyama-cho-minami 4-101, Tottori City, Tottori 680-8551, Japan

Ayumi Yamada (ayumi.yamada@gmail.com)
Human Innovation Research Center, Aoyama Gakuin University
Shibuya 4-4-25, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150-8366, Japan

Abstract
Previous studies have indicated cross cultural differences in
conscious processes such that Easterners have a preference
for a more global perspective and Westerners for a more
analytical perspective. We investigated whether these biases
also apply to implicit learning. In Experiment 1, Japanese
and British participants were asked to attend to one of the
two aspects of a set of GLOCAL strings, global or local. The
results showed that they could learn the AG implicitly only
from the attended level in both cultural groups. They also
showed that the global superiority in implicit learning was
found only for the Japanese. In Experiment 2, these cultural
differences were examined without manipulating the
participants’ attention. The results indicated implicit learning
only at the global and not the local level for the Japanese,
but equal learning of both levels by the British. We
concluded that cultural biases strongly affect the type of
unconscious knowledge that people acquire.
Keywords: cultural differences; selective attention; implicit
learning; artificial grammar learning; global/local.

Role of Selective Attention in Implicit Learning
When repeatedly exposed to large amounts of information,
we can acquire some abstract knowledge, such as rules or
covariations between variables, without being aware of it.
This phenomenon has been known as implicit learning.
Since Reber’s pioneering work on it (Reber, 1967), implicit
learning has been studied using several paradigms, for
example, serial reaction time (SRT) task or artificial
grammar (AG) learning (for reviews, see Dienes, 2008;
Reber, 1989; Shanks, 2005).
Reber (1989) suggested that we can implicitly learn some
knowledge with a minimal amount of attention. Several
researchers have agreed with the claim (e.g. Perruchet &
Vinter, 2002; Whittlesea & Dorken, 1993). Based on this
claim, it can be supposed that some attentional selection
should occur in implicit learning.

Previous studies on the role of selective attention in
implicit learning (e.g. Cock, Berry, & Buchner, 2002;
Jiménez & Méndez, 1999; Rowland & Shanks, 2006) have
provided supportive evidence to Reber’s claim. However,
these studies have mainly used the SRT task and few studies
have investigated the role of selective attention in AG
learning.
Seger (1998) argued that different mechanisms may
underlie learning in the SRT task and in AG learning.
Specifically, SRT task involves the acquisition of perceptual
motor implicit knowledge, whereas AG learning involves
acquiring implicit knowledge for the purpose of making
judgments. Similarly, Boucher and Dienes (2003)
speculated that sequential tasks such as SRT involve error
correction mechanisms based on prediction, whereas AG
learning may involve an automatic chunking mechanism.
Although some researchers suggest that there is a common
mechanism in these two tasks (e.g. Perlman and Tzelgov,
2006), the roles of selective attention in implicit learning
may differ in SRT and AG learning. This claim needs to be
further tested.
The first attempt to investigate the role of selective
attention in AG learning was conducted by Tanaka,
Kiyokawa, Yamada, Dienes, and Shigemasu (2008). They
developed a new method using GLOCAL strings (an
example is shown in Figure 1) to manipulate selective
attention. GLOCAL strings are chains of compound letters
(Navon, 1977). A compound letter represents one large
letter (i.e. a global letter) composed of a set of small letters
(i.e. local letters). A critical feature of this stimulus is that
while a GLOCAL string can be read as one string by using
global letters (NVJTVJ in Figure 1), it can also be read as a
string using local letters (BYYFLB in Figure 1). Since
GLOCAL strings can simultaneously represent two different
strings following different AGs, we can examine whether
the participants can learn the two AGs—one is attended
while the other is unattended—by manipulating their

2206

Figure 1. An Example of GLOCAL Strings.
attention. Using the GLOCAL strings, Tanaka et al.
revealed that participants could learn an AG only from the
attended level of the GLOCAL strings. They concluded that
selective attention plays a critical role in AG learning.
Tanaka et al. (2008) also found the global superiority in
AG learning. In Experiment 1, the classification accuracy
for the attended grammatical strings was higher in the
global attention condition than in the local attention
condition. In Experiment 2, they examined whether or not
the information at the unattended level was encoded by
using a Stroop paradigm. They found the global superiority
again. These results suggest that there is a global/local
asymmetry in implicit learning. This tendency is consistent
with the claim for a general preference for processing at the
global level (see Navon, 2003, for a review).

Cultural Differences in Attention
Cultural psychology literature has suggested that there are
cultural differences in attention between Easterners and
Westerners (for reviews, see Nisbett, 2003; Nisbett &
Miyamoto, 2005; Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001).
Specifically, Easterners tend to pay attention to a scene
globally, whereas Westerners do so locally.
Masuda and Nisbett (2001) examined whether Easterners
attend to context more than Westerners do. They presented
Japanese and American participants with animated vignettes
of underwater scenes (in Study 1) or with photos of an
animal in the wild (in Study 2) and asked the participants to
report the contents. In a subsequent recognition test, the
participants were shown previously seen objects as well as
new objects, either in their original setting or in novel
settings, and were then asked to judge whether or not they
had seen the objects. The results showed that Easterners
made more statements about contextual information and
relationships than Westerners did. They also found that
Easterners recognized previously seen objects more
accurately when they saw them in their original settings
rather than in the novel settings, whereas this manipulation
had relatively little effect on Westerners.
Kitayama, Duffy, Kawamura, and Larsen (2003)
developed the framed line test (FLT). In this test,
participants were presented with a square frame in which a
vertical line was printed. They were then presented with
another square frame of a different size and required to draw
a line that was the same either in absolute length (absolute

task) or in proportional length (relative task). Kitayama et al.
(2003) found that the performance of Westerners in the
absolute task was better than that in the relative task,
whereas for Easterners the pattern was reversed. The results
indicated that Westerners are better able to filter out or to
suppress contextual frame information, whereas Easterners
are better at incorporating contextual information. Ishii and
Kitayama (2007) extended the results to non-student
participants and to auditory tasks.
Based on these studies, there is a possibility that the global
superiority found by Tanaka et al. (2008) is limited to
Easterners. In Tanaka et al. (2008), the participants were all
Japanese. Because they tended to pay more attention to the
information at the global level than that at the local level,
they might have had difficulty filtering out the information
at the global level when asked to focus on the strings at the
local level. As a result, global superiority in AG learning
emerged.

Present Study
In the present study, we determined whether or not the
global superiority in AG learning found by Tanaka et al.
(2008) would be obtained for Western participants. Based
on the cross cultural literature, there ought to be cultural
differences in attention. Since selective attention plays an
important role in AG learning, we hypothesized that the
cultural differences in attention would have an effect on AG
learning: Easterners could learn AG from the global level
more than from the local level, whereas Westerners could
not.
We modified the procedures used by Tanaka et al. (2008)
in the following ways. The first is the instructions in the
learning session. In Tanaka et al. (2008), the participants
were asked to write down the strings represented either by
global or by local levels during their presentation. This
procedure in the learning session might help the participants
to learn the attended grammar more than otherwise because
they can read the strings that they wrote down on the paper.
In the present study, the participants were asked only to
look at the strings carefully and sometimes write them down
after the GLOCAL string had disappeared.
The second is in the procedure followed in the test
session. In the previous study, the participants were not
instructed regarding on which AG they should base their
judgments. This procedure might cause the degree of each
type of AG learning to be underestimated. In the present
study, we divided the test into two sessions and the
participants were explicitly told to judge the grammaticality
based on one of the two AGs in each session. The order of
these two test sessions was counterbalanced among
participants.
In the third modification, the participants were asked to
show the basis of their judgment in each grammaticality
judgment trial. Although this point will not be discussed in
this paper owing to space constraints, this procedure allows
us to examine in more detail whether participants’

2207

grammaticality judgment was based on an implicit or
explicit basis.

Experiment 1
This experiment was designed to examine whether or not
the global superiority found in Tanaka et al. (2008) could be
replicated by Japanese and British participants.

Method
Participants Forty undergraduates from Chubu University
and forty-two from the University of Sussex participated in
the experiment and received a course credit following the
completion of the experimental session. Assignments on
types of GLOCAL strings and the order of the tests were
counterbalanced. None of the students had previously
participated in the same kind of experiment.
Stimuli The same AGs as those in Tanaka et al. (2008) were
used. Grammar 1 comprised five letters (J, N, T, V, and X),
as did Grammar 2, which used the letters B, F, L, Y, and Z.
Eighteen grammatical strings with a length of three to six
letters were constructed from each AG. Two types of
GLOCAL strings were constructed from these strings,
following the two AGs. One type of GLOCAL string
followed Grammar 1 at the global level and Grammar 2 at
the local level; this was reversed for the other type of
GLOCAL string, so grammar was counterbalanced across
levels.
GLOCAL strings were presented as white uppercase
letters against a black background. Small letters were used,
printed in 12-point MS Gothic font. One large letter was the
height of seven small letters. Eight small letters were
arranged horizontally to obtain F, J, L, and X; nine to obtain
B, N, T, and Y; thirteen to obtain V; and seven to obtain Z.
The height of a large letter on the screen was approximately
3.2 cm and the width was approximately 1.8–3.0 cm. The
distance between the display and the participants was
approximately 60 cm.
Twenty strings following each grammar used in the test
phase were composed of five or six letters. These were not
GLOCAL but regular letter strings. Half of these were used
in the learning phase and will be referred to as ‘presented
grammatical strings’. The remaining strings were not
identical to any of the strings presented in the learning phase
and will be referred to as ‘novel grammatical strings’. All of
these grammatical strings were used to construct
nongrammatical strings that violated both of the grammars
by placing one or two characters in nonpermissible locations.
Four types of string pairs were constructed for the test
phase. The first type—Global_Old—paired a presented
grammatical string at the global level of GLOCAL strings in
the learning phase with a nongrammatical one based on the
AG extracted from the global level of the GLOCAL strings.
The
second
type—Global_New—paired
a
novel
grammatical string at the global level of GLOCAL strings in
the learning phase with a nongrammatical one based on the

AG that was extracted from the global level of the
GLOCAL strings. Similarly, the third type was termed
Local_Old, and the fourth Local_New. Each type comprised
20 pairs. Thus, there were 80 pairs in the test phase.
Matching pairs of grammatical and nongrammatical strings
in each type were randomized for each participant, subject
to the constraint that the two strings should have the same
length.
Procedure During the learning phase, 18 GLOCAL strings
were presented on the display for 6 seconds. Half of the
participants were asked to look at and memorize the
GLOCAL strings represented by the large letters. The other
half were asked to do so with respect to the strings
represented by the small letters. The former was a global
attention condition and the latter was a local attention
condition. The participants were also required to write down
the string represented by the attended level when the
message was shown on the display. The message was
presented about once in ten trials. Each GLOCAL string
was presented six times. A mask stimulus comprising many
‘+’ signs in the area where the GLOCAL strings were
intended to be displayed was presented for the 1-second
interval between the presentation of GLOCAL strings.
At the beginning of the test phase, the participants were
informed that two strings would be presented in the upper
and lower regions of the display, each of the two levels of
the training strings followed a set of rules, and each string of
a pair followed one set of rules. The test phase consisted of
two sessions: a test on the global level and one on the local
level. Half of the participants were required to press the key
associated with the string that they judged to be
grammatical, extracted from the global aspects of the
GLOCAL strings in the first test session and the local in the
second one. The remaining participants were asked to do the
same thing, first for the local and then for the global level.
Forty pairs were presented to each participant in a random
order in each test session. A pair of strings remained on
display until the participants pressed one of the two keys.
The presentation of strings from a pair in the upper region
was also randomized for each participant, subject to the
constraint that one type of pair (i.e. the grammatical string)
would be presented equally in each region.
After making judgments, the participants were asked
what they based their judgments on and were required to
choose one of the following five answers:
1. Random responding or guessing: Your judgment had
no basis whatsoever; you could have just flipped a coin to
make your judgment.
2. Intuition: You have some confidence in your judgment,
but you have no idea why.
3. Familiarity: The sequence seemed familiar or
unfamiliar for reasons you could not state.
4. Recollection: You recollected or failed to recollect
seeing all or part of the sequence in the training phase.
5. Rules: You based the judgment on a rule or rules you
could state if asked.

2208

Selection Rates for the Grammatical Strings
Selection Rates of Grammatical Strings

All of the instructions were presented in Japanese for the
participants from Chubu University and in English for those
from the University of Sussex. The English instructions
were back translated and checked to make sure they had the
same meaning as those in Japanese.

Selection Rates for the Grammatical Strings
Selection Rates of Grammatical Strings

Design A 2 × 2 × 2 mixed design was employed. The first
factor was global/local. The participants were instructed to
attend to the global or local level of the learning phase. This
was a between-participants factor. The second factor was
attended/unattended. In the test phase, half of the pairs could
be judged correctly on the basis of the grammar extracted
from the attended level of the GLOCAL strings, whereas the
other half could be judged correctly on the basis of the
grammar extracted from the unattended level. This was a
within-participants factor. In addition, the third factor,
presentation, indicated whether or not the grammatical
string had been presented before in the learning phase. This
was also a within-participants factor.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows the mean classification accuracy for each
condition in the test phase. First, the proportion of accurate
classifications was subjected to a 2 × 2 × 2 mixed ANOVA
with global/local, attended/unattended, and presentation (old
or new grammatical string) as factors for each cultural group.
For the Japanese participants, the main effect of the
attended/unattended level was significant (F (1, 38) =
231.43, p < .001). Accuracy concerning the grammar of the
attended level was higher than that of the unattended level.
The
interaction
between
the
global/local
and
attended/unattended levels was also significant (F (1, 38) =
11.04, p < .01). The results of the simple main effect
revealed that accuracy in the global attention condition was
higher than that in the local attention condition at the
attended level (F (1, 76) = 10.67, p < .01), whereas this
effect disappeared at the unattended level (F < 1).
For the British participants, the main effect of the
attended/unattended level was significant (F (1, 40) = 69.03,
p < .001), indicating that accuracy concerning the grammar
of the attended level was higher than that of the unattended
level. The interaction between the global/local and
attended/unattended levels was not significant (F (1, 40) =
1.43).
In order to examine the possibility that the participants
could learn the AG from the unattended level to some
degree, we compared the proportions accurately classified
with chance (.5) in each condition. With respect to the
Japanese participants, accuracy for Unattended_Old and
Unattended_New in both the global and local conditions
was not higher than chance (ts < 1). With respect to the
British participants, on the other hand, accuracy for
Unattended_Old in the global condition was significantly
higher than chance (t (20) = 2.91 p < .01).
We replicated the results of Tanaka et al. (2008) for the
Japanese participants. They were able to learn the AG from
the global level more than from the local level only when

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50

Global
Local

0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Attended_
Old

Attended_ Unattended_ Unattended_
New
Old
New

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50

Global
Local

0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Attended_
Old

Attended_ Unattended_ Unattended_
New
Old
New

Figure 2. Mean Selection Rates for the Grammatical
Strings in the Pairs of Attended_Old, Attended_New,
Unattended_Old, and Unattended_New Grammatical
Strings with Nongrammatical Strings in Each Attention
Condition with Standard Deviations. Top panel: Japan;
Bottom panel: UK.
they paid attention to the level itself. Global superiority,
however, was not found for the British participants. In
addition, the result of a t-test showed that they were able to
learn the AG not only from the attended level but also from
the unattended level when asked to pay attention to the
global level. This might indicate that they have a tendency
to process more information from the local level than from
the global level.
In sum, the results suggest that there are cultural
differences in implicit learning such as AG learning. This
may be explained by attentional bias between Easterners
and Westerners. In Experiment 2, therefore, we examined
whether or not there would be cultural differences in
implicit learning without manipulating the participants’
attention.

2209

Strings
Grammatical
Rates
Selection
Strings
Grammatical
ofthe
Ratesfor
Selection

Experiment 2
This experiment was designed to examine whether or not
there would be cultural differences in attention and AG
learning when the participants were free to manage their
attention in the learning session.

Method
Participants Twenty undergraduates from Chubu
University and eighteen from the University of Sussex
participated in the experiment and received a course credit
following the completion of the experimental session.
Assignments on types of GLOCAL strings and the order of
test were counterbalanced. None of the students had
previously participated in the same kind of experiment.

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50

Japan
UK

0.40
0.30

0.20
0.10
0.00

Global_ Global_
Old
New

Stimuli The same AGs as those in Experiment 1 were used.
Procedure The same procedures were used as in
Experiment 1 except for the following points. First, the
participants’ attention was not manipulated in the
experiment. They were asked to look at the GLOCAL
strings not at one level but at both levels. Second, two
questions were asked at the end of the experiment. The first
question was, ‘Which aspect—the bigger letters or the
smaller letters—did you pay more attention to in the first
session?’ The second was, ‘By how much more do you
think you attended to your favorite aspect, e.g. twice as
much, three times as much, etc.?’

Figure 3 shows the mean classification accuracy for each
condition in the test phase. First, the proportion of accurate
classifications was subjected to a 2 × 2 × 2 mixed ANOVA
with cultural group, global/local, and presentation as factors.
The main effect of the global/local factor was significant
(F (1, 36) = 12.13, p < .01). The interactions between
cultural group and global/local and between cultural group
and presentation were also significant (F (1, 36) = 9.52， p
< .01; F (1, 36) = 5.50， p < .05, respectively). The results of
the simple main effect revealed that accuracy in the global
grammar was higher than that in the local one for the
Japanese participants (F (1, 36) = 21.57, p < .0001),
whereas this effect disappeared for the British participants
(F < 1). The results of the simple main effect showed that
accuracy in the new grammatical stimuli was higher than
that in the old ones for the British participants (F (1, 36) =
3.75, p = .06), whereas this effect was not found for the
Japanese participants (F (1, 36) = 1.91, p > .10).
In order to examine the possibility that the participants
could learn the AG from each level, we compared the

Local_
New

Figure 3. Mean Selection Rates for the Grammatical
Strings in the Pairs of Global_Old, Global_New,
Local_Old, and Local_New Grammatical Strings with
Nongrammatical Strings with Standard Deviations in
Each Cultural Group.
Table 1. The ratio of participants who preferred each
level in the learning session.

Global
Local
Equal

Design A 2 × 2 × 2 mixed design was employed. The first
factor was cultural group. This was a between-participants
factor. The second factor was global/local. This was a
within-participants factor. In addition, the third factor was
presentation. This was also a within-participants factor.

Results and Discussion

Local_
Old

Japan
90.0
5.0
5.0

UK
50.0
44.4
5.6
(%)

proportions accurately classified with chance (.5) in each
condition. With respect to the Japanese participants,
accuracy only for the Global_Old and Global_New strings
was significantly higher than chance. With respect to the
British participants, on the other hand, accuracy only for all
types of strings was significantly higher than chance.
To examine the attentional bias in the learning session, we
compared the ratio of the participants who paid more
attention to each level between cultural groups. Table 1
shows the ratio of the participants who preferred each level.
A chi-square test revealed that more participants preferred
the global level to the local one in Japan, whereas this
pattern was not found (chi-square (N = 38) = 8.36, p < .05).
The result indicated that there were cultural differences in
attention during learning sessions. It also indicated that this
attentional bias might cause the cultural difference in AG
learning.

2210

General Discussion
In the present study, we examined whether or not there are
cultural differences in implicit learning using an AG
learning paradigm with GLOCAL strings. In Experiment 1,
the global superiority in AG learning was obtained only for
the Japanese participants. This indicated that there was a
cultural difference in implicit learning between Easterners
and Westerners. However, it was common that selective
attention played a critical role in AG learning. Although the
British participants could memorize the grammatical strings
at the unattended level, in both cultural groups, the
participants could learn only the AG extracted from the
attended level. The results strongly support the necessity for
attention in AG learning suggested by Tanaka et al. (2008).
The results of Experiment 2 revealed that the Japanese
participants could learn the AG only from the global level,
whereas the British participants could learn from both levels.
It was also found that there was attentional bias in the
learning session: most of the Japanese participants tended to
pay more attention to the global level, whereas half of the
British participants tended to pay more attention to the local
level. Based on the cultural difference in attention, the
results of AG learning should be interpreted as showing not
that the British participants could simultaneously learn both
AGs, but that some learned the AG only from the global
level and others only from the local level, corresponding to
their attentional preference.
It is necessary to examine whether or not there are also
any cultural differences in learning or judging strategy
between Easterners and Westerners based on the
participants’ judgment bases. Previous studies (e.g. Nisbett,
2003; Nisbett et al., 2001) have suggested that Eastern
people prefer holistic processing, whereas Western people
prefer analytic. It should be examined whether this tendency
can be applied to implicit learning situations such as our
task setting.

Conclusion
Selective attention plays a critical role in implicit learning in
both Eastern and Western cultural groups. However, there
are cultural differences in global/local asymmetry.
Specifically, Japanese participants learned the AG extracted
from the attended global level better than that from the local
one, whereas British participants did not. The cultural
difference in AG learning seems to be caused by cultural
biases in attention between Easterners and Westerners.

References
Boucher, L., & Dienes, Z. (2003). Two ways of learning
associations. Cognitive Science, 27, 807-842.
Cock, J. J., Berry, D. C., & Buchner, A. (2002). Negative
priming and sequence learning. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 27-48.
Dienes, Z. (2008). Subjective measures of unconscious
knowledge. In R. Banerjee & B. Chakrabarti (Eds.),
Models of brain and mind: Physical, computational and

psychological approaches. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ishii, K., & Kitayama, S. (2007). Holistic attention to
context in Japan: A test with non-student adults. Japanese
Journal of Social Psychology, 23, 181-186.
Jiménez, L., & Méndez, C. (1999). Which attention is
needed for implicit sequence learning? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 25, 236-259.
Masuda, T. & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending holistically
versus analytically: Comparing the context sensitivity of
Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81, 922-934.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive Psychology,
9, 353-383.
Navon, D. (2003). What does a compound letter tell the
psychologist’s mind? Acta Psychologica, 114, 273-309.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: How
Asians and Westerners think differently. New York: Free
Press.
Nisbett, R. E. & Miyamoto, Y. (2005). The influence of
culture: Holistic versus analytic perception. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 9, 467-473.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: Holistic vs. analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108, 291-310.
Perlman, A., & Tzelgov, J. (2006). Interactions between
encoding and retrieval in the domain of sequence-learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 32, 118-130.
Perruchet, P., & Vinter, A. (2002). The self-organising
consciousness: A framework for implicit learning. In R. M.
French & A. Cleeremans (Eds.), Implicit learning and
consciousness: An empirical, philosophical and
computational consensus in the making. Hove, U.K.:
Psychology Press.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 6, 855-863.
Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219235.
Rowland, L. A., & Shanks, D. R. (2006). Attention
modulates the learning of multiple contingencies.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 643-648.
Seger, C. A. (1998). Independent judgment-linked and
motor-linked forms of artificial grammar learning.
Consciousness & Cognition, 7, 259-284.
Shanks, D. R. (2005). Implicit learning. In K. Lamberts & R.
L. Goldstone (Eds.), Handbook of cognition. London: Sage.
Tanaka, D., Kiyokawa, S., Yamada, A., Dienes, Z., &
Shigemasu, K. (2008). Role of selective attention in
artificial grammar learning. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15, 1154-1159.
Whittlesea, B. W. A., & Dorken, M. D. (1993). Incidentally,
things in general are particularly determined: An episodicprocessing account of implicit learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 227-248.

2211

