UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-Modality Strategy Transfer: A behavioral study of strategic discrimination skill
acquisition and transfer across auditory and visual modalities
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qx1f03c
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Bai, Hao
Ladny, Paul
Trafton, J. Gregory
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                   Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                      University of California

     Cross-Modality Strategy Transfer: A behavioral study of strategic
 discrimination skill acquisition and transfer across auditory and visual
                                                     modalities
                                                         Hao Bai
                                                Mississippi State University
                                                      Paul Ladny
                                                Mississippi State University
                                                 J. Gregory Trafton
                                                Naval Research Laboratory
                                                   Randy J. Brou
                                   Navy Personnel Research, Studies, and Technology
                                                Stephanie M. Doane
                                                Mississippi State University
Abstract: Discrimination is the ability to differentiate one object from another. Previous research suggests that
with practice, individuals develop efficient discrimination strategies, and that strategies acquired in training transfer
within a modality to novel stimuli (e.g., Haider & Frensch, 1999; Sohn, Doane, & Garrison, 2006). This study
examines whether discrimination strategies transfer across presentation modalities. Subjects were trained to make
difficult (similar) or easy (dissimilar) discriminations among visual or auditory objects during training. At transfer,
subjects made difficult discriminations among stimuli presented in a different modality. Results suggest that the
strategy acquired by subjects trained on difficult discriminations leads to superior performance at transfer compared
to subjects trained on easy discriminations regardless of the modality of initial training and the modality switch at
transfer. Cross?]modality transfer was observed, and this suggests the role of a central mechanism in the acquisition
and transfer of strategic skills.
                                                             593

