UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-Situational Statistical Learning: Implicit or Intentional?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/90c9d7sx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kachergis, George
Yu, Chen
Shiffrin, Richard

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-Situational Statistical Learning: Implicit or Intentional?
George Kachergis, Chen Yu, and Richard M. Shiffrin
{gkacherg, chenyu, shiffrin}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological & Brain Science / Cognitive Science Program
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
For decades, implicit learning researchers have examined a
variety of cognitive tasks in which humans seem to
automatically extract structure from the environment.
Similarly, statistical learning studies have shown that humans
can use repeated co-occurrence of words and referents to
build lexicons from individually ambiguous experiences (Yu
& Smith, 2007). In light of this, the goal of the present paper
is to investigate whether adult cross-situational learners
require an explicit effort to learn word-object mappings, or if
it may take place incidentally, requiring merely attention to
the audiovisual stimuli. In two implicit learning experiments
with incidental tasks that direct participants’ attention to
different aspects of the stimuli, we found evidence of
learning, suggesting that cross-situational learning
mechanisms can be incidental without explicit intention.
However, learning was superior under explicit study
instructions, indicating that strategic inference may also play
a role.
Keywords: implicit learning; language acquisition; crosssituational statistical learning; automaticity

Introduction
Humans have a remarkable capacity to adapt to the
regularities in our environment, and our everyday actions—
from navigating a room to navigating a conversation—are
evidence of our learned skills. Often, we adapt without overt
effort or even awareness of the regularity or of our changing
behavior. Dubbed implicit learning (Reber, 1967), this
automatic adjustment to the world is typically studied in
cognitive experiments using grammaticality judgments or
reaction times to stimuli generated by finite state grammars
(see Shanks, 2005 for a review).
The burgeoning statistical learning literature has
motivations and predictions that significantly overlap with
those of the implicit learning literature, as discussed by
Perruchet and Pacton (2006). The seminal work on
statistical learning (Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996)
demonstrated that infants are sensitive to statistical
regularities in a continuous stream of an audible artificial
language, enabling them to distinguish probable syllable
sequences (i.e., words) from improbable syllable sequences.
Newport and Aslin (2004) found that infants are also
sensitive to temporally distal regularities, which weighs in
favor of a more general statistical learning mechanism,
rather than a simple mechanism for associating adjacent
sounds. Other studies have found that infants can acquire
nouns via the repeated co-occurrence of words and their
referents across situations containing multiple words and
objects, which are thus separately ambiguous (e.g., Smith &
Yu, 2008).

As in adult studies of implicit learning, infant statistical
learning studies present participants with structured training
data but no explicit learning instructions, and find
behavioral differences due to the statistical regularities in
the training data. Inspired by this, our aim here is to
empirically investigate the automaticity of cross-situational
statistical word learning in adults, who are typically given
explicit instructions to learn the meaning of the words (e.g.,
Yu & Smith, 2007). In Experiment 1, we presented
participants with a set of spoken words and visual objects
with one-to-one mappings between them, but framed the
task as one of recognition memory for individual stimuli,
and not as one of learning word-object mappings. We then
gave participants a surprise test: for each of 54 word-object
pairings, they were asked to indicate how often the word
and object co-occurred. With their attention focused on
memorizing individual words or visual objects, would
participants unintentionally learn which words and objects
co-occurred more frequently? In Experiment 2, we used a
signal detection task as another incidental task to direct
participants’ attention to both auditory and visual streams,
but again with no explicit instructions to learn word-object
mappings. After that, we gave them a surprise test to assess
their knowledge of word-object mappings. In both
experiments, after the initial implicit learning blocks, as a
measure of their statistical learning capability (to compare
with implicit learning), participants also completed blocks
in which they were explicitly instructed to either count
word-object co-occurrences, or simply to learn the meaning
of the words.
The organization of the paper is as follows: we first
introduce the cross-situational learning paradigm, and then
discuss the possible learning mechanisms and potential
contributions of the present implicit learning studies to
advance our understanding of statistical learning. We then
present two implicit learning experiments and their results.
Finally, we conclude by summarizing the results from the
two studies and discussing the connection between
statistical and implicit learning.

Cross-Situational Statistical Learning
In a typical version of cross-situational learning, adults
are asked to learn which word goes with each object, and
are then shown a series of training trials, each of which
contains four objects (e.g., a sculpture) and four spoken
pseudowords (e.g., “manu”). Because correct word-referent
pairings are not indicated, learners can utilize only the
repeated co-occurrence of words with their intended
referents to learn across many trials. In a typical learning
scenario (e.g., in Yu & Smith, 2007), participants attempted

2362

to learn 18 pseudoword-object pairings from 27 12-second
trials. This design allowed each stimulus (and hence each
correct word-referent pairing) to be presented six times. In
one form or another, the learning of a pairing involves the
accumulation of word-object co-occurrence statistics across
the training trials. Participants acquired, on average, nine of
the 18 pairs, as measured by a 4-alternative forced choice
(4AFC) referent test for each word.
When each trial contains 16 possible word-referent
associations, how might learning proceed? There are at least
two distinct approaches that learners may apply. First, an
ideal associative learner may maintain a word x object cooccurrence matrix M, incrementing the count in cell Mw,o
whenever word w and object o appear together in a trial.
Table 1 shows such a matrix, which represents the training
statistics used in the present study. At test, such a learner
may choose the most frequently co-occurring referent for
each word. Associative models typically approximate this
co-occurrence matrix by strengthening a randomly sampled
(perhaps according to current association strengths) subset
of pairings on each trial. The association of spatiotemporally
proximal stimuli could be carried out by automatic
processes that require neither strategy nor intent to learn.
Modern memory models such as REM (Shiffrin & Steyvers,
1997) even predict such associations by allowing feature
values of nearby items to accidentally be recorded in an
item’s trace.
Another plausible learning approach is implemented in
rule- and inference-based models (e.g., Siskind, 1996),
which propose and store a number of hypothesized wordobject pairings on each trial. Proposals may be made with
respect to constraints such as mutual exclusivity, and
hypothesized pairings may be confirmed if consistent
evidence is presented later or removed from the lexicon if
contradictory evidence is observed. This type of learning is
more in accord with a deliberative, strategic learning
process. If cross-situational learning is largely automatic,
one may expect participants to have some knowledge of
which words and objects frequently co-occurred during
training, even when they were not explicitly trying to learn
these relations. On the other hand, if cross-situational
learning relies on more strategic, intentional inferences, then
participants may perform much worse in such an incidental
learning condition. Thus, the results from incidental learning
tasks may shed light on the underlying learning mechanisms
that learners use.
In particular, the present study will test participants’
knowledge not only of the correct pairings (i.e., the diagonal
cells of Table 1) as is typically done, but also of the
spurious word-object co-occurrences (non-diagonal cells)
that appear during training— the sort of detailed and partial
information that is stored by associative models (or an ideal
learner), but typically not by rule-based models. We do this
by asking participants to rate the strengths of co-occurring
word-object pairings for both correct and incorrect pairings.

Table 1: Word x Referent matrix with the co-occurrences of
each word and object accumulated across the 27 training
trials used in each condition in both present experiments.
The testing paradigm allows us to both access participants’
knowledge of spurious pairs and to compare that with what
they know about correct pairs. Previous work has found
evidence that people are sensitive to how often words and
objects have co-occurred—even when a single object
appears with a few words with differing frequency
(Vouloumanos, 2008). However, Vouloumanos presented
only a single word-object pair per trial, giving participants
no choice as to which pairings to attend. In contrast, our
paradigm offers 16 possible pairings per trial. Thus, the
presence of four concurrent objects and four successive
words per trial demands that participants modulate their
attention, possibly forming stronger associations between
particular words and objects, or perhaps attending only a
subset of possible pairings. Thus, it is unclear how well
participants’ co-occurrence ratings will be correlated with
actual stimuli co-occurrences in the explicit conditions,
since inference-based learners may only track a lexicon of
the most likely pairs (i.e., high co-occurrence stimuli),
rather than a full matrix of associations.

Experiment 1
Every participant went through four blocks of training and
testing in a fixed order. Training and testing in block 0 was
structured differently than the remaining three. Participants
were told that they would see multiple objects and hear
multiple words on each trial, and that they should remember
each object and word because their memory will be tested at
the end. After the brief training period in block 0, they were
given a recognition memory test: a single stimulus (word or
object) was presented, and they were asked to label it old or
new. In block 1, participants were told again that they
should remember each object and word for a subsequent
memory test. However, after this training period,
participants were given a surprise test of their knowledge of
stimuli co-occurrences. In block 2, participants were
explicitly asked to remember how many times each word
and object appeared together during training. They were not

2363

told what type of test to expect, but the co-occurrence rating
test given was exactly the same as in block 1. In block 3,
participants were simply asked to learn the meanings of the
words—explicit learning instructions like those given in
previous cross-situational word learning studies.

Subjects
Participants were 35 undergraduates at Indiana University
who received course credit for participating. None had
participated in other cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli
Verbal stimuli were 72 computer-generated pseudowords
that are phonotactically-probable in English (e.g., “bosa”),
and were spoken by a monotone, synthetic female voice.
Objects were 72 photos of uncommon, difficult-to-name
objects (e.g., strange sculptures). Of these sets of objects
and words, 54 were randomly assigned to three sets of 18
word-object pairings; one set for each study condition. The
remaining 18 words and 18 objects were used for an initial
recognition memory test.
In block 0, each trial presented three unusual objects
concurrently and three pseudowords heard in succession.
Block 0’s training consisted of only three 11-second trials,
displaying in total nine unique words and objects. After
these trials, participants were given a recognition test for
each trained word and object, as well as nine new words and
objects. On each test trial, a single stimulus (word or object)
was presented, and participants were asked to indicate if it
was old or new.
In blocks 1-3, each training trial consisted of a display of
four objects and four pseudowords were played in
succession, and 27 such trials were in each block. Each
training trial began with the appearance of four objects,
which remained visible for the entire trial. After 2 seconds
of initial silence, each word was heard (randomly ordered,
duration of one second) followed by two additional seconds
of silence, for a total duration of 14 s per trial.
After each training period, participants were tested for
knowledge of stimuli co-occurrences. One word and one
object were presented on each trial, and participants were
asked to indicate how many times [0-6] the given wordobject pairing had appeared during training. Each of the 18
words and objects appeared in three test trials, for a total of
54 randomly-ordered trials. The correct (6-co-occurrence)
pairings comprised 18 of the test trials (Table 1’s diagonal).
The remaining 32 trials tested cells in the matrix with 0 (14
trials), 1 (14), 2 (12), 3 (8), and 4 (6) co-occurrences.

participants were asked to track how often each word cooccurred with each object. After the 27 training trials—
which had the same co-occurrence statistics as in block 1,
albeit different stimuli—participants were again given test
trials asking them to rate the same 54 pairings. Finally, in
block 3 participants were simply instructed to learn the
meanings of the words, given cross-situational training
(statistically identical to blocks 1 and 2), and again tested on
the same 54 pairings.

Results & Discussion
In block 0, participants recognized a mean of 96% of the
objects and 90% of the words, with a low false alarm rate
(8%). In both word and object recognition, every participant
was at least 77% accurate. It is notable that memory is
imperfect for the stimuli, since many models of crosssituational learning assume that learners can absolutely
identify each stimulus, which is evidently not the case.
To determine how related participants’ co-occurrence
ratings were to the actual number of times the tested wordobject pairings actually appeared together during training,
Kendall’s rank correlation coefficient (tau) was calculated
for each participant’s 54 test trials in each condition. The
mean tau values for each condition are shown in Figure 1. In
block 1, when participants were studying individual words
and objects (but not attending to co-occurrences), their
responses in the surprise rating task showed a small but
significant positive correlation with the actual number of
times the presented pairings co-occurred during training (M
= .04, one-sided t(34) = 1.90, p<.05). In comparison, in the
explicit learning conditions in blocks 2 and 3, when
participants were respectively told to track all word-object
co-occurrences and to learn the meaning of the words, their
ratings were significantly more positively correlated than in
block 1 (block 2 M = .15, paired t(34) = 3.82, p<.001; block
3 M = .17, paired t(34) = 3.86, p<.001). Moreover, the
strength of correlations in the two explicit conditions is not
significantly different (paired t(34) = 0.66, p>.05).

Procedure
Condition order was fixed, and each participant took part in
all four blocks. Block 0 was a three trial training period with
three words and objects per trial, followed by a recognition
test of every individual stimulus presented, and nine new
words and objects. In block 1, participants were instructed
to study individual stimuli for a memory test. However,
following the 27 training trials, participants were instead
asked to indicate how many times [0-6] each of 54 specific
word-object pairings appeared during training. In block 2,

Figure 1: Mean correlation of participants’ responses with
the actual pair co-occurrences in Exp. 1. Error bars: +/-SE.

2364

Positive correlations between ratings and a broad sample
of the actual co-occurrence statistics from training indicate
that participants are sensitive to arbitrary stimuli cooccurrences when explicitly told to attend to such
correspondences. However, one could imagine that the
positive correlations could be due largely to knowledge of
some particular subsets of the co-occurrences: e.g., perhaps
learners are sensitive to words and objects that never cooccurred, and thus rated these pairings very low, and all
others high. To examine performance in more detail, we
calculated each participant’s d-prime (d´)1 for the most
extreme pairings tested in each condition: stimuli that cooccurred 0 or 6 times. Positive d´ shows sensitivity resulting
from a high hit rate and low false alarm rate. As shown in
Figure 2, participants only had significant sensitivity for 6co-occurrence (‘correct’) pairings in the explicit learning
conditions (count co-occurrences M = 0.64, one-sided t(34)
= 4.92, p<.001; word meanings M = 0.81, one-sided t(34) =
5.08, p<.001).
Two patterns from this study are noteworthy. First, based
on both d´ analysis and correlation measures, the learning
that results from the counting co-occurrences condition and
the word learning condition were similar. Although not
conclusive, this may suggest that participants in the word
learning condition may have used an associative learning
strategy based on counting word-object co-occurrences.

correct pairings and stimuli pairings that never co-occurred.
Nonetheless, the positive correlations found in every
condition—although smaller in the implicit condition—
show that participants do, on average, absorb some of the
stimulus co-occurrences in all conditions. However, this
sensitivity is not enough to support implicit word learning in
our study, as much stronger correlations are shown when
learners are instructed to count co-occurrences or learn word
meanings. Under these instructions, participants become
sensitive to words and objects that frequently co-occur.
Experiment 2 investigates whether a different incidental
task, which may direct attention to word-object cooccurrences, rather than the stimuli themselves, may yield
automatic word learning.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that an incidental memory task results
in some implicit knowledge of word-referent cooccurrences, but that explicit instructions to learn wordobject co-occurrence or to learn word meanings resulted in
much greater knowledge. In Experiment 2, we use a
different task in the implicit learning condition: instead of
asking participants to remember individual stimuli for a
later memory task, we give participants a signal detection
task to carry out during training. This task—detecting visual
noise added to visual objects, and louder auditory stimuli
(words)—directed participants to pay attention to both
visual and auditory stimuli simultaneously, but gave no
directions to engage in learning of word-object pairings.

Subjects
37 undergraduates at Indiana University received course
credit for participating. None had participated in previous
cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli

Figure 2: Mean d´ for 0- and 6-co-occurrence word-object
pairings in Experiment 1, by condition. Error bars are +/-SE.
Second, despite having good recognition memory for
individual words and objects that were presented during
training, word learning was very poor in the implicit
learning condition, as measured both by correlation of their
responses with actual pair co-occurrences, and by d´ for
1
For example, hits for 0-co-occurrence pairings are responses of
0, and false alarms are responses of 0 for pairings that co-occurred
more than never. d´ = Z(p(hit)) – Z(p(false alarm)), where Z is the
inverse of the cumulative Gaussian distribution.

The sets of pseudowords and referents for Experiment 2
were identical to those used in Experiment 1. Training trials
were the same as those used in Experiment 1, and had the
same co-occurrence statistics (shown in Table 1). However,
on each training trial in blocks 1 and 2, a random number
[0-4] of the words were louder than others, and Gaussian
pixel noise was momentarily added to a single object during
a word presentation a random number of times [0-4] each
trial. Thus, for 6.3% of audio stimulus presentations during
training, that word would be loud and one of the objects
would simultaneously have noise added, highlighting a
pairing—but only the correct pairing in 25% of these cases.

Procedure
In block 1, participants were told that they would be
presented with artificial words and objects on a series of
slides, on which some words would be louder than the
others and some objects would have multicolored speckles
(noise). Their task was to quickly press the mouse button
each time a loud word or noisy object was presented.
However, after the 27 training trials, participants were given
a surprise test, and asked to indicate how many times [0-6]

2365

each of 54 specific word-object pairings appeared during
training. In block 2, participants were asked to track how
often each word co-occurred with each object, and were also
told to do the same signal detection task during training.
Instructions for block 3 asked participants to track wordobject co-occurrences without doing the signal detection
task, and in block 4 participants were simply told to learn
the meanings of the words. The same 54 rating test trials of
specific pairings followed the training periods of blocks 2,
3, and 4, though with different stimuli for each block.

Results & Discussion
Experiment 2 used a signal detection (SD) task that required
participants to attend to both auditory and visual stimuli, but
did not mention that they would need to remember the
stimuli later. However, as in Experiment 1, after this first
training block participants were given a surprise test for
incidental learning. In successive learning conditions,
participants were instructed to do both the SD task and to
count word-object co-occurrences (SD+CC), to count cooccurrences (with no other task; CC), and finally, to simply
learn the meanings of the words (Word Meanings). As in
Experiment 1, Kendall’s tau was calculated for each
participant’s 54 test trials in each condition to measure how
related their ratings were to the actual number of wordobject co-occurrences. As shown in Figure 3, although the
SD task resulted in significantly positive correlations (M =
.10, one-sided t(36) = 3.75, p<.001), the explicit learning
conditions showed significantly more correlated responses
(CC M = .21, paired t(36) = 3.57, p<.01; SD+CC M = .25,
paired t(36) = 5.12, p<.001; Word Meanings M = .29, paired
t(36) = 4.97, p<.001). Thus, as found in Experiment 1,
participants show sensitivity to stimuli co-occurrences in
every condition, but greater sensitivity in the explicit
learning conditions than in the implicit learning condition.

Figure 3: Mean rank correlation of each participant’s
responses with the actual number of pairing co-occurrences
in Experiment 2. Error bars show +/-SE.

As in Experiment 1, we calculated d´ for maximal and
minimal co-occurrence pairings by condition to gain insight
into the kind of pairings to which participants in Experiment
2 were sensitive. As shown in Figure 4, participants had
significant sensitivity for 6-co-occurrence pairings in the
implicit learning condition (SD M = .19, one-sided t(36) =
1.81, p<.05) as well as the explicit conditions, but showed
significantly greater sensitivity in the explicit conditions
(CC M = .61, paired t(36) = 2.97, p<.01; SD+CC M = .61,
paired t(36) = 3.44, p=.001; word meanings M = .81, paired
t(36) = 3.58, p<.001). In the explicit conditions, d´ for 0-cooccurrence pairings was significantly positive (CC M = .49,
one-sided t(36) = 1.50, p=.07 (marginal); SD+CC M = .32,
one-sided t(36) = 2.66, p<.01; word meanings M = .30, onesided t(36) = 2.20, p<.05), but not in the implicit condition
(SD M = .07, one-sided t(36) = .87, p=.19). Thus, although
participants given SD instructions did show some implicit
learning of 6-co-occurrence pairings, they were more
sensitive to these pairings under explicit instruction.
There are a few intriguing results from this experiment.
First, performance in the SD+CC condition was at least as
good as CC alone. Thus, participants could handle the two
tasks concurrently without hindering performance. We
suspected that the signal detection task might encourage
participants to attend to both auditory and visual streams
simultaneously, perhaps increasing storage of cross-modal
associations. Possibly as a result of this focus, in contrast to
Exp. 1, participants in Exp. 2 showed significant sensitivity
to 0-co-occurrence pairings in the explicit conditions.
Second, word-learning instructions yielded performance
as high as found in other explicit instructions (SD+CC and
CC). This confirmed our finding from Experiment 1: both
counting co-occurrences—as an ideal associative learner
might do—and attempting to learn words result in similar
performance in humans, both for correct pairs and for
spurious co-occurrences.

Figure 4: Mean d´ for 0- and 6-co-occurrence word-object
pairings in Experiment 2, by condition. Error bars are +/-SE.

2366

General Discussion
Implicit learning and statistical learning both describe an
agent’s adaptation to regularities in its environment. We set
out to determine whether cross-situational word learning can
be accomplished by mere exposure to the same type of
training used in intentional settings. In Experiment 1’s
implicit learning condition, participants attempted to
remember individual stimuli. In a surprise test of knowledge
for word-object co-occurrences, participants’ ratings were
correlated with the actual number of co-occurrences,
meaning that learners had acquired a rough approximation
of the real-world statistics, much like associative models
predict. However, a signal detection analysis showed no
sensitivity to correct word pairings. Moreover, in
subsequent explicit conditions, participants showed stronger
correlations, as well as sensitivity to correct pairings. Using
a signal detection task rather than a memory task in the first
block, thus encouraging concurrent attention to both words
and objects, Exp. 2 asked again whether participants acquire
cross-situational co-occurrence statistics automatically.
Participants demonstrated some implicit knowledge as in
Exp. 1, but also showed some sensitivity for correct wordreferent pairs. However, in explicit conditions participants
showed greater sensitivity to such frequently co-occurring
stimuli, as well as significant knowledge of spurious cooccurrences. Furthermore, we found that participants’
learning when instructed to count co-occurrences looks
similar to learning under instructions to merely learn words,
which we speculate may mean that participants utilize a
similar strategy in both conditions. By asking participants to
perform slightly different tasks with the same input and then
comparing their resulting learning, it will be possible to
determine which regularities are automatically acquired and
which must be explicitly attended or inferred.
What do the present results tell us about cross-situational
statistical learning? They seem to contradict simple
hypothesis-testing mechanisms, which would typically not
maintain information about spurious co-occurrences, and
which may not operate automatically. However, the results
also contradict a strong associative account: learning was
greater in explicit conditions than in implicit conditions,
suggesting that learning may be in part strategic, or at least
modulated by attention. Thus, we may say that crosssituational statistical word learning is neither wholly
implicit, nor wholly explicit: some statistics are acquired
automatically, and the learning system indubitably uses this
information during explicit study, as well. Moreover, the
fact that the explicit conditions always produced greater
sensitivity for the correct pairings than for pairings that
never co-occurred suggests that some mechanism for
highlighting stimuli that frequently co-occur is at work.
In summary, although the implicit learning we observed
was inferior to the explicit learning, its presence indicates
that knowledge of co-occurrence statistics can be acquired
incidentally. Since implicit learning requires few resources,
it can be carried out minute-by-minute, hour-by-hour and
day-by-day. Hence, in the long run, cumulative implicit

learning may still play an important role in human language
acquisition. Overall, our work suggests that neither simple
associative models that approximate ideal observers, nor
hypothesis-testing models relying on explicit inferences
capture both the implicit and intentional aspects of crosssituational word learning. We hope that this work will
motivate researchers to consider hybrid models that include
both strategic, inference-based mechanisms as well as
automatic, associative ones. Finally, we believe this work
represents an early step in linking the implicit learning and
statistical learning literatures.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institute of Health Grant
R01HD056029. Special thanks to Jeanette Booher for data
collection.

References
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2009). Frequency
and contextual diversity effects in cross-situational word
learning. In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L.
Schomaker (Eds.) Proceedings of CogSci 31. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Learning at a
distance: I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent
dependencies. Cognitive Psychology, 48(2), 127–162.
Perruchet, P. & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and
statistical learning: one phenomenon, two approaches.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 233-238.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
J. Verbal Learn. Verbal Behav., 6, 855-863.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Shanks, D.R. (2005). Implicit learning. In Handbook of
Cognition (Lamberts, K. & Goldstone, R., eds), pp. 202–
220, Sage Publications.
Shiffrin, R. M. & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: REM: Retrieving effectively from
memory. Psychonom. Bulletin and Review, 4(2), 145-166.
Siskind, J. M. (1996) A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61(1-2):1-38.
Smith, L. & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Vouloumanos, A. (2008). Fine-grained sensitivity to
statistical information in adult word learning. Cognition,
107, 729-742.
Yu, C. (2008). A statistical associative account of
vocabulary growth in early word learning. Language
Learning and Acquisition, 4(1), 32-62.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.
Yurovsky, D. & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual exclusivity in crosssituational statistical learning. Proceedings of CogSci 30.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

2367

