UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Culturally-Guided Beliefs about Opposing Categories and Their Consequences for Action:
The Case of Cooperation and Competition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/77r172cs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Keller, Josh
Loewenstein, Jeffrey
Yan, Jin

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Culturally-Guided Beliefs about Opposing Categories and Their Consequences for
Action: The Case of Cooperation and Competition
Josh Keller (jwkeller@ntu.edu.sg)
Division of Strategy, Management & Organisation, Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Ave. S3-B2C-97, Singapore 639798

Jeffrey Loewenstein (jeffrey.loewenstein@mccombs.utexas.edu)
Department of Management, The University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station B6300, Austin, TX 78712 USA

Jin Yan (yanjin@zju.edu.cn)
School of Management, Zhejiang University
Gudun Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058 China
Abstract
We provide a new approach to how, why and with what
results people think about opposing or paradoxical categories.
Using a two-part laboratory study, we found differences in
whether people in China and the US categorized “attempts to
outperform others” as an instance of both competition and
cooperation. We call membership in both categories in a
paradox integrative categorization. We found that Chinese
were more likely than in the US to engage in integrative
categorization, and that the cultural difference was mediated
by differences in lay dialecticism. Finally, we showed
behavioral effects: integrative categorization predicted
peoples’ cooperative behavior after they experienced others’
attempt to outperform them.
Keywords: Categories; paradox; coopetition; cooperation;
competition; culture; dialecticism; China.

Introduction
Opposing categories, such as past and future, nature and
nurture, or habit and originality, can be powerful organizers
of cognition and action if they demarcate endpoints of
important causal dimensions. Alternatively, they can distort
cognition and action if they impose too simple a distinction
on a complex space of possibilities. When faced with
opposing categories, people could try to determine what the
right answer is: what are the properties of the two opposing
categories, are they endpoints of a single dimension and
hence mutually exclusive, and does that dimension capture
important causal forces in a domain of knowledge and
activity. Alternatively, people might rely on general
reasoning tendencies about how categories relate to one
another and on the guidance of their cultural norms.
Because most categories that people think about are
complex and ambiguous in practice, a logical examination
of the properties of an instance and whether those properties
do or do not warrant category membership may not be
possible. People may instead take predictable shortcuts in
their reasoning about categories, with predictable
consequences.
The specific case of opposing categories that we examine
is the case of cooperation and competition. We study how
people in China and the US understand these categories and

the consequences for their behavior. Cooperation and
competition are important categories. They are central to
what it means to interact with others, be it in groups,
organizations, industries or societies (e.g., Deutsch, 1949;
Johnson & Johnson, 1989; Tyler & Blader, 2000).
Most research defines and operationalizes cooperation
and competition as opposites (e.g., Bettenhausen &
Murnighan, 1991). According to these views, individuals
are either in a competitive situation or in a cooperative
situation (Deutsch, 1949), either wanting to compete or
wanting to cooperate (McClintock & Allison, 1989), or
either acting competitively or acting cooperatively
(Komorita & Parks, 1996). All of these views predict that
the absence of cooperation indicates the presence of
competition (and vice-versa) and treat the co-occurrence of
both cooperation and competition as a contradiction.
Recently, an alternative theoretical perspective has
emerged that conceptualizes cooperation and competition
not as opposites, but distinct dimensions, which allows
cooperation and competition to co-occur ("coopetition;"
Brandenburger & Nalebuff, 1996; Tsai, 2002). For example,
an individual might have a general disposition towards
wanting to help others (a cooperative personality). At the
same time, the individual might also like to be the most
highly rewarded (a competitive personality; Xie, Chen, Yu,
& Chang, 2006). All of these views predict that knowing
about the presence or absence of cooperation will be
uninformative regarding the presence or absence of
competition.
There is a third logical possibility that no theory has yet
defended but that is possible and empirically observable
(Keller & Loewenstein, 2010). This is that cooperation and
competition can at least partially overlap. At least in some
cases, the presence of cooperation implies the presence of
competition.
We provide a general framework for understanding how
opposing or paradoxical categories can be related. We treat
cooperation and competition as cultural categories (Atran,
Medin, & Ross, 2005; Keller & Loewenstein, 2010; Sperber
& Hirschfeld, 2004). Cultural categories are social
conventions (Millikan, 2005) generated by cultural groups

1289

for labeling and grouping sets of objects, practices, actors
and other socially experienced examples (Douglas, 1986;
Hannan, Pólos, & Carroll, 2007). Social conventions can
also guide how people think about the relationship between
categories. The words that are used to label cultural
categories have semantic relationships (Lyons, 1977). If two
words have antonymic semantic relationships (Jones, 2002;
Murphy, 2003), this would imply a social convention that
the named categories are in opposition.
The presence of these two kinds of social conventions—
conventions about category membership and conventions
about antonymy provides leeway for culture to shape which
kind of convention has priority. If antonymy conventions
dominate, then category membership conventions should
conform, maintaining the distinction between categories by
making category membership mutually exclusive. If
category membership conventions dominate, then this
allows paradoxes to be integrated. This is because an
example that has features representative of two categories
can be a member of both categories (Rosch, 1978; Smith &
Medin, 1981). If those two categories happen to be
antonyms, this example’s dual categorization, which we call
integrative categorization, represents a general account of
how to integrate paradoxes. This is novel; discussions of
paradoxes and paradoxical cognition (e.g., Miron-Spektor &
Argote, 2008; Smith & Tushman, 2005) have claimed
paradoxes can be integrated but not analyzed how in general
this can be done.
For example, the words “work” and “play” are perceived
as antonyms (Glynn, 1994). This is so regardless of the
specific activities that constitute work or play, which might
even have overlapping features (Jones, 2002). If an
“engaging task” has features of both work and play, and
work and play are antonyms, then engaging tasks establish a
categorization paradox. Forcing engaging tasks to be
categorized as either work or play would maintain the workplay distinction. Allowing engaging tasks to be categorized
as both work and play (i.e., the integrative categorization of
engaging tasks) would integrate the distinction.
We test whether people believe that cooperation and
competition are antonymic cultural categories. Previous
literature has found that antonymic patterns are often
consistent across national cultures (Raybeck & Herrmann,
1996). Thus, our focus is on whether people engage in
integrative categorization for cooperation and competition.
Testing whether people integrate the categories of
cooperation and competition through overlapping category
membership requires identifying an act with features of both
categories. According to Tyler and Blader (2000), the key
feature of a cooperative act is that it is an attempt to benefit
the group. According to Johnson and Johnson (1989), the
key feature of a competitive act is that it is an attempt to
attain a higher relative position than others. Assuming these
are accurate descriptions of conventional lay beliefs as well,
then an individual’s attempt to outperform others within a
team or organization has features of both cooperation and
competition. This act represents an attempt to gain a higher

status and an increase in effort on group tasks. Therefore, it
is possible to categorize an attempt to outperform others as
an instance of both competition and cooperation. This act
provides an opportunity for integrative categorization.
To be clear, integrative categorization does not require
that all members of one category also be categorized as
members of the other category. For example, attempts to
undermine others are attempts to gain higher status (and
hence representative of competition) by harming others,
which is detrimental to group outcomes (and hence
representative of non-cooperation). There is no need for
integrative categorization to include attempts to undermine
others as instances of both cooperation and competition.
Our account suggests that whether people categorize
attempts to outperform others as an instance of both
cooperation and competition is at least in part a function of
social conventions. Social conventions can be generated at
different social levels, yet for fundamental social categories
like cooperation and competition, the social conventions are
likely to be generated at the level of the society because the
categories are used in many social contexts (Keller &
Loewenstein, 2010).
Societies appear to differ in their approaches to
paradoxical categories. Theories of paradoxes have pointed
to East Asian philosophy, with its emphasis on holism,
dynamism and a “middle-way,” as fostering a societal level
tendency towards integrating paradoxes (Chen, 2008;
Eisenhardt, 1988). Integrating paradoxes is exemplified in
the 阴阳(Yin-Yang) symbol found in the classic text 易经
(Yi Jing, Book of Changes; Wilhelm & Baynes, 1968)
demonstrating that black and white are part of one whole.
Integrating paradoxes is a prominent feature in Laozi’s
道德经 (Dao de jing; Lao, 1997). In China, Japan, Korea
and Vietnam, these texts have long been canonized
(Schwartz, 1985), and the integration of paradoxes has long
permeated stories, proverbs and other commonplace cultural
artifacts within East Asian societies (Peng & Nisbett, 1999).
As supporting evidence, cultural psychology research has
found tendencies toward integration of paradoxes among lay
people in East Asia, establishing societal-level lay theories
on contradiction and change, or lay dialecticism
(Norenzayan, Smith, Kim, & Nisbett, 2002; SpencerRodgers, Boucher, Mori, Wang, & Peng, 2009). Although
dialecticism is present in Western philosophy (Walton
1990), its influence on lay people is less pervasive (Samson
2004), suggesting that societal-level cultural conventions
that emphasize the integration of paradoxes are weaker in
Western societies.
A heightened exposure to lay dialecticism encourages a
tolerance of contradictions in people’s general views of their
self and their social relations (Spencer-Rodgers et al., 2009).
Therefore, a tendency towards lay dialecticism could foster
integrative categorization generally, and more specifically,
could foster integrating the cultural categories of
cooperation and competition (such as by categorizing
attempts to outperform others as instances of both

1290

cooperation and competition). So, people exhibiting a
greater degree of lay dialecticism should be more likely to
believe that even if cooperation and competition are
generally opposites, it is possible that an act can be both
cooperative and competitive because there are situations
where contradictions can occur.
Taken together, the preceding discussion leads us to
predict that national culture should influence people’s
predilection for lay dialecticism. Lay dialecticism, in turn,
should influence people’s tendency for integrative
categorization—specifically, categorizing attempts to
outperform as an instance of both cooperation and
competition.
Integrative categorization should influence behavior.
Categories serve as cognitive mediators between settings
and actions (Keller & Loewenstein, 2010; Markman &
Ross, 2003). Individuals use categories to interpret the type
of setting they are in and the actions of others, and then use
their interpretations to select appropriate responses (March,
1994; Smith, 1989). The interpretation and reaction to
settings and prior actions is particularly important for
cooperation, because cooperation requires reciprocity
(Koster & Sanders, 2006). Reciprocity implies responding
with an action of the same kind (Gouldner, 1960), that is,
with a response drawn from the same category. Therefore,
individuals’ propensity to act cooperatively is contingent on
whether they categorize the setting and others’ actions as
cooperative. If individuals categorize others’ actions as noncooperative, they are unlikely to respond with a cooperative
act (Andersson & Pearson, 1999), even when the behavior
does not have a material impact on the individual (Stanne et
al., 1999). As a result, integrative categorization of attempts
to outperform should increase people’s likelihood of
responding to attempts to outperform by cooperating.

Methods
Participants
Participants were 94 US undergraduates (62% female, mean
age 20.3 years) and 100 Chinese undergraduates (65%, 21.2
years).

Part 1 procedure and materials
The study consisted of two parts, separated by 1-2 weeks.
During the first part, participants completed computer-based
questionnaire measures for lay dialecticism (from SpencerRodgers et al, 2009), integrative categorization (based on
Keller & Loewenstein, 2010), antonymy (based on
Herrmann & Conti, 1979), self-construal measures (as
control variables) and demographics. All original materials
were developed in English, translated into Chinese and back
translated into English; tests of the back-translated versions
showed comparable results.
The key new measure is the integrative categorization
measure. Participants rated 25 behaviors three times;
whether they indicated a strong or weak indicator of (1)
cooperation, (2) commitment (as a foil), and (3)

competition. Four of these 25 behaviors were key, because
they represented attempts to outperform others. They were:
1) “A team member attempts to outperform other team
members”, 2) “A team member gauges others' performance
and makes sure that the he or she is doing better that the
others”, 3) “A team member tries to get the quality of the
his or her work to be better than the quality of others’
work”, and 4) “A team member tries to make sure that he or
she isn't outdoing others in the team” (reverse-coded). These
behaviors were consistently categorized by people in China
and the US as indicating competition (α=.81, M=4.06,
SD=.55). There was considerable variance as to whether
these items indicated cooperation (α=.73), and hence we
used their cooperation ratings as our measure of integrative
categorization.
The remaining behaviors were mostly banal instances
taken from prior research on lay beliefs about cooperation
(Keller & Loewenstein, 2010) used as filler items so there
would not be undue attention on attempts to outperform
others. The exception was that we also included behaviors
representing attempts to undermine others as a foil for
attempts to outperform others. We found that people in both
China and the US consistently rated attempts to undermine
others as competitive (M=4.06) and non-cooperative
(M=1.52). Thus, finding that some people’s ratings indicate
integrative categorization of attempts to outperform others
should indicate their specific beliefs about attempts to
outperform others rather than a general response bias.

Part 2 procedure and materials
Participants engaged in a group brainstorming task to
facilitate the development of group entitativity (Campbell,
1958; Kramer, Kuo & Dailey, 1997). We assessed
participants’ ratings of how strongly they felt they were a
group and part of a group as manipulation checks, and found
that these ratings were generally high, and also that they did
not account for the core findings we present later.
Participants next moved to a computer for a simulated
group sales task. During the simulation, each participant
managed a cart selling tea. Two simulated team members
managed two other carts. During the simulation, participants
had eight opportunities to share information with their
teammates. The number of times they did so was our
measure of cooperation.
Lastly, participants completed a post-task questionnaire.
This included a manipulation check that showed that
participants believed their teammates in the simulation were
the people with whom they had completed the
brainstorming task. The four participants who did not
believe so were dropped from the analysis.
The participants in China and and the US engaged in one
of two versions of the tea sales simulation. In the
outperform condition, participants received messages from
their teammates stating that they wanted the team to do well
and that they wanted to perform the best. During the
simulation, the teammates constantly checked on the others’
performance (this act was made visible in the interface). In a

1291

baseline condition, bland messages were sent and little signs
of checking on the others’ performance occurred. A posttask manipulation check showed that those in the
outperform condition stated they experienced their
teammates attempting to outperform them more so than
those in the baseline condition, (Moutperform = 5.45, SD= 1.15
Mbaseline.= 2.83, SD=1.35, t(199)= 13.26, p<.001). Finally,
we note that we used an unbalanced design, placing more
participants in the outperform condition because at issue is
whether there would be a difference in cooperation rates in
the outperform condition. We expected (and found) no
difference in the baseline condition.

Results
As shown in Table 1, we found China-US differences in lay
dialecticism
(t(143)=8.75,
p<.001);
integrative
categorization (t(143)=10.50, p<.001); and cooperative
behavior in the outperform condition (t(143)= 4.41, p<.001),
but not the baseline condition. We also found China and US
consistency in believing cooperation and competition to be
antonyms.
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics.

Lay Dialecticism
Integrative
Categorization
Cooperative Behavior in
Outperform Condition
Cooperative Behavior in
Baseline Condition
Antonymy of
“Cooperation” and
“Competition”
Independent SelfConstrual
Group-Collective SelfConstrual
Perceived Task Difficulty

China
(n=100)
Mean (SD)
4.33 (0.49)

US
(n=94)
Mean (SD)
3.57 (0.58)

3.70 (0.47)

2.68 (0.67)

5.12 (2.28)

3.54 (2.03)

4.95 (1.85)

4.95 (1.68)

1.84 (1.12)

1.88 (0.90)

4.49 (0.63)

5.31 (0.74)

5.23 (0.82)

4.63 (0.99)

4.45 (1.56)

4.65 (1.61)

We used stepwise linear regression models to examine
relations among variables just for those in the outperform
condition. First, we found that lay dialecticism predicted
integrative categorization (B=.48; SE=.11; p<.05). National
culture also predicted integrative categorization (B=1.09;
SE=.12; p<.05). To examine lay dialecticism as a mediator
of the national culture effect, we ran a bootstrapped test of
an indirect effect of national culture on integrative
categorization through lay dialecticism (Preacher, Rucker,
& Hayes, 2007). The mean indirect effect was 0.12 (95%
CI: 0.01-0.22), p<.05, providing evidence of mediation.
Therefore, the impact of national culture on integrative
categorization can be at least partially attributed to
differences in lay dialecticism.

Second, we found that lay dialecticism predicted
cooperative behavior (B=1.09; SE=.31; p<.05). Integrative
categorization also predicted cooperative behavior (B=.95;
SE=.31; p<.05). A bootstrapped test of the indirect effect of
lay dialecticism on cooperative behavior through integrative
categorization found that the mean indirect effect was 0.13
(95% CI: 0.02-0.35), p<.05, providing evidence of
mediation. Therefore, the impact of lay dialecticism on
cooperative behavior can be at least partially attributed to
differences in integrative categorization.
Analysis of control variables showed that the nationality
to dialecticism to integrative categorization to cooperative
behavior pathway was not explained away by alternative
factors. For example, we found national differences in
independent self-construal and group-collective selfconstrual, but the mediation analyses included these
variables—as well as age, gender, and subjective ratings of
task difficulty—as controls and still found the predicted
patterns.

Discussion
We found US and Chinese consensus that cooperation and
competition are antonyms, providing evidence of a
coopetition paradox. We introduced the concept of
integrative categorization as a specific means of integrating
a paradox. We found cultural and individual differences in
the integrative categorization of attempts to outperform as
instances of competition and cooperation. We further found
predictable consequences of integrative categorization on
people’s cooperative behaviors in a group simulation task.
Therefore, we advance research on categories and on
cooperation and competition.
We found societal-level differences between the US and
China, suggesting that integrative categorization is
culturally conditioned. The cultural differences were
attributable to lay dialecticism differences. This implies that
the national culture difference in integrative categorization
was due to broad cultural belief systems about how to think
about contradictions and change. The broad cultural
tendencies towards lay dialecticism, by influencing
integrative categorization, influenced people’s reactions to
others’ behaviors. Therefore, the results suggest that
culturally-influenced lay beliefs about paradoxes establish
broad conditions that make particular behaviors more or less
likely to occur. Specifically, lay dialecticism makes
integrative categorization more likely, which in the case of
cooperative and competitive behaviors, makes coopetition
and the sustaining of cooperation within a group more likely
to occur.
We note here that the data pattern described here has
turned out to be robust. Subsequent research manipulating
participants’ social motivations (whether they are trying to
maximize their own outcomes, group outcomes, or both) has
shown that motivation effects are distinct from the
dialecticism and integrative categorization effects that are
our focus. The results are also robust when controlling for
participants’ performance on the simulation task.

1292

Our results have implications for research on categories.
There is growing interest in how categories are used
(Markman & Ross, 2003), in complex categories (Gentner
& Kurtz, 2005), and in how categories relate to each other
(Goldstone, 1996; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005). We
contribute to these streams of category research by showing
that people’s decisions about category membership are not
entirely a function of the features of the instance.
Membership in one category can suppress the possibility of
acknowledging membership in another category. Further,
this suppression is a function of general beliefs about
contradiction and change that are acquired through cultural
experience exogenous to the immediate social context and
the particular categories at hand. Thus, our study
demonstrates that research on how people think about and
use multiple categories is not only a matter of the features of
exemplars, but also subject to broad and predictable cultural
influence.
Our results also have implications for research on
cooperation and competition. It is well established that
cooperation can facilitate effective social outcomes
(Campion, Medsker, & Higgs, 1993; Kogut & Zander,
1992). It is less well established but also supported that
competition can increase individual effort towards collective
goals, and thereby also generate effective social outcomes
(Luo et al., 2006). Finally, it is also established that many
social situations involve mixed motives (Komorita & Parks,
1996). The results from this study suggest that integrative
categorization is important to making effective use of the
positives of both cooperation and competition to advance
social outcomes. People who engaged in integrative
categorization were more likely to maintain cooperation and
less likely to treat cooperation and competition as “tradeoffs.” Accordingly, people with beliefs that facilitate the
integration of paradoxes may be more suitable for jobs with
paradoxical situations, such as working in teams with mixed
motive incentive structures. In teams with mixed motives,
members with higher overall propensities for lay
dialecticism and integrative categorization may perform
better than teams whose members have low propensities or
a mixture of propensities for lay dialecticism and integrative
categorization. They might better take advantage of the
positives aspects of both cooperation and competition. More
broadly, the implication is that by examining categories
central to social interaction, we can improve our ability to
predict and provide prescriptions for obtaining positive
social outcomes.
To conclude, how people think about and use specific
categories can be influenced by broader cultural tendencies
as to how to address oppositions and paradoxes. This is
consequential; we showed that cultural tendencies to
maintain separation between categories, rather than to seek
out ways to integrate them, can lead to failures to support
social opportunities for mutual gain.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the support of the McCombs School of
Business, its Center for International Business Education
and Research, and its Herb Kelleher Center for
Entrepreneurship. We would also like to thank Caroline
Bartel, George Huber, Martin Kilduff, Bradley Love and
Kyle Lewis for their constructive feedback.

References
Atran, S., Medin, D. L., & Ross, N. O. 2005. The Cultural
Mind: Environmental Decision Making and Cultural
Modeling Within and Across Populations. Psychological
Review, 112(4): 744-776.
Bettenhausen, K. L., & Murnighan, J. K. 1991. The
Development of an Intragroup Norm and the Effects of
Interpersonal and Structural Challenges. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 36(1): 20-35.
Brandenburger, A., & Nalebuff, B. 1996. Co-Opetition : A
revolution mindset that combines competition and
cooperation : the game theory strategy that's changing
the game of business. New York: Doubleday.
Campion, M. A., Medsker, G. J., & Higgs, A. C. 1993.
Relations between work group characteristics and
effectiveness: implications for designing effective work
groups. Personnel Psychology, 46(4): 823-850.
Chen, M.-j. 2008. Reconceptualizing the CompetitionCooperation Relationship: A Transparadox Perspective.
Journal of Management Inquiry, 17: 288.
Deutsch, M. 1949. A theory of cooperation and competition.
Human Relations, 2: 199-231.
Eisenhardt, K. M. 1988. Agency- and institutional- theory
explanations: The case of retail sales compensation.
Academy of Management Journal, 31(3): 488-511.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman
& P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization inside and outside
the lab (pp. 151-175). Washington, DC: APA.
Glynn, M. A. 1994. Effects of work task cues and play task
cues on information processing, judgment, and
motivation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79(1): 34-45.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and Interrelated Concepts.
Memory & Cognition, 24, 608-628
Gouldner, A. W. 1960. The Norm of Reciprocity: A
Preliminary Statement. American Sociological Review,
25(2): 161-178.
Hannan, M. T., Pólos, L., & Carroll, G. 2007. Logics of
organization theory: audiences, codes, and ecologies:
Princeton.
Herrmann, D., G. Conti, et al. 1979. "Comprehension of
antonymy and the generality of categorization models."
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 5(6), 585-597.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. 1989. Cooperation and
competition: Theory and research. Edina, MN:
Interaction book.
Jones, S. 2002. Antonymy: a corpus-based perspective.
London: Routledge.

1293

Keller, J., & Loewenstein, J. 2010. The cultural category of
cooperation: a consensus model analysis of the united
states and china. Organization Science, (in press).
Kogut, B., & Zander, U. 1992. Knowledge of the firm,
combinative capabilities, and the replication of
technology. Organization Science, 3(3): 383-397.
Komorita, S. S., & Parks, C. D. 1996. Social Dilemmas.
Boulder, CO: Westview.
Koster, F., & Sanders, K. 2006. Organisational citizens or
reciprocal relationships? An empirical comparison.
Personnel Review, 35(5): 519-537.
Lao, T. 1997. Tao Te Ching (G.-F. Feng, Trans.): Vintage.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 315-363.
Luo, X., Slotegraaf, R. J., & Pan, X. 2006. Cross-Functional
"Coopetition": The Simultaneous Role of Cooperation
and Competition Within Firms. Journal of Marketing,
70(2): 67-80.
Lyons, J. 1977. Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
March, J. G. 1994. A primer on decision making. New
York: Free Press.
Markman, A. B., & Ross, B. H. 2003. Category use and
category learning. . Psychological Bulletin, 129(4): 592613.
McClintock, C. G., & Allison, S. T. 1989. Social Value
Orientation and Helping Behavior<sup>1</sup>. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 19(4): 353-362.
Millikan, R. G. 2005. Language: a biological model OUP.
Miron-Spektor, E., & Argote, L. 2008. The effect of
paradoxical cogntion on individual and team innovation.
Academy of Management Proceedings: 1-6.
Murphy, L. 2003. Semantic Relations and the Lexicon.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Norenzayan, A., Smith, E. E., Kim, B. J., & Nisbett, R. E.
2002. Cultural preferences for formal versus intuitive
reasoning. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary
Journal, 26(5): 653 - 684.
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. 1999. Culture, Dialectics, and
Reasoning About Contradiction. American Psychologist,
54(9): 741.
Preacher, K. J., Rucker, D. D., & Hayes, A. F. 2007.
Addressing Moderated Mediation Hypotheses: Theory,
Methods, and Prescriptions. Multivariate Behavioral
Research, 42(1): 185-227.
Raybeck, D., & Herrmann, D. 1996. Antonymy and
semantic relations: the case for a linguistic universal.
Cross-cultural research, 30(2): 154-183.
Rosch, E. 1978. Principles of Categorization. In B. Rosch,
& E. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and Categorization: 27-47.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Samson, A. 2004. "Contradictions in counter-intuitive
beliefs and naïve dialecticism", Journal of Cognition and
Culture, 4(2): 373-390.
Schwartz, B. I. 1985. The World of Thought in Ancient
China.: Harvard University Press.

Smith, E. E. 1989. Concepts and Induction. In M. I. Posner
(Ed.), Foundations of Cognitive Science: 501-526.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. 1981. Categories and
concepts. . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Smith, W. K., & Tushman, M. L. 2005. Managing Strategic
Contradictions: A Top Management Model for Managing
Innovation Streams. Organization Science, 16(5): 522536.
Spencer-Rodgers, J., Boucher, H., Mori, S., Wang, L., &
Peng, K. 2009. The Dialectical self-concept:
Contradiction, Change, and Holism in East Asian
cultures. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35:
29-44.
Sperber, D., & Hirschfeld, L. A. 2004. The cognitive
foundations of cultural stability and diversity. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 8(1): 40-46.
Stanne, M. B., Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. 1999.
Does competition enhance or inhibit motor performance:
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 125(1): 133-154.
Tsai, W. 2002. Social Structure of "Coopetition" Within a
Multiunit Organization: Coordination, Competition, and
Intraorganizational Knowledge Sharing. Organization
Science, 13(2): 179-190.
Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. 2000. Cooperation in groups :
procedural justice, social identity, and behavioral
engagement. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Walton, D. 1990. "What is Reasoning? What Is an
Argument?" Journal of Philosophy, 87(8), 399-419.
Wilhelm, R., & Baynes, C. 1968. The I ching; or, Book of
changes. London, UK: Routledge.
Xie, X. F., Chen, X. P., Yu, Y. Y., & Chang, S. Q. 2006.
Cooperation, competition, and coopetition: Scale
development and validation. International Association of
Chinese Management Research Conference Proceedings.

1294

