UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cultural Network Analysis: Mapping Cultural Theories of Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vr070d7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Sieck, Winston
Rasmussen, Louise

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cultural Network Analysis: Mapping Cultural Theories of Mind
Winston R. Sieck (wsieck@ara.com)
Culture & Cognition Group, Applied Research Associates
1750 Commerce Center Blvd, Fairborn, OH 45324 USA

Louise J. Rasmussen (lrasmussen@ara.com)
Culture & Cognition Group, Applied Research Associates
1750 Commerce Center Blvd, Fairborn, OH 45324 USA

Abstract
People‘s ability to interact with members of other cultures is
determined, in part, by their understanding of the folk
psychological theories that explain behavior in those cultures.
A comprehensive methodology is offered here for
investigating such folk theories. It attempts to characterize
the distribution of mental models within a cultural group. A
network representation is used to depict the consensus
elements (and level of consensus) in a cultural group‘s
knowledge within a domain. The method is general with
respect to knowledge domain, though the emphasis here is on
folk theories of mind. The methodology is illustrated with
two studies directed at Afghan explanations of an Afghan
Mullah‘s decision making in a well-defined context.
Keywords: Cultural epidemiology, cultural modeling, folk
psychology, mental models, decision making, mixture
modeling.

Background
The epidemiological conception of culture has been gaining
fairly wide acceptance among culture and cognition
theorists. ―Epidemiology‖ is used in the general sense of
describing and explaining the distributions of any property
within a population, and ―cultural epidemiology‖
emphasizes explanations of the distribution of ideas within
specific populations. According to Sperber (1996), culture
is made up of contagious ideas, that is, the ideas that
propogate effectively and durably in a population. One line
of cultural research within this program seeks to directly
explain how some ideas become widely distributed and
long-lasting within a population (Berger & Heath, 2005).
Other research has focused more on understanding the
origins and distributions of complex concepts (―folk
theories‖ or ―mental models‖) that include systematic
causal, explanatory beliefs (Atran, Medin, & Ross, 2005;
D‘Andrade, 1995; Hirschfeld & Gelman, 1994).
With respect to this latter area, cognitive psychology has
long characterized the organization of knowledge in terms
of networks of interconnected ideas, or mental models
(Gentner & Stevens, 1983). Scientific investigations of
mental models have spanned physical, biological, and
psychological systems. Our research program focuses on
understanding decision making within intercultural
encounters. In particular, we have been investigating the
relationship between how people represent the minds of
culturally-different others and the decisions they make as
regards those others (cf. D‘Andrade, 1987). From this

standpoint, mental models that pertain to psychological and
social domains are especially useful.
Research in the psychological domain has sought to
establish that people have theories about the workings of
other people‘s minds and behavior, as well as to elucidate
the abstract and general properties of theories of mind
(Gopnik, & Wellman 1994). There is a general consensus
among theory of mind researchers that basic awareness of
mental constructs and their relationship with behavior is
universal (Wellman, 1998). This, however, does not entail
that higher level folk psychology interpretations of these
basic theory of mind constructs are culturally universal. In
fact, evidence suggests that they are not (Lillard, 1998). For
example, in some cultures, "because one wants to" will be
considered an important reason for any action. In contrast,
within another culture, the most important reason for doing
anything might be ―because it is prescribed". In such a
culture, actions follow a set of rules—often referred to as
traditions or rituals. For instance, if upon encountering a
Mursi woman from Ethiopia, it would be mistaken to think
that she wears a lip plate because ‗she wants to.‘ Now, that
does not necessarily mean that she wears it unwillingly—
―will‖ simply has little to do with it.
Recent research in cognitive science on the neural
foundations of social learning also provides evidence to
support the existence of differences in theory of mind
constructs across cultures. For example, Leslie, Friedman,
and German (2004) differentiate between the mechanism
underlying theory of mind reasoning and the content of the
reasoning process. Their research suggests that, along with
very basic ‗theory of mind‘ concepts, modular processes
that promote attention to mental states and facilitate learning
about them appear very early and develop rapidly. On the
other hand, the heuristic processes that select appropriate
contents for mental states develop over a longer timeframe
and undergo several major changes. This timeframe in
which the contents of mental states are selected suggests an
important window of opportunity for the introduction of
cultural variations in mental models of psychology. As
children grow up in different cultures with different
practices, different languages, and different external
circumstances, they would correspondingly also generate
different ideas about the mind to fit those experiences.
In summary, there are several reasons to believe that
theory of mind functionality is supported by mental models
of psychology that vary across cultures, in much the same

1756

way that folk theories of biology differ between cultural
groups. The direct investigation of such cultural theories of
mind is useful for theoretical development, as it provides a
comprehensive base of kinds of explanations, as well as
correlations among explanatory elements. It also has
considerable practical potential, primarily for the purposes
of enhancing understanding of a crucial component of
thought between culturally distinct groups. In order to
support such investigations, we provide a method for
directly eliciting, analyzing, and representing cultural
models in any domain, and illustrate its use for mapping
cultural theories of mind.

Cultural Network Analysis
We describe a comprehensive method for modeling culture
as networks of ideas that are distributed among members of
a population (Sieck, Rasmussen, & Smart, 2010). The
method, Cultural Network Analysis (CNA), represents an
interdisciplinary synthesis of techniques drawn from the
fields of cognitive anthropology, cultural and cognitive
psychology, and decision analysis. CNA is used to develop
cultural models for groups and populations.
The
development of cultural models reflects a well-established
practice in cognitive anthropology (D‘Andrade, 2005;
Quinn, 2005). Furthermore, CNA follows a similar overall
pattern of research to other approaches for building cultural
models, beginning with qualitative studies, followed by
quantitative study and analysis. One refinement to the
customary anthropological practice includes a common
format for representing cultural models. Specifically, CNA
cultural models are typically depicted as a network
representation of the culturally-shared concepts, causal
beliefs, and values that influence key decisions (Sieck,
Rasmussen, & Smart, 2010). This and other refinements of
the process are discussed more extensively by Sieck (2010).
Here, we focus on providing a general overview of the
process.
As mentioned, Cultural Network Analysis encompasses
both qualitative, exploratory analysis, and quantitative,
confirmatory analysis. The specific techniques used to
achieve each step in the analysis depend on whether the
cultural researcher is employing exploratory CNA or
confirmatory CNA.
A primary goal of exploratory CNA is to develop an
initial understanding of the concepts and characteristics that
are culturally relevant within the domain. In exploratory
CNA, concepts, causal beliefs, and values are extracted
from interviews and other qualitative sources. Semistructured interviews employ questions intended to elicit
antecedents and consequences of concept states, as in the
―explanatory models framework‖ sometimes used in
cognitive anthropology (Garro, 2000). Questioning along
these lines draws out a more comprehensive set of ideas
than would typically be verbalized in standard think aloud
procedures, and places particular emphasis on drawing out
perceived causal relations. We have also combined this
interview approach with ―value focused thinking‖ from

decision analysis to elicit values and objectives directly,
along with the causal beliefs that link more fundamental
values with the means intended to achieve them (Keeney,
1994; Rasmussen, Sieck, & Smart, 2009). Qualitative
analysis and representation at this stage yield insights that
can be captured in initial cultural models.
Influence diagrams have proven to be quite useful for
representing mental models relevant to key judgments and
decisions (Bostrom, Fischhoff, & Morgan, 1992). We
further believe they are an important representation format
for depicting cultural models, especially for showing both
qualitative structure and numeric prevalence information.
In an influence diagram, nodes are linked by arrows that
represent local causal influences. That is, the value of the
concept at the beginning of an arrow affects the value of the
concept at the arrow‘s point. Fully-specified influence
diagrams can also represent numerical quantities, but the
basic structure is useful as well. Specifically, an influence
diagram provides a relatively simple and useful
representation of a cultural model of another‘s mind that
includes key judgments and decisions of interest to the
researcher, as well as the culture-specific concepts, values,
and causal beliefs typically used to explain those decisions
within a population.
Confirmatory CNA serves to test the structure of
previously developed qualitative cultural models, as well as
to elaborate the models with quantitative data on the
prevalence of ideas in the population(s) of interest. In
confirmatory
CNA,
specially-designed
structured
questionnaires are used to obtain systematic data that can be
subjected to statistical analysis. Most questionnaires treat
ideas as independent entities, and so do not provide any
means for revealing their interrelated, network form. A few
studies have attempted to capture first-order causal beliefs.
We have begun developing questionnaires that permit the
analysis of longer causal belief chains by starting with
influence diagram representations of qualitative cultural
models from exploratory CNA to provide a suitable
reference.
Statistical models, such as cultural consensus theory and
mixture models are employed in confirmatory CNA to
assess the patterns of agreement from the ―causal-belief‖
surveys, and derive statistics describing the distribution of
concepts, causal beliefs, and values. Cultural consensus
theory is a collection of formal statistical models that has
been long used within cognitive anthropology to assess
agreement in knowledge and beliefs among a set of
respondents (Romney, Weller, & Batchelder, 1986). When a
cultural consensus is found, it provides the consensual
responses that indicate culturally shared knowledge and
estimates of the strength of consensus for those responses.
Our group has increasingly been relying on mixture
modeling as an alternative approach to cultural consensus
theory, primarily as it permits direct segmentation of
cultural groups based on clusters of consensus (Mueller &
Veinott, 2008; Sieck & Mueller, 2009). Mixture models
have been applied in many scientific fields, including

1757

marketing, biology, medicine, and astronomy. A mixture
model, or ―finite mixture model,‖ is given as a combination
of different groups, each described by a distinct probability
distribution. Mixture models sort through the data and group
them into sets of relatively homogeneous cases or
observations. In cultural modeling applications, the distinct
segments resulting from the analysis represent cultural
groups, i.e., groups defined by the similarity of their ideas.
Finally, influence diagram representations of the cultural
models are constructed in confirmatory CNA that illustrate
the statistical properties, as well as the qualitative structure
elucidated in exploratory CNA. In the confirmatory CNA
application, the influence diagram represents the ―culturally
correct‖ concepts, values, and causal linkages as determined
by mixture modeling for each cultural group that was found.
Furthermore, the numerical probability values in the
diagram are populated with the prevalence of each idea, as
measured by selection percentage, within a group. The
result in this case is a summary of the full distribution of
ideas, with probabilities indicating the consensus on any
particular causal link (or node).
As discussed above, CNA provides an integrated
collection of techniques and procedures that can be usefully
employed to build cultural models in virtually any
knowledge domain. Here, we illustrate their use for building
cultural models that pertain to folk psychology. Specifically,
the substance of our research primarily considers the general
concept of corruption and its relationship to explanations of
individual decisions in the context of Afghanistan.

Exploratory CNA: Afghan Expatriates
Method
Participants 14 Afghans living in the U.S. participated in
the study. Most (80%) were men, aged between 20 and 34
(mean 26.7) years, and had resided in the U.S. for a time
between 3 months and 9 years (mean 2.7 years). All spoke
English in addition to Dari or Pashto.
Materials The interviews were structured around short
scenarios based on real events. All involved Afghan actors
who engaged in some behavior that puzzled Americans.
Here, we focus on a scenario involving a Mullah who was
helping a group of Afghans and Americans to distribute
humanitarian assistance supplies in several villages. The
scenario included that the Mullah was extremely helpful,
especially in facilitating positive interactions with village
elders. Everything was going very well. After finishing with
the distribution, as everyone was packing up to leave, the
American leader learns that the Mullah has kept a truckload
of the supplies. The American who originally relayed this
incident indicated a belief that the Mullah was operating out
of a desire to increase his own wealth. As will be seen, the
Afghan interpretations are somewhat different.
Procedure Each participant was interviewed individually
using the same CNA interview guide. A primary and

secondary interviewer were present for all interviews. The
primary interviewer was responsible for covering the
questions in the interview guide. The secondary interviewer
took notes and asked additional questions of clarification.
The interview guide consisted of open-ended questions to
elicit participants‘ overall explanations of the situation, as
well as their beliefs regarding the Mullah‘s intentions,
objectives, fundamental values, and causal links between
them. Questions also covered participants‘ beliefs about the
Mullah‘s decision process, value conflicts, and anticipated
reactions to possible mitigating actions.

Results and Discussion
Coding Two independent coders read through all of the
transcripts and identified segments that contained concept causal belief - value chains. Next, the two analysts coded
each segment by identifying the antecedent, the
consequence, and the direction of the relationship between
the antecedent and consequence (increasing or decreasing)
for each causal belief. Percent agreement for the coding was
95.2%.
Representation The concept - causal belief – value chain
fragments were then integrated into a network diagram that
synthesized participants‘ models of the Afghan Mullah‘s
mind, as bounded by the scenario (See Figure 1). In the
diagram, circles depict concepts, arrows represent causal
beliefs, and values are indicated by color of the circles. One
analyst constructed an initial draft of the overall diagram by
first focusing on fragments related to key decision points
and fundamental values within the scenario, and
subsequently adding further detail. Three other analysts
independently reviewed the resulting diagram against the
original set of codes, and a final version determined by
consensus.
Findings A rich structure emerged from the process, as
illustrated in Figure 1. As can be seen in Figure 1, three
main sections of peoples‘ beliefs about the Mullah‘s mental
states are represented: 1) Mullah successfully acquiring
supplies, 2) Mullah being caught taking supplies, and 3)
Mullah‘s concept of theft. As shown, respondents believed
that the Mullah‘s intentions for the supplies included using
them within his own household, selling them, or distributing
them among people within his village (this latter category
can be further decomposed into distinct groups of people, as
described in Study 2). Interestingly, the fundamental values
projected onto the Mullah rarely reflected considerations of
material gain for the sake of wealth alone. Instead, the
Mullah‘s fundamental values guiding his decisions in this
situation were believed to comprise considerations of status,
respect, power, and honor. These considerations are
examined further in Study 2. Being caught with the supplies
was generally felt to negatively impact these four values,
and so come at a significant personal cost to the Mullah.
However, respondents believed the degree of impact would
be minimized or exacerbated depending on how discreetly

1758

the situation was resolved. With respect to the concept of
theft, participants did not believe the Mullah would consider
himself as stealing and also felt that he would likely view
theft quite negatively. In order for the act of reserving
supplies to be considered theft, the goods would need to
come from local rather than foreign sources.

Confirmatory CNA: Afghans in Afghanistan
Method
Participants Participants were 405 men from 4 provinces
(Balkh, Kandahar, Kabul, Herat) representing north, south,
east, and west regions of Afghanistan. Approximately half
were from rural villages (54%), and the remainder lived in
urban areas. Ages ranged from 18 to 78 years old (mean =
32.6). The vast majority (96.8%) spoke either Pashto or Dari
as their primary language.
Materials The Mullah section of the survey consisted of a
series of brief vignettes describing possible intended
actions, followed by closed-form questions about the

Again, the survey options presented were not created by the
researchers, but instead derived from interviews with
Afghans in the exploratory CNA study. The sequences
ultimately led to six fundamental values that were also
derived in the exploratory phase of the study: status,
honor/respect, wealth, power, safety, and family approval.
The CNA survey was translated into Dari and Pashto
languages, and back-translated to ensure preservation of
meaning (Brislin, 1970).
Procedure The survey was administered to participants
through structured face-to-face interviews. The interviews
were conducted by trained Afghan interviewers who live in
the same province where they collected data. Before the
data collection began, supervisors from each provincial data
collection center met with the principal investigator at the
opinion research center headquarters in Kabul to discuss the
study purpose, survey content, and data collection
procedures.
The supervisors then returned to their
provincial centers and held similar sessions for the local
Afghan interviewers. Local interviewers then collected data

Figure 1. Qualitative cultural model of a Mullah‘s mind.
objectives and consequences for those actions. An example
vignette/question is, assuming the Mullah successfully
acquires the supplies, ―what will he most likely do with the
supplies?‖
1. Use in his immediate household;
2. Sell or trade them;
3. Give them to his close friends or supporters;
4. Give them to his extended family; and
5. Give them to needy people in his own village.

at randomly assigned sampling points in their province.
Participants were interviewed individually by one
interviewer.
The interviewer documented participant
responses to the survey using paper-and-pencil. The survey
took approximately 1 hour to administer.

Results and Discussion
Model fitting was conducted using a statistical package
called ―FlexMix‖ (Leisch, 2004). FlexMix uses an iterative
maximum likelihood procedure called the, ―EM algorithm,‖

1759

for model estimation. A mixture of binomial distributions
was fitted to the data set, after categorical variables were
recoded in binary terms. The possible (―finite‖) number of
resulting groups was allowed to vary between 1 and 7. The
best fitting model was selected using the Bayes Information
Criterion (BIC) statistic. The BIC statistic indicated that the
best fit was achieved with 3 cultural groups (BIC =
73096.7) of roughly equivalent size (n1=121, n2=152,
n3=132).
Differences between the groups appeared to be fairly
subtle. For brevity, a trimmed version of the cultural model
is presented for Group 2, only (see Figure 2). As illustrated
in Figure 2, participants in this group tended to believe the
Mullah would use the supplies within his own household,
though reasonable proportions felt he would either sell
them, or distribute them among the needy in his village.
Interestingly, the majority of possible motivations for
Mullah actions center around fundamental values of status
and respect. The possibility that the Mullah is simply
seeking to increase his wealth appears to constitute a
minority view among Afghans. This finding corroborates
the initial results from the exploratory CNA study, and
again differs from the original American interpretation that
the Mullah was operating out of greed.

distribution of a cultural group‘s knowledge within a
domain and situation is analyzed and displayed using a
network representation of consensus elements. We also
illustrated the use of the method to explicitly represent folk
theories of mind in a cultural context. In particular, we used
exploratory and confirmatory CNA, respectively, in two
studies to tease out Afghan explanations of an Afghan
Mullah‘s decision making in an ethically-charged scenario.
A core assumption of our program is that peoples‘
intuitive understandings of human psychology are
fundamental to many more complex domains of interest in
cultural research and applications (e.g., reading intentions,
negotiating, and collaborating across cultures). Hence,
cultural investigations of mental models of psychology
using cultural network analysis, among other methods, will
provide a useful starting point for addressing these more
complex cultural domains.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Human Social
Cultural Behavioral (HSCB) modeling program, under
CTTSO cooperative agreement W91CRB-09-C-0028. The
authors thank collaborators Mansour Javidan, Rafik Ullah
Kakar, Joyce Osland, Ben Simpkins, and Jennifer Smith, for
assistance and suggestions at various stages of the research.

References

Figure 2. Quantitative cultural model of a Mullah‘s mind.

Discussion
We all have the ability to think and speculate about the
behavior of objects, events, and other people. We do this
naturally in a variety of domains. In the social domain, we
are able to make guesses about other people‘s thoughts and
therefore speculate about their intentions and their motives
and use those guesses to generate plausible explanations for
their behavior. Human interaction and communication relies
heavily on our ability to anticipate each other‘s actions and
questions. In fact, one could argue that the ability to predict
and explain the behaviors of people around us in common
terms is central to our ability to thrive in the local social
environment. Methods to support the investigation of such
explanations and predictions among localized populations
are clearly warranted.
In this article, we described a method that can be used to
study folk theories of psychology. The method, Cultural
Network Analysis seeks to explicitly map the distribution of
mental models within a cultural group. Specifically, the

Atran, S., Medin, D. L., & Ross, N. O. (2005). The cultural
mind: Environmental decision making and cultural
modeling within and across populations. Psychological
Review, 112(4), 744-776.
Berger, J. A., & Heath, C. (2005). Idea habitats: How the
prevalence of environmental cues influences the success
of ideas. Cognitive Science, 29, 195-221.
Bostrom, A., Fischhoff, B., & Morgan, M. G. (1992).
Characterizing mental models of hazardous processes: A
methodology and an application to radon. Journal of
Social Issues, 48, 85-100.
Brislin, R. W. (1970). Back-translation for cross-cultural
research. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 1, 185216.
D‘ Andrade, R. (1987). A folk model of the mind. In D.
Holland and N. Quinn (Eds.), Cultural Models in
Language and Thought (pp. 112-148). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
D‘Andrade, R. (1995). The Development of Cognitive
Anthropology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
D‘Andrade, R. (2005). Some methods for studying cultural
cognitive structures. In Naomi Quinn (Ed.), Finding
Culture in Talk (pp. 84-104). New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Garro, L. C. (2000). Remembering what one knows and the
construction of the past: A comparison of cultural
consensus theory and cultural schema theory. Ethos,
28(3), 275-319.
Gentner, D., & Stevens, A. L. (Eds.). (1983). Mental
models. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum & Associates.

1760

Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (1994). The theory theory.
In L. Hirschfeld & S. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the Mind:
Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture (pp. 257293). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hirschfeld, L., & Gelman, S. (Eds.). (1994). Mapping the
mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture. New
York: Cambridge University.
Keeney, R. L. (1994). Creativity in decision making with
value-focused thinking. Sloan Management Review,
35(4), 33-41.
Leisch, F. (2004). FlexMix: A general framework for finite
mixture models and latent class regression in R. Journal
of Statistical Software, 11(8), 1-18.
Leslie, A. M., Friedman, O., & German, T. P. (2004). Core
mechanisms in 'theory of mind'. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(12), 529-533.
Lillard, A. (1998). Ethnopsychologies: Cultural variations in
theories of Mind. Psychological Bulletin, 123, 3-32.
Mueller, S. T., & Veinott, E. S. (2008). Cultural mixture
modeling:
Identifying
cultural
consensus
(and
disagreement) using finite mixture modeling. Proceedings
of the Cognitive Science Society. Washington, DC.
Quinn, N. (2005). Finding Culture in Talk: A Collection of
Methods. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rasmussen, L. J., Sieck, W. R., & Smart, P. (2009). What
is a good plan? Cultural variations in expert planners‘
concepts of plan quality.
Journal of Cognitive
Engineering & Decision Making, 3, 228-249.
Romney, A. K., Weller, S. C., & Batchelder, W. H. (1986).
Culture as consensus: a theory of culture and informant
accuracy. American Anthropologist, 88, 313-338.
Sieck, W. R., & Mueller, S. T. (2009). Cultural variations in
collaborative decision making: Driven by beliefs or social
norms? In Proceedings of the International Workshop on
Intercultural Collaboration (pp. 111-118). Palo Alto, CA.
Sieck, W. R. (2010). Cultural network analysis: Method
and application. In D. Schmorrow & D. Nicholson (Eds.),
Advances in Cross-Cultural Decision Making, CRC Press
/ Taylor & Francis, Ltd.
Sieck, W. R., Rasmussen, L. J., & Smart, P. (2010). Cultural
network analysis: A cognitive approach to cultural
modeling. In D. Verma (Ed.), Network Science for
Military Coalition Operations: Information Exchange and
Interaction (pp. 237-255). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Sperber, D. (1996). Explaining culture: A naturalistic
approach. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

1761

