UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Determining the Internal Consistency of Attitude Attributions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01m5j8qf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Jennings, Kylie

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Determining the Internal Consistency of Attitude Attributions
Kyle E. Jennings (jennings@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1650 USA
Abstract

Checking internal consistency requires knowing what information is relevant to a judgment, and how that information determines the correct answer. This paper develops a
Bayesian model relating assumptions and perceptions to attitude attributions. Since the model is grounded in mathematics, the steps between premises and conclusions can be
more readily verified than with verbally justified standards
(Morris & Larrick, 1995). Additionally, the model is agnostic
to what process people might use to make judgments, helping
researchers advocating different mechanisms at least agree on
the correct outcome.

In the attitude attribution paradigm, observers must estimate
the true attitude of an author who was assigned to advocate a
particular position. Observers’ tendency to attribute an attitude
in line with the expressed position despite its having been assigned is called the correspondence bias. While there is strong
evidence that such attributions are externally invalid, it is less
clear whether they are internally consistent. This research develops a Bayesian model that specifies what attitude an observer should attribute, given assumptions about the prior attitude distribution, and perceptions of the degree of compliance
shown in the essay and the strength of the situation. The model
reproduces classical findings regarding chosen vs. assigned positions, prior attitude probability, and degree of compliance,
and also fits newly collected data. The results suggest that future research should examine observers’ assumptions and perceptions, and focus less on the reasoning process itself.

Normative Model
In the attitude attribution paradigm, observers know what essay was written, and the circumstances under which it was
written. Their judgment of whether the essay author holds
the expressed attitude is (Morris & Larrick, 1995):

Keywords: Correspondence bias; Attitude attribution; Normative standard; Bayesian modeling.

People’s tendency to neglect situational influences on behavior has been a subject of long-standing interest to social
psychologists. Many of the earliest and most famous demonstrations of this error make use of the attitude attribution
paradigm (Jones & Harris, 1967), wherein participants read
an essay that expresses an opinion on an issue, and must estimate the author’s attitude. Complicating this judgment is
the fact that the author was assigned what position to express,
which pits two competing explanations—holding the attitude,
or complying with the request—against each other. Participants tend to make attitude attributions in line with the essay
even when the position was assigned, which is called the correspondence bias (Gilbert & Jones, 1986).
It is not straightforward to say whether people’s responses
in the attitude attribution paradigm are in fact biased. On
the one hand, when participants rate essays that other study
participants wrote under constraint, the attributed attitudes
are more in line with the essay than with the authors’ selfreported attitudes (e.g., Reeder, Fletcher, & Furman, 1989).
On the other hand, if people’s attributions are internally
consistent with their own perceptions and assumptions, it
is hard to call their attributions completely biased (Jones,
Worchel, Goethals, & Grumet, 1971; Morris & Larrick, 1995;
Forsyth, 2004). These two views involve two different standards for correctness, known as correspondence and coherence (Hammond, 1996), which concern the external validity and internal consistency of the judgment, respectively.
To avoid confusion between correspondence criteria and the
correspondence bias, the terms external validity and internal
consistency will be used. Though people’s judgments probably lack external validity, it is not clear whether they are at
least internally consistent.

P(attitude | essay, circumstances)
Letting A, E, and C stand for the attitude, essay, and circumstances, and strategically applying Bayes’ rule,1 this equals:
P(A) ·

P(C | A) P(E | A,C)
·
P(C)
P(E | C)

Intuitively, these terms express the prior probability of the attitude, the co-occurance of the circumstances and the attitude,
and the relative likelihood of a person writing the essay, comparing someone with the attitude to the average person.
The model can be applied in two ways. First, it can be
interpreted schematically in order to draw conclusions about
the general direction of normative inferences. For instance,
the standard shows that the conventional wisdom that the essay communicates no information about the author’s attitude
in light of the circumstances is correct only if two conditions
are met. First, the co-occurrance term must be one, meaning
that positions must be assigned without respect to the author’s
attitude. Studies that merely say that the position to advocate
was assigned leave open the possibility that the author’s attitude was considered when making the assignment, in which
case a correspondent inference may be justifiable. Second,
the likelihood term must also be one, meaning that the constraint must be seen as equally compelling regardless of the
author’s attitude (with completely compelling being a special
case of this). As other researchers have argued (e.g., Jones
1 P(A | E,C) = P(A, E,C)/P(E,C) = P(E | A,C)P(A,C)/
P(E,C) = P(E | A,C)P(C | A)P(A)/[P(E | C)P(C)]. See also
Jennings (2010).

978

e

−4

−2

0

2

0.4
0.3
0.2

0.2
0.1

!

0.0

!

!

0.1

p(e = 2 | a, p = 2, s = .5)

0.5

µ = a(1 – s) + ps
= 2(1 – .5) + 2(.5)
=1+1=2

!

0.3

0.4

µ = a(1 – s) + ps
= -2(1 – .5) + 2(.5)
= -1 + 1 = 0

0.0

p(e | a, p = 2, s = .5)

0.5

a

4

−4

e

−2

0

2

4

a

Figure 1: Illustration of p(e | a, p = 2, s = .5). Left panel shows two essay distributions, for a = −2 and a = 2. Right panel
shows likelihood distribution over attitudes for e = 2. As shown in the middle panel, these two distributions are really slices of
the same three-dimensional function.
et al., 1971) or found (e.g., Forsyth, 2004), observers do not
seem to hold this belief.
Though these conclusions are powerful, it is possible to do
better. The second way to apply a model such as this one is
to use it to quantitatively assess the internal consistency of
people’s judgments, which is done by measuring quantities
on both sides of the equation. Previous authors have done
this using alternative Bayesian standards (Trope, 1974; Morris & Larrick, 1995; Forsyth, 2004). However, every previous
model has required participants to think in terms of discrete
probabilities (e.g., the probability that the author holds the attitude expresed in the essay), while nearly all other studies
of attitude attribution ask participants to estimate the author’s
attitude on a Likert-type scale. Achieving a match to what
participants customarily estimate requires switching from the
probabilities of dichotomous events to probability densities
over continuous variables, as follows:

occurance term expresses how the circumstances vary with
the author’s attitude. Assuming a random assignment process, then this term equals one. This leaves the likelihood
term, p(e | a, p, s)/p(e | p, s). Since the denominator does not
involve a, the expression can be written:
p(a | e, p, s) ∝ p(a) · p(e | a, p, s)
These terms will be called the posterior, the prior, and the
(essay) likelihood, respectively.
The final task is to specify a form for the likelihood,
p(e | a, p, s). This can be done by determining the distribution of essay positions that an author with attitude a would
write when asked to express position p, facing an inducement
of strength s. Instead of requiring participants to estimate this
themselves, the form of the function will be specified mathematically. Past research has found that observers expect constrained authors to express an attitude somewhere in between
their own attitude and the position that was assigned (Miller
& Rorer, 1982), which Reeder et al. (1989) refer to as the
central tendency assumption. Thus, an author with (say) a
strong con attitude who was asked to express a strong pro position would attempt to write a neutral essay. This expectation
can be modeled by saying that when a, p, and s are known,
p(e | a, p, s) is a normal distribution, with:

• “Pro” and “con” attitudes are generalized to real-valued attitudes along a “con” (negative) to “pro” (positive) continuum, with attitudes further from zero being more extreme.
The variable a will refer to the author’s attitude, while e
will refer to the position expressed in the essay.
• The circumstances (C) are decomposed into two things: p,
the position that the author was asked to express, and s, the
strength of that request. The variable p can vary as discussed above, while s can vary between zero (no inducement) and one (a completely compelling inducement).

µ = a · (1 − s) + p · s
With no inducement (s = 0), µ = a, the author’s own attitude.
With a completely compelling inducement (s = 1), µ = p, the
requested position. For other values of s, µ is a weighted
compromise between a and p. While one could imagine ways
that the distribution’s standard deviation might depend on a,
p, and s, for parsimony it will be assumed to be constant.
The above model of authors’ responses specifies the distribution of e, given that the other variables are known. However, when applied, e is known but a is unknown. This does
not present a problem, as illustrated in Figure 1. The left
graph shows the essay distributions for two values of a (-2
and 2), where s = .5 and p = 2. The right graph shows the

Using the above variables, P(A | E,C) becomes p(a |
e, p, s). Converting the prior, co-occurance, and relative likelihood terms into probability distributions and multiplying the
three over the range of a gives the probability of each possible attitude. The expected value of this distribution will be
the attitude attribution, and the confidence in this attribution
will be proportional to the distribution’s standard deviation.
Completing the normative model requires specifying the
forms of the three terms. The prior distribution, p(a), is just
the assumed attitude distribution in the population. The co-

979

-2

0

2

0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
0.20
0.15
0.05

0.10

visible.as

0.00

p(a)
p(a)
-4

4

0
d = 2.58

-4

a

-2

0

2

4

a

Figure 2: Model of the choice (left) and no choice (right) conditions for Jones and Harris (1967), Study 1. In the bottom panel,
black arrows show original results, and black lines show the model’s results.
likelihood distribution over the range of a, where e = 2. The
middle image shows how the two are related, with two points
shown on all three graphs (e = 2, a = ±2) for reference.
As already mentioned, this model improves upon previous
Bayesian models of attitude attribution in that its output is
the same kind of variable as participants usually estimate. In
addition, the model’s inputs correspond to perceptions that
are relatively straightforward for participants to reason about
(the position expressed in the essay, e, whether the essay is
weaker or stronger than was expected of the author, e − p,
and how constraining the situation was, s). When testing
scenarios schematically, this makes it possible to continuously vary the model parameters, or to test specific combinations of parameters, rather than having to make verbal arguments about, say, the relative sizes of P(Essay | Attitude) and
P(Essay | Attitude). When testing the internal consistency of
participants’ actual judgments, it becomes possible to directly
ask for the relevant quantities. The tradeoff is that the model
assumes people believe that constrained authors will express
a position between their own attitude and the request. However, other models of how authors respond could be translated
into likelihood functions, and the results compared.

anyway. It is for this reason that they used advocacy for
“Castro’s Cuba”—a highly unexpected behavior in 1960’s
America—as the critical test. As predicted, they found that
people made attributions corresponding to the constrained behavior when the behavior was expected (arguing against Castro). What they were surprised to find was that though people
did not make completely corresponding attributions when the
behavior was unexpected (arguing for Castro), their attributions did not revert to the level that would be obtained had the
behavior been completely disregarded. This is the result that
triggered the volumes of research on the correspondence bias
that continues to this day.
This paper’s model can reproduce the pattern of results
that Jones and Harris obtained, using two reasonable assumptions. First, assume that the prior attitude distribution was
strongly right skewed (i.e., very few people supporting Castro).2 Second, for parsimony, assume that the pro and con
essays were equivalently strong, and no weaker or stronger
than requested.
To reproduce the “choice” condition, the model is run with
strength set to zero (s = 0), which is illustrated in the left half
of Figure 2. The top panel of this graph shows the prior distribution, p(a), while the middle panel shows the likelihood
functions for the con (dashed line) and pro (dotted line) essays. These lines show p(e | a, p, s), where e = ±3,3 s = 0
since authors could choose what to express (making the requested position, p, irrelevant), and a varies across the x-axis
to encompass the range of attitudes shown. The bottom panel
shows the posterior distributions, p(a | e, p, s), which are the
result of multiplying the prior distribution by either likelihood
distribution. In this case, the prior distribution has only a
small effect on the posterior distributions, and the expected

Illustrations
Choice and Prior Probabilities
Correspondent inference theory (Jones & Davis, 1965) was
intended to be a normative standard for how people should
make attributions, and aims to specify which behaviors justify the inference of information about a person that would
not have been assumed previously (Jones & McGillis, 1976).
Jones and Harris (1967) was an attempt to show that while
both constrained behavior and expected behavior do not contribute new information, an expected behavior performed under constraint will still lead to a corresponding attribution,
simply because the underlying disposition would be expected

2 See

Jones and Harris (1967), p. 5.
that attitude values are always rescaled to a −4 [con] to 4
[pro] for consistency of comparison across studies.
3 Note

980

P

Nomothe
essay ex

0.0015

p(a|e=±3,p=±3,s=.6)
p(e=±3|a,p=±3,s=.6)
p(a|e,p,s)
p(e|a,p,s)

0
d = 5.2

C

D

0.0000

p(a)
p(a)

0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.004 0.00

p(e|a,p,s)
p(e=±3|a,p=±3,s=0)

visible.as

0.002

relative
kelihood

The model can "postdict" findings in previous studies. For instance, the following
graphs show the pro and con essays from the choice and no choice conditions from
Jones and Harris, Study 1. The arrows point to the original values.

p(a|e,p,s)
p(a|e=±3,p=±3,s=0)

ty of the
g Bayes'

Postdicting Jones and Harris, Study 1

0.000

e internal
estimate
dict what

Using a
essay, th
collected
correspo
attributio
should in

Requested position (p)
Essay position (e)
Attribution (a), weak constraint (s = .25)
Attribution (a), strong constraint (s = .75)
Essay position (e)
Attribution (a), strong constraint (s = .75)

Con
Strong Weak
-2
-2
-3
-1
-2.78
-0.56
-2.16
0.72
-3
-2
-2.16
-0.72

Weak
2
1
0.56
-0.72
2
0.72

Pro
Strong
2
3
2.78
2.16
3
2.16

Table 1: Model-predicted attributions for strong and weak essays under weak and strong situational constraint. Weak situation
shows no reversal for the weak essays, but strong situation does. The same pattern can be obtained by keeping situation strength
constant but making the weak essays less weak.
values of the distributions (shown by the black, vertical lines)
are a very close match to the results that Jones and Harris
originally obtained (shown by the black arrows).
Jones and Harris found nothing counterintuitive about their
results for the choice condition, but were surprised by the results in the no choice condition, which can be replicated by
choosing an appropriate value for s. Not shown in the figure is
the case where the situation is seen as completely constraining (s = 1). Under conditions with no behavioral freedom,
everyone is equally likely to have written the requested essay,
and so the two likelihood functions are flat lines. As such,
both posterior distributions are equal to the prior distribution,
making the normative attribution for both essays equal to the
mean attitude in the population. This result is what Jones and
Harris were expecting to find. Since this is not what they obtained, values of s less than one must be tried.
A good fit to the original results was obtained with s = .6.
The right half of Figure 2 shows this case, where it can be
seen that though the prior distribution is the same and the
likelihood functions have the same locations, the likelihood
functions are also more spread out (since constrained behavior is less informative than freely chosen behavior). Even
though the pro and con likelihood functions are equal and opposite, the posteriors are not, which is a result of multiplying
by the asymmetric prior.
As the bottom panel shows, the expected values of either
posterior (black, vertical lines) are quite close to the results
that Jones and Harris obtained (black arrows). In particular,
for the “con” essay, the model-derived and actual attributions
are still in the direction of the essay. For the “pro” essay,
however, multiplying by the prior probability has brought the
model-derived results closer to the midpoint, and like the actual results, still somewhat correspondent with the essay itself. It is also worth noting that the “pro” posterior is more
spread out than the “con” posterior, just as Jones and Harris found greater variance in this condition than in the other
conditions of their study.
As the above shows, the model can reproduce the important
features of the original demonstration of the correspondence
bias, with only one parameter varying between the choice and
no choice conditions. As such, it establishes that the results

in Study 1 of Jones and Harris (1967) could be the result of an
internally consistent reasoning process, given the assumption
that the participants did not believe that the author’s situation in the no choice condition was completely constraining.
In fact, according to the model, the only internally consistent way for perceivers to make attributions other than to the
mean attitude in the population is if they believe that the situation leaves room for choice, and that this choice depends
on the compatibility of the author’s attitude and the assigned
position. Though these attributions are probably externally
invalid, the possibility that they are internally consistent suggests that defects in observers’ reasoning processes are not
necessary to explain the results. Likewise, people may make
perfectly reasonable assumptions about how situational constraints in general would influence essay authors. The source
of “bias” may simply be that people applied those assumptions using an insufficiently strong appraisal of the power of
the author’s particular situation.

Degree of Compliance
Thus far, it has been assumed that perceivers believe that the
essay written was no weaker or stronger than was requested.
However, compliance needn’t be all-or-nothing. Jones et al.
(1971) manipulate the strength of the essay in order to understand how behavioral extremity affects attributions. One of
their key results is that when people read an essay written under constraint and expressing a weak position, they attribute
the opposite attitude to the author as was assigned. When
the essay position was strongly argued, they attribute a corresponding attitude. In an attempt to replicate this result, Miller
(1974) found that people made less extreme attributions when
reading a weak essay than when reading a strong essay, but
did not find any reversal. In both cases, however, the degree
of compliance affected the attributions.
The model is able to reproduce these result patterns by
varying the situation strength parameter, s, and leaving everything else constant. Model-predicted attitude attributions
for weak and strong levels of constraint are shown in the top
and middle of Table 1. Reversal occurs for the strong constraint, but not for weak constraint. Intuitively, this is because stronger constraints make it less likely that a person

981

0.12
−4

−2

0

2

4

0.3
0.00300.0

0.1

0.2

visible.as

0.0015

0

0.0000

p(a|e,p,s)
p(e|a,p,s)
p(a|e=-3,-1,p=-2,s=.75)
p(e=-3,-1|a,p=-2,s=.75)

0.40.04

0.08

p(a)
p(a)

0.12
0.08

p(a)
p(a)

0.40.04
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0060.0
0.003

0

0.000

p(a|e,p,s)
p(e|a,p,s)
p(e=-3,-1|a,p=-2,s=.25)
p(a|e=-3,-1,p=-2,s=.25)

visible.as

−4

a

−2

0

2

4

a

Figure 3: Illustration of strong and weak “con” essays for weak constraint (left, s = .25) and strong constraint (right, s = .75).
In both cases, the requested position, p, is -2 and the essay positions, e, are -3 and -1 for the strong and weak essays.
pants (N = 246) read essays for and against the death penalty,
and then learned that the author was randomly assigned the
position to take. Participants then rated what they thought
the author’s attitude was, how confident they were in their
answer, and other perceptions (detailed next). Replicating
past results, there was a significant difference between the
pro and con essay attributions (M = −0.90 vs. M = 0.98,
t(244) = −8.44, p < .0001). Model-based predictions were
then tested, after reversing all of the relevant quantities for
participants in the “con” essay condition.
As the model of the Jones and Harris (1967) results
showed, a skewed prior attitude distribution should result in
asymmetric attitude attributions. In particular, attributions
for essays expressing rare opinions should be closer to the
midpoint that attributions for essays expressing common positions. Additionally, as judged by the variance of the posterior distributions, people should be less confident in their
attributions when the expressed position is rare. This was
tested by looking at participants’ self-reported prior attitude
distributions, which were elicited by having people apportion
100 percentage points to three equal-sized intervals encompassing the measurement scale. A “skew” was calculated for
each participant by taking the log ratio of the lower and upper
intervals of their priors. Negative ratios imply more probability mass near the “pro” end of the scale, and positive ratios
imply more probability mass near the “con” end of the scale.
Supporting the model’s predictions, the correlation of attribution and skew was r = −.14 (p < .05), and the correlation of
confidence and skew was r = −.20 (p < .01).
Next, the co-occurrance between the situation and attitudes
was examined. As mentioned at the outset, if assignment
is non-random, people might believe that the essay author’s
own attitude and the assigned position are related. To test

would deviate from the requested position. Therefore, when
someone does deviate from the requested position by writing a weaker-than-expected essay, it is reasonable to conclude
that this person must hold an attitude very different than what
was requested. This is illustrated in Figure 3. As can be seen,
the likelihood functions are both further from the requested
positions and more spread out at higher constraint.
Varying situation strength is not the only way to replicate
the different patterns of results. The bottom two rows of Table 1 show what happens when the weak essays are made less
ambivalent, but the strong level of constraint kept consistent.
This change removes the reversal that had been obtained with
the weak essays. In speculating on the failure to replicate the
Jones et al. (1971) weak essay reversal, Miller (1974) does
in fact note that his weak essays were not as weak as those
in Jones et al. While both Jones et al. and Miller speculate
that strong essays “engulf the field” whereas the weak essays
allow the perceiver more latitude to notice the situation, the
model suggests that no such perceptual metaphors are necessary. Instead, both outcomes are reasonable conclusions of
an internally consistent logic that does not depend on any distortions in perception, failure to notice the situation, or alteration in the underlying behavioral model being used to make
the attribution. This example also makes clear that there are
often multiple internally-consistent ways to obtain the same
pattern of results. The model makes it possible to explore
many sources of a result, thereby suggesting hypotheses for
behavioral research.

Empirical Results
In addition to fitting previous research results, the model
fits new data (collected for a different purpose).4 Partici4 These data are part of an in-progress replication of Miyamoto
and Kitayama (2002), which uses their essays as stimuli. In addition to having “pro” and “con” essays, the study varies essay length.

Since the effects listed next are not qualified by length, the length
manipulation is not discussed further.

982

References

this, people were compared by whether they indicated (as intended) that the author had no control over assignment. There
was a significant difference (M = 0.73 vs. M = 1.21, for no
control vs. control, respectively, t(244) = 2.16, p < .05).
Finally, the likelihood model predictions were examined.
As shown with the modeling of the Jones et al. (1971) and
Miller (1974) result patterns, the model predicts that overcompliance and attribution extremity should be positively related, and that perceived situation strength and attribution extremity should be negatively related. Participants estimated
overcompliance via a question asking how much weaker (or
stronger) the essay was than what they believed was expected,
and strength was measured via a question about how much
overall choice the author had (reversed). After partialing out
the effects of skew and strength, attribution and overcompliance were positively related, pr = .14 (p < .05). After partialing out skew and overcompliance, attribution and strength
were negatively related pr = −.16 (p < .05). Because higher
strengths lead to more spread out likelihood functions, the
model also predicts that confidence and strength should be
negatively related, which was supported r = −.24 (p < .001).
Though these results do not prove that people’s attributions
are internally consistent, they do demonstrate promise. Future work will systematically test the match between model
predictions and empirical results in greater detail.

Forsyth, D. R. (2004). Inferences about actions performed in
constraining contexts: Correspondence bias or correspondent inference? Current Psychology, 23(1), 41–51.
Gawronski, B. (2003). Implicational schemata and the correspondence bias: On the diagnostic value of situationally
constrained behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84(6), 1154–1171.
Gilbert, D. T., & Jones, E. E. (1986). Perceiver-induced constraints: Interpretation of self-generated reality. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 269–280.
Hammond, K. R. (1996). Human judgment and social policy: Irreducible uncertainty, inevitable error, un-available
injustice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Jennings, K. E. (2010). Coherent attributions with cooccurring and interacting causes. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Jones, E. E., & Davis, K. E. (1965). From acts to dispositions:
The attribution process in person perception. In Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 219–266).
New York: Academic Press.
Jones, E. E., & Harris, V. A. (1967). The attribution of attitudes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 3, 1–
24.
Jones, E. E., & McGillis, D. (1976). Correspondent inferences and the attribution cube: A comparative reappraisal.
In J. H. Harvey, W. J. Ickes, & R. F. Kidd (Eds.), New directions in attribution research (Vol. 1, pp. 389–420). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jones, E. E., Worchel, S., Goethals, G. R., & Grumet, J. F.
(1971). Prior expectancy and behavioral extremity as determinants of attitude attribution. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 7, 59–80.
Miller, A. G. (1974). Perceived freedom and the attribution
of attitudes. Representative Research in Social Psychology,
5, 61–80.
Miller, A. G., & Rorer, L. G. (1982). Toward an understanding of the fundamental attribution error: Essay diagnosticity in the attitude attribution paradigm. Journal of Research
in Personality, 16, 41–59.
Miyamoto, Y., & Kitayama, S. (2002). Cultural variation in
correspondence bias: The critical role of attitude diagnosticity of socially constrained behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(5), 1239–1248.
Morris, M. W., & Larrick, R. P. (1995). When one cause
casts doubt on another: A normative analysis of discounting in causal attribution. Psychological Review, 102(2),
331–355.
Reeder, G. D., Fletcher, G. J. Q., & Furman, K. (1989). The
role of observers’ expectations in attitude attribution. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 168–188.
Trope, Y. (1974). Inferential processes in the forced compliance situation: A Bayesian analysis. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 10, 1–16.

Conclusions
Using a simple yet plausible model of how people respond
to instructions to advocate a particular opinion, this work derives a model that can postdict prior attitude attribution results, and that fits newly-collected data. Though the correspondence bias can be seen when people’s attributions are
compared to the ground truth, this work suggests that these attributions could be internally consistent with other beliefs and
perceptions that people have. Future work should investigate
why these beliefs (e.g., about how people respond to requests)
and perceptions (e.g., of the request strength or the essay extremity) don’t match reality. The likelihood model could also
be extended to encompass other essay features, such as argument quality (cf. Miller & Rorer, 1982; Gawronski, 2003).
Early in the history of correspondence bias research, Jones
et al. (1971) conceded that correspondent inferences for constrained behavior are only wrong if every person in that situation would comply. Short of this extreme, they say that “it
would be very difficult if not impossible to determine whether
[a correspondent inference] should be judged as attributional
distortion” (p. 77). The model presented here helps answer
this question by encoding a set of assumptions mathematically, and then using the logic of Bayes’ rule to understand
the implications of those assumptions. It is likely that many
attitude attribution findings can fruitfully be reexamined in
light of the added precision that this model provides.

Acknowledgments
Tom Griffiths, Rob MacCoun, and Kaiping Peng provided
valuable comments on and assistance with this work.

983

