UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Developmental differences in learning the forms of causal relationships

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4cr2d0fx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Lucas, Christopher
Gopnik, Alison
Griffiths, Thomas

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Developmental differences in learning the forms of causal relationships
Chris Lucas (clucas@berkeley.edu)
Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Abstract
Children learn causal relationships quickly, and make farreaching causal inferences on the basis of what they see. In
order to be such efficient learners, they must bring abstract
knowledge to bear on their problems. This paper addresses
children’s ability to acquire that knowledge. We present evidence that children can learn about the abstract properties of
causal relationships using only a handful of events, and – consistent with a hierarchical Bayesian model of casual inference
– children can be more sensitive to evidence than adults.

Introduction
Recent work suggests that children are skilled at inferring
specific causal relationships from patterns of data (Gopnik
et al., 2004; Sobel, Tenenbaum, & Gopnik, 2004). For example, they can infer which blocks will activate a machine
based on the contingencies between the blocks and the machine’s activation. But an additional question is whether children can infer more abstract causal principles from patterns in
data, and use those principles to shape their subsequent predictions. For example, can a child infer that a particular type
of machine activates reliably, or requires only a single cause
to activate? Will those abstract discoveries bias the child’s
interpretations of new data?
Developmental data suggest that children do have broad inductive biases. For example, in language learning the shape
bias and the mutual exclusivity principle influence more specific inferences about word meaning (Smith, Jones, Landau,
Gershkoff-Stowe, & Samuelson, 2002; Markman & Wachtel,
1988). However there is debate about whether these biases
are the result of innate constraints or are themselves the product of learning (Elman et al., 1996; Leslie, 1994). Recent
formal work on hierarchical Bayesian models suggests that,
at least in principle, the shape bias may itself be learned as a
result of normative inferences from patterns of data (Kemp,
Perfors, & Tenenbaum, 2007). Similar high-level biases apply to causal learning, and we know that children can learn
about causal types (Schulz, Goodman, Tenenbaum, & Jenkins, 2008), and the plausibility of cross-domain relationships
(Schulz, Bonawitz, & Griffiths, 2007). In this paper, we explore whether children can learn abstract principles about the
forms of causal relationships themselves.
The hierarchical Bayesian approach suggests that the nature of inductive biases may change as evidence accumulates. Absent evidence, a learner without strong built-in biases should assign similar probabilities to a wide range of
hypotheses. As data accumulate, the abstract hypotheses consistent with those data become more probable, and the learner

discounts any hypotheses that fit the current data but are less
compatible with past experience. If this is correct, then we
might expect to see different patterns of inductive bias in
adults and children. In particular, children might rely less
on past experience and more on present evidence than adults.
This is a possibility that has not previously been explored
in the causal learning literature, and one that we examine
through head-to-head (or prior-to-prior) comparison of children and adults in a causal learning task that requires making
an abstract generalization about the nature of causal relationships.
We test the high-level generalizations made by children
and adults by contrasting two abstract “overhypotheses”
(Goodman, 1955; Kemp et al., 2007) about how a causal system works. One is a noisy-OR model, in which each object
has a certain independent probability of bringing about an effect. This model is pervasive in the literature on adult causal
inference (e.g., Cheng, 1997; Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005).
The other is an AND model in which individual causes are
unable to produce an effect, but multiple causes in conjunction can produce an effect. We provided children and adults
with evidence for either an AND or OR relationship and then
examined how this evidence biased their judgment of a novel,
ambiguous pattern of evidence. Would seeing several instances of a machine activated by a conjunction of causes
lead them to assume that this would be the case for a new set
of blocks? By comparing how children and adults respond
to data that support these different overhypotheses, we can
examine first whether children are capable of forming appropriate abstract generalizations, and second whether they are
more willing to make these generalizations than adults.
The plan of the paper is as follows. First, we consider
how an ideal Bayesian learner can gather evidence for overhypotheses relevant to causal induction. We then discuss the
specific overhypotheses about the functional form of causal
relationships that we contrast in this paper, together with a
method that can be used to diagnose whether learners infer
these overhypotheses from data. We go on to use this method
to compare the abstract generalizations of children and adults
in a causal learning task, finding support for the hypothesis
that children are more willing to adopt a novel overhypothesis than adults. We close by discussing the implications of
these results.

Causal overhypotheses
Children can identify causes using only a handful of observations (Gopnik et al., 2004), but the extent to which they learn

2852

about the abstract properties of causal relationships remains
largely unexplored. From a Bayesian standpoint, learning
about causal structure requires having a priori beliefs – or priors – about what items are plausible causes, and expectations
about how a given causal structure leads to different observable events. These expectations can be expressed formally
using a likelihood function, which specifies the probability of
observing a particular set of events based on the underlying
causal structure.
Most work on probabilistic models of causal learning has
assumed a specific kind of likelihood function. This likelihood function is based on causes and effects interacting in a
“noisy-OR” manner, each having an independent opportunity
to produce the effect (Cheng, 1997; Griffiths & Tenenbaum,
2005; Glymour, 1998). More precisely, a noisy-OR relationship implies that the probability that an effect E occurs given
the presence of a set of causes C1 ; : : : ; CN is
P(E jC1 ; :::; CN ) = 1

N

∏(1
i=1

wi )

T
contexts

T : Theory/overhypothesis

events

D : Data

D

Figure 1: The structure of a hierarchical Bayesian model.
a learner sees (D) should change the learner’s beliefs, both
about the casual system at hand (H), and about the higherlevel properties of that kind of system (T ). Formally, we have

(1)

where wi is the probability that Ci generates the effect in the
absence of other causes.
Despite the popularity of the noisy-OR in models of causal
learning, other kinds of causal relationships are clearly possible. For instance, a noisy-OR model cannot describe an
AND relationship, where an effect only occurs when multiple causes are present. This might be the case in an electrical circuit where multiple switches are wired in series, and
a light only turns on when all of the switches are flipped.
It is important, then, for models of causal inference to accommodate flexible beliefs about the forms relationships can
take. Formalizing inferences about the form of a relationship is straightforward, using an expanded likelihood function, P(E jC1 ; :::; CN ; F ), where F captures information about
the form of the causal relationship. For example, F could indicate that the relationship has a noisy-OR form, but another
value of F might indicate that a causal relationship has an
AND form.
Learning the form of a causal relationship and generalizing that discovery when reasoning about other causal relationships requires inference at multiple levels of abstraction.
This kind of inference, in which lessons from one context can
be carried forward for future learning, is easily captured by
using a hierarchical Bayesian model (Tenenbaum, Griffiths,
& Kemp, 2006; Kemp et al., 2007). A learner’s abstract beliefs, or overhypotheses, determine the probabilities of moreconcrete hypotheses, each encoding specific causal structures
and the form a relationship takes. These hypotheses, in turn,
determine the likelihood of different patterns of events.
Formally, we can imagine an inference involving variables
at three levels: the observed data D, hypotheses about the
causal structure underlying those data H, and overhypotheses
(or a “theory”, as in Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2009) T representing generalizations relevant to evaluating those hypotheses (see Figure 1). Bayes’ rule then specifies how the events

H

H : Hypothesis

p(T jD) =

p(DjT ) p(T )
p(D)

(2)

where p(T ) is the prior probability of the overhypothesis T ,
p(T jD) is the posterior probability, and p(D) is obtained by
summing the numerator over all overhypotheses T . The probability of the data given an overhypothesis is obtained by
summing over all hypotheses consistent with that overhypothesis,
Z
p(DjT ) = p(DjH ) p(H jT ) dH ;
(3)
and can be interpreted as an average of the probability of the
observed data under those hypotheses weighted by the extent
to which each hypothesis is consistent with the overhypothesis.
Intuitively, this hierarchical Bayesian approach provides a
way to explain how learners can form and use abstract generalizations about causal systems. For example, if a child
sees events that are likely under an AND relationship, such
as a machine activating only when pairs of causal objects are
placed on it, then the probability of an overhypothesis predicting future AND relationships increases. This is because the
best hypotheses for explaining the observed events are those
that are most likely under this overhypothesis, so Equation 3
yields a high value. Incorporating this value into Equation 2,
the posterior probability for that overhypothesis will increase.
As the evidence supporting a particular overhypothesis increases, it will be easier to learn about the structure and form
of causal systems that are consistent with that overhypothesis. This comes with a cost: if a causal system has strange or
rare abstract properties, such as an unlikely functional form,
much more evidence will be necessary to learn about it. The
implication is that adults, who have seen a great deal of evidence, should find it very easy to learn about the structure
and form of causal relationships that have typical properties.
Conversely, children, with their limited experience, should be
more sensitive to evidence when learning about relationships

2853

that have unusual properties. In the following section, we discuss an experimental design for testing this idea.

of the relationship. If people expect that a single blicket suffices to activate the machine, they should believe then F is
likely to be a blicket, while D and E are not. If, in contrast,
people exploit the information provided by the training block
so they conclude that two blickets are necessary to activate
the machine, then they should think that objects D and F are
blickets, and be uncertain about object E.
In the OR condition, participants saw a different set of
events in the training block, which were chosen to indicate
that an OR relationship applied (see Figure 2). Then they saw
the same test events that the participants in the AND condition
saw. Based on the training evidence, participants in this condition were predicted to say that only object F was a blicket.
As predicted, people in the AND condition assigned significantly higher probabilities to object D being a blicket, giving
a mean score of 3.08 (SD=3.32), versus 0.23 (SD=0.99) in
the OR condition. The mean rating was less than 5 in the
AND condition, consistent with the idea that adults believe
that disjunctive relationships are more probable, and could
interpret the AND condition events in several ways, including as evidence for a noisy relationship in which the machine
happened to fail to activate when a single, normally sufficient
blicket was placed on it.
In summary, Lucas and Griffiths (2009) showed that people’s inferences about causal structure are driven by their beliefs about the probable forms of causal relationships, which
are in turn influenced by events they have seen in the past.
The specific pattern of judgments is consistent with the predictions of a hierarchical Bayesian model given priors reflecting a strong bias in favor of disjunctive (OR) and deterministic relationships. Such priors are also consistent with
adults’ performance in other experiments (Lu, Yuille, Liljeholm, Cheng, & Holyoak, 2006). This prior could be chiefly
due to adults’ experiences revealing that OR relationships are
more common, or an innate bias. By comparing the judgments of 4-year-old children to those of adults, we aim to
answer that question and better understand the origins of the
abstract knowledge that drives efficient causal inference.

The functional form of causal relationships
If children update their abstract beliefs about causal systems
in a manner consistent with Bayesian inference, then the
events they see should influence their judgments about different sets of events and prospective causes. To test this hypothesis, we used an experiment with two phases, each with a
distinct set of objects. In the first phase, children saw a set of
events designed to be likely under one of two abstract overhypotheses about the forms of causal relationships. In the
second phase, they saw events where different beliefs about
the form of the causal relationship should lead them to make
different judgments about which objects are causes.
The specific evidence we provided to participants was
very similar to that given to adults in Lucas and Griffiths
(2009), where the task was to identify the blickets within a
set of objects, knowing only that blickets have “blicketosity”.
Prospective blickets could be placed on a “blicketosity meter”, causing it to either activate by lighting up and playing
music or do nothing. People might entertain a variety of expectations about the relationship between the blickets and the
machine, determining how they interpret different events. For
example, if they think that two blickets are necessary to activate the machine, seeing a single object fail to activate it
provides no information. At the same time, their expectations
about the form of the relationship between blickets and the
blicketosity meters can be shaped by the events they observe.
For instance, seeing two objects fail to activate the machine
separately but succeed together suggests that two blickets are
necessary for activation.
We used events from two conditions from Experiment 2 of
Lucas and Griffiths (2009). Since this experiment is closely
related to the approach we take here, we will recapitulate the
method and results. In the AND1 condition of the experiment,
participants saw a training block of events where objects labeled A, B, and C were placed sequentially on the machine,
which failed to activate in all cases. Next, all pairs of objects
were placed on the machine sequentially, with only A and B
together causing activation. See Figure 2 for a summary of
the events in the training and test blocks. Participants were
then asked to rate the probability that A, B, and C were blickets on a 0-10 scale, with 0 indicating the object was definitely
not a blicket, a 10 indicating it definitely was, and 5 indicating
it was as likely to be a blicket at not.
After making these judgments, participants saw three new
objects, D, E, and F, which they had never seen before, and
a series of test events intended to be ambiguous, leading to
different judgments about which of D, E, and F were blickets, depending on participants’ expectations about the form

Causal overhypotheses in children and adults

1 Lucas and Griffiths labeled their conditions conjunctive and disjunctive rather than AND and OR, to highlight a hypothesis space
that included a wide range of functional forms, including AND and
OR as special cases. We use AND and OR here for the sake of simplicity.

We used the experimental design from Lucas and Griffiths
(2009) to explore two questions about the use of causal overhypotheses by children and adults. The first question was
whether children, like adults, can use events to update their
knowledge about the likely forms of causal relationships, and
apply that knowledge to learn the causal structure behind
new and ambiguous sets of events. The second question was
whether children are more or less sensitive to evidence supporting such high-level generalizations, as opposed to their
prior beliefs.
If children are more likely than adults to call objects D and
E blickets in the AND condition, we can conclude that much
of the bias we see in adults is due to learning during and after
childhood, including, for instance, experience with machines
to which OR relationships apply. If children’s judgments are

2854

OR condition training

AND condition training

Test

Figure 2: Evidence presented to participants in the two training phases, as well as the subsequent test phase which all participants saw. Events are given as a set of prospective causes and the presence or absence of an effect. The bright-paneled machines
represent events in which the effect occurs and the dark-paneled machines represent events in which the effect does not occur.
indistinguishable from adults’, we have evidence that learning about the forms of causal relationships occurs early, or
plays a minor role in driving our expectations. Finally, if there
is no effect of training evidence on test-block judgments, we
should question the applicability of the model used by Lucas
and Griffiths (2009) to causal inference in children.

Participants

We can generate more detailed predictions by speculating
about the priors that children bring to the problem of identifying blickets. It seems unlikely that children are constrained
to a small set of discrete overhypotheses – it is more natural
to suppose that they consider a space of possibilities that includes both OR and AND relationships as special cases. Following Lucas and Griffiths (2009), we use a sigmoid family of
likelihood functions, where the probability of the machine’s
activation given that n blickets are present is

Adults UC Berkeley undergraduates received course credit
for participating during lectures of an introductory psychology course. There were 88 participants in the AND condition
and 55 in the OR condition. Five participants in the AND
condition were excluded for declining to answer one or more
questions.

P(effectjNblickets = n) =

1
1 + expf g(n

b)g

:

Children Thirty-two children were recruited from
university-affiliated preschools, divided evenly between
the AND and OR conditions. Children in the AND and
OR conditions had mean ages of 4.46 (SD=0.27) and 4.61
(SD=0.31) years, respectively.

Methods

(4)

The overhypotheses determine the probability of different
values of the gain g and the bias b. The gain specifies how
many blickets are necessary to activate the machine, and the
bias reflects how noisy the relationship is. Lucas and Griffiths found that exponential priors predicting a high mean
gain (3.34) and a low mean bias (0.23) – or reliable OR relationship – lead to model predictions that closely match adults’
judgments. If children are happier believing that a relationship could be conjunctive or noisy, the priors that best capture
their inferences should lead to a priori gains and biases closer
to 1. This space of likelihood functions is intended to cover a
range of relationships that are appropriate to the cover story
and participants’ prior knowledge, and we do not claim it includes all relationships that people could conceivably learn,
such as those in which blickets prevent the machine from activating.

Children Each child sat at a table facing the experimenter,
who brought out three objects, each painted a different color,
as well as a green box with a translucent panel on top, describing the box as “my blicketness machine”.
At the beginning of the experiment, children were
prompted to help the experimenter name the objects using
their colors, e.g., “red”. They were then told that the goal of
the game was to figure out which of the objects were blickets,
that blickets have blicketness inside them, and blickets cannot be distinguished from non-blickets by their appearance.
No other information was provided about the relationship between blickets and the activation of the machine.
The children then observed a set of training events in which
the experimenter placed objects alone or in pairs on the machine, which activated in some cases by lighting up and playing music. These events corresponded to either the OR condition or AND condition training given in Figure 2. After
the children saw these events, they were asked whether each
object was a blicket or not. Next, the experimenter brought
out three objects that the children had not seen before. After
the children named the new objects, the experimenter demonstrated the test events listed in Figure 2 and asked whether

2855

Figure 3: Proportions of objects that were judged to be blickets for children (top row) and adults (bottom row) for the AND (left
column) and OR (right column) conditions. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
each of these new objects was a blicket or not. In a departure from Lucas and Griffiths’s design, the experiment was
repeated a second time for each child, using the same patterns of evidence, but with a distinct set of objects that varied
by shape and had a uniform gray color. The identities of the
individual objects were counterbalanced, as was whether the
children saw the different-shaped or different-colored objects
first.

(p < 0:005, two-tailed permutation test), consistent with the
results in Lucas and Griffiths (2009). See Figure 3, bottom
row, for a summary of their judgments for the test objects.

Adults The adults were tested in groups, and saw demonstrations that were almost identical to what the children saw in
the corresponding conditions. Unlike the children, the adults
were not asked to name the objects, and they recorded their
judgments on sheets of paper rather than responding verbally.

Results
Children The critical prediction was that children would be
more likely to judge object D to be a blicket in the AND condition than in the OR condition, indicating that they were (1)
learning about the form of the relationship between blickets
and the machine’s activation, and (2) transferring that abstract
knowledge to make better inferences about novel objects and
otherwise ambiguous events.
Children were more likely to judge object D to be a blicket
in the AND condition than in the OR condition (p < 0:005,
two-tailed permutation test). There was also a change in the
predicted direction for object E, albeit non-significant.
Adults Adults were also more likely to judge object D to
be a blicket in the AND condition than in the OR condition

Differences In the AND condition, the adults judged object
D to be a blicket less frequently than children (p < 0:005,
Fisher’s exact test). See Figure 3 for a summary of ratings in
the three conditions. Children’s ratings were also higher for
object E (p < 0:001, two-sided permutation test), which is
consistent with their being quicker to learn that an AND relationship applies: under an AND relationship, the event where
E fails to activate the machine is uninformative, so judgments
of E being a blicket should reflect the base rate of blickets
occurring. The high frequency of other objects being blickets
under an AND relationship (4 of 5), plus a belief that blickets
are not rare, should lead a learner to expect that a novel object
is somewhat likely to be a blicket.
Model fits We converted children’s judgments about blickets to probabilities in order to examine them using the
previously-mentioned hierarchical Bayesian model and sigmoid space of hypotheses. We treated is-a-blicket judgments
as assertions that objects were definitely blickets, and not-ablicket judgments as assertions that objects were definitely
not blickets. Lucas and Griffiths (2009) found that priors favoring disjunctive, deterministic relationships – predicting a
mean gain of 3.34 and a mean bias of 0.23 – fit adults’ judgments closely, with a mean squared error of 0.29 per judgment on a zero to ten scale. We found that similar priors best

2856

captured adults’ judgments in our experiment, giving a mean
squared error of 0.80 with a mean gain of 5.30 and bias of
0.11.
These same priors were wildly inconsistent with children’s
inferences, giving a mean squared error of 6.12. In contrast,
priors giving a mean a priori gain and bias of 1 – favoring
neither AND nor OR relationships – were much more accurate, with a mean squared error of 0.58. The priors that best
fit the children’s judgments gave a mean gain and bias of 1.45
and 0.85, respectively, with mean squared error of 0.15.

and breathtaking innovation that characterizes children’s interactions with the world.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by the James S.
McDonnell Foundation’s Causality Collaborative Initiative and the
Air Force Office of Scientific Research, grant FA9550-07-1-0351.

References

Discussion
Our experiment was designed to explore two questions:
whether children could make high-level generalizations about
the form of causal relationships, and whether they were more
willing to do so than adults. Our results show that children
are capable of making such inferences, and that their judgments were more strongly influenced by the available evidence than adults, whose inferences reflected a bias toward
OR relationships. Our results thus support the view that when
learning about cause and effect, children are flexible learners
whose inexperience may sometimes let them learn better from
sparse evidence, especially in novel situations. These results
are also consistent with treating the acquisition and application of causal knowledge as a matter of hierarchical Bayesian
inference, where a learner has beliefs expressed at multiple
levels of abstraction, with abstract theories driving specific
hypotheses which, in turn, enable prediction and categorization.
Before closing, we will address two alternative explanations for our results. The first is that children are more likely
than adults to judge any object to be a blicket. This is less
consistent with the data than our interpretation, given that
adults were more likely than children to call object F a blicket
in the OR condition, and nearly as likely in the AND condition
(75 percent of the objects versus 81 percent). A second alternative is that the children were confused by the training data
in the AND condition, and responded to the novel objects by
guessing randomly. This explanation can be ruled out by noting that children judged objects D and F to be blickets more
often than chance would predict (t (15) = 3:529, p < 0:005).
The results of our experiment have implications for understanding causal learning, and for understanding cognitive development more generally. In terms of causal learning, these
results suggest that the fundamental biases that lie beneath
causal inference are more subtle and abstract than a priori
preferences for specific kinds of causal relationships. We believe that trying to understand these biases is fertile ground
for future research. For cognitive development, the idea that
children are more flexible in their commitments about the
way that causal systems tend to work seems like not just a
necessary consequence of a hierarchical Bayesian approach,
but an important insight for understanding how it is that children see the world differently from adults. The plasticity of
beliefs that this implies helps to explain the bold exploration

Cheng, P. (1997). From covariation to causation: A causal power
theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367-405.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloff-Smith, A.,
Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking innateness: A connectionist perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Glymour, C. (1998). Learning causes: Psychological explanations
of causal explanation. Minds and Machines, 8, 39-60.
Goodman, N. (1955). Fact, fiction, and forecast. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L., Kushnir, T., &
Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in children: Causal
maps and Bayes nets. Psychological Review, 111, 1-31.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and strength
in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51, 354-384.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Theory-Based Causal
Induction. Psychological Review, 116(4), 661–716.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical bayesian models. Developmental Science, 10(3), 307–321.
Leslie, A. M. (1994). ToMM, ToBY, and agency: Core architecture and domain specificity. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman
(Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and
culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lu, H., Yuille, A., Liljeholm, M., Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2006). Modeling causal leanring using bayesian generic priors
on generative and preventive powers. In R. Sun & N. Miyake
(Eds.), Twenty-eighth conference of the cognitive science society
(p. 519-524). Erlbaum.
Lucas, C., & Griffiths, T. (2009). Learning the Form of Causal Relationships Using Hierarchical Bayesian Models. Cognitive Science, 34(1), 113–147.
Markman, E., & Wachtel, G. (1988). Childrens use of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words. Cognitive Psychology,
20(2), 121–157.
Schulz, L. E., Bonawitz, E. B., & Griffiths, T. L. (2007). Can being
scared make your tummy ache? naive theories, ambiguous evidence, and preschoolers’ causal inferences. Developmental Psychology.
Schulz, L. E., Goodman, N., Tenenbaum, J., & Jenkins, A. (2008).
Going beyond the evidence: Abstract laws and preschoolers’ responses to anomalous data. Cognition, 109(2), 211–223.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L., &
Samuelson, L. (2002). Object name learning provides on-thejob training for attention. Psychological Science, 13(1), 13–19.
Sobel, D. M., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gopnik, A. (2004). Children’s
causal inferences from indirect evidence: Backwards blocking
and Bayesian reasoning in preschoolers. Cognitive Science, 28,
303-333.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Griffiths, T. L., & Kemp, C. (2006). Theory-based
Bayesian models of inductive learning and reasoning. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 10, 309-318.

2857

