UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Differential effects of dopamine dysfunction on context usage in people with autism and
schizophrenia: A computational exploration
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56z918p1
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Kriete, Trent
Noelle, David C.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

Differential effects of dopamine dysfunction on context usage in people
         with autism and schizophrenia: A computational exploration
                                                   Trent Kriete
                                            University of California, Merced
                                                 David C. Noelle
                                            University of California, Merced
Abstract: The ability to utilize contextual information in a flexible manner is vital for the successful navigation
of our lives. People with autism demonstrate serious problems on tasks requiring the integration of contextual
information across experiences. One such task is the determination of the proper meaning of an ambiguous word
in a sentence. Homographs are words with one spelling, but different meanings, such as ”bow” and ”tear”. People
with autism appear unable to utilize sentential context in order to determine the correct meaning of a homograph.
Instead, they rely on the statistically most frequent meaning. We present a neurocomputational model that suggests
that these difficulties arise from a deficit in the flexible updating of attentional control, driven by dysfunctional
interactions between the prefrontal cortex and the midbrain dopamine system. This work is compared to a previous
computational account of the effects of abnormal dopamine levels on context processing difficulties in schizophrenia.
                                                           674

