UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Differences in the Development of Analogy Across Cultures: A Computational Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1z7631w3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Doumas, Leonidas
Morrison, Robert
Richland, Lindsey

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Differences in the Development of Analogy Across Cultures:
A Computational Account
Leonidas A.A. Doumas (leonidas@hawaii.edu)
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Department of Psychology
2430 Campus Rd. Honolulu, HI 96822

Robert G. Morrison (rmorrison@luc.edu)
Loyola University Chicago, Psychology Department,
6525 North Sheridan Road Chicago, IL 60626 USA

Lindsey E. Richland (lerich@uci.edu)
University of California, Irvine, Department of Education
2001 Berkeley Place, Irvine, CA 92697-5500
Abstract

Goswami and colleagues (Goswami, 1992, 2001;
Goswami & Brown, 1989) proposed that the ability to
make analogies is present even in early infancy.
However, children can only evidence this ability with age
and increased knowledge. In other words, the change in
children’s ability to make analogies is not a function of a
developing mechanism, but rather knowledge accretion.
Alternately, Gentner and Rattermann (1991;
Rattermann & Gentner, 1998) argued that a domainspecific “relational shift” is responsible for changes in
children’s analogical abilities. Gentner and Rattermann
suggest that as children build knowledge in a particular
domain they progress from reasoning about that domain
in terms of the perceptual features of objects, to the
relations between those objects. For example, 3 year-old
children will categorize objects based on overall featural
similarity (e.g., they will match apples to red balls rather
than bananas), however by age 4 or 5, children will
categorize objects based on relational similarity (e.g.,
matching apples to bananas even in the presence of
featural distracters like red balls; Gentner & Namy, 1999).
The ability to make analogies based on relational
commonalities between domains, therefore, progresses on
a domain-by-domain basis with more complex analogies
produced in domains in which knowledge is richer.
In contrast to accounts of analogy development based
on increases in knowledge, the relational complexity
hypothesis of Halford (1993; Andrews & Halford, 2002;
Halford et al., 2002) holds that limits in children’s WM
capacity affects their ability to process relations
simultaneously, and therefore their ability to make
analogies. According to Halford and colleagues, children
can process only specific levels of relational complexity,
defined as the number of sources of variation that are
related and must be processed together. The simplest
level of relational complexity is a binary relation, where
only two arguments are sources of variation. The
relation, chase (dog, cat), for instance, specifies a single
relation (chase) between two objects (dog, cat). To
reason about this relation, a one must keep only the two
objects and their relation in mind. A ternary relation (e.g.,

Theories of the development of analogical reasoning
emphasize either the centrality of relational knowledge
accretion or changes in information processing. Recent
cross-cultural data collected from children in the United
States and China (Richland, Chan, Morrison, & Au, 2010)
provides a unique way to test these theories. Here we use
simulations in LISA/DORA (Doumas, Hummel, &
Sandhofer, 2008; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 2003), a
neurally-plausible computer model of relational learning
and analogical reasoning, to argue that the development of
analogical reasoning in children may best be
conceptualized as an equilibrium between knowledge
accretion and progressive improvement in information
processing capability. Thus, improvements in inhibitory
control in working memory as children mature enable them
to process more relationally complex analogies. At the
same time, however, children produce more complex and
more accurate analogies in domains in which they have
learned richer and more refined representations of
relational concepts.

Relational thinking—i.e., thinking based on the roles that
objects play rather than the literal features of those
things—is a cornerstone of human cognition. It underlies,
among many other things, our ability to make analogies,
or to appreciate correspondences between domains (e.g.,
Holyoak & Thagard, 1995).
As with many cognitive processes, our ability to make
analogies changes with development. While there is
considerable agreement that analogy is a very important
process in cognitive development (e.g., Gentner, 2003),
there is considerable disagreement as to how the ability to
reason analogically develops.

Theories of the Development of Analogical
Reasoning
Three primary hypotheses have been put forward to
explain age-related differences in analogical reasoning:
changes in domain knowledge, a relational shift from
object similarity to relational similarity, and increased
processing or working memory (WM) capacity.

2338

gives-to (boy, girl, book) is more complex, requiring a
reasoner to consider three objects and their respective
roles. The more complex the relation, the more WM
resources are required to process it. As children mature,
neural developments leading to increased WM capacities
(see, e.g., Diamond, 2002) allow processing situations
with greater relational complexity, and, by extension,
children are capable of drawing richer and more complex
analogies.
Likewise, Richland, Morrison, and Holyoak (2006)
proposed that inhibitory control might help to explain the
relationship between maturation and the impact of
relational complexity on analogical reasoning in young
children. While inhibitory control has been a major topic
in models of cognitive development (Bjorklund &
Harnishbeger, 1990; Diamond, 2002) it has not previously
been applied to understanding the development of
analogy; however, the hypothesis that inhibitory control is
important for the development of analogy is consistent
with results from other cognitive tasks (e.g., Diamond,
Kirkham & Amso, 2002; Lorsbach & Reimer, 1997;
Zelazo et al., 2003).

no theoretical reason to expect differences in information
processing capacity between the US and Hong Kong
(Hedden, et al., 2000).
Accordingly, Richland et al. (2010) reasoned that the
US and HK 3-4 year old children each had decreased
inhibitory control relative to older children resulting in
their distractibility, but that HK children had more
sophisticated relational representations than US children
resulting in their superior ability to solve more
relationally complex problems.

A Computational Account of the MultipleSource Theory of Analogical Development
Previous Work
Traditionally, researchers have attempted to model the
effects of knowledge accretion and increased working
memory capacity on analogical development in isolation.
For example, Gentner and colleages (e.g., Gentner et al.,
1995) used SME (Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989)
to model the relational shift data of Gentner and
Rattermann (1991).
Gentner et al. captured the
differences in analogical reasoning in 4 and 5 year-old
children by providing the model with more relational
representations at age 5 than at age 4. That is, with
limited knowledge of relations, the model behaved like
the younger children in Gentner and Rattermann’s
experiments, making analogies based on over-all
perceptual similarity. However, with increased relational
knowledge, the model behaved more like the older
children, making analogies based on shared relations.
Importantly the representations provided to the model had
to be hand-coded by the modeler.
More recently, Morrison, Doumas, and Richland
(2006), used the LISA model (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997,
2003) in an attempt explain changes in children’s analogy
making in terms of changes in capacity limits. LISA is a
model of analogy-making that relies on time as a signal to
bind distributed (i.e., connectionist) representations of
objects and relational roles into structured (i.e., symbolic)
representations. LISA is powerful, in part, because it
benefits from both the flexibility of connectionist
approaches and the structure-sensitivity of symbolic
approaches (an important property for demonstrating
human like relational reasoning; see, e.g., Doumas &
Hummel, 2005; Holyoak & Hummel, 2000; Penn,
Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008).
In addition, as a
consequence of using time to carry binding information,
LISA suffers from capacity limitations that mirror those
of human WM (Hummel & Holyoak, 2003; Morrison,
Doumas, & Richland, 2006; Morrison et al., 2005). LISA
relies on lateral inhibition between units to establish the
temporal patterns that carry binding information. By
decreasing lateral inhibition, LISA’s WM is effectively
reduced. Morrison et al. (2006), used this property of to
capture the pattern of results from Richland et al. (2006).
Approaches using SME and LISA both suffer from
limitations, though. First, each approach is based on a

Multiple Sources in Analogical Development
Richland, Morrison and Holyoak (2006) developed a
set of scene analogy problems to investigate relational
complexity and featural distraction within a single
analogical reasoning task. They found that children from
age 3 to 14 steadily improved in their ability to solve
more relationally complex problems and resist distraction.
In a follow-up study Richland, Chan, Morrison, and Au
(2010) used these same problems with Cantonese
speaking 3-4 year old children from Hong Kong. While
US children of this age showed main effects of both
relational complexity and featural distraction, Chinese
children only showed an effect of featural distraction (see
Figure 5).
There are several reasons to believe that the Chinese
children would score differently on analogical reasoning
problems than U.S. children based on their knowledge
base and experience with reasoning about relations.
Adult studies have shown cultural differences in
normative patterns for drawing relational inferences (see
Nisbett 2003) such that Chinese and Japanese reasoners
may be more attuned to relational correspondences than
U.S. participants. These differences also appear crossculturally in children's socialization and linguistic
routines. For example, Asian caregivers use more action
oriented language and referential verbs than relatively
object-focused U.S. caregivers (e.g., Chinese: (Mandarin)
Tardif, 1996; Tardif, Gelman & Xi, 1999; Tardif, Shatz,
Naigles, 1997; (Cantonese) Leung, 1998). Chinese
children themselves may additionally show a higher
relative rate of verb usage in Mandarin (Tardif, 1996;
2006; Tardif, Shatz, & Naigles, 1997; Tardif, Gelman, &
Xu, 1999) than U.S. children of comparable ages who
show a more pronounced noun bias. In contrast, there is

2339

single explanatory variable. As a result, the knowledge
accretion approach seems insufficient to explain the
results of the Scene Analogy task (see Richland et al.,
2006), while the simply changing capacity limits cannot
explain the cross-cultural findings of Richland et al.
(2010). In addition, both approaches rely on hand-coded
relational representations that must be added by the
modeler. Neither model makes any claims where these
representations, which both models require in order to
reason relationally—and that provide the explanatory
mechanism in the knowledge accretion case—come from
in the first place.
Doumas, Hummel, and Sandhofer (2008) have
developed an extension of the LISA model, called DORA
(Discovery of Relations by Analogy) that learns structured
representations of relations from unstructured (i.e., flat
feature vector) representations of object properties.
DORA provides a means by which the representations
used by LISA are learned from examples, and,
consequently, provides an opportunity to understand the
interplay between the dual sources of knowledge
accretion and increasing capacity limits as effectors of the
changes in children’s analogy making.

Figure 1. (a) Representation of a LISA/DORA representation
like that used to simulate a Scene analogy problem like that in
(b). The P (oval), RB (rectangle), and predicate (triangle) units
were learned during Simulation Part One. Objects (circles)
desribed the objects involved in the Scene Analogy problem. (b)
Example of a scene analogy problem from Richland et al., 2006.

Propositions are divided into two mutually exclusive
sets: a driver and one or more recipients. In LISA/DORA,
the sequence of firing events is controlled by the driver.
Specifically, one (or at most three) proposition(s) in the
driver becomes active (i.e., enter working memory).
When a proposition in the driver becomes active, rolefiller bindings must be represented dynamically on the
units that maintain role-filler independence (i.e., POs and
semantic units; see Hummel & Holyoak, 1997). In LISA
binding information is carried by synchrony of firing
(with roles firing simultaneously with their fillers). In
DORA, binding information is carried by systematic
asynchrony of firing, with bound role-filler pairs firing in
direct sequence (see Doumas et al., 2008 for details).1
Activation flows from the driver units to their semantic
units. Units in the driver and recipient share the same pool
of semantic units. Thus, units in the recipient become
active in response to the pattern of activation imposed on
the semantic units by the active driver proposition.
Relational Learning Very simply, DORA uses
comparison to isolate shared properties of objects and to
represent them as explicit structures. DORA starts with
simple feature-vector representations of objects (i.e., a
node connected to set of features describing that object).
When DORA compares one object to another,
corresponding features of the two representations fire
simultaneously. Any semantic features common to both
objects receive twice as much input and thus become
roughly twice as active as features connected to one but
not the other. By recruiting a new PO unit and learning
connections between that unit and active semantics via
Hebbian learning (wherein the strength of connections is a
function of the units’ activation), DORA learns stronger
connections between the new PO unit and more active

The LISA/DORA model
LISA (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 2003) is a symbolicconnectionist model of analogy and relational reasoning.
DORA (Doumas et al., 2008) is an extension of LISA that
learns structured (i.e., symbolic) representations of
relations from unstructured inputs. That is, DORA
provides an account of how the structured relational
representations LISA uses to perform relational reasoning
can be learned from examples.
DORA accounts for over 20 phenomena from the
literature on relational learning, as well as its
development (e.g., Doumas & Hummel, 2010; Doumas et
al., 2008). In addition, as DORA learns relational
representations, it comes to take LISA as a special case,
and can simulate the additional 30+ phenomena in
relational thinking simulated by LISA. The description of
LISA/DORA that follows is a brief overview due to space
constraints. For full details of the models and their
operations see Doumas et al. (2008) and Hummel and
Holyoak (1997, 2003).
LISAese Representations In LISA (and DORA after it
has gone through learning) relational structures are
represented by a hierarchy of distributed and localist
codes (see Figure 1). At the bottom, “semantic” units
represent the features of objects and roles in a distributed
fashion. At the next level, these distributed
representations are connected to localist units (POs)
representing individual predicates (or roles) and objects.
Localist role-binding units (RBs) link object and predicate
units into role-filler binding pairs. At the top of the
hierarchy, localist P units link RBs into whole relational
propositions.

1

Asynchrony-based binding allows role and filler to be coded
by the same pool of semantic units, which allows DORA to
learn representations of relations from representations of objects
(Doumas et al., 2008).

2340

semantic units. The new PO thus becomes an explicit
representation of the featural overlap of the compared
objects. Applied iteratively this process results in explicit
and structured representations of object properties and
relational roles (see Doumas et al., 2008). Comparison
also allows DORA to learn representations of multi-place
relations by linking sets of constituent role-filler pairs into
relational structures (i.e., to learn the chases relation by
linking together representations of the roles chaser and
chased; see Doumas et al., 2008 for details).
Mapping For the purposes of analogical mapping,
LISA/DORA learns mapping connections between units
of the same type (e.g., PO, RB, etc.) in the driver and
recipient (e.g., between PO units in the driver and PO
units in the recipient). These connections grow whenever
corresponding units in the driver and recipient are active
simultaneously.
They permit LISA to learn the
correspondences (i.e., mappings) between corresponding
structures in separate analogs. They also permit
correspondences learned early in mapping to influence the
correspondences learned later.

iteration we presented DORA with sets of objects from
similar relations, and allowed it to compare the objects
and learn from the results (as per DORA’s relation
learning algorithm). As DORA learned new
representations it would also use these representations to
make subsequent comparisons. For instance, if DORA
learned an explicit representation of the property chases
(x, y) by comparing sets objects attached to the roles of
chase (i.e., chaser and chased), it could use this new
representation for future comparisons. On each trial we
selected between 2 and 4 representations and let DORA
compare them and learn from the results (i.e., perform
predication, and relation learning routines).
We ran 25 sessions each consisting of 800 learning
trials During each session, the inhibition parameter was
set to a value sampled from a random distribution with a
mean of 0.7, and a standard distribution of 0.1. The value
of the parameter reflected the reduced WM capacity
evidenced in young children (see Morrison et al., 2006)..
We measured the quality of the representations DORA
had learned during the last 100 trials after each 100 trials.
Quality was calculated as the mean of connection weights
to relevant features (i.e., those defining a specific
transformation or role of a transformation) divided by the
mean of all other connection weights + 1 (1 was added to
the mean of all other connection weights to normalize the
quality measure to between 0 and 1). A higher quality
denoted stronger connections to the semantics defining a
specific relation relative to all other connections (i.e., a
more pristine representation of the relation). Figure 2
shows the quality of the representations DORA learned
for each set of 100 comparisons from 100 to 800. As
expected, the quality of the representations DORA learns
increase as a function of experience (see Doumas et al.,
2008 for more details)

Simulations
Methods
We tested the hypothesis that differences in performance
between U.S. and Chinese children were due to
differences in relational knowledge. Specifically, we
hypothesized that the relational representations of
children from Hong Kong were more developed than
those of children from the U.S. We used LISA/DORA to
test this hypothesis by simulating the results of Richland
et al. (2010).
The simulation consisted of two
complementary parts. In the first part we used DORA to
develop representations of relational concepts from
examples. We simulated the difference in U.S. and
Chinese children by allowing DORA increased learning
trials in order to simulate the Chinese children, reflecting
the assumption that the experience of children in Hong
Kong differs from children in the U.S. We then used the
representations that DORA had learned during the first
part of the simulation to simulate the Richland et al.
(2010) task.
Simulation Part One We used DORA’s relational
learning algorithm (see Doumas et al., 2008 for details) to
develop relational representations from unstructured
examples. We started DORA with representations of 100
objects attached to random sets of features (chosen from a
pool of 100). We then defined 4 relations (chase, reachfor, angry-with, and hang-from). Each relation consisted
of two roles, each with three semantic features (e.g., for
the chase relation, both the roles chaser and chased were
each defined by three specific semantic units). Each of the
100 objects was attached to the features of between 1 and
3 relational roles chosen at random. For example, object1
might be attached to the features for chaser (one role of
chases) and reaching (one role of reach-for). On each

Figure 2. Quality of the representations DORA learned
during Simulation Part One.

2341

General Discussion

Simulation Part Two
To model the Scene Analogy
Problems we used representations of the four problem
types (1-relation, no distracter; 1-relation, distracter; 2relation, no distracter; 2-relation, distracter) composed
from the representations DORA had learned during
Simulation Part One. For example, to represent the
problem from Figure 1, we used a representation of the
chase relation DORA had learned during Simulation Part
One (relational role, RB, and P units) along with object
units (e.g, boy and girl) composed of 5 semantic features
describing that object (see Figure 1). For 2-Relation
problems both relations were represented in LISA’s WM
together (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997). Vitally, we
simulated children from the U.S. by using the
representations DORA had learned after only 400
comparisons, and those of the children from Hong Kong
using the representations DORA had learned after 600
comparisons.
The laternal inhibition parameter was set exactly as in
Simulation Part One. Each simulation run consisted of
firing three phase sets in LISA/DORA’s working
memory, “randomly” assigned by LISA/DORA and
allowing LISA/DORA to try to map the representation in
the driver to the representation in the recipient. When
LISA/DORA failed to determine a stable mapping after
firing three phase sets, an answer was selected at random.

In this paper we presented simulations in LISA/DORA
that support the hypothesis that both maturation of
inhibitory control in working memory and development
of knowledge representations is critical for the
development of adult-like analogical reasoning.
Specifically, we demonstrated that simple changes in
inhibition levels in LISA/DORA (i.e., inhibition between
elements of competing relational representations in
working memory) coupled with DORA’s predicate
learning routines could account for both relational
complexity and featural distraction effects in young
children’s analogical reasoning performance across
cultures. In contrast, approaches based on knowledge
accretion and capcity changes in isolation seem unable to
capture all of these results.
We conclude that both relational knowledge acquisition
and inhibitory control in working memory shape an
individual’s analogical reasoning performance. We
suggest that the development of analogical reasoning in
children can be conceptualized as an interaction between
these two factors. As children age their knowledge about
relations advances while their working-memory capacity
as modulated by inhibitory control also improves. At a
given time during development, the child is able to
perform an analogical task based on both their level of
relational knowledge and their working-memory
resources. Specifically, the equilibrium operates such that
greater relational knowledge can impose fewer processing
demands while less knowledge imposes higher demands.
Thus, Hong Kong children given the same workingmemory resources can better solve relational complex
problems. Thus, as relational knowledge increases in a
domain, the demands on working memory decline,
allowing for more complex reasoning at any given age.
This pattern in cognitive development builds on an
understanding of working-memory effects in expertise
(e.g., Chase & Simon, 1973) where advanced relational
knowledge can decrease processing demands and thereby
allow experts to accomplish cognitive tasks which
novices cannot.
We believe that to truly understand the development of
relational reasoning in children, future experimental and
computational studies must take into account both
advances in relational knowledge and changes in
inhibitory control in working memory, and importantly,
studying how these two aspects of development interact.

Results
The simulation results along with the experimental results
from Richland et al. (2010) are presented in Figure 3.
LISA/DORA’s performance mirrored experimental
results for the age groups from both the U.S. and China
across conditions.

References
Andrews, G. & Halford, G.S. (2002). A cognitive
complexity metric applied to cognitive development.
Cognitive Psychology, 45, 153-219.
Bjorklund, D. F., & Harnishfeger, K. K. (1990). The
resources construct in cognitive development: Diverse
sources of evidence and a theory of inefficient
inhibition. Developmental Review, 10, 48-71.

Figure 3: Experimental (Richland et al. 2010) and
Simulation,.

2342

Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). The mind’s eye in
chess. In W. G. Chase, (Ed.), Visual Information
Processing (pp 215–281). New York: Academic Press.
Diamond A. (2002). Normal development of prefrontal
cortex from birth to young adulthood: Cognitive
functions, anatomy, and biochemistry (pp. 466-503). In
D.T. Stuss & R.T. Knight (Eds). Principles of frontal
lobe function. London: Oxford University Press.
Doumas, L. A. A. & Hummel, J. E. (2010). A
computational account of the development of the
generalization of shape information. Cognitive Science,
34, 698-712.
Doumas. L. A. A., Hummel, J. E., & Sandhofer, C. M.
(2008). A theory of the discovery and predication of
relational concepts. Psychological Review, 115, 1 - 43.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989).
The structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and
examples. Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner
and S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind:
Advances in the study of language and thought, 95-235.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gentner, D. , & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and
the career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P.Byrnes
(Eds).
Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London,
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., Markman, A. B., &
Kotovsky, L. (1995). Two forces in the development of
relational similarity. In T. J. Simon & G. S. Halford
(Eds.), Developing cognitive competence: New
approaches to process modeling (pp. 263-313).
Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Goswami, U. (1992). Analogical reasoning in children.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goswami, U. (2001). Analogical reasoning in children. In
D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science
(pp. 437-470). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A. L. (1989). Melting chocolate
and melting snowmen: Analogical reasoning and causal
relations. Cognition, 35, 69-95.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children’s understanding: The
development of mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Halford, G. S., Andrews, G., Dalton, C., Boag, C., &
Zielinski, T. (2002). Young children’s performance on
the balance scale: The influence of relational
complexity. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
81, 383 – 416.
Hedden, T., Park, D. C., Nisbett, R., Ji, L., Jing, Q., &
Jiao, S. (2002). Cultural variation in verbal versus
spatial neuropsychological function across the life span.
Neuropsychology, 16(1), 65-73.

Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical
access and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427466.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Leung, V. W.-Y. (1998). The use of nouns versus verbs in
Cantonese-speaking children’s early vocabularies and
their mothers’speech. PhD dissertation, University of
Hong Kong.
Morrison, R.G. (2005). Thinking in working memory. In
K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), Cambridge
handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 457-473).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: How
Asians and Westerners think differently ... and why.
New York: The Free Press.
Piaget, J., Montangero, J., & Billeter, J. (1977). La
formation des correlats. In J. Piaget (Ed.) Recherches
sur l'abstraction reflechissante I (pp. 115-129). Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France.
Rattermann, M.J., Gentner, D (1998) More evidence for a
relational shift in the development of analogy:
Children's performance on a causal-mapping task
Cognitive Development, 13, pp. 453-478
Richland L.E., Chan, T-K., Morrison, R.G., & Au, T.K-F.
(2010). Young children’s analogical reasoning across
cultures: Similarities and differences. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105, 146-153 .
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning:
Insights from scene analogy problems. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 94, 249–273.
Tardif, T. (1996). Nouns are not always learned before
verbs: Evidence from Mandarin speakers' early
vocabularies. Developmental Psychology, 32, pp. 492504.
Tardif, T. (2006). But Are They Really Verbs? Chinese
Words for Action. In. K. Hirsh-Pasek, K. Golinkoff, R.
Michnick; Action meets word: How children learn
verbs. New York, NY, US: Oxford University Press,
pp. 477-498.
Tardiff, T. Gelman, S. A., Xu, F. (1999). Putting the
'noun bias' in context: A comparison of English and
Mandarin. Child Development, 70, 620-635.
Tardif, T. Shatz, M. Naigles, L. (1997). Caregiver speech
and children's use of nouns versus verbs: A comparison
of English, Italian, and Mandarin. Journal of Child
Language, 24, 535-565.

2343

