UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Disentangling Representation from Conceptualisation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3t1740pj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Salay, Nancy Adrienne

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Disentangling Representation from Conceptualisation
Nancy Adrienne Salay (salay@queensu.ca)
Queen‘s University, Department of Philosophy, Watson Hall 309
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6 CANADA
Abstract

positions, and then suggest a new paradigm for
understanding mental re-presentations as symbols of
particulars.

Drawing on recent work in the area of episodic memory, I
suggest a novel way of dissolving the representation/antirepresentation debate; if we treat representation and
conceptualisation as two separate capacities, the latter being
parasitic on the former, we unify the insights of both camps,
but succumb to none of their failings. I provide a sketch of
how we might understand de-conceptualised representation
and I show that, on this new approach, many of the old
problems, e.g. grounding, disappear.

Why Cognitivism is in Trouble
The central point of contention between Dreyfus and the
cognitivist is whether or not cognition is ultimately a matter
of symbol manipulation. Cognitivism begins with the idea
that a cognitive system responds intelligently to its
environment by way of its internal symbols but it is
precisely this commitment, Dreyfus thinks, that constitutes
cognitivism‘s fatal flaw. As soon as one thinks that internal
stuff can stand for external stuff, the problem of how the
symbols are connected to their objects arises. What makes
the symbols symbols? How do the inner representations get
to be about the things they represent? What makes the inner
models, models of the external world and, further, models of
this specific part of the external world? If, as Quine so
eloquently argued (1951), concepts are so deeply entangled
with one another that having one entails that one must also
have a host of others, this web of concepts – even if
internally coherent – could never model the stuff out there;
such a system could never decide, for example, that a
particular real-world situation is a birthday party situation
because the rule for recognising a birthday party situation
would cite other concepts that would in turn need rules of
application and those rules would also cite concepts that
would need rules of application and so on ad infinitum.
Now of course one way to hold on to the representational
story, but avoid the infinite regress, is to reject concept
holism and suppose that there is some level of symbols for
which the fixing process is not mediated by other symbols,
that is direct in some non-representational way. This is the
project of giving a naturalistic account of intentionality. If
all holistically inter-linked symbols are ‗grounded‘ in a level
of symbols that have their contents fixed in some nonintentional way, the idea goes, the regress will end there.
Recognition that representational accounts that don‘t have
some grounding layer – we should think of these as
disembodied or ungrounded cognitivist approaches – face
serious problems of exactly the sort that Dreyfus raises has
made the project of ―solving the grounding problem‖ an
increasingly topical one. 2 But, for Dreyfus, grounding
cannot be a way out of the vicious circle since grounding
requires a commitment to some form of concept atomism –
the view that individual symbols can represent

Keywords:
representation;
anti-representation;
intentionality;
episodic
memory;
cognitivism;
cognition; dynamic systems

Introduction
One of the central debates in cognitive science is the dispute
over the role of representation in cognition: on one view,
cognition is taken to be a kind of conceptual process; on the
other, it‘s seen as a particular sort of physical process. But
this characterisation of the two perspectives leads to a
deeply unsatisfying theoretical divide: either our
interactions with our world are mediated by our
representations or we do a lot less modelling than we think.
Accounts situated in the representational camp are plagued
by the problem of intentionality, while those leaning
towards the anti-representational side seem incapable of
saying anything theoretically interesting about the higherlevel conceptual type of cognition that purportedly develops
out of the underlying non-representational physical
processes. This unhelpful polarisation is due, I think, to a
presupposition that drives the debate; the idea that
representations are conceptual1, that is, that they stand in for
classes of things, not for particulars. I want to suggest that
if we unpack this, and treat representation and
conceptualisation as two separate capacities, the latter being
parasitic on the former, we get a more nuanced and robust
theory of cognition that unifies the insights of both camps.
In what follows, I‘ll take Hubert Dreyfus‘ arguments
against
cognitivism
(computational/representational
approaches) as paradigmatic of the anti-representational
camp, since his are the most explicit and best worked out in
the literature. I‘ll describe the competing views, uncover
the underlying intuitions that motivate the respective
1

Indeed, Fodor (1990) goes to some length to argue that being a
generalisation is a requirement for being a representation; symbols
that stand in for particulars only are mere ―labels‖ on his view. I
think this is deeply mistaken and rests on the confusion that is the
focus of this paper.

2

See Taddeo & Floridi (2005) for a good review of the current
state of work in this area.

182

independently of all other symbols – and he thinks that there
are independent reasons for thinking that concept atomism
must be false.
Dreyfus thinks that concept atomism is wrong in two
ways. Not only does it not speak to the Quinean intuitions
about concept holism – that concepts come in groups, not as
individuals – but it assumes that our most basic relation with
the world is a conceptual one. Dreyfus thinks that both the
atomists and (some) holists are wrong in thinking that, at
base, we come to know our world by theorising about it. He
follows Heidegger in insisting that fundamentally our
relation to the world is not a theoretical one, but a practical
one. On this Heideggerian view, the idea that things in the
world are meaningful in isolation from our practices is
incoherent. Things are what they are and play the role they
play partly because of their natural features – being heavy,
being sharp, and so on – and partly because of the
background practises of the culture within which those roles
develop.
Although practical understanding – everyday coping
with things and people – involves explicit beliefs and
hypotheses, these can only be meaningful in specific
contexts and against a background of shared practices.
And just as we can learn to swim without consciously
or unconsciously acquiring a theory of swimming, we
acquire these social background practices by being
brought up in them, not by forming beliefs and learning
rules. (Dreyfus, 1980, p.7)
Practical understanding underwrites and makes theoretical
understanding possible: meaning is always situated, that is,
it arises out of holistic, dynamic, inter-relations between
agents and their environment. Meaning arises, as a whole,
out of activity, and never individually, as a result of
assignments:
To say a hammer has the function of being for
hammering leaves out the defining relation of hammers
to nails and other equipment, to the point of building
things, and to our skills – all of which Heidegger called
readiness-to-hand – and so attributing functions to brute
facts couldn‘t capture the meaningful organization of
the everyday world. (Dreyfus, 2008, p.1138)
Thus, it's the complex nexus of background practices and
(sometimes) conceptual relations that holds together
hammers, nails, wood, etc., that connects hammer with
hammers. Any view that requires a base-level of conceptdetectors, as it appears cognitivism does if it is to avoid the
regress, has been completely derailed. The fact that it was
the initial assumption of representationalism that was
responsible for this flight towards conceptual atomism,
Dreyfus urges, should be a red flag that something is deeply
wrong with that assumption.
Now some might think that Dreyfus is creating much ado
about nothing, that if there is any debate here it‘s merely a
terminological one since the internal states, or at least some
subset of them, that underlie our practical understanding just

are the low-level representations that ultimately ground a
higher-level theoretical conceptual structure. The rising
influence of neuroscience in the cognitive sciences coupled
with the widespread acceptance of some kind of information
theoretic account of representation has made this idea that
conceptual cognition might be grounded in a simple
capacity for object detection a natural one.
But this is no mere terminological conflict; it is a deep
and confounding burden of proof debate: there seems to be
no non-question-begging way of specifying what constitutes
a representational system. If we are loose with our use of
the term ―representation‖ and we suppose that nomic
covariance relations are sufficient to establish representation
relations, then we are in danger of begging the question in
one way, of assuming that using a representation and acting
in a way that can be interpreted as using a representation
are two sides of the same coin. This ―loose‖ understanding
is mainstream in neuroscience. When a neuron or a cluster
of neurons is found to be ‗sensitive‘ to a particular class of
objects, and the underlying explanation is taken to be that a
nomic causal relation between the objects of some class and
the activation of a neuron or cluster of neurons has been
found, that neuron or cluster is said to represent that class.
There is a dispute, to be sure, over whether or not localist,
single-cell, representations are possible or whether neural
representations are distributed over clusters of neurons; but
there is very little discussion (except among the antirepresentationalists of course) about whether or not nomic
covariance is sufficient to warrant representational
attribution3.
But surely, one might think, there is a difference between
what I do when I consult a map in order to find the shortest
route across the city and what I do when I follow a series of
instructions for crossing the city. In the first case I am using
the map in virtue of its content, but in the second case, while
the entire sequence of steps taken together could be viewed
as a model of the shortest distance across the city, I do not
follow the instructions in virtue of their semantic content, I
follow them in virtue of their syntactic properties – turn left
at Bank Street, proceed for two blocks, and so on. If I
didn‘t understand the semantic features of the map, e.g. if I
didn‘t know that the black lines represented streets and the
red lines stood for highways, I wouldn‘t be able to use the
map; on the other hand, whether or not I understood that,
taken as a whole, the sequence of steps represented the
shortest path across the city, I could follow the instructions
for taking that path. In the first case I am using the
representation, but in the second I am merely acting in a
way that could be interpreted as using a representation.
Neuronal chain reactions, looked at from an investigator‘s
vantage point, can certainly be interpreted as
3

See, for example, the recent debate – rekindled by Jeffrey Bowers
(2009) – concerning localist vs. distributed neural representations.
Nowhere in this discussion is the question of whether or not we
should be calling these regularities representational at all raised.

183

―possess[ing] states that could inform about other states of
affairs‖ (2003, p.135) and being an informer— ―be[ing]
plugged into the right sort of system in the right sort of way,
such that the relevant entailment relations are put to a very
specific sort of use.‖ (2003, p. 135) It‘s the latter that is
required to meet the functional specification challenge,
since only in such cases is the information actually playing
some kind of role in the overall account. But in none of
Dretske‘s examples, Ramsey argues, is the informer
condition met.
I won‘t rehearse here Ramsey‘s support for this claim
since ultimately it‘s not important that we be convinced of
Ramsey‘s conclusion; indeed, one of the morals of this
paper is that so long as some of our key presuppositions
about the nature of representation remain, we will never be
able to solve this burden of proof debate. Ramsey‘s insights
are important, however, because they uncover the fact that
information theoretic accounts of representation are
convincing only if we assume a particular (impoverished, on
one view) understanding of representation; consequently,
we shouldn‘t be optimistic that an information theoretic
grounding account could ever settle the score.
But as I‘ve already noted, for anti-representationalists like
Dreyfus, the entire grounding agenda, information theoretic
or not, is misguided ultimately because it cannot
accommodate our dynamic nature as systems who are
continually responding to and causing changes in our
environment. Any view on which it makes sense to see
coping skills as decomposing into finer and finer grained
skills at dealing with object types, even those that are
―action-oriented‖ or Gibsonian, is a representational view
by Dreyfus‘ lights and thus one that he rejects. On the
representational view, our interactions with the world are
mediated by categories and we see the world as divided up
into hammers and tables and chairs. In coping, on the other
hand, there is no ―seeing as‖ at all. One copes with situation
wholes, as unfolding happenings, rather than as composites
of objects.
Dreyfus‘ anti-representationalism is thus quite radical; he
rejects any and all representational interpretations of the
internal states that underpin our coping skills. There is no
mere terminological argument here.

representational, in the same way that the sequence of steps
can be seen as a model of the shortest route across the city,
but unless one has some kind of story to tell about how one
part of the system, or perhaps the system taken as a whole,
makes use of the content of those neural states, we have no
reason to think that these neuronal impulses actually play a
representational role. Of course, by stating the distinction in
this way, I am also begging the question, in the other way,
since to get to my conclusion one has to first assume that
using a representation and acting in a way that can be
interpreted as using a representation are different. This is
why the debate about representation seems so intractable;
the competing intuitions that undergird the various positions
are so polarised.
William Ramsey does a good job of making the gap
between these alternative perspectives explicit when he
argues that any account of representation must meet what he
calls the functional specification challenge: ―a minimal
requirement for a successful functional specification of any
notion of representation is that the content—or, if you like,
the fact that the representation has semantic content—be an
explanatorily relevant fact about that state.‖ (2003, p. 129)
In other words, one needn‘t go so far as to show that a
system is actually using a representation in order to make
the case that the system is a representational one (as in my
map example) – it‘s unclear how one could ever give a
naturalistic account of intentionality if this were the
requirement – but one does need to provide a justification
for treating a system as though it were using a
representation; that is, the fact that the internal indicator
states have some content must play some kind of role in
one‘s account.
Fred Dretske‘s information theoretic account of
representation (1988), perhaps the most robust and
ambitious indicator theory of representation that has been
offered thus far, looks like the best candidate for meeting
this challenge. According to that account, what makes one
internal state X a representation of some class of things or
actions Y is the following:
1. The presence/absence of X covaries with the
presence/absence of members of Y;
2. The co-variance is under-written by a nomic causal
relation, that is, the presence/absence of members of Y
cause or are a necessary part of the cause of the
presence/absence of X; and,
3. The functional role of X, within the system within
which it arises, is to carry information about the
presence/absence of members of Y.
It‘s condition three that makes this account a candidate
for meeting the functional specification challenge, since it‘s
this requirement that makes the content of the purportedly
representational state relevant to a complete description of
its functional role in the system. Or so it seems. Ramsey
argues that it doesn‘t. To support his contention, Ramsey
develops a distinction between carrying information about –

Re-Presentation: A New Model
Dreyfus‘ deep and important insight into the way we think
has led us to the following impasse: any disembodied or
ungrounded AI founded on the principle that cognition is
fundamentally a matter of concept manipulation will be
caught in an infinite regress of concept consultation and,
consequently, its concepts will fail to be about the things
they purportedly represent. But the mainstream cognitivist
response, to close the concept-world gap by grounding
conceptual schemas, requires that we take concept atomism
seriously. Dreyfus rejects this route and takes the fact that
this looks to be the only way out of the infinite regress as a

184

clue that the initial representational assumption must be at
fault. Others, who are more firmly rooted in the Cartesian
tradition, are not as quick to reject the grounding possibility;
they think that some kind of information theoretic atomism
will eventually provide the answer. But, as Ramsey show
us, low-level concept detectors alone can‘t provide us with a
naturalistic account of representation, since they cannot play
the required functional role of concepts or even protoconcepts unless they are already part of an intentional
system, a system capable of using semantic content. Such
grounding theories, instead of solving the problem, merely
push it back a level. Dreyfus urges us towards an antirepresentational AI, but I suspect the radical see-saw
between the full-blooded representationalist and the strident
anti-representationalist is a tug ‗o war that no-one is likely
to win, likely because, as Andy Clark and others (1994,
1997, 2002) have been suggesting all along, the truth lies
somewhere in the middle. I suggest that we take Dreyfus‘
charge seriously, but explore other ways out of the impasse.
His solution is to reject the foundational commitment to
some form of representationalism outright, but I want to
argue that even if we accept Dreyfus‘ arguments that
cognition isn‘t fundamentally a conceptual process, we need
not accept his more radical and less helpful conclusion that
it is also not a representational process.
As evolved biological agents, there is no doubt that, as
Dreyfus emphasises, we first and foremost cope with our
environment in an entirely non-representational way – we
avoid obstacles, recoil from harmful situations, and are
drawn towards safe and pleasant ones in an unmediated
way. But we‘re not just biological agents; we‘re cognitive
ones as well. And as such we are able to respond not only
to the intricacies of present situations, but to past and future
ones as well. I am able to respond to the subtleties of the
ebb and flow of traffic, while I‘m driving my car, while at
the same time, thinking about how my class went yesterday
and considering ways in which I will do things differently or
the same in next week‘s class. But while this ability does
require that we have some capacity to re-present the past
and imagine future situations, it need not require a
conceptual ability, an ability to generalise beyond the
specific cases to a class. I have in mind here the distinction,
first proposed by Endel Tulving, between episodic and
semantic memory. Episodic memories are re-presentations
of past experiences (and imaginings of future ones), while
semantic memories are conceptualisations of past
experiences – they consist in the knowledge we distil from
our experiences, that is, the generalisations we make on the
basis of experience. Proust‘s In Search of Lost Time gives
us wonderfully vivid descriptions of both. The narrator has
an episodic memory of a particular moment in his
childhood, when he‘d tasted a bite of his aunt‘s lime-teasoaked madeleine, and in this re-experiencing he tells us
that ―immediately the old grey house upon the street, where
her [his aunt‘s] room was, rose up like a stage set to attach

itself to the little pavilion opening on to the garden which
had been built out behind it for my parents (the isolated
segment which until that moment had been all that I could
see); and with the house the town, from morning to night
and in all weathers, the Square where I used to be sent
before lunch, the streets along which I used to run errands,
the country roads we took when it was fine.‖ (p.50) This
memory is portrayed in stark contrast with his more
conventional semantic memories of Combray, the village of
his childhood summers, where his aunt lived: ―Many years
had elapsed during which nothing of Combray, save what
was comprised in the theatre and the drama of my going to
bed there, had any existence for me.‖ (ibid.) The ability to
have an episodic memory, then, is the ability to reexperience some situation not present, while to have a
semantic memory is to have some capacity for
generalisation. Tulving, both when he first suggested the
distinction and today, sees episodic memory as parasitic on
semantic memory:
Episodic memory is a recently evolved, latedeveloping, and early-deteriorating past-oriented
memory system, more vulnerable than other memory
systems to neuronal dysfunction, and probably unique
to humans. It makes possible mental time travel
through subjective time, from the present to the past,
thus allowing one to re-experience, through autonoetic
awareness, one‘s own previous experiences. Its
operations require, but go beyond, the semantic
memory system. (Tulving, p. 6)
Martin Conway, however, has recently suggested an
intriguing new way of understanding episodic memories as
a tripartite structure only elements of which are entwined
with semantic memories. His analysis provides us with a
new way of understanding the relationship between mental
representations and conceptualisation, one that can serve as
the foundation for the theoretical bridge between our coping
skills and our conceptual abilities.
On this new picture, episodic memories can be analysed
into inter-related parts:
1. Episodic elements (EE‘s) – these are snippets of
experiences, Proustian experience snapshots;
2. Semantic episodic memories (SEM‘s) – these are small
sets of EE‘s grouped by a contextualising conceptual frame,
for example, one‘s breakfast routine; and,
3. Conceptual episodic memories (CEM‘s) – these are
groupings of SEM‘s by a higher-order conceptual frame, for
example, a day at work.
Of these, the most basic are EE‘s:
Episodic elements are the most event-specific, most
experience-near representations in long-term memory.
They are often in the form of visual images (which may
be the main representational format of episodic
memories) and they represent moments of experience
or summaries of moments of experience, particularly

185

and perhaps exclusively, moments of conscious
experience. (Conway, p. 2308)
Importantly, on Conway‘s view, and contra the received
wisdom, EE‘s are a-conceptual and conceptually a priori.
This means that the capacity for semantic memory is not a
requirement for having episodic elements; indeed, he
suggests, the relation goes the other way – episodic
elements are required for semantic memory.
An interesting question that then arises is: how can EEs
be associated with conceptual frames in an infant‘s
memory? One answer to this is that the ability to form
EEs is hard-wired and functioning prior to birth.
Conceptual knowledge is abstracted from EEs. (p.
2312)
Conway here is suggesting that free-floating EE‘s, what I‘m
calling re-presentations, that aren‘t yet grouped and framed,
might be the building blocks of our concepts. At some point
in a human infant‘s development, EE‘s begin to be grouped.
These groupings form ‗proto-SEM‘s‘, the beginnings of
conceptual frames. The mechanism for grouping is of
course the big ticket question since, on this view, this just is
the mechanism for conceptualisation. An initial suggestion
is that both the temporal contiguity of EE‘s and closeness
with respect to sensory attributes are likely factors in how
EE‘s are grouped in long-term memory.
Obviously, more work needs to be done in this area
before we can claim anything as bold as a theory of concept
development, but in speaking to the insights of both the
representational and anti-representational camps, EE‘s as representations play an important role in the cognitive story
we have collectively been telling thus far. The antirepresentationalist is motivated by the bottom-up
observation that cognitive agents such as ourselves are, most
fundamentally, dynamical physical systems and, as such, are
best described in terms of the low-level mechanisms from
which our higher level capacities emerge. That representations are the building blocks out of which our
conceptual capacities emerge supports this picture since representations themselves are just responses to past
experiences, neurally encoded and re-played and, in that
sense, are no different from other coping responses. The
representationalist, on the other hand, is motivated by the
top-down observation that, unlike most physical systems,
cognitive agents are able to respond to past events and
possible future ones in addition to present situations. Here
again, the insight is captured since a re-presentation is either
a response to an experience that has already happened or is a
playing out of a possible future one: ―The temporal
dimension in episodic memory extends then both backward
and forward in time and we have recently termed this the
remembering-imaging window.‖ (p. 2307)
Recall that attempts to ground conceptual schemas
directly in some kind of body-world relation (this is what
the detector accounts try to do) can never resolve the clash
of intuitions. Either the attribution of representation to

internal indicator states will be unwarranted, given a more
robust notion of representation, or it will be justified only if
we assume that the overall system is already intentional,
which is the very thing we are trying to explain. Instead of
responding to this observation by embracing the opposing
intuition, as Dreyfus does, I‘m suggesting a possible
theoretical middle ground. We do rely on inner models of
our environment in our interactions, but, as part of a lowprimitive cognitive capacity, these models are wholly
particular, not conceptual. There is no gap between a representation and the world that needs to be bridged (as in
the case of conceptual representation); the re-presentation is
just another situation to be (re)experienced.
Representations do not threaten the underlying anti-Cartesian
picture of ourselves as, ultimately, dynamic copers, since representations don‘t mediate our interactions with the world;
although they do make mediation possible, since it is out of
these snapshots that concepts develop.
Finally, representations meet the functional specification challenge
without begging the intentional question. Being a neuronal
response and thus embedded within a network of
connections, a re-presentation triggers other responses as
well. As a first response, of course, not re-experienced,
there is nothing representational about the underlying
neuronal structure that encodes that response. But once that
set of neural encodings is re-activated, it now has the role of
carrying information about the original situation for the
system to which it is being re-presented. Not just any set of
neural encodings can count as representational then, no
matter how detector-like they behave; only those in a system
that is capable of re-presenting to itself count as
representations, since only in such systems is the experience
as a whole, that is to say, the content of the experience,
playing a role.

Conclusions and Speculations
It sounds like we get to have our cake and eat it too. Is this
too good to be true? Perhaps, but it certainly opens up some
new avenues of investigation where now we seem to be
stalled. The anti-representationalist seems incapable of
offering a theory of cognition, distinct from a theory of, say,
action, because he ignores our theoretical capacities; the
representationalist, on the other hand, seems incapable of
offering a theory of embodied cognition because she begins
the cognitive account too high up – already at the level of
concepts. If we let go of the idea that a representation must
relate some particular to a class, we have a way of marrying
the insights of either approach and moving forward with a
new conception of intentionality: an intentional being is one
that has the capacity to respond to its own response to some
past experience.
Intentionality, on this view, is a
prerequisite for conceptual cognition; that is, giving an
account of intentionality and giving an account of mental
concepts are separate endeavours. And this is very happy
news because until now we‘ve had the proper order of
investigation backwards; the thought was that once we

186

understood conceptual representation, the right story about
intentionality would follow. But no naturalistic account of
conceptual cognition is forthcoming, no surprise, since that
story is parasitic on, not precedent to, an account of
intentionality.
This scaled back understanding of
intentionality as the capacity for re-presentation, however,
looks like a much more promising candidate for
naturalisation. If we can manage that, we‘ll have, at last, a
naturalistic grounding for a theory of conceptual
representation.

Scott Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin. New York:
Vintage.
Quine, W.V.O. (1951). Two Dogmas of Empiricism. The
Philosophical Review, 60, 20-43.
Ramsey, W. (2003). Are receptors representations?
Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial
Intelligence, 15:2, 125-141.
Taddeo, M. & Floridi, L. (2005). Solving the symbol
grounding problem: a critical review of fifteen years of
research. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 17 (4), 419–445.
Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain.
Annu. Rev. Psychology, 53, 1–25.
Van Gelder, T. (1995). What might cognition be, if not
computation? Journal of Philosophy, XCII(7), 345-381.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (1991). The
embodied mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wheeler, M. (2008). Cognition in context: phenomenology,
situated robotics and the frame problem. International
Journal of Philosophical Studies, 16 (3), 323-349.

References
Clark, A. & Toribio, J. (1994). Doing without representing?
Synthese, 101, 401–431.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2002). Is seeing all it seems? Action, reason, and
the grand illusion. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
9(5/6).
Conway, M.A. (2009). Episodic memories.
Neuropsychologia, 47, 2305–2313.
Dretske, F. (1988). Explaining Behavior. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Dreyfus, H. (1980). Holism and Hermeneutics. The Review
of Metaphysics, 34 (1), 3-23.
Dreyfus, H. (2002). Intelligence without representation –
Merleau-Ponty‘s critique of mental representation.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1, 367–383.
Dreyfus, H. (2008). Why Heideggerian AI failed and how
fixing it would require making it more Heideggerian.
Artificial Intelligence, 171(18), 1137–1160.
Freeman, W. (2000). How brains make up their minds.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Fodor, J. (1990). Information and representation. In P.
Hanson (Ed.), Information, language, and cognition.
Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem.
Physica D, 42, 335-346.
Keijzer, F. (1998). Doing without representations which
specify what to do. Philosophical Psychology, II(3), 269302.
Keijzer, F. (2002). Representation in dynamical and
embodied cognition. Cognitive Systems Research, 3, 275–
288.
Kirsh, D. (1990). When is information explicitly
represented? In P. Hanson (Ed.), Information, language,
and cognition. Vancouver: University of British
Columbia Press.
Prinz, J. & Barsalou, L. (2000). Steering a course for
embodied representation. In E. Dietrich & A. Markman
(Eds.), Cognitive dynamics: Conceptual changes in
humans and machines (51-77). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Proust, M. (1913-27). Remembrance of Things Past.
Volume 1: Swann's Way: Within a Budding Grove.
The definitive French Pleiade edition translated by C.K.

187

