UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dissociating Sources of Knowledge in Artificial Grammar Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kb929n4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hendricks, Michelle
Conway, Christopher
Kellogg, Ronald

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dissociating Sources of Knowledge in Artificial Grammar Learning
Michelle A. Hendricks (mpatte20@slu.edu), Christopher M. Conway (cconway6@slu.edu), and Ronald T.
Kellogg (rkellogg@slu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Saint Louis University
St. Louis, MO 63108 USA
Abstract
Previous studies have suggested that individuals use both implicit
and explicit, as well as rule and exemplar-based knowledge, to
make grammaticality judgments in artificial grammar learning
(AGL) tasks. Experiment 1 explored the importance of explicit
mechanisms in the learning of exemplar and rule-based information
by using a dual-task during AGL training. We utilized a balanced
chunk strength grammar, assuring an equal proportion of explicit
exemplar-based cues (i.e. chunks) between grammatical and nongrammatical test items. Experiment 2 explored the importance of
perceptual cues by changing letters between AGL training and test,
while still incorporating the dual-task design and balanced chunk
strength grammar used in Experiment 1. Results indicated that
participants with a working memory load learned the grammar in

Introduction
There is widespread agreement that there exist two
distinct forms of learning, explicit and implicit. Explicit
learning refers to learning that happens actively,
consciously, and with effort, such as the type of learning
that occurs during much of formal education. Implicit
learning, on the other hand, occurs passively, unconsciously,
and without effort. Implicit learning is theorized to be
involved in procedural motor activities such as riding a bike
or typing, as well as in more complex phenomena such as
social interaction and language learning (Reber, 1993).
Artificial grammar learning (AGL) has been a useful
paradigm for the study of implicit learning. In the typical
artificial grammar learning (AGL) paradigm, individuals are
shown (or asked to memorize) letter strings that, unknown
to them, conform to rules instantiated by an artificial
grammar. Following presentation of the training exemplars,
participants are able to reliably determine whether a newly
presented letter string is grammatical according to the
artificial grammar, without being able to explicitly verbalize
the rules of the grammar. Originally, it was theorized that
individuals rely on an implicit abstract rule-learning system
during AGL tasks, with participants’ failures to verbalize
the rules as evidence that the rules were unconscious
(Reber, 1989).
Additional support for implicit rule-based learning in
AGL was provided by what are now referred to as “transfer”
experiments. In an AGL transfer experiment, the surface
features (e.g. letters) of the training exemplars are changed
during the test phase, though the underlying grammar stays
the same. Clearly, this would make grammaticality
decisions based solely on item similarity difficult, if not
impossible. Thus, the transfer manipulation is meant to
increase reliance on (presumably implicit) rules divorced
from the surface details of the exemplars. Impressively,
results from multiple studies have indicated that individuals
still successfully demonstrate above-chance classification

Experiment 1 just as well as the single-task no-load group,
presumably by relying solely on implicit learning mechanisms.
However, changing the letters from training to test resulted in no
significant learning for dual-task participants in Experiment 2,
suggesting that exemplar-based perceptual cues may the major
contributor to implicit knowledge. Overall, the results suggest that
implicit and explicit mechanisms for learning rule-based and
exemplar-based information may both contribute to AGL via four
independent, parallel routes, providing a new framework for
understanding the complex dynamic of learning in AGL tasks.
Keywords: artificial grammar learning; implicit learning;
working memory; dual-task

performance, though the learning is often attenuated (Reber,
1989, Knowlton & Squire, 1996).
In addition to the transfer studies, multiple studies have
shown that amnesic subjects, who putatively cannot rely on
explicit forms of learning, demonstrate artificial grammar
learning similarly to non-brain damaged controls
(Knowlton, Ramus, and Squire, 1992; (Knowlton & Squire,
1996). The evidence from both the transfer and the amnesic
studies suggest that AGL is mediated by implicit rulelearning mechanisms. Under this view, given that implicit
learning is theorized to happen automatically and without
effort, executive functions such as working memory (an
explicit mechanism, by definition) should have a minimal
impact on artificial grammar learning.
Although studies with amnesic patients strongly suggest
that AGL can occur without explicit memory, research with
non-brain damaged subjects suggests that under normal
conditions, explicit processes are also recruited. For
instance, test phase classification judgments have been
found to be sensitive to the similarity between test and
training items, specifically in terms of chunk strength
(Chang & Knowlton, 2004; Knowlton & Squire, 1996).
Chunks are bigrams and trigrams that are encountered
frequently in an artificial grammar due to repetitions in the
underlying structure. Studies have shown that individuals
do retain some explicit information regarding the chunks of
the training items (Dienes, Broadbent, & Berry, 1991;
Dulany, Carlson, & Dewey, 1984), and that participants
studying only training bigrams can classify the
grammaticality of test items correctly at rates similar to
controls (Perruchet & Pacteau, 1990). In addition, fMRI
studies of AGL tasks have suggested some involvement of
the medial temporal lobe (MTL; Fletcher, Buchel, Josephs,
Friston, & Dolan, 1999; Opitz & Friederici, 2004). These
findings suggest that individuals may rely on a combination
of both implicit rule-based knowledge and explicit
exemplar-based chunk knowledge to make grammaticality
judgments (Vokey & Brooks, 1992; Knowlton & Squire,
1996).

1393

2
However, although it was originally assumed that rule
knowledge is implicit and exemplar-based knowledge is
explicit (e.g. Reber 1989), the true picture appears to be
much more complex. For instance, participants in a study
by Dulany, Carlson, and Dewey (1984) were able to indicate
which parts of letter strings were grammatical by crossing
out ungrammatical portions, possibly suggesting some
explicit knowledge of rules. Similarly, participants in
another study demonstrated explicit knowledge of the
grammar by being able to complete stems of letter strings to
form grammatical strings (Dienes, Broadbent, & Berry,
1991).
Similarly, it appears that implicit learning can also be
used to learn both types of information (rule-based and
exemplar-based). For instance, Knowlton and Squire (1996)
used a balanced chunk strength grammar to show that
amnesic patients showed the same pattern of performance as
controls, suggesting they were sensitive to both exemplarbased and rule-based information, despite not having
explicit knowledge for either. Chang and Knowlton (2004)
assessed the importance of low-level perceptual features in
AGL performance. Using a balanced grammar, they
conducted two experiments: one in which they used a
concurrent articulatory suppression task during learning
(designed to disrupt perceptual processing), and one where
they changed the font and case of letters from acquisition to
test. In both cases, participants exposed to the manipulation
experienced a disruption in chunk sensitivity, suggesting
that exemplar-based knowledge may be more implicit than
commonly thought.
In summary, the existing evidence appears to suggest that
depending on learning conditions, exemplar and rule-based
knowledge may both be acquired implicitly or explicitly.
We therefore hypothesized that there may exist at least four
separate pathways to learning in AGL (see Figure 1).
Exemplar information may be acquired explicitly through
memory for chunks (Dienes et al. 1991), or implicitly via
perceptual processing (Chang & Knowlton, 2004).
Likewise, rule-based knowledge may be acquired via an
implicit rule system (Reber, 1967) or via explicit knowledge
of rules (Dulany et al. 1984).
The current study aimed to test this proposed fourpathway theory of AGL by attempting to behaviorally
dissociate each source of knowledge available to
participants. In each of two experiments, we attempted to
neutralize one or more of the four hypothesized pathways to
knowledge illustrated in Figure 1. In Experiment 1, we
incorporated an explicit dual-task during AGL, designed to
prevent participants from relying on either form of explicit
learning during training (hypothesis generation and item
memory), leaving available only implicit sources of
knowledge (perceptual fluency and abstract rule-learning).
If the four-pathway theory is correct, we should expect that
even under this dual-task condition, participants will still
demonstrate learning equivalent to single-task participants
because they still have access to exemplar-based and rulebased information via implicit learning. In Experiment 2, we

Figure 1: Hypothesized Pathways to Knowledge in
Artificial Grammar Learning
furthermore neutralized the implicit perceptual fluency route
to learning, leaving dual-task participants only with access
to the hypothesized implicit rule-learning mechanism.
Unlike Experiment 1, this manipulation is expected to
drastically affect learning performance because only the
(implicit) rule-based learning pathway is available. Finally,
an additional aim of this study is to explore the relationship
between individual differences in working memory ability
and AGL performance.

Experiment 1: Dissociating Implicit from
Explicit Learning
Experiment 1 was designed to address the question of
whether learning in the AGL task can take place when
explicit mechanisms, specifically working memory, are
unavailable. To this end, half of the participants were
engaged in a dual-task concurrently with the acquisition
phase of the AGL task, designed to make explicit encoding
of the stimuli during acquisition very difficult. The dualtask required participants to maintain a series of 6-digit
strings in memory at the same time as they were exposed to
the letter strings from the AGL task. For the AGL task, we
used a balanced chunk strength design (Knowlton & Squire,
1996), which allows us to determine the relative
contribution of learning processes to exemplar and rulebased knowledge. In a balanced chunk strength grammar,
both grammatical and ungrammatical test items are balanced
in terms of the chunks they have in common with the
training items, thus ensuring that chunk learning alone
cannot account for grammaticality performance. Since we
have four categories of test items varying on two
dimensions (chunk strength and grammatically), we are able
to determine the impact of processing load from the dualtask on grammaticality and chunk strength separately.
We predicted that individuals with diminished explicit
resources (i.e. via the concurrent working memory task
during AGL acquisition) would still show learning
(compared to a single-task control group) due to the
availability of implicit mechanisms (perceptual fluency and
abstract rule learning).
Finally, we also had each participant engage in an
automated OSPAN task (Unsworth, Heitz, Schrock, &
Engle, 2005) to measure their working memory abilities.
This provided a way to assess the extent that working

1394

3
memory ability correlates with AGL performance in the
dual- vs. single-task groups. We predicted that OSPAN task
performance would be associated with AGL performance
for the single-task group only, because unlike the dual-task
group, their explicit learning pathways are available.

Method
Participants
Participants were 45 undergraduate students (23 in the
single-task condition, and 22 in the dual-task condition)
who participated for course credit.

Materials
Automated OSPAN The Turner and Engle (1989)
OSPAN task requires individuals to solve math problems
while trying to remember a set of unrelated words, and is a
common measure of working memory.
We used an
automated version of the OSPAN, designed by Unsworth,
Heitz, Schrock, and Engle (2005).The automated OSPAN
(AOSPAN) correlates well with other measures of working
memory capacity, demonstrating both good internal
consistency and test-retest reliability (Unsworth et al. 2005).
Artificial Grammar The artificial grammar used in this
experiment is from Knowlton and Squire (1996), which has
the advantage of being a balanced chunk strength design
(see Figure 2). To determine chunk strength, Knowlton and
Squire (1996) quantified the similarity between learning and
test items by determining the number of trigrams and
bigrams in a test string that corresponded to those appearing
in the learning items. We used the same 23 training items
and 32 test items as did Knowlton and Squire (1996). The
test items are divided into four chunk-balanced categories of
8 items each: grammatical low chunk (G-LC), nongrammatical low chunk (NG-LC), grammatical high chunk
(G-HC), and non-grammatical high chunk (NG-HC).

Procedure
Participants were assigned randomly to the dual-task or
single-task condition, with all participants tested
individually on a computer in a small, private room. All
participants first completed the automated OPSAN task,
followed by the AGL task. Participants in the dual-task
condition completed a concurrent digit span task during the
practice and acquisition phases, as described below.
Dual-Task Group After the automated OSPAN, the dualtask participants first received 3 blocks of practice trials to
orient them to the task. Within each block, participants were
presented with two or three sets of random letter strings
consisting of the letters A, B, C, D, and E. For each string,
participants were asked to type the letter string as shown in
a space at the bottom of the screen; only after correctly
typing the string were they allowed to proceed to the next
trial. Participants were asked to use only one hand (their
dominant hand) to type the strings. During these practice
trials, the dual-task participants performed a concurrent
working memory task. At the beginning of each practice
block, participants were shown six random numbers

Figure 2: Balanced chunk strength grammar used in
current study. From Knowlton and Squire (1996).
presented in the middle of the computer screen for 3000ms.
Participants were instructed to maintain the number string in
their memory while typing the letter strings as described
above. At the end of each block, participants then were
required to type the six digits from memory.
Following the practice blocks, participants next
completed the acquisition phase, which was nearly identical
to the practice phase except for the following differences.
Within each block, participants were presented with eight
blocks of two or three letter strings each, where each letter
string corresponded to one of the 23 training items from the
artificial grammar1. Each training string was presented only
once. As with the practice phase, participants were required
to type the string correctly before advancing to the next trial,
as well as maintain a 6-digit number string in memory, with
a different number string given each block.
During the testing phase, participants were informed that
the letter strings shown previously conformed to very
complex rules, and that they should use their gut feeling to
determine whether the letter strings presented next also
conformed to these same underlying rules. Participants
were then presented with the 32 test strings, and asked to
decide whether each was grammatical or not by pressing a
corresponding key on the keyboard. Immediately following
each grammaticality judgment, participants were asked to
rate their confidence regarding the judgment they had just
made on a scale of 1-4 with 1 being “I am sure” and 4 being
“I am guessing”.
Single-Task Group The single-task participants followed
the exact same procedure as the dual-task participants, with
the only difference being the nature of the concurrent task.
The single-task participants saw a line of 6 asterisks instead
of 6-digit number strings at the beginning of each AGL
practice and acquisition block. They were not required to
remember the asterisks during the trials; merely, at the end
of each block, they saw each 6-digit number string and were
asked to type it. In this way, the concurrent task did not tap
working memory resources and thus serves as a good
control to the dual-task group.

Results and Discussion
Main results are shown in Table 1. First we consider
performance on the OSPAN and concurrent digit span tasks.
As shown in the table, both groups performed comparably
1

Training strings were randomized within blocks, and the
blocks were presented randomly for every participant to account
for any order effects.

1395

4
on the OSPAN task, suggesting that the two groups
possessed similar working memory abilities. The table also
shows that for the concurrent digit span task, the dual-task
participants correctly recalled all six digits at the end of
each block 67% of the time (note that the single-task
participants do not have a digit span score because they
were not required to do the concurrent working memory
digit span task). This score suggests that the dual-task had
the desired effect of being challenging but not impossible to
do. Furthermore, to act as a further control, a regression was
conducted which indicated that the OSPAN score predicted
17% of the variance in digit span scores, which was
marginally significant (F(1, 20) = 4.13, p = .056), implying
that the effort expended on the dual-task was consistent with
what would be expected given participants’ working
memory abilities. These results suggest that the dual-task
had the desired effect of neutralizing or at the very least,
attenuating, explicit processing resources for the dual-task
group.
For the AGL task, Table 1 shows that both groups
demonstrated learning as revealed by their test task
performance being significantly greater than chance (singletask group, t(22) = 5.30 p < .001; dual-task group, t(22) =
5.30, p < .001). In fact, there were no significant differences
between the single and dual-task participants on overall
accuracy, the tendency to endorse items as grammatical, or
classification confidence.
Even more strikingly, Figure 3 shows the test accuracy for
each of the four categories of test items separately for each
group. There were no differences between conditions on
accuracy for each of the four categories. This indicates that
both groups showed equivalent learning of the same two
primary types of information present in the grammar
(exemplar and rule-based information).
Interestingly, bivariate correlations indicated no
correlation between accuracy and confidence judgments for
either group. There was, however, significant positive
correlation between the OSPAN score and accuracy in the
single-task control condition (r = 0.43, p < .05), and a
negative (but non-significant) correlation between the
OSPAN score and accuracy in the dual-task condition (r = 0.23, ns). These results provide further support that our
concurrent task did in fact neutralize working memory
resources for the dual-task group; working memory
positively contributed to control participants’ ability to

Figure 3: Proportion of Correct Grammaticality
Judgments by Group and Item Type in Experiment 1.
correctly classify the grammaticality of test items, while it
did not contribute to dual-task participants’ ability to
correctly classify test items. This suggests that the singlegroup participants were successfully using working memory
to learn the grammar, while the dual-task participants were
relying on a separate pathway to learning, as indicated by
the lack of correlation of OSPAN scores with accuracy in
the dual-task.
In sum, the results from Experiment 1 indicate that dualtask participants exhibited equivalent performance on the
AGL task, despite having limited explicit resources
available due to the concurrent working memory task during
encoding. Strikingly, dual-task participants showed a pattern
of learning indistinguishable from controls, indicating that
explicit information is not necessary for the acquisition of
either exemplar or rule-based information. Our results are
consistent with the finding that patients with bilateral
hippocampal brain damage (who are unable to explicitly
encode information) also showed normal learning on an
AGL task (Knowlton & Squire, 1996). Thus, one way to
conceptualize Experiment 1 is that it provides a way to
behaviorally “simulate” hippocampal brain damage using a
concurrent working memory task. By forcing participants to
engage in the concurrent digit span task, it appears we
successfully prevented participants from relying on the
explicit pathways to learning (item memory and hypothesis
generation as shown in Figure 1); however, even without
full explicit resources available for the AGL task,
participants still were able to learn both exemplar and rulebased information in a presumably implicit fashion, leading
to performance that was identical to the single-task group.

Table 1: Mean (Standard Deviation) Proportion of Correct Responses, Proportion of Items Endorsed Grammatical, Confidence, and
OSPAN Score.
Experiment 1
Single-task

Experiment 2

Dual-task

Single-task

Dual-task

Control

Proportion Correct*

.58 (.08)

.58 (.08)

.59 (.06)

.53 (.11)

.49 (.11)

Proportion Grammatical

.58 (.10)

.55 (.12)

.54 (.15)

.49 (.22)

.46 (.15)

Confidence

2.97 (.44)

2.68 (.64)

2.45 (.55)

2.62 (.79)

1.92 (.61)

47.64 (15.90)

44.77 (15.83)

44.30 (14.91)

48.38 (12.08)

44.12 (18.04)

NA

.68 (.21)

NA

OSPAN Score
Digit Span Score

NA
.67 (.19)
*Experiment 2: Between single-task and dual-task: t(49)=2.51, p<.05

1396

5

Experiment 2: Dissociating Implicit RuleBased from Exemplar-Based Learning
In Experiment 1, we forced the dual-task participants to
rely on implicit learning to learn both exemplar and rulebased information. The aim of Experiment 2 was to attempt
to remove an additional pathway to learning, namely
implicit perceptual fluency, a form of exemplar based
knowledge (see Figure 2), leaving only the implicit rulebased system hypothesized by Reber (1967).
In order to remove the availability of perceptual
exemplar-based cues, we incorporated the “transfer”
methodology described earlier. Specifically, participants
were required to do the test classification task on test strings
that consisted of an entirely new letter set. With no
perceptual similarity between the acquisition and test
phases, dual-task participants can only rely on a more
abstract form of knowledge gained via the implicit abstract
rule-learning route.
We therefore predicted that single-task participants would
show some learning even without exemplar-based cues,
since explicit rule-based sources of information would still
be available. For dual-task participants, however, only the
hypothesized implicit rule-based information will be
available. Therefore, dual-task participants should still be
able to make correct grammaticality judgments, but they
may lose the sensitivity to chunk strength due to lack of
exemplar-based cues. Alternatively, dual-task participants
may fail to learn the grammar entirely if exemplar-based
cues are crucial to learning, as suggested by some accounts
(Johansson, 2009; Vokey & Higham, 2005).

Method
Participants
Participants were 84 undergraduate students (26 in the
single-task condition, 25 in the dual-task condition, and 32
in the control condition) who participated for course credit.
A non-trained control condition was used to ensure that any
learning that takes place was not due to the test materials
themselves.

Materials& Procedure
The materials and procedure for the single and dual-task
groups were identical to Experiment 1, with the exception
that the test strings used letters F, Z, N, and C in place of X,
T, V and J, respectively. The replacement letters were
chosen to be perceptually dissimilar from the training
letters, and vowels were avoided so that words could not be
formed from strings. Care was also taken to ensure that the
letters used for test strings did not result in common
acronyms that may interfere with the expression of learning.
The control group completed the same procedure as the
dual and single-task conditions, with the exception that they
were not given the AGL training. During test, they were
told that the letter strings they were about to see were
created using a complex set of rules, and that they should

Figure 4: Proportion of Correct Grammaticality
Judgments by Group and Item Type in Experiment 2
use their gut feeling to decide if each string belonged to the
rules or not.

Results and Discussion
Again, we consider OSPAN and digit span scores first.
As Table 1 shows, OSPAN results were equivalent between
the two groups, suggesting that the groups’ working
memory abilities were evenly matched. In addition,
performance on the dual-task (68%) was similar to
Experiment 1.
As Table 1 also shows, accuracy on AGL test items was
significantly greater than chance for the single-task
participants only (59%, t(25) = 6.86, p<.001); dual-task test
accuracy (53%, t(22) = 1.08, p = ns) and control accuracy
(49%, t(32) = -0.47, p = ns) were not significantly greater
than chance, indicating that only the single-task participants
successfully learned the grammar. Further, single-task
accuracy was significantly greater than dual-task accuracy
(t(49) = 2.51, p < .05). As in Experiment 1, there were no
significant differences between conditions on tendency to
endorse grammaticality or classification confidence.
There were however significant differences between
conditions on accuracy for the four categories of test items
(See Figure 4). Though overall learning for dual-task
participants was not significantly above chance, participants
did show greater than chance accuracy for the NG-LC
category of test items (t(22) = 2.07, p < .05). Nonetheless,
control participants also demonstrated greater than chance
accuracy on NG-LC items (t(22) =, df = 32, p < .05)
suggesting that accurate performance on these items may
reflect test item artifacts rather than implicit learning.
Bivariate correlations indicated no relationship between
confidence, accuracy, and OSPAN scores for any group.
This is in contrast to Experiment 1, in which there was a
significant correlation between OSPAN scores and accuracy
for single-task participants.
It is unclear why this
relationship would not persist in Experiment 2 given that
access to explicit knowledge is presumably still available
for single-task participants. It is possible that lack of
perceptual information resulting from the transfer
manipulation made explicit information regarding

1397

6
exemplars more difficult to utilize during grammaticality
judgments at test.
Experiment 2 demonstrates that without explicit learning
mechanisms and perceptual features, no learning takes
place. We hypothesized that using a combination of
concurrent dual-task and transfer methodology, the only
pathway to learning left to participants would be the
hypothesized implicit abstract rule-learning route. If true,
then our results suggest that the kind of implicit rule-based
learning originally hypothesized by Reber (1967) does not
occur, at least not for transfer tasks. Instead, it appears that
explicit mechanisms may be the sole source of knowledge in
AGL transfer experiments (Redington & Chater, 1996).

General Discussion
The goal of this study was to attempt to dissociate implicit
from explicit learning in artificial grammar learning by
selectively neutralizing one or more of the four pathways
that we hypothesized are available to learners. In
Experiment 1, a concurrent dual-task was used during AGL
acquisition to diminish explicit forms of learning.
Participants in the dual-task showed strikingly similar test
classification performance to the single-task control group,
suggesting that they relied on a different – and presumably
implicit – set of learning mechanisms at training to
demonstrate the same learning as the single-task group. In
Experiment 2, we added an additional manipulation –
changing the letter set used in the test phase – in order to
remove exemplar-based information. Without three of the
four hypothesized learning routes, dual-task participants
showed patterns of performance similar to non-trained
controls, indicating that little to no learning occurred.
Therefore, our results bring into question the idea of a rulebased implicit learning system proposed by Reber (1967).
Instead, our results are more consistent with recent
proposals that implicit knowledge is acquired primarily
through exemplar-based perceptual mechanisms (Chang &
Knowlton, 2004; Vokey & Higham, 2005). Alternatively, if
an implicit rule-learning mechanism does exist, it does not
appear to be recruited during AGL transfer tasks.
These results are consistent with the existence of
independent implicit and explicit learning mechanisms
operating in parallel. Interestingly, access to both implicit
and explicit learning systems (e.g. single-task in Experiment
1) does not substantially enhance learning relative to when
only implicit learning is available (dual-task in Experiment
1). This suggests that these systems do not operate
synergistically. Future work investigating the development
of these hypothesized pathways to knowledge in young
children, as well as neuroimaging studies to specifically
isolate the underlying neural circuits, may prove fruitful.
Furthermore, we anticipate that this framework may have
ramifications for understanding the nature of certain
cognitive and neuropsychological disorders, especially cases
in which cognitive learning mechanisms may be disturbed,
such as dyslexia or other language impairments.

References
Chang, G. Y., & Knowlton, B. J. (2004). Visual feature
Learning in artificial grammar classification. J Exp
Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 30(3), 714-722. doi:
10.1037/0278-7393.30.3.7142004-13181-014 [pii]
Deines, Z., Broadbent, D., & Berry, D. (1991). Implicit
and explicit knowledge bases in artificial grammar
learning. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 17(5), 875887.
Dulany, D. E., Garlson, R. A., & Dewey, G. I. (1984). A
case of syntactical learning and judgment: How conscious
and how abstract? J Exp Psychol Gen, 113, 541-555.
Fletcher, P., Buchel, C., Josephs, O., Friston, K., &
Dolan, R. (1999). Learning-related neuronal responses
in prefrontal cortex studied with functional
neuroimaging. Cereb Cortex, 9(2), 168-178.
Johansson, T. (2009). Strengthening the case for
stimulus-specificity in artificial grammar learning: no
evidence for abstract representations with extended
exposure. Exp Psychol, 56(3), 188-197. doi:
Y8071KR6Q47652GT [pii]10.1027/16183169.56.3.188
Knowlton, B.J., Ramus, S., J., & Squire, L. R. (1992).
Intact artificial grammar learning in Amnesia:
Dissociation of classification learning and explicit
memory for specific instances. Psychological Science,
3(3), 172-179.
Knowlton, B. J., & Squire, L. R. (1996). Artificial
grammar learning depends on implicit acquisition of
both abstract and exemplar-specific information. J Exp
Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 22(1), 169-181.
Opitz, B., & Friederici, A. D. (2004). Brain correlates
of language learning: the neuronal dissociation of rulebased versus similarity-based learning. J Neurosci,
24(39), 8436-8440. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.222004.2004 [doi]24/39/8436 [pii]
Perruchet, P., & Pacteau, C. (1990). Synthetic grammar
learning: Implicit rule abstraction or explicit fragmentary
knowledge? J Exp Psychol Gen 119, 264-275.
Reber, A.S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial
grammars. Journal of Verbal Learning andVerbal
Behavior, 77, 317-327.
Reber, A.S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
J Exp Psychol Gen, 118(3), 219-235.
Reber, A. S. (1993). Implicit learning and tacit
knowledge: An essay on the cognitive unconscious.
Oxford University Press: New York.
Turner and Engle, R. W. (1989) Is working memory capacity task
dependent? Journal of Memory & Language,28, 127-154.
Reddington, M. & Chater, N. (1996). Transfer in artificial
grammar learning: A reevaluation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 125, 123-28.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Schrock, J. C., & Engle, R.
W. (2005). An automated version of the operation span
task. Behav Res Methods, 37(3), 498-505.
Vokey, J. R., & Brooks, L. R. (1992). Salient of item
knowledge in learning artificial grammars. J Exp Psychol
Learn Mem Cogn, 18(2), 328-344.
Vokey, J. R., & Higham, P. A. (2005). Abstract analogies
and positive transfer in artificial grammar learning. Can
J Exp Psychol, 59(1), 54-61.

1398

