UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Spatial Verbal Information Interfere with Picture Processing in Working Memory? The
Role of the Visuo-spatial Sketchpad in Multimedia Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9h85s8t4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Schueler, Anne
Scheiter, Katharina
Gerjets, Peter

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Spatial Verbal Information Interfere with Picture Processing in Working
Memory? The Role of the Visuo-spatial Sketchpad in Multimedia Learning
Anne Schüler (a.schueler@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40,
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40,
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40,
72072 Tuebingen, Germany
cognitive resources so that an overload in one or both
systems can be avoided.
However, since Baddeley’s first comprehensive
descriptions of his model there have been numerous new
findings concerning the functioning of working memory
that have been considered in newer versions of the Baddeley
model, but have not yet been incorporated into the CTML.
In particular, the structure of the VSSP has been further
specified. According to our view, these specifications may
play an important role in multimedia learning. Thus, the aim
of this paper is to have a closer look at the VSSP and its
implications for learning with multimedia.

Abstract
The reported study examined whether the processing of
spatial verbal information interferes in the visuo-spatial
sketchpad with the execution of eye movements, associated
with viewing pictures and reading. Seventy-four students
were randomly assigned to six groups, resulting from a 2×2×2
mixed design, with spatial secondary task (with vs. without),
text contents (visual vs. spatial), and text modality (spoken
vs. written) as independent variables. Consistent with our
assumptions, learners with text containing spatial contents
showed worse recall performance than those with text
containing visual contents. Furthermore, written presentation
of text containing spatial contents loaded the visuo-spatial
sketchpad to a higher extent than spoken presentation.
Implications of these results for learning with multimedia are
discussed.

A Closer Look at the Visuo-spatial Sketchpad

Keywords: multimedia; working memory; modality effect;
spatial verbal information; secondary task

Introduction
In the last two decades, a lot of research has been conducted
on how people learn from multimedia, that is, from the
presentation of texts together with pictures (Mayer, 2009).
The Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML;
Mayer, 2009) is one of the most important theories
concerning multimedia learning. One of its theoretical
foundations is an older version of Baddeley’s working
memory model (1992). According to this model, working
memory consists of three systems: The phonological loop
(PL), where all verbal information is processed, the visuospatial sketchpad (VSSP), where visual and spatial
information is processed, and the central executive, which
governs the functioning of the phonological loop and the
VSSP. Accordingly, the CTML assumes that texts are
processed in the phonological loop, whereas pictures are
processed in the VSSP. The working memory systems are
limited in the amount of information that can be processed
in parallel. Accordingly, processes accomplished within the
same system can interfere with each other and hinder
learning. Therefore, text-picture presentations should be
designed in a way that a learner can make optimal use of the

According to Logie (1995), the VSSP can be divided into a
visual and a spatial part. Whereas the visual part deals with
information like an object’s color or form, the spatial part
handles information like spatial sequences or spatial
configurations (e.g., Darling, Della Sala, & Logie, 2007;
Della Sala et al., 1999). Whereas Logie and colleagues
focused on pictorial stimuli, other researchers have
addressed the question whether the VSSP may also be
involved in the processing of text. This research suggests
that if text contains information about spatial and/or visual
configurations, it will not be processed only in the PL but
also in the respective part of the VSSP, whereas if it
contains more abstract information, it will be processed in
the PL alone (De Beni et al., 2005; Deyzac, Logie, & Denis,
2006). Another line of research on the spatial VSSP has also
shown that this structure is not responsible only for the
processing of spatial information but also for the control of
movements, for example arm or eye movements (e.g., Postle
et al., 2006).
Although from a theoretical perspective the VSSP should
play a crucial role in multimedia learning, its involvement
has not often been considered empirically in multimedia
learning. One method to measure the involvement of the
spatial VSSP in task performance is the secondary task
paradigm. In this paradigm, two tasks are combined, a
primary and a secondary task. The primary task is the main

2828

task, for example a multimedia learning task, whereas the
secondary task is a task that loads one of the working
memory systems. If both tasks rely on the same working
memory systems, they will compete for its limited
resources. As a consequence, primary task and/or secondary
task performance will decrease compared to a control
condition in which participants perform the two tasks
separately. A secondary task that is assumed to load the
spatial VSSP is the spatial tapping task. In this task,
participants have to press buttons in a predefined order on a
keyboard, which is hidden from view (e.g., Della Sala et al.,
1999). Because the spatial VSSP controls the execution of
movements, the continuous tapping interferes with the
processing of spatial information (Farmer, Berman, &
Fletcher, 1986).
Another way of assessing the involvement of the VSSP
focuses on determining the learner’s capacity of the spatial
and visual VSSP and relating them to learning outcomes.
Two tasks have been used to measure the capacities of the
spatial and the visual VSSP, respectively, the Corsi block
task (Milner, 1971) and the Visual Pattern Test (VPT; Della
Sala et al., 1997), respectively. In the Corsi block task, the
instructor taps fixed spatial sequences of cubes on a wooden
board, which the participant has to recall afterwards. In the
VPT, the participant has to recall abstract visual patterns.
These patterns are presented in two-dimensional matrices in
which a random selection of half of the cells is colored
black.

Implications for Multimedia Learning
Figure 1 shows which parts of the VSSP are needed to
represent different combinations of pictures and text
contents, different amounts of eye movements, and a spatial
secondary task. Whereas pictures are assumed to be
processed in the visual and spatial VSSP because they
contain visual as well as spatial information, texts load the
visual or spatial VSSP as a function of their contents. Text
containing no visuo-spatial information loads neither the
visual nor the spatial VSSP, whereas text containing visual
contents loads the visual VSSP (Figure 1, upper row), and
text containing spatial contents loads the spatial VSSP
(Figure 1, bottom row). Furthermore, as the spatial VSSP
controls the execution of eye movements, viewing pictures
and reading written text will result in an additional load of
the spatial part (Figure 1, b, d, f, h). Moreover, the load of
the spatial VSSP can be increased by implementing a spatial
secondary task (Figure 1, right column).
In the current paper we focus on three implications that
result from this analysis and that will be outlined in the
following.
First implication: A Spatial Secondary Task Interferes
with Picture Processing, Text Containing Spatial
Contents, and Eye Movements. The first implication of the
preceding analysis refers to the effects of a spatial secondary
task on learning. It is presupposed that the spatial secondary
task loads the spatial VSSP but not the visual VSSP (Figure

1, compare left vs. right column). Therefore, the spatial
secondary task should interfere with the processing of the
picture, the processing of text containing spatial contents,
and the execution of eye movements associated with
reading. On the other hand, it should not interfere with the
processing of texts containing visual contents, and it should
interfere less with spoken than with written text, because no
eye movements are required to listen to text.
Second Implication: Text Containing Spatial Contents
interferes with Picture Processing. When presenting
pictures together with text containing spatial contents, one
would expect interference in the spatial VSSP, because the
processing of the spatial picture and spatial text contents as
well as the control of eye movements both take place here
(see Figure 1, bottom row). When presenting pictures
together with text containing visual contents, one would
expect less interference because the load is distributed more
equally (see Figure 1, upper row). Accordingly, pictures
presented together with text containing spatial contents
should result in worse learning outcomes than pictures
presented together with text containing non-spatial contents.
A study conducted by Schmidt-Weigand and Scheiter
(2008) confirms this assumption by showing that pictures
are helpful for learning only, when they accompany text
with a low degree of spatial information compared to text
with a high degree of spatial information.
Third Implication: Written Text Containing Spatial
Contents Interferes more with Picture Processing than
Spoken Text Containing Spatial Contents. A third
implication of the preceding analysis refers to the modality
of the text: Because eye movements are not needed only for
picture inspection, but also for reading, one might expect
worse performance with written text than with spoken text
when processing text containing spatial contents. Figure 1
(bottom row) shows that the spatial part is less loaded with
spoken text containing spatial contents than with written
text containing spatial contents, because more eye
movements are required to read the text and to switch
between text and picture. This load difference might result
in worse learning outcomes for written text containing
spatial contents than for spoken text containing spatial
contents. For text containing non-spatial contents the
difference between written text and spoken text is not
expected to be equally harmful, because the text contents
are not processed in the spatial VSSP and therefore no
interference with the control of eye movements is expected.
Note that a general superiority of spoken over written text
presentations has been acknowledged for a long time
already in multimedia research (i.e., modality effect,
Moreno & Mayer, 1998); however, its explanation is
different from the one presented here and in particular does
not depend on the text content. Hence, we will not address
this effect here any further.

2829

Figure 1. The load (grey color) of the VSSP as a function of the processing of pictures, the processing of different text
contents, the processing of a spatial secondary task (Spatial SecTask), and the control of eye movements.
There is some evidence for the prediction that the text
contents may moderate the modality effect. Kürschner,
Schnotz, and Eid (2007) showed modality effects only with
spatial information but not with non-spatial information.
One purely text-based study (Glass et al., 1985) explicitly
examined the influence of text modality on the processing
of text containing visual versus spatial contents. Whereas
with regard to sentences about spatial relations a modality
effect occurred, this was not the case with regard to
sentences about visual characteristics like color.

Experiment
The aim of the current study was to investigate whether
processing texts containing spatial contents would interfere
with picture processing and whether reading written text
containing spatial contents would interfere more with
picture processing than listening to the same text.
Furthermore, it was investigated whether a spatial secondary
task would interfere with the processing of pictures, text
containing spatial contents, and eye movements.

Method
Participants and Design. Seventy-four students of the
University of Tuebingen (62 female, average age:
M = 21.89 years, SD = 3.08 years, 6 left-handed)
participated in the study. They were randomly assigned to
one of four conditions, which resulted from a 2×2×2 mixed
design, with spatial secondary task (with vs. without) and
text contents (visual vs. spatial contents) as between-subject
factors and text modality (spoken vs. written text) as within-

subject factor. Due to the mixed design, between 18 and 19
students were assigned to one cell (see Table 1).
Materials. The materials were presented in a computerized
learning environment. The system-paced learning phase
consisted of six static pictures of fictitious fish accompanied
by six corresponding texts. Each fish was presented on a
single slide. The pictures were identical in all groups,
whereas the texts differed with regard to contents and
modality as a function of the experimental condition. The
lengths and the Flesch reading ease scores (Flesch, 1948) of
the two text versions were equivalent indicating that there
were no differences in text difficulty across the two
versions. The pace of presentation was determined by the
duration of the spoken text conditions.
The independent variables were varied between groups in
the learning phase as follows: Learners with secondary task
had to press different buttons in a predefined order on a
keyboard hidden from view during learning. Learners
without secondary task learned without performing a
secondary task. Learners with text containing visual
contents received information about visual features of the
depicted fish species, that is, the color or form of specific
body parts (e.g., “The pectoral fin has the same light brown
color as the dorsal fins”). Learners with text containing
spatial contents received information about spatial features
of the fish species, that is, the location of a body part or its
spatial relation to other parts (e.g., “The pectoral fin lies
between the two dorsal fins”). Text modality was varied
within the learning environment. Three of the six fish were
accompanied by spoken text, the other three fish by written

2830

text (partially balanced design). In the conditions with
spoken text, learners listened to the text while the picture
was presented on the screen. In the conditions with written
text, the text was presented below the picture (see Figure 2).

Figure 2: Presentation of the learning materials with
spoken (left) and written (right) texts.
Measures. The test phase consisted of four open recall
questions, which measured text or picture recall. To
measure text recall, learners had to write down everything
they remembered from the texts regarding two of the
presented fish. To measure picture recall, learners had to
draw two of the fish (only information not mentioned in the
text was analyzed). Two independent raters blind for
experimental condition scored the open recall questions
afterwards with an interrater reliability of Cohen’s
kappa = .79 for text recall and Cohen’s kappa = .73 for
picture recall. With regard to picture recall, we
distinguished between the recall of visual versus spatial
picture information. Additionally, the VPT (Della Sala, et
al., 1997) to measure the capacity of the visual VSSP and
the Corsi Block test (Milner, 1971) to measure the capacity
of the spatial VSSP were administered.
Procedure. Participants were tested individually. First,
participants were given a short written instruction about the
experiment (i.e., about the learning domain as well as the
procedure of the experiment). Second, participants in the
secondary task conditions were introduced to the task and
practiced it for two minutes. Third, all participants entered
the system paced learning phase that was subject to
experimental manipulation. Fourth, they responded to the
open recall questions. Finally, they performed the VPT and
Corsi block test. A single experimental session lasted about
60 minutes.

Results
Because it could not be excluded that gender or handedness

interacted with the processing of spatial information, we
conducted prior analyses in a first step. For gender, no
significant interactions were observed, indicating that
gender did not influence learning outcomes. Regarding
handedness, the corresponding analyses were not possible
because of an insufficient number of left-handed
participants. However, due to the small number of lefthanded participants we did not expect an influence on
learning outcomes.
Because of the results of the prior analyses, we collapsed
across gender and handedness for the following analyses.
For text recall, an ANOVA was conducted. For spatial and
visual picture recall, the corresponding variables were
analyzed by means of a MANOVA. In all analyses,
secondary task and text contents were incorporated as
between-subject factors and text modality was incorporated
as within-subject factor. To control for individual
differences in the capacity of the visual and spatial VSSP,
the Corsi block scores and VPT scores were incorporated as
covariates. Note that there were no interactions between the
two capacity measures and any of the experimental factors.
In the following, the statistical details are only reported for
significant results, because of space limitations. Adjusted
marginal means and standard errors corrected for the
influence of the visual and spatial VSSP capacity are
reported in Table 1.
With regard to text recall, the results showed an effect of
the VPT, F(1, 68) = 4.11, p = .047, η2p = .06: The higher the
capacity of the visual VSSP was, the better learners recalled
the text information (r = .21, p = .08). Furthermore, in line
with the second implication, learners with text containing
visual contents (M = 32.82%, SE = 3.37) outperformed
learners with text containing spatial contents (M = 18.95%,
SE = 3.36), F(1, 68) = 8.29, p = .01, η2p = .11. This indicates
that text containing spatial contents and picture processing
interfere in the spatial VSSP, resulting in worse learning
outcome for the recall of spatial text information compared
to visual text information.
With regard to picture recall, the MANCOVA showed a
significant difference between learners with texts containing
visual and spatial contents, V = .46, F(3, 67) = 28.20,
p < .001, and an influence of the secondary task on learning
outcomes, V = .09, F(3, 67) = 3.21, p = .046. Also the threeway interaction text modality × text content × secondary
task was significant, V = .09, F(3, 67) = 3.26, p = .045.

Table 1: Adjusted marginal means and standard errors as a function of the experimental condition.

Recall of text information (%)

text containg visual contents
without secondary task
with secondary task
spoken
written
spoken
written
n = 18
n = 18
n = 19
n = 19
35.91
35.30
30.32
29.79
(7.08)
(6.50)
(6.69)
(6.14)

text containing spatial content
without secondary task
with secondary task
spoken
written
spoken
written
n = 18
n = 18
n = 19
n = 19
20.48
20.12
15.82
19.37
(6.85)
(6.30)
(6.87)
(6.31)

Recall of visual picture
information (%)

57.52
(4.79)

49.97
(4.37)

52.09
(4.52)

46.83
(4.13)

32.90
(4.63)

33.24
(4.23)

36.61
(4.64)

27.90
(4.24)

Recall of spatial picture
information (%)

53.32
(5.43)

44.59
(5.87)

38.80
(5.13)

42.63
(5.54)

42.45
(5.26)

58.04
(5.68)

44.81
(5.27)

34.58
(5.69)

2831

The first assumption concerning interference between
the spatial secondary task and the processing of pictures,
text containing spatial contents as well as the execution of
eye movements was only partially confirmed.
Performance decrements while conducting a spatial
secondary task were observed with regard to the recall of
spatial picture information, especially for learners with
written text containing spatial contents (see Figure 3). As
mentioned before, the load of the VSSP is assumed to be
extremely high in this specific case (see Figure 1, h). This
may explain why the secondary task interfered
particularly with the recall of spatial picture information
accompanied by written text containing spatial contents.
Contrary to our assumptions, the secondary task did not
hinder the recall of spatial verbal information or the recall
of written text in general. These findings imply that the
processing of text containing spatial contents and the
control of eye movements in general did not load the
spatial VSSP to such a high degree that interference with
a secondary task was observed.
The second assumption concerning worse learning
outcomes with pictures accompanied by text containing
spatial contents as compared to text containing visual
contents was confirmed: Learners, who received pictures
together with text containing spatial contents, showed
overall worse performance in recalling text-based and
visual picture-based information. Furthermore, learners
with text containing visual contents recalled spatial
picture-based information to the same extend as did
learners with text containing spatial contents. Thus, text
containing spatial contents did not support the recall of
spatial picture information: These results indicate that
learners with text containing visual contents processed the
picture more thoroughly than learners with text containing
spatial contents. How can these results be explained? In
the theoretical part of the paper we assumed that text
containing spatial contents leads to an additional load of
the spatial VSSP, resulting in worse learning outcomes for
text and picture recall. However, in total, the secondary
task did not reduce the performance of learners with text
containing spatial contents, which may indicate that
spatial text contents do not increase the load of the spatial
VSSP. Instead, as mentioned above, the secondary task
interfered with the processing of spatial picture
information only when the load of the spatial VSSP was
assumed to be extremely high (see Figure 3). Thus, it
cannot be definitely concluded that the observed
performance decrement with text containing spatial
contents is due to a higher load of the spatial VSSP.
Rather, it is also possible that a spatial secondary task
does not reduce performance when the spatial VSSP gets
simply loaded but only if it gets overloaded.
An alternative explanation for the found performance
decrement with text containing spatial contents might be
the text difficulty. With regard to recall of text contents,
one might argue that text containing visual information,
that is, information about color and form, is easier to

Follow-up three-way ANCOVAs confirmed the
expected main effect of text content with regard to the
recall of visual picture information: Learners with text
containing visual contents (M = 51.60%, SE = 2.06)
recalled the visual aspects of the pictures (like color or
form) better than learners with text containing spatial
contents (M = 32.67%, SE = 2.06), F(1, 68) = 41.16, p <
.01, η2p = .38). This confirms the second implication that
text containing spatial contents interferes with picture
processing, whereas text containing visual contents does
not. With regard to the recall of spatial picture
information the effect of the secondary task,
F(1, 68) = 6.24, p = .02, η2p = .08, as well as the threeway interaction, F(1, 68) = 5.76, p = .02, η2p = .08, were
confirmed: In line with the first implication, learners, who
performed a spatial secondary task during learning,
recalled the spatial picture information (M = 40.21%,
SE = 2.58) worse than learners who did not perform a
secondary task (M = 49.60%, SE = 2.65). This indicates
that the spatial picture contents are processed in the
spatial VSSP. However, the Bonferroni tests of the threeway interaction text modality × text content × secondary
task, showed that this main effect of the spatial secondary
task on spatial picture recall was due to interference
between the spatial secondary task and the processing of
written text containing spatial contents (p = .01, see
Figure 3). This result supports the third assumption,
because it indicates a higher load of the spatial VSSP with
written than with spoken text presentation, when spatial
text contents are presented.

Recall of spatial pictorial information (%)

without secondary task

with secondary task

70

*

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

text containing
visual contents

text containing
spatial contents

spoken

text containing
visual contents

text containing
spatial contents

written

Figure 3: The pattern of results for spatial picture recall
(adjusted means). *p < .05

Summary and Discussion
One purpose of the reported study was to examine
whether pictures, text containing spatial contents as well
as eye movements load the spatial VSSP. Furthermore,
the hypotheses were tested that text containing spatial
contents would interfere with picture processing and that
this interference would be affected by the modality of the
presented text.

2832

visuo-spatial working memory. Cognitive Processing,
8, 175-181.
De Beni, R., Pazzaglia, F., Gyselinck, V., & Meneghetti,
C. (2005). Visuospatial working memory and mental
representation of spatial description. European Journal
of Cognitive Psychology, 17, 77-95.
Della Sala, S., Gray, C., Baddeley, A., Allamano, N., &
Wilson, L. (1999). Pattern spans: A tool for unwelding
visuo-spatial memory. Neuropsychologia, 37, 11891199.
Della Sala, S., Gray, C., Baddeley, A., & Wilson, L.
(1997). Visual Pattern Test: a test of short-term visual
recall. London: Harcourt Assessment.
Deyzac, E., Logie, R. H., & Denis, M. (2006).
Visuospatial working memory and the processing of
spatial descriptions. British Journal of Psychology, 97,
217-243.
Farmer, E. F., Berman, J. V. F., & Fletcher, Y. L. (1986).
Evidence for a visuo-spatial scratch-pad in working
memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 38, 675-688.
Flesch, R. (1948). A new readability yardstick. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 32, 221-233
Glass, A., Millen, D., Beck, L., & Eddy, J. (1985).
Representation of images in sentence verification.
Journal of Memory and Language, 24, 442-465.
Kürschner, C., Schnotz, W., & Eid, M. (2007). Welchen
Einfluss haben die Präsentationsmodalität und
Repräsentationsmodalität
auf
die
kognitive
Verarbeitung von Text mit Bildern. Zeitschrift für
Entwicklungspsychologie
und
Pädagogische
Psychologie, 39, 70-83.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Logie, R. H. (1995). Visuo-spatial working memory.
Hove, England: Erlbaum.
Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia Learning. Second
edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., & Moreno R. (1998). A split-attention
effect in multimedia learning: Evidence for dual
processing systems in working memory. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 90, 312-320.
Milner, B. (1971). Interhemispheric differences in the
localization of psychological processes in man. British
Medical Bulletin, 27, 272-277.
Postle, B. R., Idzikowski, C., Della Sala, S., Logie, R. H.,
& Baddeley, A. (2006). The selective disruption of
spatial working memory by eye movements. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59,
100-120.
Schmidt-Weigand, F., & Scheiter, K. (2008). The
Influence of Spatial Text Information on the
Multimedia Effect. In J. Zumbach, N. Schwartz, T.
Seufert, & L. Kester (Eds.) Beyond knowledge: The
legacy of competence. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Springer.

recall than text containing spatial information, that is,
information about spatial relationships or the position of a
certain characteristic. Thus, the fact that learners with text
containing visual contents performed better, when they
had to recall text-based information might potentially be
simply explained by differences in text difficulty and not
by interference in the spatial VSSP. On the other hand,
the Flesch scores indicated the same reading ease for both
texts. Furthermore, one may ask why text difficulty
should influence the processing of the pictures, which
were the same in all groups. One might argue that because
text containing spatial contents is more difficult to
process, learners might concentrate more on the text and
neglect the picture. This in turn might result in worse
recall performance for pictures. However, a further study
where we used eye tracking methodology to assess the
amount of attention devoted to text and pictures showed
no differences between learners with different text
contents with regard to their viewing behavior. Thus, it
seems as if text difficulty is not responsible for the results.
The third assumption concerning a modality effect that
would occur only with text containing spatial contents
was confirmed for the recall of spatial picture
information, when learners additionally performed a
secondary task. Thus, under extreme load conditions the
eye movements necessary to read the text interfered with
picture processing. This implies that written text can
decrease performance when the load of the spatial VSSP
is already high.
To conclude, these results show that the presentation of
text containing spatial contents together with pictures
might be detrimental to learning under certain
circumstances such as restricted learning time or systempaced presentations. Under these conditions it might be
better to convey spatial information only through
visualizations, because visualizations are more efficient
than texts for accomplishing tasks that require the
processing of visuo-spatial properties (Larkin & Simon,
1987). If it is not possible to convey the spatial
information only via picture, we recommend presenting
spoken texts, because otherwise the eye movements
associated with reading may decrease performance when
the load of the spatial VSSP is high.
To get deeper insights into the interplay of working
memory and multimedia learning, further research is
needed that addresses more fine-grained processing
aspects (e.g., measuring the amount of eye movements
and relate it to spatial text processing). This is in line with
our conviction that more cognitive basic research is
needed to develop more precise theoretical frameworks
for explaining how multimedia learning works.

References
Baddeley, A. D. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255,
556-559.
Darling, S., Della Sala, S., & Logie, R. H. (2007).
Behavioural evidence for separating components within

2833

