UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Goal Specificity on a Search in a Hypothesis Space and an Instance Space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8wc6g5w8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Matsumuro, Miki
Miwa, Kazuhisa

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Goal Specificity on a Search in a Hypothesis Space
and an Instance Space
Miki Matsumuro (muro@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan
Abstract

as we concentrate on a search in an instance space to achieve
the goal.
Problem-solvers given a specific goal learn more poorly
than problem-solvers given a nonspecific goal (Sweller &
Levine, 1982). Burns and Vollmeyer (2002) investigated this
effect of goal specificity based on the dual space search theory. Using a task in which participants were asked to learn
the relations between inputs to and outputs from a system,
they observed the effect of goal specificity. The NSG (nonspecific goal condition) participants, who were not informed
of the target values of the outputs, learned the system structure better than the SG (specific goal condition) participants,
who were informed of the target values. Burns and Vollmeyer
(2002) also found that the NSG participants conducted more
hypothesis testing than the SG participants. From these results, they concluded that a nonspecific goal encouraged the
participants to search actively in a hypothesis space. Therefore, a nonspecific goal might lead to better learning than a
specific goal.

We examined the effect of goal specificity on a search in two
problem spaces: a hypothesis space and an instance space.
Two hypotheses were considered: 1) a nonspecific goal facilitates a search in a hypothesis space more than a specific goal,
and 2) as a hypothesis space is searched more, the performance
in discovering the target rule improves. We also defined an
initial hypothesis space consisting of initially considered hypotheses, and investigated the effect of this initial hypothesis
space on the goal specificity effect. The results of three experiments indicated that when an initial hypothesis space was
offered, the goal specificity effect was observed. A nonspecific goal actually facilitated a search in the hypothesis space.
When, however, no initial hypothesis space was offered, the
goal specificity effect was not confirmed. We also found that
the facilitation of the hypothesis space search improved performance in discovering the target rule.
Keywords: discovery, rule induction, goal, hypothesis testing

Introduction
Dual Space Search Theory
Rule induction and scientific discovery have been studied
based on the dual space search theory. Simon and Lea (1974)
first suggested that a problem space consists of two spaces: a
“rule space” for searching rules and an “instance space” for
testing rules. Both rule and instance spaces are searched to
find a correct rule.
Klahr and Dunbar (1988) extended the dual space search
theory to the Scientific Discovery as Dual Search (SDDS)
model for investigating scientific discovery. They considered a “hypothesis space” as a rule space and an “experiment
space” as an instance space where the process of scientific
discovery develops through the interaction between two types
of searches in the two spaces. Reasoners state hypotheses by
searching in a hypothesis space, receive feedback from an experiment space, and modify the current hypotheses or propose new hypotheses. Klahr and his colleague confirmed this
model through a long series of experiments (Klahr & Dunbar, 1988; Klahr, 2000). They also identified “experimenters”
who preferred to search in an experiment space and “theorists” who preferred to search in a hypothesis space. In this
study we call the two spaces a “hypothesis space” and an “instance space.”
The search in a hypothesis space is crucial for scientific discovery. Klahr and Dunbar (1988) demonstrated that a search
in only a hypothesis space led to the discovery of a correct
rule without the execution of any experiments.

Present Study
A hypothesis space is usually huge, hence a hypothesis space
search is performed based on constraints offered by attentional perspectives (van Joolingen & de Jong, 1997). In the
present study we define the hypothesis space in which the participants initially search as an “initial hypothesis space” and
the space containing a target rule to be discovered as a “target
space.”
In the earlier studies, the initial hypothesis space was typically decided by an experimenter because the participants
were informed of all the relative factors of focus. This initial hypothesis space also contained the target rule to be discovered. There was no need for the participants to find the
target hypothesis space, as the initial hypothesis space and
target hypothesis space were identical (Figure 1(a)). Here, in
contrast, we investigate situations in which the participants
must find a target hypothesis space by themselves in order to
discover an appropriate rule.
(1) Initial-space situation
One situation we deal with is the “initial-space situation”
(Figure 1(b)). Participants are given an initial hypothesis
space by an experimenter. This initial space, however, contains no rule to be discovered. The initial hypothesis space
differs from the target hypothesis space. To discover the
target rule, the participants need to shift a searching space
from the initial hypothesis space to the target hypothesis
space. This situation typically emerges in insight problem
solving (Kaplan & Simon, 1990).

Goal Specificity Effect in Dual Space Search
On the other hand, we often neglect to consider the theories
or rules behind phenomena when we aim for a specific goal.
We tend not to search in a hypothesis space at times like this,
766

Initial hypothesis
player
(blue)

True rule

judgment
(black)

Initial hypothesis space = Target hypothesis space
(a) Preceding studies
(e.g., Burns and Vollmeyer, 2002; Trumpower et al., 2004)

ball
basket

Shifting search space

Initial hypothesis

obstacle

True rule
Initial hypothesis space

Figure 2: Screen shot of the task
A screen shot of one of the games during Phase 1. The participants pass the ball from player to player and shoot for the
basket.

Target hypothesis space

(b) Initial space situation
Finding search space
?

?
?

?

corresponds to the up-arrow button in the true rule, whereas
the direction of the current player’s nose corresponds to the
up-arrow button in the fake rule. Although the fake rule is expected to be discovered more easily than the true rule, it can
be valid in the initial games (not in all games). The true rule,
in contrast, is valid in all games.
The participants, having discovered the fake rule, initially
search in the hypothesis space consisting of hypotheses characterized by a face direction (the “face hypothesis space”).
Even if the fake rule no longer validly works in the games, the
participants continue to search in the face hypothesis space.
To discover the true rule, the participants must shift a searching hypothesis space from the face hypothesis space to the
hypothesis space made up of hypotheses characterized by the
orbit of the prior pass (the “orbit hypothesis space”). The orbit hypothesis space contains the true rule. Thus, in this task,
the initial hypothesis space means the face hypothesis space
and the target hypothesis space means the orbit hypothesis
space.
The experiment basically consists of three phases.
Phase 1: The participants engage in games in which both the
fake and true rules are valid. The participants are asked to
shoot the ball into the basket as many times as possible. We
expect the participants to discover the fake rule and use it in
Phase 1.
Phase 2: Only the true rule can be applied in the games in
Phase 2. At the beginning of Phase 2, the participants are
expected to search in the face hypothesis space, based on
their successes with the fake rule accumulated in Phase 1.
To discover the true rule, the participants must shift a searching hypothesis space from the face hypothesis space to the
orbit hypothesis space. We manipulate experimental factors
and observe how these factors affect the searches in the hypothesis space. The playing time is limited in Phases 1 and
2. The participants are told that the games in these phases are
for training, and that the real games, or the actual takes, will
come in Phase 3.
Phase 3: The participants are informed the real games, or actual takes, come in Phase 3. They are asked to shoot the ball
into the basket. Phase 3 consists of two games, each of which

True rule

?

No initial hypothesis space

Target hypothesis space

(c) No initial space situation

Figure 1: Conceptual diagrams of preceding and present studies
(2) No-initial-space situation
The other situation is the “no-initial-space situation” (Figure 1(c)). The participants in this case are not informed
of any relative factors of focus, and thus receive no information on the initial hypothesis space to be searched. The
participants have to find relative factors for the search from
the initial stage. The investigation of this situation is important, as the size of a hypothesis space and the number
of available hypotheses might affect the search strategies.

Aim of the Present Study
We investigate two hypotheses regarding the effect of goal
specificity on a search in the dual spaces in the two situations:
the initial-space situation and the no-initial-space situation.
Hypothesis 1: A nonspecific goal facilitates a search in a
hypothesis space more than a specific goal. In other words,
participants who are given a nonspecific goal may search
more actively in a hypothesis space.
Hypothesis 2: As a hypothesis space is searched more, the
performance in discovering the target rule improves.

Task
Figure 2 is a screen shot of the task for this study. The participants are asked to use the arrow buttons to pass the ball
from player to player and to shoot for the basket. Two rules,
one fake and one true, are valid in each game. These rules
determine the relation between the arrow buttons and pass
directions for the ball. In both rules, the up-arrow button corresponds to a certain direction and the other seven buttons
correspond to the other seven directions relative to the uparrow in clockwise rotation. The direction of the prior pass
767

is played to completion without a time limit imposed. The
true rule is valid in both the first and second games, but the
fake rule can be applied to only the first game. We, the researchers, judge whether or not the participants discover the
true rule based on their performances in each game.

pass interval time is valid as a measurement of the amount of
searches in a hypothesis space. In the search-oriented condition (the SO condition), the participants were asked to find
a rule that determines the relation between the arrow buttons
and pass directions. By contrast, in the non-search-oriented
condition (the NSO condition), the participants were told
nothing about the rule. This manipulation may lead the participants in the SO condition to search more in the hypothesis
space, compared to the participants in the NSO condition. If
the pass interval time correlates with the amount of searches
in the hypothesis space, the pass interval time of the participants in the SO condition will exceed that of the participants
in the NSO condition.

Manipulation of Goal Specificity
Goal specificity is manipulated mainly through the following
three experiments. The participants are given a specific goal
(the SG condition) and asked to play the games in Phase 2
(the screen shot in Figure 2 shows a Phase 2 game). The basket and obstacles determine only one pass route. Thus, the
participants’ next moves are specified. Meanwhile, the participants in the other group are given a nonspecific goal (the
NSG condition) and asked to play games in which there are
no obstacles and in which the basket is replaced by a player.
In this situation, the next move is unspecified: a participant
can intentionally select one of several valid passes without
a specific final goal (basket). With these manipulations in
the games come differences between the instructions under
the SG and NSG conditions in Phase 2. The participants in
the SG condition are asked to shoot the ball into the basket,
whereas the participants in the NSG condition are asked to
pass the ball from player to player. In both conditions, the
participants are asked to perform as many games as possible
within the time limit. The time point of every button selection
by a participant is recorded.

Method
Participants Sixty-four undergraduates participated in Experiment 1. Each was assigned to one of four conditions: goal
specificity (SG and NSG) × instruction (SO and NSO).
Task and Procedure Experiment 1 was conducted in small
groups of three or fewer participants. After the participants
received a basic explanation of the procedures, the participants briefly rehearsed the task. Next, they carried out the
task in the three phases. Phase 1 and Phase 2 each lasted
for five minutes. In Phase 2, two factors: the participants’
search preferences in the hypothesis space by the instruction
and goal specificity, were manipulated. Finally, in Phase 3, all
participants played two games in an identical situation without a time limit imposed.

Measurement The hypothesis space in this task consists of
hypothesized rules on the relations between the arrow buttons
and the pass directions. An instance space consists of all instances; each instance is described as “when a certain arrow
button is selected, a ball is thrown to a certain direction under a certain situation.” Assuming that a search in one space
is performed after a search in the other space, in turn, a hypothesis space search is performed during the period elapsed
between the receipt of one pass result (the result of one pass
thrown) to the receipt of the next pass result. Therefore, in
this study, we use a time interval of two successive passes
as a measurement for the amount of searches in a hypothesis
space. Henceforth we refer to this time interval as the “pass
interval time.”
We judged whether each participant discovered the true
rule from his or her performance in Phase 3. If the participants could not discover the true rule, the adjustment strategy
minimized errors. The participants who use the adjustment
strategy make a pass at first based on some criterion or randomly, and then adjust the direction of arrow buttons in order
to minimize the difference between the expected and actual
pass directions. We defined the successful participants as the
participants whose error rate was lower than the expected error rate when they use the adjustment strategy.

Results and Discussion
Pass Interval Time Figure 3 presents the average pass interval time in each condition in Phase 2. A two-way ANOVA
((goal specificity: SG and NSG) × (instruction: SO and
NSO)) was performed on the pass interval times in Phase
2. The interaction between the two factors was not significant (F(1, 60) = 0.673, n.s.). The main effects of both the
goal specificity factor (F(1, 60) = 38.454, p < .001) and the
instruction factor (F(1, 60) = 5.030, p < .05) reached significance.
SG
NSG

pass interval time (ms)

8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
SO

NSO

Figure 3: Average pass interval time in each condition in
Phase 2 in Experiment 1 (bars show standard errors)

Experiment 1

For the instruction factor, the pass interval time of the participants in the SO condition was longer than that of the participants in the NSO condition. The instruction given in the
SO condition, the instruction which encouraged the participants to find a rule, increased the pass interval time. Noting

We conducted Experiment 1 to investigate the effect of goal
specificity on a search in a hypothesis space in the initialspace situation (see Figure 1(b)). In addition, we manipulated another factor, the instruction factor, to test whether the
768

SG
NSG

8000
pass interval time (ms)

that this implied a correlation between the pass interval time
and the amount of searches in a hypothesis space, we decided
to use the pass interval time as a measurement of the amount
of searches in a hypothesis space.
For the goal specificity factor, the pass interval time of the
participants in the NSG condition was longer than that of the
participants in the SG condition. This corroborated the first
hypothesis: a nonspecific goal facilitates a search in a hypothesis space.

7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
SO

NSO

Figure 4: Average pass interval time in each condition in
Phase 2 in Experiment 2 (bars show standard errors)

Proportion of Successful Participants Next, we analyzed
the proportion of participants who discovered the true rule in
each condition. For the instruction factor, 6 of 33 participants
in the SO condition and 2 of 31 participants in the NSO condition were successful. There was no significant difference
between the two conditions (p > .10). Similarly, for the goal
specificity factor, 4 of 30 participants in the SG condition and
4 of 34 participants in the NSG condition were successful.
Again, there was no significant difference between the two
conditions (p > .10). Hence, these results did not confirm
the second hypothesis: more searches in a hypothesis space
improve performance in discovering the target rule.

In the analysis for the goal specificity factor, the pass interval time was longer in the NSG condition than in the SG
condition. This result also confirms the first hypothesis, corroborating the finding of Experiment 1. Note, however, that
the difference between the SG and NSG conditions was much
smaller in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1. We will discuss this difference further in a later section.
Proportion of Successful Participants Next, we analyzed
the proportion of participants who discovered the true rule in
each condition. In the analysis for the instruction factor, 4 of
32 participants in the SO condition and 5 of 32 participants
in the NSO condition were successful. There was no significant difference between the two conditions (p > .10). The
result was similar in the analysis for the goal specificity: 3 of
32 participants in the SG condition and 6 of 32 participants
in the NSG condition were successful. Again, there was no
significant difference between the two conditions (p > .10).
Hence, these results did not confirm the second hypothesis.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we investigated the effect of goal specificity
on a search in a hypothesis space in the no-initial-space situation (see Figure 1(c)). We also manipulated the instruction
factor to test the validity of the pass interval time, as was done
Experiment 1.

Method
Participants Sixty-four undergraduates participated in Experiment 2. Each was assigned to one of four conditions: goal
specificity (SG and NSG) × instruction (SO and NSO).

Comparison between Experiments 1 and 2
By comparing the results of Experiments 1 and 2, we could
explore how the existence of the initial hypothesis space affected the effect of goal specificity. A premise for this study
was dual spaces for search: the hypothesis space and instance
space. Yet the participants in the NSO condition may not have
assumed any hypothesis space, as they may not have noticed
the rule determining the pass directions. For this reason, the
following analysis focused on the participants in the SO condition.
In these experiments we introduced what we called the “situation factor,” manipulating whether or not the participants
had the initial hypothesis space across Experiments 1 and 2.
At the beginning of Phase 2, the participants in Experiment
1 had the initial hypothesis space. Recollecting their accumulated successful experiences with the fake rule in Phase 1,
they directed their attention to the face hypothesis space. This
situation was called the “initial-space condition” (the IS condition). In contrast, the participants in Experiment 2 did not
acquire an initial hypothesis space or experience any game
play in Phase 1. And by removing the faces as cues from the
players of the games in Phase 2, we deprived the participants
of perspectives for forming hypotheses. This situation was
called the “no-initial-space condition” (the NIS condition).
A two-way ANOVA ((situation: IS and NIS) × (goal speci-

Task and Procedure The task in Experiment 2 was almost
the same as that in Experiment 1, with the following adjustments. No Phase 1 was conducted in Experiment 2. The faces
were removed from the players and the referee, and replaced
with blue- and black-filled circles. The participants did not
acquire the initial hypothesis space, as they were given no
perspectives on which to focus for forming hypotheses at the
beginning of the task.

Results and Discussion
Pass Interval Time Figure 4 presents the average pass interval time in each condition in Phase 2. A two-way ANOVA
((goal specificity: SG and NSG) × (instruction: SO and
NSO)) was performed on the pass interval times in Phase 2.
The interaction between the two factors was not significant
(F(1, 60) = 0.022, n.s.). The main effects of both the goal
specificity factor (F(1, 60) = 6.708, p < .05) and the instruction factor (F(1, 60) = 4.056, p < .05) reached significance.
In the analysis for the instruction factor, this result was
consistent with the result in Experiment 1. The pass interval
time of the participants in the SO condition was significantly
longer. The correlation between the pass interval time and the
searches in a hypothesis space was again supported.
769

ficity: SG and NSG)) was performed on the pass interval
times in Phase 2. As a result, a marginally significant interaction between the situation and goal specificity factors was
revealed (F(1, 61) = 3.158, p = .081). In the IS condition,
the pass interval time was longer in the NSG condition than
in the SG condition (F(1, 61) = 17.449, p < .001). This effect, however, disappeared in the NIS condition (F(1, 61) =
2.769, n.s.). Both the goal specificity and situation factors had
significant effects (ps < .05).
In this comparison, the participants with a nonspecific goal
had a longer pass interval time than the participants with a
specific goal in the IS condition. Meanwhile, the goal specificity factor had no effect on the pass interval time in the NIS
condition. Thus, the first hypothesis was confirmed only in
the IS condition, and not in the NIS condition.

player faces used in Phase 2, but without a time limit.

Results and Discussion
Pass Interval Time Figure 5 presents the average pass interval time in each condition in Phase 2. A two-way ANOVA
((situation: IS and NIS) × (goal specificity: SG and NSG))
was performed on the pass interval times in Phase 2. The
interaction between the situation and goal specificity factors reached significance (F(1, 70) = 4.989, p < .05). In the
IS condition, the pass interval time was longer in the NSG
condition than in the SG condition (F(1, 70) = 9.078, p <
.005). This effect disappeared, however, in the NIS condition
(F(1, 70) = 0.021, n.s.). The goal specificity and situation
factors both had significant effects (ps < .05).
SG
NSG

8000
pass interval time (ms)

Experiment 3
In Experiments 1 and 2, we found that goal specificity had
no effect on a search in a hypothesis space when the participants lacked an initial hypothesis space. In Experiment 3,
we manipulated both the goal specificity and situation factors to confirm the effect of these factors directly. Several of
the experimental procedures were improved for this experiment. First, Phase 1 was performed in both the IS and NIS
conditions, so that the participants would begin Phase 2 with
identical prior experiences. In the NIS condition, the faces of
the players and referee were removed in Phase 2 to eliminate
the initial hypothesis space. Second, only a few participants
successfully discovered the target rule in Experiments 1 and
2. In Experiment 3, the players who threw a successful pass
and the receiver from the previous trial were marked visually on the game display. This cue lowered the memory loads
of the participants, thus helping the participants discover the
true rule in the orbit hypothesis space more easily.

7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
IS

NIS

Figure 5: Average pass interval time in each condition in
Phase 2 in Experiment 3 (bars are standard errors)
The result of Experiment 3 was consistent with the results
of Experiments 1 and 2. In the IS condition, where the participants acquired the initial hypothesis space, goal specificity
had an observable effect on a search in a hypothesis space.
The participants with a nonspecific goal searched in a hypothesis space more actively than the participants with a specific
goal. This effect was not observed, however, in the NIS condition, where the initial hypothesis space was eliminated by
the change of the game display. Therefore, the presence or
absence of an initial hypothesis space affected the goal specificity effect in a search in a hypothesis space. The first hypothesis is confirmed only in the IS condition.

Method
Participants Seventy-four undergraduates participated in
Experiment 3. Each was assigned to one of four conditions:
situation (IS and NIS) × goal specificity (SG and NSG).
Task and Procedure Experiment 3 was conducted in small
groups of three or fewer participants. To control prior experiences, the participants in all conditions played games in
all three phases. In Phase 1, the participants played games
in which both the fake and true rules were valid, over a total
play time of five minutes. In Phase 2, the participants played
games in which only the true rule was valid. The goal specificity factor was manipulated by the same method used in the
prior two experiments. Additionally, the situation factor was
manipulated by adjusting the players’ faces. The participants
in the IS condition played the games with normal face players, as they had in Experiment 1. Meanwhile, the participants
in the NIS condition played the games with faceless players,
as they had in Experiment 2. Unlike Experiments 1 and 2, the
game time in Phase 2 was increased to seven minutes in order
to increase the number of successful participants. All participants were instructed that there was a rule valid through all
of the games. Finally, Phase 3 was conducted using the same

Proportion of Successful Participants Next, we analyzed
the proportion of participants who discovered the true rule
in each condition (Figure 6). In the IS condition, 2 participants discovered the true rule in the SG condition and 8
participants discovered the true rule in the NSG condition.
unsuccess
success

rule discovery rate

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
SG

NSG
IS

SG

NSG
NIS

Figure 6: Proportion of successful participants in each condition in Experiment 3
770

The participants in the NSG condition discovered the true
rule more frequently than the participants in the SG condition (χ2 (1) = 4.502, p < .05). In the NIS condition, 10 participants discovered the true rule in the SG condition and 9
participants discovered the true rule in the NSG condition.
There was no significant difference between the SG and NSG
conditions in the NIS condition (p > .10).
In the IS condition, the pass interval time of the participants in the NSG condition was longer than that in the SG
condition. Additionally, the proportion of successful participants in the NSG condition was also greater than that in the
SG condition. Thus, the second hypothesis is confirmed.

hypothesis space from a given initial hypothesis space to a
target hypothesis space with fewer instances, and discovered
the true rule. In contrast, the participants with a specific goal
preferred to search in an instance space, repeating the behavior of the experimenters defined in Klahr’s study.
In the initial-space situation we observed the effect of goal
specificity on a search in a hypothesis space, duplicating the
results from earlier studies. This situation is identical to situations covered in the preceding studies, where participants
were given an initial hypothesis space. Unlike the preceding
studies, we used a task in which the true rule was not included
in the initial hypothesis space. To discover the true rule, the
participants needed to shift their attention to the target hypothesis space. Here, the effect of goal specificity on a search
in a hypothesis space was still confirmed.
Yet when the participants were given no initial hypothesis
space, goal specificity had no observable effect on a search
in a hypothesis space. To state hypotheses, the participants
initially needed to find a focused hypothesis space by themselves in this situation. We assume that they searched in an
instance space to collect data as cues for determining a hypothesis space to search. This may explain why the hypothesis space search was not activated for the participants with the
nonspecific goal. The SDDS model proposed that a discovery
process is controlled with three main components: “search
hypothesis space,” “test hypothesis,” and “evaluate evidence.”
The search hypothesis space component corresponds to a
search in a hypothesis space in our study. This component
contains a search in an experiment (instance) space as one
of the sub lower components. Participants could collect data
and find a pattern of these data gathered through the experiment space search, and state hypotheses. Similarly, the participants in our study who were given no initial hypothesis space
needed cues to find a focused hypothesis space and state hypotheses. Therefore, we conclude that they searched in an
instance space regardless of goal specificity.

Discussion and Conclusions
In this study we investigated the following two hypotheses
in two situations, an initial-space situation and a no-initialspace situation: (1) A nonspecific goal facilitates a search
in a hypothesis space rather than a specific goal. (2) As a
search in a hypothesis space is more actively performed, the
performance in discovering the target rule improves.
From the results of three experiments, the first hypothesis was partially confirmed. The effect of goal specificity on
a search in a hypothesis space depended on whether or not
the participants noticed an initial hypothesis space. When the
participants noticed an initial hypothesis space, goal specificity had an observable effect on a search in a hypothesis
space. The participants with a nonspecific goal searched in
a hypothesis space more actively than the participants with a
specific goal. On the other hand, this effect of goal specificity
was not observed when the participants were not given any
initial hypothesis space.
The second hypothesis was confirmed in the results of Experiment 3. The pass interval time of the participants with a
nonspecific goal was longer than that of the participants with
a specific goal in the IS condition. Additionally, the proportion of successful participants with a nonspecific goal was
larger than that of successful participants with a specific goal
in the IS condition. However, there was no significant difference between the specific goal and nonspecific goal conditions in Experiments 1 and 2. This may have been due to a
floor effect, as only a few participants discovered the true rule
in these experiments.
The results of the present study are consistent with the finding of Klahr and Dunbar (1988). They defined hypotheses
as the forms of a “frame.” In their study, they classified the
frames (hypotheses) into several types, according to their features. The hypothesis spaces in our study, i.e., sets of hypotheses sharing a common feature, could be explained by
the types of frames defined by Klahr and Dunbar (1988). The
theorists in Klahr’s experiments preferred to do their searches
in hypothesis spaces. They were able to switch the hypotheses types correctly, within short periods of time and over the
course of only a few experiments, and discovered the rule
rapidly. In our study, the participants with nonspecific goals
behaved like the theorists in the situation where the initial
hypothesis space was given. They preferred to search in a
hypothesis space, repeating the behavior of the theorists in
the earlier studies. They were able to switch the searching

References
Burns, B. D., & Vollmeyer, R. (2002). Goal specificity effects
on hypothesis testing in problem solving. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 241–261.
Kaplan, C. A., & Simon, H. A. (1990). In search of insight.
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374–419.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science. The MIT Press.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during
scientific discovery. Cognitive Science, 12, 1–48.
Simon, H. A., & Lea, G. (1974). Problem solving and rule
induction: A unified view. In I. L. W. Gregg (Ed.), Knowledge and cognition. Potomac, Md: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Sweller, J., & Levine, M. (1982). Effects of goal specificity
on means-ends analysis and learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8,
463–474.
van Joolingen, W. R., & de Jong, T. (1997). An extended
dual search space model of scientific discovery learning.
Instructional Science, 25, 307–346.

771

