UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of generative and discriminative learning on use of category variability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5988d55b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hsu, Anne
Griffiths, Thomas

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of generative and discriminative learning on use of category variability
Anne S. Hsu (ahsu@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College London, London, UK

Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract

shown humans can adopt these two different strategies while
learning an artificial language (Hsu & Griffiths, 2009). In this
paper, we explore whether people can adopt these two strategies in category learning.
The paper will be presented as follows. First we will provide an overview of generative and discriminative categorization models. Second, we will review related work from the
existing human categorization literature. Third, we will revisit a previously studied paradigm that showed people are
sensitive to category variability, being more likely to assign
an object equidistant from the mean of two categories to the
category with higher variance (Stewart & Chater, 2002; Cohen, Nosofsky, & Zaki, 2001; Rips, 1989; Smith & Sloman,
1994). Modelling results show that a generative model exhibits greater sensitivity to category variability than a discriminative model. We use this analysis as the basis for
an empirical investigation of whether human learners can be
prompted to take these two distinct learning approaches. Our
results support the idea that humans adopt generative and discriminative approaches when appropriate. This provides new
insight into the factors affecting human category learning.

Models of category learning can take two different approaches
to representing the relationship between objects and categories. The generative approach solves the categorization
problem by building a probabilistic model of each category and
using Bayes’ rule to infer category labels. In contrast, the discriminative approach directly learns a mapping between inputs
and category labels. With this distinction in mind, we revisit a
previously studied categorization experiment that showed people are biased towards categorizing objects into a category with
higher variability. Modelling results predict that generative
learners should be more greatly affected by category variability than discriminative learners. We show that humans can
be prompted to adopt either a generative or discriminative approach to learning the same input, resulting in the predicted
effect on use of category variability.
Keywords: human category learning; generative models; discriminative models; rational models; Bayesian models

Introduction
Categories can be learned using a variety of approaches. Here
we examine two distinct approaches that humans can use
to learn categories: generative and discriminativelearning.
While relatively unexplored in human categorization, this distinction has been widely studied in machine learning (e.g., Ng
& Jordan, 2001). The distinction comes down to whether the
ability to categorize objects is the result of estimating a distribution for each category, or learning a mapping from objects
to categories. Both of these strategies can be used in learning
real life categories. For example, you could learn the food
preferences of a friend by observing the foods he eats and
trying to infer a probability distribution, or by recording his
affective responses to different kinds of foods and trying to
identify which factors lead to positive or negative reactions.
More formally, generative and discriminative models represent two distinct strategies for estimating the probability
that a particular object belongs to a category. Generative
learners solve this problem by building a probabilistic model
of each category, and then using Bayes’ rule to identify which
category was most likely to have generated the object. Discriminative learners estimate the probability distribution over
category labels given objects directly. These different strategies have implications for the performance of these models. Theoretical and empirical analyses have shown that generative and discriminative models differ in their generalization behavior, as well as the speed and accuracy of learning
(Efron, 1975; Ng & Jordan, 2001; Xue & Titterington, 2008).
While the generative/discriminative distinction has been
studied extensively in machine learning and statistics, it has
been little examined in human behavior. A recent study has

Generative and discriminative models
Rational models of categorization identify the underlying
problem as one of estimating the probability of a given object x belonging to a category c, as expressed by the distribution p(c|x). The difference between generative and discriminative approaches to categorization comes down to how
this probability distribution is estimated. Generative models
build a probabilistic model of the input by learning the probability that an object x is generated given that the category is
c, p(x|c), and then solving the categorization problem by applying Bayes’ rule. Discriminative models estimate p(c|x) directly. Generative models thus assume that observed objects
are sampled in a way that reflects p(x|c), while discriminative
models do not make any assumptions about the distribution
from which the input is sampled. These two approaches to
categorization are illustrated schematically in Figure 1.
Comparison of generative and discriminative approaches
to category learning has been done in the machine learning and statistics literature, where the classic generativediscriminative pair being compared is usually (generative)
naı̈ve Bayes vs. (discriminative) logistic regression (Efron,
1975; Ng & Jordan, 2001; Xue & Titterington, 2008).
Under certain conditions, these two models are identical
in the asymptotic form of the function p(c|x) that they
produce, differing only in how that function is estimated.

242

erative exemplar models estimate category distributions using
kernel density estimation (Ashby & Alfonso-Reese, 1995).
Despite the prevalence of human categorization models
with both discriminative and generative approaches, most experimental paradigms seem more consistent with discriminative learning: stimuli are presented, participants guess the
category and feedback is given. However, a few exceptions
this can be seen in previous work on classification vs. inference learning, and observational vs. feedback learning.
While not explicitly mentioned in previous work, both of
these paradigms are potentially related to our discriminative
vs. generative distinction.

Classification vs. inference learning
Another line of experiments has shown that human category
learning can also be influenced by using different tasks to
teach people about the relationship between categories and
features. The effect of using these two different tasks is similar to that of changing the direction of a learned causal relationship. (A. L. Anderson, Ross, & Chin-Parker, 2002;
Markman & Ross, 2003; Ross & Murphy, 1996). In these
experiments, all participants were presented with exactly the
same training stimuli, consisting of the features and category
membership of a set of objects. In one condition, learning
took place via through classification: Participants were provided with the values for (some of) the features of an object
asked to predict category membership. In the other condition, learning was based on making a predictive inference:
The category membership and/or values of some of the features were provided and participants were asked to predict
the value of another feature. Because participants in both
conditions were given feedback, they were both ultimately
provided with exactly the same information about categories
and features. However, learning results differed in terms of
performance accuracy and generalizations made. For example, inference learners performed better than classification
learners on single-feature classification tasks but more poorly
when all of the features were provided (A. L. Anderson et
al., 2002). While this study was not motivated by generative
and discriminative learning, people may have adopted these
different strategies in the different conditions: Classification
learning can be done using a discriminative model, while inference learning requires a generative model.

Figure 1: Generative and discriminative models. Generative
models aim to estimate the probability distribution over the
input given the category label. Discriminative models find a
direct mapping between inputs and category labels.
Such generative-discriminative pairs can thus be used to explore the consequences of adopting these different strategies
through mathematical analysis and simulations. For example, if the training data consist of two normally distributed
samples, generative models learn categories more quickly
(Efron, 1975; Ng & Jordan, 2001). However, when the training data come from other distributions, discriminative models
are asymptotically more accurate (Xue & Titterington, 2008),
though in some cases generative models may perform better initially and arrive at their (higher) asymptotic error more
quickly (Ng & Jordan, 2001).

Summary of related work
Previous models of categorization have used both generative and discriminative strategies, without necessarily recognizing that the significance of the distinction.The commonly cited prototype and exemplar models can be applied
both generatively and discriminatively. Prototypes and exemplars are psychological models of category representation
whereas discriminative and generative are statistical models
of learning. Thus, prototype and exemplar models can be
used under either approach, depending on how learning takes
place. For instance, ALCOVE (Kruschke, 1992) is an exemplar model akin to discriminative kernel methods. SUSTAIN (Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004) is a discriminative
model that chooses between exemplar and prototype representations. Decision bounds (Maddox & Ashby, 1993) can be
either discriminative or generative depending on how model
parameters are estimated. While rational models of categorization can adopt either approach, the ones proposed so far
have taken a generative approach (e.g., J. R. Anderson, 1990;
Griffiths, Canini, Sanborn, & Navarro, 2007). These generative categorization models span the range between exemplar
and prototype representations. At the extremes, generative
prototype models estimate parameters of category distributions (usually a Gaussian with a mean and variance) and gen-

Observation vs. feedback training
Another study, by Ashby, Maddox, and Bohill (2002), has
also examined how learning of the exact same input was affected by presentation style. Here they compared what they
called feedback training (where the category label appears after the object) with observation training (where the category
label appears before the object). Their results showed that
participants in the feedback condition performed significantly
better than those in the observation condition for informationintegration categories, where category membership could not
be expressed in terms of a rule using a single feature. These
two forms of training might encourage learners to adopt gen-

243

by maximizing the likelihood ∑nj=1 log p(x j |c j , µ, σ), where
c j and x j are the category membership and features of the
jth stimulus respectively. The probability a novel stimulus
belongs to a category, p(c|x), is then computed by applying
Bayes’ rule, with the prior probability of each category being
proportional to the number of observed stimuli from that category. The naı̈ve Bayes model is similar to the Gaussian decision bound model used in Normal general recognition theory
(Stewart & Chater, 2002; Maddox & Ashby, 1993).
The discriminative model uses logistic regression to estimate p(c|x) directly, with

erative and discriminative strategies. Feedback training gives
an error signal that can be used to adapt a discriminative
model. Observation training is more relevant for learning object features based on the category label, which is the generative approach.

Summary
Generative and discriminative models use different approaches to solve the problem of categorizing objects. Existing models of human category learning differ in which of
these approaches they use. Previous work has not explored
whether people are able to switch the approach they take in
learning categories, although the effects of different training
regimes that might encourage one approach over the other
have been investigated. In the remainder of the paper, we explicitly test whether people can adopt these two approaches
to learning categories, using a phenomenon that is diagnostic
for one generative-discriminative pair of models.

p(c = 1|x, w, b) = 1/(1 + exp{−wT x) − b})

where w and b are the parameters of the model and x is a vector of feature values. The parameters w and b are estimated by
maximizing the log likelihood ∑nj=1 log p(c j |x j , w, b). In general, w and b are vectors of length equal to the number of stimulus features. However, we will be using one-dimensional
stimuli (x j is scalar), so w and b will be scalars in our case.

Differential use of category variability
Several experiments have shown an effect of category variability on human categorization judgments. In these experiments, the stimuli belong to one of two categories with different means and variances. The key question is how stimuli
with features lying (perceptually) in between the two categories are categorized. The results of these experiments all
showed that there was a bias towards categorizing stimuli into
the high-variance category (Stewart & Chater, 2002; Cohen
et al., 2001; Rips, 1989; Smith & Sloman, 1994). Here we
propose that the degree of preference for the high variance
category may be affected by whether the learner is adopting
a generative or discriminative approach.
Intuitively, we expect category variability to have a greater
effect on generative learners because estimating p(x|c) for
each category requires being sensitive to the variance of that
category. In contrast, one need not consider the variance of
the stimuli in simply learning a function from x to c, p(c|x).
Indeed many discriminative models used in machine learning, such as support vector machines (Schölkopf & Smola,
2002), focus just on the location of the most extreme members of each category. We are not claiming that all generative
models are sensitive to category variance, or that all discriminative models are insensitive, but that these approaches differ
in the extent to which they are sensitive to this property of the
stimuli. To illustrate this, we will explore the predictions of
one generative-discriminative pair of models.
We follow previous work exploring the difference between
generative and discriminative models (e.g., Ng & Jordan,
2001) and focus on the generative-discriminative pair of naı̈ve
Bayes and logistic regression. Since we will focus on continuous stimuli, we assume a Gaussian generative model, with
p(x|c = i) = N(µi , σi )

(2)

Cat A Middle stimuli

Cat B

Figure 2: Stimuli used in the experiment. Category A and B
were the low and high variance categories respectively
To examine the predictions of these models, we used stimuli based largely on those of Cohen et al. (2001). Stimuli
consisted of vertical lines of varying lengths. Training stimuli belonged to one of two categories, A and B. Category A
is the low variance category. Category A contained lines of
length 110, 120, 130, 140 and 150 pixels. Category B was the
high variance category. Category B contained lines of length
300, 375, 450, 525 and 600 pixels. All stimuli were equally
likely within each category (categories had a flat distribution
of stimuli). We also included novel transfer stimuli in the test

(1)

where µi and σi are the mean and variance of the ith category
with i ∈ {1, 2}. The parameters µi and σi can be estimated

244

Stimuli Stimuli was the same training and transfer stimuli
used in the model simulations described in the previous section. In the experiment, these stimuli were presented as white
vertical lines in a black circle.
Procedure While previous related work had paradigms that
may have encouraged discriminative or generative learning
(Ashby et al., 2002; A. L. Anderson et al., 2002), the connection between these paradigms and the distinction was tentative. Thus, we will use our own experimental manipulation
in order to encourage participants to adopt the distinct approaches as strongly as possible. Participants in both learning conditions were trained under the same randomized sequence of trials. In order to prompt generative or discriminative learning, the two conditions differed in the instructions,
category-stimulus presentation order and question presented
during testing blocks. Participants in both conditions were
told they will see “signs” from an alien tribe. Participants in
the generative condition were told that two aliens, one from
each tribe (A and B) will appear and produce signs from their
respective tribes. A picture of two aliens, who were identical except for the letter on their chest, was shown alongside
the instructions. These instructions were intended to make it
clear that the observed stimuli were generated from a probability distribution associated with the target category, consistent with the assumptions of a generative model. Participants in the discriminative condition were told that there are
signs from two alien tribes and they would be shown a single
alien translator who can report which tribe a sign was from.
A single alien was shown alongside these instructions with a
question mark on its chest. These instructions were intended
to establish a situation in which participants learned a function from stimuli to category membership, consistent with a
discriminative model.

stimuli. There were eight transfer stimuli, equally spaced between the highest value of A and the lowest value of B (see
Figure 2). A range of intermediate transfer stimuli were used
in case the middle stimulus in psychological space differed
from the numerical middle stimulus. The precise location of
the middle stimulus is not important for our purposes, as the
difference in results between generative and discriminative
models is the question of interest.

Prob in high variance category

Model categorization results
1
Generative
Discriminative

0.5

0

167 183 200 216 233 250 267 283

Transfer stimulus length

Figure 3: Generative and discriminative model predictions
for the probability of categorization stimuli into the high variance category. The model predictions are that a generative
learner is more likely to categorize in between stimuli in the
high variance category
We trained a generative naı̈ve Bayes model and discriminative logistic regression model on all labeled examples from
category A and B. Our naı̈ve Bayes model had uniform category priors, i.e. both categories were assumed to be equally
likely. Parameters for both models were fit using maximum
likelihood estimation. To compare the outcomes of the two
models, we analysed categorization predictions for our transfer stimuli using these generative and discriminative models.
The generative model predicts intermediate transfer stimuli
will be classified to the high-variance category more often
than the discriminative model (see Figure 3).This is because
it is more likely that intermediate stimuli are extreme values from the high-variance category than the low-variance
category. These results illustrate that sensitivity to category
variability may be a diagnostic indicator of whether learners are using a generative or a discriminative strategy. In the
next section we present an experiment that uses this indicator
to determine whether human learners switch between these
strategies depending on the way in which a categorization
task is presented.

For all participants, the experiment contained 10 blocks
of 20 trials (each of 10 training stimuli were shown twice).
Training blocks (odd blocks) were interleaved with testing
blocks (even blocks). During training trials, participants were
shown a black circular background on which the “sign” appears as a white vertical line, next to an alien with either A
or B written on its chest. In the generative condition, the
alien appeared 500 ms before the sign during training and the
alien disappeared between trials to simulate different aliens
appearing. In the discriminative condition, the sign appeared
500 ms before the alien and the alien did not disappear between trials to simulate one constant alien interpreter. In both
conditions,once both stimulus and letter had appeared, both
remained simultaneously on the screen for 1.5 s (see Figure
4). The total length of each training trial was 2 s and there
were 700 ms between each trial.
During test trials, participants were shown a sign (white
vertical line) on the black circular background. Participants in
the generative condition were asked “Which alien was more
likely to have produced this sign?”. Participants in the discriminative condition were asked “Which alien tribe does this
sign belong to?”. Stimuli during each test block consisted of

Human generative and discriminative learning
Method
Participants We collected data from 24 participants (12 in
each condition). Participants wereundergraduates at the University of California, Berkeley and received course credit.

245

the larger stimuli (Stewart & Chater, 2002). As a result of this
compression, the perceptual variability of the longer length
lines (which made up the high variability category) may have
been significantly smaller than the absolute numerical variability values that were used in our models. If this were the
case, a suitable transformation, such as to log space, would
leave our qualitative results the same, while resulting in an
appropriately less strong variability preference for the generative model. Another possibility is that people are not making
the Gaussian assumption that was made by our model. This is
plausible as our stimuli were very non-Gaussian. In this case,
it is possible that the probability of belonging in the high variance category under a Gaussian assumption is greater than the
probability estimates that generative participants might have
made for our actual stimuli. Finally, participants may not be
behaving fully generatively, or that the instructions resulted in
a mixed population of generative and discriminative learners
in this condition.

every example stimulus in categories A and B, along with the
eight transfer stimuli that were equally spaced between and
highest value of category A and the lowest value of category
B. (The highest value of category A and lowest value of category B were seen twice during each test block to make up
the 20 trials.) No feedback was given during testing in either
condition.

Prob in high variance category

Human categorization results

Figure 4: Screen shot of the experiment

Results
The human learning results correspond to the predictions of
the models: Generative learners are more likely to categorize transfer stimuli that lie in between the two categories in
the high-variance category relative to discriminative learners
(see Figure 5). A two-way within-between ANOVA revealed
statistically significant effects of test stimulus (F(9, 198) =
76.88, MSE = 0.036, p < .001) and condition (F(1, 22) =
5.43, MSE = 0.216, p < .05) and a marginally significant
interaction (F(9, 198) = 1.90, MSE = 0.036, p = .054).
Planned comparisons using two-sample t-tests showed statistically significant effects of condition for stimuli 216 (t(22) =
2.57, p < .05) and 233 (t(22) = 2.46, p < .05). These statistics are calculated under the most conservative assumption,
under which the responses from each participant for each
stimulus are averaged together and treated as a single response.
The “middle stimulus” that lies midway between the two
categories in human perceptual space (i.e. equally likely to be
categorized in both categories in the discriminative condition)
is of length around 200 pixels. This is smaller than the numerical middle (225 pixels). This is approximately the same
value as the perceptual “middle stimulus” that was found in
previous work (Cohen et al., 2001). Accounting for this shift,
the discriminative model predictions match fairly well with
the discriminative human results. The generative model predictions are significantly shifted to the left compared with our
generative human results, meaning the generative model predicted an even stronger tendency to categorize the in-between
stimuli in the high variance category. This difference in degree between model predictions and human judgments could
be explained in many possible ways. One possibility is that
perceptual stimuli might follow Weberian compression for

1
Generative
Discriminative

0.5

0

167 183 200 216 233 250 267 283

Transfer stimulus length

Figure 5: Probability of categorizing transfer stimuli in high
variance category for participants in the generative and discriminative learning conditions. Total values are the average
of all probabilities for individual stimulus lengths.

Discussion
The distinction between generative and discriminative approaches to categorization has played an important role in
machine learning research, but has not previously been explored in cognitive psychology. Our results show that people
can be cued to take these two different approaches to category
learning through the way in which a categorization task is
presented. These results have implications for understanding
human category learning, and for establishing links between
the communities studying human and machine learning.
The finding that people behave differently when encouraged to adopt these two different approaches to category
learning may shed light on previous empirical results in
cognitive psychology. For example, some previous experiments have shown effects that may be partly due to learning paradigms that encouraged participants to adopt generative or discriminative learning approaches (e.g., Ashby et al.,

246

References

2002). The generative/discriminative distinction also has potential implications for previously proposed models of categorization. For example, it seems appropriate that connectionist models (Kruschke, 1992; Love et al., 2004) will best
characterize behavior when humans adopt a discriminative
learning approach whereas rational models (J. R. Anderson,
1990; Griffiths et al., 2007) will best describe behavior when
humans adopt a generative learning approach. Developing
a deeper understanding of how this distinction plays out in
human learning may provide additional insights into longstanding debates on category learning.

Anderson, A. L., Ross, B. H., & Chin-Parker, S. (2002). A further
investigation of category learning by inference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, Cognition, 30, 119–128.
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ashby, F. G., & Alfonso-Reese, L. A. (1995). Categorization as
probability density estimation. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 39, 216–233.
Ashby, F. G., Maddox, W. T., & Bohill, C. J. (2002). Observational versus feedback training in rule-based and informationintegration category learning. Memory and Cognition, 80, 666–
677.
Cohen, A. L., Nosofsky, R. M., & Zaki, S. R. (2001). Category variability, exemplar similarity, and perceptual classification. Memory
and Cognition, 29, 1165-1175.
Efron, B. (1975). The efficiency of logistic regression compared to
normal discriminant analysis. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 70, 892–898.
Griffiths, T. L., Canini, K., Sanborn, A. N., & Navarro, D. J.
(2007). Unifying rational models of categorization via the hierarchical dirichlet process. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hsu, A. S., & Griffiths, T. L. (2009). Differencial use of implicit negative evidence in generative and discriminative language
learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
22.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based connectionist model of category learning. Psychological Review, 99, 22–44.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004). SUSTAIN: A
network model of category learning. Psychological Review, 111,
309–332.
Maddox, W. T., & Ashby, F. G. (1993). Comparing decision
bound and exemplar models of categorization. Perception and
Psychophysics, 53, 49–70.
Markman, A. B., & Ross, B. H. (2003). Category use and category
learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 592–613.
Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. (2001). On discriminative vs. generative
classifiers: A comparison of logistic regression and naive Bayes.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 17. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization. In
S.Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1996). Category-based predictions:
influence of uncertainty and feature associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, sCognition, 22, 736–
753.
Schölkopf, B., & Smola, A. J. (2002). Learning with kernels. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smith, E. E., & Sloman, S. A. (1994). Similarity-versus rule-based
categorization. Memory and Cognition, 22, 377–386.
Stewart, N., & Chater, N. (2002). The effect of category variability
in perceptual categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, Cognition, 28, 893–907.
Xue, J., & Titterington, D. M. (2008). Comment on ”On discriminative vs. generative classifiers: A comparison of logistic regression
and naive Bayes”. Neural Processing Letters, 28, 169–187.

Showing that people can adopt both generative and discriminative learning strategies establishes a new connection
between human and machine learning. While many of the
goals of machine learning are inspired by human capabilities
(e.g., the ability to recognize and categorize complex structures quickly and efficiently), the principal issues that are
topical in machine and human learning seldom coincide. By
showing that a key distinction long studied in machine learning research is also significant to human learning, this work
begins to build an important bridge between machine learning and human learning communities. This will encourage
collaboration between the two research communities where
computational models of learning provide insight into human
learning and human learning, in turn, inspires computational
modelling. It also establishes a way to know how advances
in specific aspects of machine learning, such as improved discriminative models, might be relevant to predicting aspects of
human learning.
Identifying the relevance of the generative/discriminative
distinction in human categorization also opens up many new
avenues of research questions. For the neuroscience community, one can ask: What neural mechanisms are implementing these two very different learning strategies? Are the
neural circuits involved similar or different? This research
also provokes many questions about learning more generally:
When does human learning tend to be generative or discriminative? How flexible are learners in alternating between generative and discriminative learning approaches? Can learning approaches be retrospectively altered? (i.e. if input is
learned with a discriminative perspective and learners were
later made to understand that the data was generated from a
probability distribution, would they switch their categorization judgments?) Since much of human learning in everyday
life consists of a mix of scenarios in which one or the other of
these strategies is more appropriate, clarifying when people
use generative and discriminative approaches will help us understand differences in learning among individuals and across
situations. We anticipate that exploring these questions will
result in improved models of human category learning, and
a tighter coupling between research on human and machine
learning.
Acknowledgments. We thank Ky Merritt for assistance in data collection. This research was funded by the Economics and Social Research Council grant RES-000-22-3275 and National Science Foundation grants SES-0631518 and IIS-0845410.

247

