UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effector-specific Motor Interference in Action Simulation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1bf09712

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Tausche, Peggy
Springer, Anne
Prinz, Wolfgang

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effector-specific Motor Interference in Action Simulation
Peggy Tausche, Anne Springer and Wolfgang Prinz
(Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany)

relative to the middle finger, even when the observed
movement was irrelevant to the task. Other studies
have investigated the influence of action execution on
action perception (Daprati, Wriessnegger, &
Lacquaniti, 2007a, 2007b; Jacobs & Shiffrar, 2005).
Jacobs and Shiffrar (2005) showed that the ability to
discriminate between two observed walking speeds is
selectively impaired in walking observers as compared
to cycling and standing observers. Taken together these
findings propose a bi-directional link between action
perception and action production.
While several studies support a bi-directional link
between action perception and action production on the
level of movements (Brass, et al., 2001; Brass, et al.,
2000; Kilner, et al., 2003; Stürmer, et al., 2000), others
were able to provide evidence for a link on the level of
goals (Bekkering, Wohlschlager, & Gattis, 2000;
Hamilton & Grafton, 2006; Woodward, 1998). This
suggests that a common representational system of
action execution and action observation might be
hierarchically organized (1990).
Neurophysiologic findings support this idea by
showing a different nature of the so called mirror
neurons. These neurons are located in area F5 in the
macaque monkey brain (Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, &
Rizzolatti, 1996) and fire both when the monkey
observes an action and when it performs this action on
its own. Studies using functional magnet resonance
imaging (fMRI) and transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) have provided significant evidence that such a
mirror neuron system also exists in the human brain
(Fadiga, Fogassi, Pavesi, & Rizzolatti, 1995; Grezes,
Armony, Rowe, & Passingham, 2003; Rizzolatti &
Craighero, 2004). Moreover, there is evidence that
there are “strictly congruent” mirror neurons which fire
only when the observed and the executed action
correspond in means and goals. In contrast, “broadly
congruent” neurons generalize across different means
and goals (Gallese, et al., 1996).
Other studies have addressed the question of the
underlying processes of action simulation itself (Graf,
et al., 2007; Prinz & Rapinett, 2008). For instance,
Graf and colleagues (2007) recently proposed that the
internal simulation of observed actions runs in realtime. The authors used a paradigm in which the
participants perceived temporally occluded sequences
of point-light actions. In their studies they presented
the beginning of an action sequence which was
interrupted by an occluder. The occluder was followed
by a static test posture. Two independent variables

Abstract
Neuroscientific findings suggest that observing
temporally occluded actions evokes a mental
simulation of the occluded action part. This action
simulation may involve corresponding motor programs
in the observer and is suggested to run in real time. The
present study aimed to investigate whether real-time
action simulation relies on effector-specific motor
representations. Our participants watched transiently
occluded actions performed either with the arms or the
legs and had to predict the action course after
occlusion. Participants also responded to the task with
a movement involving either their arms or legs.
Simulation performance broke down when the
observed effector and the moved effector
corresponded. In contrast, simulation was intact when
the effectors did not correspond. The results are in line
with previous research and extend it by showing that
interference effects can occur within the real-time
course of action simulation. Furthermore, shared
representations between action simulation and action
execution are effector specific.

Introduction
In everyday life, humans experience hundreds of
situations in which other people’s actions are
temporally or partially occluded. Nevertheless,
observers perceive the actions in a fluent manner. It is
suggested that humans fill the perceptual gap with a
mental simulation of the unseen action parts. This
action simulation implies the establishment of a mental
representation of the unseen part that is equivalent to
the visual representation during visual perception.
In the Common Coding framework, it has been
argued that action execution and action perception
share a common coding system (Prinz, 1990, 1997).
This might enable observers to understand, anticipate
and predict others’ ongoing behavior (Blakemore &
Frith, 2005; Prinz, 2006; Wilson & Knoblich, 2005;
Wolpert & Flanagan, 2001). Behavioral studies
supported this assumption by showing that concurrent
action execution and action observation can interact
with each other (Brass, Bekkering, & Prinz, 2001;
Brass, Bekkering, Wohlschlager, & Prinz, 2000;
Kilner, Paulignan, & Blakemore, 2003; Stürmer,
Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2000). An influence of action
observation on action execution was shown by Brass et
al. (2000). They showed that the observation of a
lifting movement of the index finger led to faster
execution of a lifting movement with the index finger

2698

were manipulated: occluder time (100, 400 or 700 ms)
and test posture time (the time which would pass
behind the occluder) (100, 400 or 700 ms). The
participants’ task was to decide whether the test
posture was a continuation of the previous seen action
in the same visual angle, or whether it was rotated in
depth. In accordance with the real-time simulation
hypothesis, the participants showed best performance
when occluder and test posture time corresponded.
Furthermore, performance decreased as the time
distance between occluder and test posture time
increased. The authors argued that the internal
representation of the action is updated in real time and
that this leads to high task performance when the
upcoming test posture corresponds to a real-time
outcome. Furthermore, task performance decreases
with increasing dissimilarity in the internal
representation and the test posture.
Our study connects to this work by investigating the
role of motor representations in this action simulation
process. In extension to previous research on motor
interference in action observation and action
discrimination (Daprati, et al., 2007a, 2007b; Jacobs &
Shiffrar, 2005), we focussed on motor interference
effects within the real-time course of action simulation
(as proposed by Graf et al., 2007). Moreover, we
wondered whether motor representations, which might
be used in action simulation, are organized on an
effector-specific level.
It has been suggested that humans have a long-term
body representation which contains the basic spatial
arrangement of different body parts (Reed & Farah,
1995). A structural overlap between one’s own and
another person’s body enables humans to represent
visual, motor and proprioceptive inputs from both
bodies within a common code in a shared
representational system which in turn would lead to
more interactions between both processes. When a
common code is used for one process (e.g., action
execution), it is not or less available for the other
process (e.g., action perception), which should lead to
interference. Accordingly, we hypothesized that a
structural overlap on the effector-specific level (i.e., the
same effector is involved in action simulation and
action execution) would lead to increased interference
effects as compared to no structural overlap (i.e.,
different effectors are involved in action simulation and
action execution).
In order to investigate this, we adopted the action
prediction task used by Graf et al. (2007) and
combined it with a secondary motor task. This motor
task was performed simultaneously to the action
prediction task and involved either the same effector as
the relevant effector in the point-light action or a
different effector.

Methods
Participants: Thirty right-handed participants (mean 25
years; range 20 – 35 years; 14 female) were tested. One
participant’s data had to be excluded from the analysis,
because of a faulty response device which caused the
loss of a part of the data set. Thus, data analysis was
based on a total number of 29 participants. All
participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and were naive with respect to the purpose of
the study. They were paid for their participation.
Informed written consent was obtained from each
participant prior to the experiment.
Material: We used six film sequences showing a pointlight character (Johansson, 1973, 1975) performing
familiar actions. These were three arm-related actions
(tennis, throwing something with one hand, throwing
something with both hands) and three leg-related
actions (knee-bends, standing up from a chair, standing
up from the floor). We chose actions which were rated
on a visual analogue scale as being highly arm- or legrelated by an independent sample (N = 15). All actions
of the present study were familiar everyday actions and
all participants could easily recognize and name them.
This is unique and contrasts with other studies using
very simplistic and artificial movements (Brass, et al.,
2000; Kilner, et al., 2003; Reed & Farah, 1995; Reed &
McGoldrick, 2007), thus allowing us to investigate the
involvement of effector-specific motor representations
in action simulation of complex and familiar actions.
We used point-light stimuli (instead of real films),
because these stimuli are known to emphasize motion
information instead of alternative sources of
information like social information. The videos were
taken from a stimulus set provided by Graf et al. (2007)
and showed a male right-handed agent recorded using a
motion capture system (Vicon Motion Systems Ltd.,
Oxford, UK). Each point-light display consisted of 13
black dots that were located at the major joints and
were 2 mm in diameter. The point-light character was
about 7 cm in height and actions were performed
within an area of 340 pixels width and 312 pixels
height at the center of the screen. An occluder of the
same size was presented as a square.
Design and Data Analysis: As in the original paradigm
of Graf et al. (2007), we manipulated the factors
occluder time (100, 400 and 700 ms) and test posture
time (TPT; 100, 400 and 700 ms). A combination of
each level of both factors resulted in a condition in
which occluder time and TPT correspond (i.e., time
distance of 0 ms) and conditions in which occluder
time and TPT did not correspond (i.e., time distance of
300 ms and 600 ms, respectively). Participants had to
decide whether the test posture was a continuation in
the same visual angle, or whether it was rotated in
depth. In accordance with Graf et al. (2007), we used

2699

this task, because no explicit judgments about the
timing of the actions were requested. Therefore
subjects were explicitly instructed to decide whether
the test posture was a correct or rotated continuation at
any point in time which avoids that task instruction
generates potential real-time effects. In order to
investigate effector-specific interference effects in
action simulation, we introduced a secondary motor
task, which was either performed with the arms or with
the legs. Participants were instructed to hold their
hands/feet on two home buttons during the action
sequence of the action prediction task and to perform a
discrete bimanual/bipedal movement in order to
provide a response to the action prediction task. The
movement was a reaching movement towards two
diagonally opposite buttons of an arrangement of four
different target buttons (e.g., pressing the right upper
key with the right hand and pressing the left lower key
with the left hand simultaneously in order to give a
“correct continuation” response) (Figure 1). The
location of the target keys were randomized across
participants. Participants were asked to respond
immediately when the static test posture appeared and
a time out for their response was set at 4000 ms (time
out trials were excluded from data analysis).

occluder times did not follow each other. The factors
video effector (arm versus leg) and test posture time
were completely randomized. Prior to the first session,
participants received an initial familiarization phase
where all actions were presented twice. This was
followed by a practice phase containing different
actions as in the experiment (knee-bends, leapfrog,
basketball). The practice phase consisted of 30 trials
and was performed with the same effector that was
required in the first experimental session. Prior to the
second session, a practice phase of 15 trials was
performed again using the other effector, which was
required in the second session. The experimental
sessions lasted about 1.5 and 1 hour, respectively.
Feedback was given to the participants during the
practice and the experimental phases.
Data analysis focused on error rates and reaction
times (RTs). RTs were defined as the time between
TPT onset and leaving the home buttons. RTs were
only analyzed for correct responses. Due to the fact that
spatial and temporal aspects were mixed in the rotated
trials, the analysis included only unrotated trials.
Our analyses were based on compatibility between
the relevant effector in the action prediction task and
the effector in the action execution task. Compatible
trials were those trials in which the video effector and
the response effector corresponded (arm/arm and
leg/leg); incompatible trials were the trials in which the
video effector and the response effector did not
correspond (arm/leg and leg/arm). Compatibility was
considered to be an adequate factor for the analysis
because participants were required to predict exactly
the same actions and to answer with their arms and legs
in both compatible and incompatible trials. This
allowed us to control for stimulus-dependent effects
(due to variability within the point-light actions) and to
control for response-dependent effects (due to
variability between arm and leg responses), which are
not in the center of interest in this study.

Figure 1: Schema of the experimental setting (exemplary for arm
responses). The actions for the action prediction task were presented
on the screen. The hands or feet rested on the home buttons (dark
gray). The motor task involved a discrete bimanual/bipedal
movement towards two diagonally opposite target keys in order to
give a response to the action prediction task.

Results and Discussion
Error rates: We performed an analysis-of-variance
(ANOVA) with the factors occluder time, test posture
time (TPT) and compatibility. Error rates showed a
significant main effect of TPT (F(2, 56) = 38.395; p
< .001; Eta2 = .578) with significantly higher error rates
in the long TPT as compared to short and medium
TPTs (ps < .001; Bonferroni corrected). No main effect
of occluder time and no main effect of compatibility
were found (Fs < .1). A significant two-way interaction
between the factors occluder time and test posture time
was found (F(2, 112) = 2.835; p < .05; Eta2 = .092). In
line with Graf et al. (2007), lowest error rates were
found when occluder time and test posture time
corresponded. No other two-way interaction reached
significance (Fs < 1). Most importantly, the three-way
interaction between the factors occluder time, TPT and

The experiment consisted of 648 trials (3 occluder
times x 3 test posture times x 2 response devices [same,
rotated] x 2 video effector [arm versus leg] x 2
response effector [arm versus leg] x 9 repetitions)
divided into two experimental sessions with a break of
one to two hours in between. Each session consisted of
324 trials divided into 12 blocks. The factor response
effector (arm versus leg) was constant within one
session. The order of the sessions was randomized
across participants. The factor occluder time was
blocked and the order of blocks was balanced across
participants, with the restriction that two identical

2700

compatibility was significant (F(4, 112) = 2.664; p
< .05; Eta2 = .087). There was no significant occluder
time x TPT interaction in the compatible condition (F <
1.8), while this interaction was reliable in the
incompatible condition (F(4, 112) = 3.660; p < .01;
Eta2 = .116). This indicates that incompatible trials, in
contrast to compatible trials, involved real-time action
simulation processes.
A way of confirming this effect and to increase
power is the analysis of the time distance effect. In a
further step, we collapsed the different occluder times
and TPTs across time distances (time distance of 0 ms,
300 ms and 600 ms, respectively) and performed an
ANOVA with the factors time distance (0, 300 and 600
ms) and compatibility. Data showed a significant main
effect of time distance (F(2, 56) = 11.235; p < .001;
Eta2 = .286). As put forward in the real-time
hypothesis, error rates were significantly higher in the
greatest time distance as compared to the short and
medium time distance (ps < .001; Bonferroni
corrected). Again, there was no main effect of
compatibility (F < .1). Most interestingly, data showed
a significant interaction between the factors time
distance and compatibility F(2, 56) = 5,050; p < .05;
Eta2 = .153), with a significant main effect of time
distance in the incompatible trials (F(2, 56) = 13.461; p
< .001; Eta2 = .325), while there was no reliable effect
of time distance present in the compatible trials (F <
1.9) (Figure 2). Again, this indicates that incompatible
trials, in contrast to compatible trials, involved realtime action simulation processes.

main effect of occluder time (F(2, 56) = 4.745; p < .05;
Eta2 = .145), with significantly shorter RTs in the
medium as compared to the short occluder time (p
< .05; Bonferroni corrected). A significant main effect
of TPT (F(2, 56) = 23.389; p < .001; Eta2 = .455) was
found with increasing RTs with increasing TPT (ps
< .01; Bonferroni corrected). Furthermore, a significant
main effect of compatibility was found (F(1, 56) =
6.362; p < .05; Eta2 = .185), with shorter RTs in
compatible as compared to incompatible trials. A
significant two-way interaction between the factors
occluder time and test posture time was found (F(2,
112) = 6.568; p < .001; Eta2 = .19), with longest RTs
when occluder time and test posture time did not
correspond. Neither other two-way interactions nor the
three-way interaction reached significance (Fs) < 1.
Again, we collapsed the different occluder times
and TPTs across time distances (time distance of 0 ms,
300 ms and 600 ms, respectively) and performed an
ANOVA with the factors time distance (0 ms, 300 ms
and 600 ms) and compatibility. Data showed a
significant main effect of time distance (F(2, 56) =
5.337; p < .01; Eta2 = .160). RTs were significantly
higher in the long time distance as compared to the
short and medium time distance (p < .05; Bonferroni
corrected). There was a main effect of compatibility
(F(1, 56) = 6.123; p < .05; Eta2 = .179), with
significantly faster RTs in compatible as compared to
incompatible trials. No significant time distance x
compatibility interaction was found (F < .4) (Figure 3).

Figure 2: Error rates plotted as a function of time distance dependant
on the compatibility between video effector and response effector.
Error rates showed a significant time distance effect in incompatible
trials, while no reliable time distance effect was present in
compatible trials.

Figure 3: Reaction times plotted as a function of time distance
dependant on the compatibility between video effector and response
effector.

General Discussion
The present study aimed to investigate the role of
motor representations in action simulation by focussing
on motor interference within the real-time course of
action simulation. Furthermore, it was investigated
whether motor representations, which might be used in

Reaction times: We performed an ANOVA with the
factors occluder time, test posture time (TPT) and
compatibility. Reaction times showed a significant

2701

real-time action simulation, are organized on an
effector-specific level.
Overall, the results showed two major findings:
First, our data showed that action simulation and action
execution share a common representational system.
Action simulation is considered to run in real time
(Graf, et al., 2007), but we could show interference in
the time course of action simulation in an online action
prediction task. To our knowledge, our results are the
first to demonstrate that a secondary motor task leads
to an interference effect within the real-time course of
action simulation. We assume that the preparation of
the to-be-executed action takes resources of the same
representational system as action simulation, which in
turn leads to a lack of resources which might be
necessary for an action simulation to run in real time.
Second, we were successfully able to show that this
motor interference effect was effector-specific. That is,
real-time action simulation broke down when the
action prediction task and the action execution task
involve the same type of effector as compared to a
different type of effector, although the predicted and
the executed actions differed in terms of the kind of
action, the exact trajectory and action goals. This
allows us to specify that shared representations are
coded on an effector-specific level and that they can
generalize across different kinds of actions, trajectories
and goals. This finding is in line with other studies
(Reed & Farah, 1995; Reed & McGoldrick, 2007). For
example, Reed and McGoldrick (2007) showed that the
task performance in a body posture memory task is
selectively impaired when a concurrent movement task
is applied that involves the same type effector as the
body posture memory task as compared to a different
type of effector. In this study the only structural
overlap regards the effector while the kind of the
action, the trajectory and the goals differs between both
tasks. The idea that shared representations might be
organized hierarchically is also supported by imaging
studies showing that parts of the mirror neuron system
are organized in a somatotopic pattern which resembles
the classical motor homunculus (Buccino, et al., 2001;
Buccino, et al., 2004). In line with the common coding
framework (cf. Introduction), these results suggests the
existence of a hierarchically organized matching
system of action observation and action execution.
As mentioned above, real-time simulation was no
longer applied in trials, in which the relevant effector
in the action prediction task and in the action execution
task corresponded. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to
assume that real-time action simulation was replaced
by another process because task accuracy was
comparable between compatible and incompatible
trials. Possible candidates of processes are either the
memorizing of the arrangement of certain points of the
point-light display and matching them onto the test
posture which was presented after the occluder or

memorizing the test postures and the according
feedback and applying a memory process without any
simulation process. Although we cannot make any
assumptions about the type of process which was
applied in compatible trials, we can completely rule out
a real-time simulation process. One could speculate
that real-time simulation is the default process and that
a blocking of a common coding system by a secondary
motor task leads to a breakdown of such a process and
requires the application of an alternative process.
However, the motor interference effect in real-time
action simulation was statistically reliable only in error
rates. There are several reasons which might account
for that fact. First, we used quite a demanding task.
Participants’ error rates were relatively high (about 23
percent). This is in contrast to other studies that involve
very simplistic and easy tasks showing a compatibility
effect in the RTs, which could show floor effects in
error rates (Brass, et al., 2001; Brass, et al., 2000).
Second, we used a decision task. It is likely that this
requires higher cognitive processes in order to reach
the decision rather than a reaction towards a certain
stimulus. An indication of this is the fact that RTs were
much longer (average of 820 ms) than RTs for simple
reactions towards a certain stimulus (about 300 ms)
(Brass, et al., 2001; Brass, et al., 2000). Third, although
we instructed our participants to respond as fast and as
accurately as they could, it is possible that they focused
more on task accuracy. They had a quite long time in
which to give a response (time out of 4000 ms) and
participants received feedback on the basis of accuracy
while no explicit feedback was given regarding speed.
It is likely that this caused participants to focus on task
accuracy rather than task speed, which in turn lead to a
visible effect of compatibility on action simulation in
error rates.
In conclusion, this study demonstrates for the first
time motor interference within the real-time course of
action simulation. This indicates that real-time action
simulation of temporally occluded actions and action
execution share a common representational system.
Preparation for action execution leads to the activation
of these shared representations, which in turn leads to a
lack of representations for action simulation. This, in
turn, causes interference in the real-time cause of
action simulation. Finally, we were successful in
showing that this representational system is specific on
the level of effectors, even when the actions differ in
terms of the kind of the movement, trajectories and
goals.

Acknowledgments
We are thankful to Wiebke Berger and Christina
Schuster for assistance in data acquisition and to
Nadine Diersch for fruitful discussion. Special thanks
to the Max-Planck-Society for founding this research.

2702

References

Keele, S. W., Cohen, A., & Ivry, R. (1990). Motor Programs
- Concepts and Issues.
Attention and
Performance(13), 77-110.
Kilner, J. M., Paulignan, Y., & Blakemore, S. J. (2003). An
interference effect of observed biological
movement on action. Current Biology, 13(6), 522525.
Prinz, W. (1990). A common coding approach to perception
and action. In O. Neumann & W. Prinz (Eds.),
Relationships between perception and action:
Current approaches (pp. 167-201). New York:
Springer.
Prinz, W. (1997). Perception and action planning. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 9, 129-154.
Prinz, W. (2006). What re-enactment earns us. Cortex, 42(4),
515-517.
Prinz, W., & Rapinett, G. (2008). Filling the Gap: Dynamic
Representation of Occluded Action. In F. Morganti,
A. Carassa & G. Riva (Eds.), Enacting
Intersubjectivity: A Cognitive and Social
Perspective on the Study of Interactions. (pp. 223236). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Reed, C. L., & Farah, M. J. (1995). The psychological reality
of the body schema: a test with normal participants.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 21(2), 334-343.
Reed, C. L., & McGoldrick, J. E. (2007). Action during body
perception: processing time affects self-other
correspondences. Social neuroscience, 2(2), 134149.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169192.
Stürmer, B., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz, W. (2000).
Correspondence effects with manual gestures and
postures: a study of imitation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 26(6), 1746-1759.
Wilson, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005). The case for motor
involvement
in
perceiving
conspecifics.
Psychological Bulletin, 131(3), 460-473.
Wolpert, D. M., & Flanagan, J. R. (2001). Motor prediction.
Current Biology, 11(18), R729-732.
Woodward, A. L. (1998). Infants selectively encode the goal
object of an actor's reach. Cognition, 69(1), 1-34.

Bekkering, H., Wohlschlager, A., & Gattis, M. (2000).
Imitation of gestures in children is goal-directed.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. A,
Human Experimental Psychology, 53(1), 153-164.
Blakemore, S. J., & Frith, C. (2005). The role of motor
contagion in the prediction of action.
Neuropsychologia, 43(2), 260-267.
Brass, M., Bekkering, H., & Prinz, W. (2001). Movement
observation affects movement execution in a
simple response task. Acta Psychologica, 106(1-2),
3-22.
Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Wohlschlager, A., & Prinz, W.
(2000). Compatibility between observed and
executed finger movements: comparing symbolic,
spatial, and imitative cues. Brain and Cognition,
44(2), 124-143.
Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi,
L., Gallese, V., et al. (2001). Action observation
activates premotor and parietal areas in a
somatotopic manner: an fMRI study. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 13(2), 400-404.
Buccino, G., Lui, F., Canessa, N., Patteri, I., Lagravinese, G.,
Benuzzi, F., et al. (2004). Neural circuits involved
in the recognition of actions performed by
nonconspecifics: an FMRI study. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(1), 114-126.
Daprati, E., Wriessnegger, S., & Lacquaniti, F. (2007a).
Kinematic cues and recognition of self-generated
actions. Experimental Brain Research, 177(1), 3144.
Daprati, E., Wriessnegger, S., & Lacquaniti, F. (2007b).
Knowledge of one's kinematics improves
perceptual discrimination. Consciousness and
Cognition, 16(1), 178-188.
Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Pavesi, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (1995).
Motor facilitation during action observation: a
magnetic
stimulation
study.
Journal
of
Neurophysiology, 73(6), 2608-2611.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996).
Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain,
119 ( Pt 2), 593-609.
Graf, M., Reitzner, B., Corves, C., Casile, A., Giese, M., &
Prinz, W. (2007). Predicting point-light actions in
real-time. Neuroimage, 36 Suppl 2, T22-32.
Grezes, J., Armony, J. L., Rowe, J., & Passingham, R. E.
(2003). Activations related to "mirror" and
"canonical" neurones in the human brain: an fMRI
study. Neuroimage, 18(4), 928-937.
Hamilton, A. F. D., & Grafton, S. T. (2006). Goal
representation in human anterior intraparietal
sulcus. Journal of Neuroscience, 26(4), 1133-1137.
Jacobs, A., & Shiffrar, M. (2005). Walking perception by
walking observers. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
31(1), 157-169.
Johansson, G. (1973). Visual-Perception of Biological
Motion and a Model for Its Analysis. Perception &
Psychophysics, 14(2), 201-211.
Johansson, G. (1975). Visual Motion Perception. Scientific
American, 232(6), 76-&.

2703

