UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Varied Priority Training on Complex Perceptual-Motor Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xg5b0pg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Wang, Yi
Moon, Michelle
Fu, Wai-Tat
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Varied Priority Training on Complex Perceptual-Motor Learning
1

Yi Wang, 2J. Michelle Moon, 1Wai-Tat Fu, 3Walter Boot, 4Kirk Erickson, 1Arthur Kramer
1

Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA
2
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
3
Department of Psychology, Florida State University, 600 W. College Avenue, Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA
4
Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, 3107 Sennott Square, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
Abstract
We reported results from a study on the effects of different
training methods on complex perceptual-motor skill
acquisition using a version of the Space Fortress game, which
was originally designed to study the acquisition of complex
perceptual-motor and cognitive skills in a multi-tasking
environment. Participants were randomly assigned to the
Fixed Priority (FP) and Varied Priority (VP) training
conditions. Action sequences for controlling the spaceship in
a frictionless environment using a joystick were analyzed and
compared across conditions. Consistent with the previous
findings, VP training was in general more successful than FP
training. However, we found that VP training benefited
participants more in the low performance group than in the
high performance group. Participants in the VP training
condition showed faster learning of optimal action sequences
and faster reduction of suboptimal action sequences. In
addition, results showed that in the high performance group,
participants in the VP training condition used significantly
more optimal action sequences than in the FP training
condition. The findings have important implications on how
the effectiveness of different training methods can be
optimized for people with different cognitive abilities.
Keywords: Space Fortress game; Fixed Priority training;
Varied Priority training, High performance group, Low
performance group.

Introduction
Effectiveness of training perceptual-motor skills in complex,
multi-tasking environments has been an important cognitive
science research topic and has been studied for decades.
Examples of tasks in complex, multi-tasking environments
involved flying a military jet, driving a vehicle, operating a
machine, etc. Operators in these environments are required
not only to learn the necessary information regarding
operation modes, control procedures, regulations and
limitations, but also to apply these details under real-time
constraints with competing cognitive demands.
Although in complex multi-tasking environments,
practice generally improves performance in different
training methods, researchers have found that practice time
alone is not sufficient to explain differences in effectiveness
of these methods. This has directed more focus towards
comparing different training methods through computerbased cognitive simulations such as the ‘Space Fortress’
game (Mane & Donchin, 1989). This kind of synthetic
training environment not only allows careful manipulation
of multiple variables to carefully tease apart the multiple
cognitive processes that interact dynamically to influence

performance, but also allow direct measurement of how
performance improves in different training environments.
Among the different training methods, the differences
between whole-task training (e.g. learning to steer a bicycle
and operate the pedals simultaneously) and part-task
training (e.g. separately learning to steer a bicycle and
operate the pedals) have been studied most extensively by
researchers. In general, research shows that whole-task
training is ineffective because the trainee may be
overwhelmed by the complexity of the task; while part-task
training is ineffective because the trainee may not have
sufficient experience in coordinating between different subcomponents of the tasks (Ioerger et al., 2003). As a result, a
hybrid training method, often called part-whole training,
was proposed. Under this approach, the whole task is
decomposed into segments. Participants are trained on each
of the segments separately before moving to practice the
total task as a whole. Although part-whole training has
shown to be effective for training in complex, multi-tasking
environments (Adams 1987, Wightman & Lintern 1985,
Schneider 1985), it still has two problems. First, it is
difficult to select the parts to train. Second, by isolating
segments, it still suffers from the same problem as in part
training, in which training effectiveness may decrease
because of the removal of the broader context in which the
parts were performed (Gopher et al., 1989).
Varied Priority (VP) training (e.g., Kramer et al., 1995) is
a training method that manipulates only the relative
emphasis of selected subcomponents in the multi-tasking
environment and leaves the whole task intact (Gopher et al.,
1989). Gopher et al. showed that systematically varying
levels of priorities on attentional control through instruction
and feedback could lead to better learning and performance
in multi-tasking tasks. They argued that VP training enabled
participants to explore different strategies and thus develop
a better match between the requirements of the tasks and the
efficiency of their efforts. They suggested that participants
under VP training condition not only could receive more
information on their performance on the emphasized
element, but could also learn the costs to performance
decrement on the de-emphasized task. As a result, VP
training makes people better able to strategically allocate
attention to multiple components of the task to comply with
the change in emphases during training.
Although benefits of VP training on global performance
have been demonstrated through a number of studies, there
is still a lack of understanding on the specifics of how it
promotes learning of perceptual-motor control. The current

2536

study used a version of the original Space Fortress game to
study the impact of VP training on learning a complex
perceptual-motor skill. The goal is to understand the impact
of VP training on learning of action sequences in a dynamic
multi-tasking environment.

PNTS indicated the points subscore,
core, CNTRL indicated the
control subscore, etc.) at the physical function level, which
were continuously updated on the display as participants
interacted with the task, and they were directly influenced
by moment-to-moment
moment actions (joystick or mouse) executed
exe
by the participants at the physical form level.

The Space Fortress Game
The Space Fortress game was originally developed to study
the acquisition of complex perceptual-motor
motor and cognitive
skills in fast-paced multi-tasking
tasking environments (Mane &
Donchin, 1989). The main objective of the game was to
maximize the total scores by shooting missiles at and
destroying the space fortress, while maintaining a sp
spaceship
within a certain velocity limit and pre-specified
specified boundaries
on the screen. Missiles were fired from the spaceship, whose
movement was controlled by the participant. In addition to
destroying the fortress, the participant had to protect his/her
spaceship
ceship against damage from the fortress and mine.
Participants used a joystick to control the spaceship.
Forward movement (thrust) of the stick caused the
spaceship to accelerate. Left and right movements caused
the spaceship to rotate counter-clockwise
clockwise an
and clockwise
respectively. Because the spaceship flied in a frictionless
environment, it would continue to fly in the direction to
which it was pointing unless it was rotated and a thrust was
applied. In that case, the spaceship would change its
direction off movement. This change of movement was
essential not only in controlling the spaceship within
boundaries, but also in maintaining its velocity within limits
because of the frictionless environment (accelerating in a
frictionless environment would lead to higher and higher
velocity unless there was a change in flying direction).
Participants were instructed to learn to control and
maintain the spaceship within a particular range of velocity
and a bounded area on the screen. These two subtasks were
reflected by the velocity and control scores respectively,
which were continuously updated on the screen. Participants
also had to protect the spaceship from being hit by bombs
emitted from the fortress and mines that periodically
emerged on the screen. Participantss could also shoot the
mines to gain points. The four subscores: points, control,
velocity, and speed added up to the total scores, which were
also continuously displayed on the screen.
A cognitive task analysis (Schraagen et al., 2000) was
conducted to identify
entify major components of the task and to
explicate the hierarchical relationship between internal goals
and external cues. Figure 1 shows the overall structure of
the cognitive task analysis of the Space Fortress game. The
overall objective of the game iss shown at the function
purpose level. The four major subscores are shown at the
abstract function level, and each of the subscores is mapped
to one or more generalized functions. These generalized
functions were assumed to the major subgoals that
participants
ants had when they were learning to do the task, and
they were explicitly taught how to accomplish these
subgoals before they began the training. Each generalized
function is then mapped to the various state indicators (e.g.,

Figure 1: Cognitive task analysis of the Space Fortress game.

In the Fixed Priority (FP) training condition, participants
were instructed to give equal weight to the subscores
throughout the sessions.
ns. In the Varied Priority (VP) training
condition, participants were instructed to emphasize one of
the four subscores in each game, and the emphasis changed
throughout the sessions. Due to space limitation, we will
focus on effects of the training conditions
condit
on the velocity
subscore, which reflected how well the participants could
successfully control the velocity of the spaceship. This
subscore was also the most predictive of overall
performance for all participants.

Method
Participants
Thirty-nine participants
icipants recruited from University of Illinois
community were randomly assigned to either the Fixed
Priority (FP) training or the Varied Priority (VP) training
condition. Participants had no more than a moderate amount
of video game experience.

Tasks
Figure 2 shows the Space Fortress game display. The
starting position of a computer--controlled fortress was
centered within two concentric hexagons. And a spaceship
controlled by a joystick was located between two hexagons.
The fortress rotated to track and fire
fir shots at the spaceship.
The small diamond between two hexagons is a shot from the
fortress. The arrow is a missile from the spaceship. The

2537

larger diamond is a mine, which appeared every few
seconds. The dollar sign indicated an opportunity for bonus.
A control panel was shown below the area in which the
spaceship and mines flew. It displayed four subscores,
including points (PNTS), control (CNTRL), velocity
(VLCTY), and speed (SPEED). It also displayed the
vulnerability (VLNER) of the fortress, an indicator to
identify friend or foe (IFF), an interval (INTRVL) which
indicated the time between IFF responses, and shots
(SHOTS) which indicated the number of missiles remaining
on the spaceship.

There were 5 emphasis (practice) blocks between the test
blocks. For the VP group, in each emphasis block
participants were asked to emphasize some aspect of the
game in the order of control, velocity, speed, points, and
total score, and every other day, the reverse order. All
emphasis conditions were communicated to participants by
pop-up windows between sessions. Additionally, for the VP
group, reminder text appeared at the corner of the display
telling participants what they should be focusing on (see
Figure 2). For the FP group, participants did the same
amount of trials but are told to always emphasize total score.

Results
Due to technical difficulties, two participants did not
complete all of the tasks. The total score of one participant
was 3 standard deviations away from the mean and was
excluded from further analysis. We therefore had data from
36 participants in the following analyses.
7000
6000

Total Scores

5000
4000

FP-L
FP-H
VP-L

VP-H

VP-H

FP-H
VP-L

3000
2000

FP-L

1000

Figure 2: The Space Fortress game display

Participants in both FP and VP conditions initially
completed the same three trials of an aiming task to destroy
as many mines as possible. This aiming task was designed
to demonstrate how to use the joystick to control the
spaceship in a frictionless environment. The total aiming
score was a function of the number of destroyed mines and
the speed with which they were destroyed.
After completing the aiming task, participants in each
condition received instructions for the actual Space Fortress
game. Participants were instructed that the main objective of
the game was to maximize the total score, and this was the
same for both conditions. However, participants in the FP
condition were told to emphasize each of the four main
subscores (points, control, velocity, and speed) equally
throughout the whole experiment. On the other hand,
participants in the VP condition were told to improve and
monitor only one particular subscore while maintaining
focus on other subscores in any one of the trials.

Procedure
All participants completed the training in 10 consecutive
days. Each day they did a 2-hour session, with each session
consisting of 7 blocks. The first and last blocks are test
blocks in which participants are required to emphasize total
scores. Participants are told these are not practice blocks.

0
-1000

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-2000

Figure 3: Average total scores across test blocks for the High (H)
and Low (L) groups in each condition

Based on previous findings that VP training had different
benefits for low and high ability participants (Gopher et al.,
1989), we performed a median split on the total scores of
the first test block to identify the High (H) and Low (L)
performance groups in each condition. Figure 3 shows the
total scores for each group across the 20 test blocks.
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) showed a significant main
effect of blocks (F(19, 627) =106.946, p<.001), H-L (F(19,
627) =106.946, p<.001), but not for conditions (FP vs. VP).
However, there was a significant interaction between blocks
and H-L (F(19,627) =3.891, p<.001), and between blocks
and conditions (F(19,627) =1.745, p<.05). Participants in
the High and VP groups learned significantly faster across
blocks than the Low and FP groups, respectively. The threeway interaction conditions x HL x blocks was marginally
significant (p=0.18).
The results showed that, in general, VP training was more
successful than FP training. Interestingly, the difference was

2538

larger in the Low performance group, in which participants
started with a much lower score and was consistently lower
throughout the 20 test blocks. In fact, Figure 3 shows that
for the High performance group, participants in the VP
condition were only slightly better than those in the FP
conditions. However, for the Low performance group, the
total scores for participants in the VP condition increased to
almost the same level as the High performance group at the
last block, but participants in the FP condition had a much
lower total score even after 20 hours of training.

Participants in the FP condition and Low group used
significantly more CCW actions than the VP condition and
High group, respectively. As shown in Figure 5, the number
of CCW actions in the FP-L group was significantly higher
than the VP-L group, but there was almost no difference
between the FP-H and VP-H groups.
1600
FP-H
FP-L
VP-H
VP-L

1400
1200

T

Analysis of Action Sequences

1000

FP-L

800

VP-L

600
400

VP-H
FP-H

200
0
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

19

Figure 4: The number of T actions across test blocks for the High
(H) and Low (L) groups in the Fixed Priority (FP) and Varied
Priority (VP) conditions.
500
450
400

CCW

To further understand the effects of VP training on
perceptual-motor skill acquisition, action sequences were
extracted from the game and compared across conditions.
The game was designed such that clockwise rotation of the
spaceship was better than counter-clockwise direction.
Participants were informed of this optimal strategy upfront
before the training began. To study how well participants
learned to use this optimal strategy, we focus on the analysis
of the number of clockwise rotation (CW), counterclockwise rotation (CCW), and thrust (T) actions across
blocks. Given that participants were instructed to control
their spaceships by clockwise rotation, it was expected that
participants would performed more CW and fewer CCW
actions across blocks. In addition, given that the velocity
score would decrease when velocity of the spaceship was
too high, it was also expected that the number of T actions
would decrease across blocks.
First-order Action Sequences Figure 4 shows that the
number of T (thrust) actions in each condition. ANOVA
showed significant main effect of H-L (F (1, 33) =26.313,
p<.001), but not for conditions. The interaction between
conditions and H-L was marginally significant (F(1, 33)
=3.849, p=.058). As shown in Figure 4, participants used
significantly fewer T actions in the High than the Low
group. Participants in the FP-L group used much more T
actions than those in the VP-L group, but the difference was
much smaller between the FP-H and VP-H groups. ANOVA
also showed that the main effect of blocks was significant
(F(19,627) =3.331, p<.001), confirming the obvious
downward trend, suggesting that participants were
successful in reducing the use of thrust in controlling the
spaceship. The interaction between blocks and H-L was also
significant (F(19,627) =3.859, p<.001). The interaction
between blocks and conditions and the three-way interaction
was not significant.
Figure 5 shows the number of CCW (counter-clockwise)
actions across 20 test blocks. ANOVA on the number of
CCW actions showed significant main effects of conditions
(F(1,33)=6.842, p<.05) and H-L (F(1,33)=28.116, p<.001).
The interaction between conditions and H-L was also
significant (F(1, 33)=5.08, p<0.05). The main effect of
blocks and the interaction between H-L and blocks was
significant
(F(19,627)=11.306,
p<.001
and
F(19,627)=3.161, p<.001 respectively).
However the
interaction between conditions and blocks was not
significant, nor was the three-way interaction.

FP-H
FP-L
VP-H
VP-L

350
300

FP-L

250
200
150
100
50

FP-H

VP-L

VP-H

0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Figure 5: The number of CCW actions across test blocks for the
High (H) and Low (L) groups in the Fixed Priority (FP) and Varied
Priority (VP) conditions.

The overall behavioral patterns shown in Figure 4 and 5
were very similar, both showing that the number of
“suboptimal” actions decreased across test blocks. However,
similar to the improvements in total scores (Figure 3),
participants in the High performance groups did not differ
between conditions. On the other hand, participants in the
Low performance groups showed a large difference: the FPL group used significantly more “suboptimal” actions than
the VP-L group. This pattern of results again supported the
notion that VP training was more effective than FP training
for the Low performance group. Apparently, participants

2539

significant (p=.085). Three-way interactions blocks x
conditions x H-L was significant (F(19,627) = 2.178,
p<.005). No other effect was significant.

who were already good at controlling the joystick did not
benefit much from either training method.
700

120

VP-L
FP-H
VP-H
FP-L

500
400
300

FP-H
FP-L
VP-H
VP-L

100

CW-T

CW

600

VP-H

80

FP-H

60

FP-H

VP-L
FP-L

FP-L

200

40

VP-H
VP-L

100

20

0

0
1

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

19

Figure 6: The number of CW actions across test blocks for the
High (H) and Low (L) groups in the Fixed Priority (FP) and Varied
Priority (VP) conditions.

Figure 7: The number of CW-T actions across test blocks for the
High (H) and Low (L) groups in the Fixed Priority (FP) and Varied
Priority (VP) conditions.

Figure 6 shows the number of CW (clockwise) actions
across test blocks. ANOVA on the number of CW actions
showed that main effects of conditions, H-L and their
interaction were not significant. However, the main effect of
blocks was significant (F(19,627)=10.210, p<.001). The
interaction between conditions and blocks was significant
(F(19,627)=2.358, p<.001). As shown in Figure 6, although
all participants used more CW actions across test blocks, the
improvement differed across conditions. The improvement
was bigger in the VP than the FP condition in the Low
performance group, but not in the High performance group.
Results again supported the notion that VP training was
more effective to learn the optimal strategy to control the
spaceship. Overall, we see that participants not only learned
to reduce the number of actions needed to control the
spaceship, but also learned to use more effective actions and
reduced the use of suboptimal actions.

Figure 7 clearly shows that the three-way interaction was
caused by the higher number of CW-T in the VP-H group.
Although we did not see major differences between the VPH and FP-H in previous analyses, the higher number of
CW-T showed that participants in the VP-H group not only
were successful in controlling the spaceship (like the FP-H
group), but they were also better at chunking the actions
required to control and aim than the other groups.

Higher-order Action Sequences We also extracted the
transitions between actions to investigate further how the
different training conditions influence learning of these
higher-order action sequences. We extracted all second and
third order transitions among the three actions CW, CCW,
and T (e.g., CW-CW indicates a clockwise rotation followed
by another clockwise rotation). There were a total of 9
second order and 27 third order transitions. None of the
third order transitions showed significant differences
between conditions. Due to space limitation, we will focus
on two most frequent second-order transitions that showed
significant differences between conditions.
Figure 7 shows the number of CW-T (clockwise-thrust)
actions across test blocks. One major function of this action
sequence was to change direction of the spaceship, and to
control the spaceship to rotate in a clockwise direction and
aim (and fire) at the fortress or mines to gain more points.
ANOVA on the number of CW-T actions showed that the
main effects of conditions (FP vs. VP) was marginally

CCW-T

50
45
FP-H

40

FP-L
VP-H

35

VP-L
30
25
20

FP-L

15

VP-L
VP-H
FP-H

10
5
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Figure 8: The number of CCW-T actions across test blocks for the
High (H) and Low (L) groups in the Fixed Priority (FP) and Varied
Priority (VP) conditions.

Figure 8 shows the number of CCW-T (counterclockwise-thrust) actions across test blocks. CCW-T
allowed participants to rotate in a counter-clockwise
direction (which was suboptimal) and aim at the fortress or
mines. ANOVA on the number of CCW-T actions showed
that the main effect of H-L, and the two-way interaction
blocks x conditions were marginally significant (p=.054 and
p=.108 respectively). The main effect of blocks was
significant (F(19,627) = 11.804, p<.001), so was the three-

2540

way interaction blocks x conditions x H-L (F(19,627) =
1.620, p<.05). Results showed that participants were better
at reducing the use of the suboptimal action sequences, and
this improvement was faster for the VP-L than the FP-L
group.

Conclusion and Discussion
The current results in general provided further support for
the VP training method for perceptual-motor skill learning
in complex, multi-tasking environments. In the Space
Fortress game, perceptual-motor skill learning (controlling
the spaceship) was the most difficult and critical skill for
performance. The total scores across test blocks showed that
for the High performance group, participants in the VP
condition were only slightly better than those in the FP
conditions. However, for the Low performance group,
participants in the VP condition were much better than those
in the FP condition.
CW actions were designed to be better than CCW actions
in the game, and T actions were expected to decrease across
test blocks to obtain a higher velocity score. Therefore CW
actions were identified as optimal first-order action
sequence, and T actions, CCW actions, and CCW-T actions
were separated into suboptimal action sequences. All
participants used more CW actions (optimal) across test
blocks, and similar to the improvements in total scores, the
increases in CW actions were bigger in the VP than the FP
condition in the Low performance group, but not in the
High performance group. The results of T actions, CCW
actions, and CCW-T actions showed that the number of
suboptimal action sequences decreased across test blocks,
and participants in the VP-L group used much fewer
suboptimal action sequences than those in the FP-L group,
but the difference was much smaller between the FP-H and
VP-H groups. In addition, the analysis of CW-T action
sequences showed that participants in VP-H group not only
could successfully control the spaceship, but also perform
better at chunking the actions required to control and aim
than the other groups.
Research has shown that VP training is often better than
whole-task, part-task, and part-whole training because VP
training not only can reduce task complexity but also can
keep the task components as a whole. Our results showed
that VP training was more effective for people who started
off with a lower performance level. Given that the Space
Fortress game is a difficult task that requires efficient
attention allocation strategies, it was possible that
performance were largely limited by cognitive resources
available to the individuals. Participants in the Low
performance group were therefore likely reached the
resource limits earlier than the High performance group.
Given that under FP training, the trainees have to
simultaneously split their resources over different
subcomponents, but under VP training, the trainees can
invest all resources in one subcomponent at one time and
then shift to other subcomponents in other trials,
participants in the VP group would therefore more likely
able to practice each subcomponent with more resources
available, and thus would more likely to acquire better
action sequences than in the FP group.

In addition to more resources available for each
subcomponent, experiences of how different subcomponents
were dynamically related to each other were also important
in the game. Under FP training, participants received
feedback based on the total score that represented the sum
of subcomponents (control, velocity, speed, points); while
under VP training, participants received feedback on
different subcomponents in different trials. Thus, in VP
training, participants obtained more diverse feedback and a
wider range of experiences of different attention allocation
strategies than the FP group. In other words, not only did
participants in the VP group able to learn to improve each
subcomponent better, they were also more likely to learn
when and how to shift attention to different subcomponents
and experience the performance consequences. Participants
in the VP group would therefore more likely learn to acquire
the better action sequences than in the FP group.
In general, participants in the Low performance group
tended to benefit most from the VP training, as they showed
the biggest overall improvement through faster learning of
optimal action sequences and reduction of suboptimal action
sequences. However, even in the High performance group,
participants were better at acquiring complex action
sequences in the VP condition. Our studies complement
previous research by showing exactly how the training
method has an impact on the acquisition of optimal action
sequences in a complex multi-tasking environment, and
highlight how the method interacts with the initial learning
ability of participants, which is important for realistic
training consideration. Future research will further
investigate the effectiveness of different training methods
for people with different cognitive profiles to understand
how these methods can be optimized for them.

References
Adams, J.A. (1987). Historical review and appraisal of
research on learning, retention and transfer of human
motor skills. Psychological Bulletin 101, 41-77.
Gopher, D., Weil, M., & Siegel, D. (1989). Practice under
changing priorities: An approach to training of complex
skills. Acta Psychologica, 71, 147-179
Ioerger, T.R., Sims, J., Volz, R.A, Workman, J., and
Shebilske, W.L. (2003). On the Use of Intelligent Agents
as Partners in Training Systems for Complex Tasks.
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (CogSci'03).
Kramer, A.F., Larish, J.F., & Strayer, D.L. (1995). Training
for Attentional Control in Dual Task Settings: A
Comparison of Young and Old Adults. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 1 (10), 50-76.
Mane A., & Donchin, E. (1989). The space fortress game.
Acta Psychological, 71, 17-22.
Schneider, W. (1985). Training high performance skills:
Fallacies and guidelines. Human Factors 27, 285-301.
Schraagen, J. M., Chipman, S. F., & Shalin, V.L. (2000).
Cognitive Task Analysis. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Wightman, D.C. and G. Lintem. (1985). Part-task training
for tracking and manual control. Human Factors 27,
267-284.

2541

