UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Pragmatic Inference on Phoneme Identification

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8cx6v225

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Rohde, Hannah
Ettlinger, Marc

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Pragmatic Inference on Phoneme Identification
Hannah Rohde (hannah@northwestern.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 2016 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Marc Ettlinger (marc@northwestern.edu)
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2240 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract

constitute minimal pairs in order to construct acoustically
ambiguous words that vary along a h~sh continuum. The
results we find attest to the extent of interactive effects that
any successful language processing model must capture.
The results also contribute to the well-established literature
on phoneme identification by broadening the set of known
factors that can influence processing.

Although previous research has established that multiple topdown factors guide the identification of sounds during speech
processing, the ultimate range of interaction across levels of
linguistic structure is still unknown. In a set of experiments,
we investigate whether interactive effects emerge between the
two most disparate domains: pragmatic inference and acoustic
speech perception. We use contexts that trigger pragmatic
expectations regarding upcoming coreference (expectations
for either he or she), and, in those contexts, we test listeners'
identification of phonetic category boundaries (using words
on the /hi/~/∫i/ continuum). The results indicate that pragmatic
inference can indeed alter listeners’ identification of phonetic
categories.

Modeling Pragmatic Interaction
Interactive approaches to processing are characterized by
models “in which lexical, structural (syntactic) and
interpretive knowledge sources communicate and interact
during processing in an optimally efficient and accurate
manner” (Marslen-Wilson & Tyler 1980). Existing work has
identified top-down pragmatic effects, i.e. interaction,
within syntactic processing, but interactive effects between
pragmatic and phonetic information sources have not, to our
knowledge, been demonstrated before.
Early work demonstrated the effect of pragmatic factors
on other levels of sentence processing, showing that
appropriate discourse contexts can eliminate syntactic
garden paths (Crain & Steedman 1985; Altmann &
Steedman 1988). This work established that comprehenders
treat material following a definite NP (The horse in The
horse raced past the barn fell) differently depending on the
number of available referents (the number of horses) in the
discourse context. These contextual effects have been
attributed to a felicity constraint that requires that a definite
NP have a unique and identifiable referent—a constraint
that encourages comprehenders to interpret post-nominal
material (raced past the barn) as NP modification rather
than a main verb. Referential context has also been shown to
yield online effects in syntactic processing (Ni, Crain, &
Shankweiler 1996; van Berkum, Brown, & Hagoort 1999;
Sedivy 2002). These results lend support to models of
incremental processing in which comprehenders have access
to pragmatic information before sentence-internal syntactic
decisions have been fully resolved. Our work also relies on
referential biases, but we push the extent of interactivity
further by showing that discourse context can influence the
identification of a phonetic category boundary.

Keywords: Phonetics, pragmatics, categorical perception,
pronoun interpretation, implicit causality

Introduction
There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that
language processing requires the integration of multiple
sources of linguistic knowledge across multiple levels of
linguistic structure. These relevant knowledge sources range
from low-level features of the acoustic signal, through
lexical and morpho-syntactic properties of words and
phrases, up to higher-level semantic and pragmatic
inferences about the speaker’s intended message (e.g.,
Ganong 1980 and Pitt 1995 for lexical effects on phoneme
perception; Spivey & Tanenhaus 1998 for lexical effects in
syntactic processing; and van Berkum, Brown, & Hagoort
1999 for pragmatic effects in syntactic processing, among
many others). Occupying the far ends of this spectrum are
phonetics and pragmatics. Therefore, we submit that
identifying contexts in which comprehenders bring together
cues from these two very distinct domains would provide a
strong demonstration of the maximum extent of this
interactivity.
Our experiments test for interactive effects at the
pragmatic-phonetic interface in contexts in which listeners’
comprehension of an acoustically ambiguous word might
reflect pragmatic biases of the discourse context. To do this,
we use words whose interpretation is inherently discourse
dependent—namely, personal pronouns. Based on existing
pragmatics work on pronoun interpretation, we use contexts
in which listeners have been shown to anticipate subsequent
reference to a particular referent. We then capitalize on the
fact that the English third person pronouns he and she

Modeling Contextual Effects in Phonetics
Existing work on the factors that influence phoneme
identification has established that listeners use more than

381

just the acoustic signal. The contextual factors that have
been shown to have an impact include cues such as lexical
status, syntactic category, and semantic congruity. The
influence of such contextual factors can be captured both in
models that permit top-down contextual information to
impact sound perception directly, as in McClelland &
Elman’s (1986) TRACE model as well as in models in
which the perceptual system operates fully independently
from other levels of language processing and top-down
factors only exert an influence at the point of lexical
decision, as in Norris, McQueen, & Cutler’s (2000) Merge
model. Models like TRACE permit interaction at all levels
whereas models like Merge attribute top-down effects to the
integration of multiple information sources when a lexical
decision is made. We use the term interactive effects here
to refer to listener responses that reflect biases from
information sources at different levels of linguistic structure,
but we do not distinguish between the interaction and
integration accounts (for discussion of this debate as well as
methods for distinguishing the two approaches, see Norris et
al. 2000, Magnuson, McMurray, Tanenhaus, & Aslin 2003,
and Samuel & Pitt 2003). Our primary goal here is to extend
the observed range of top-down effects beyond the
previously reported lexical, syntactic, and semantic levels.
Contextual effects based on lexical status were first
shown by Ganong (1980) in experiments that established
that listeners’ phonetic category judgments can be
influenced by the lexical status of the stimulus: Ambiguous
sounds along the /t/~/d/ continuum are more likely to be
reported as /t/ when presented as the onset in a task~dask
continuum and are more likely to be reported as /d/ when
presented as part of a tash~dash continuum.
Phonetic category judgments are also sensitive to
syntactic context: Acoustically ambiguous words along the
to~the continuum are more likely be reported as to in
contexts with a verb, as in We tried to go, than in contexts
with a noun, as in We tried the gold (Isenberg, Walker, &
Ryder 1980; see also van Alphen & McQueen 2001)
Furthermore, there is evidence that ambiguous sounds are
interpreted differently depending on the semantic congruity
of the target word in a particular context: Ambiguous
sounds along the path~bath continuum are more likely to be
reported as /p/ in the context She likes to jog along the…
and are more likely to be reported as /b/ in the context She
needs hot water for the…(Miller, Green, & Schermer 1984).
Miller et al. report, however, that semantic congruity effects
disappear when the task requires listeners to focus only on
the target word, rather than on the full sentence frame.
One way of understanding these syntactic and semantic
effects is to assume that a particular interpretation of the
acoustically ambiguous item is more accessible or more
strongly activated given the surrounding lexical items. In
other words, lexical items like go and gold constrain the part
of speech of the preceding word. Similarly, contexts that
mention hot and water activate the word bath, whereas
contexts that mention jogging activate path. These
associations can be said to reflect comprehenders’ syntactic

knowledge and their mental models of particular events and
event participants. As such, these results point to the
dynamic integration of information sources ranging from
hierarchical syntactic structures to real-world event
knowledge. However, these associations may also be
attributed to simple co-occurrence frequencies (see Willits,
Sussman, & Amato 2008 for a co-occurrence-based account
of data that has previously been taken to support highly
interactive models). That is, it is possible that these results
do not reflect listeners’ understanding or parsing of the
context in question, but rather reflect statistical frequencies
over adjacent words.
The results presented in this paper go beyond this
previous work in several important ways. In our contexts,
we simultaneously hold constant both the lexical status of
our target items and their syntactic category. Furthermore,
our target items can be considered semantically neutral in
that they are used across semantic contexts and their
relationships to other words in the context do not reduce to
co-occurrence frequencies.
Our experiments demonstrate that phoneme identification
is sensitive to pragmatic inferences about referents in the
discourse context and to domain-general causal reasoning.
First, Experiment 1 replicates the Ganong effect of
phonetic~lexical interaction for the /h/~/∫/ continuum.
Experiments 2 and 3 use a novel design to test whether
listeners’ pragmatic expectations can influence phonetic
category identification. For the second and third
experiments, lexical status is not at issue because all
acoustically ambiguous sounds yield legitimate lexical
items, allowing us to attribute the effects we observe to
interactive effects between pragmatic and phonetic cues.

Experiment 1: Ganong Replication for /hi/~/∫i/
In order to establish that the /h/~/∫/ continuum is a valid one
for assessing phonetic category perception, we first obtained
a measure of the effect of lexical status on acoustic
perception by replicating the Ganong effect for /h/~/∫/. We
tested whether listeners would judge the ambiguous onset of
a monosyllabic item (e.g., /ik/) as more /∫/-like if the
English lexicon contains a word with a /∫/- onset (e.g., sheik)
and lacks a corresponding word with a /h/- onset (*heik,
*heek).

Methods
Participants 35 native English-speaking Northwestern
University undergraduates received either $6 or course
credit for their participation in the study. A subset of these
participants also completed Experiments 2 and 3. Note that
this experiment, labeled here as Experiment 1, was always
completed as the last part of the experiment session if the
session included multiple tasks.
Materials Six pairs of items were created such that each
pair consisted of a word and a non-word. The pairs
sheik/*heik, sheen/*heen, and sheaf/*heaf were the /∫/-

382

biasing pairs in which the /∫/- onset constituted a word. The
pairs heeds/*sheeds, heels/*sheels, and heave/*sheave were
the /h/-biasing pairs in which the /h/- onset constituted a
word. Onsets ranged from /h/ to /∫/ along a 20-step acoustic
continuum. Unlike the /t/~/d/ continuum, which can be
generated by varying a single acoustic parameter, namely
voice onset time, /h/~/∫/ is not differentiated by a single
simple parameterizable acoustic variable. Therefore, we
combined two naturally produced tokens of he and she at
varying intensities (McGuire, 2007; Munson & Coyne, in
press). The duration of the fricative portion, which may also
serve as a cue to differentiate these two items, was the
average of the /hi/ and /∫i/ tokens. Items were constructed
such that each of the 6 pairs appeared with each of the 20
/hi/~/∫i/ steps. Participants heard all items twice.

The main effect of lexical status replicates the effect
originally observed by Ganong for the /t/~/d/ continuum,
extending the effect to the /h/~/∫/ continuum. Because a
subset of the participants had already participated in
Experiments 2 and 3 during the experiment session, we also
compared performance based on prior experiment
participation. There was no difference between participants
who had only participated in Experiment 1 and those that
had participated in multiple experiments (F<1).

Experiment 2: Referential Context
In our first examination of whether listeners’ pragmatic
knowledge and reasoning influences their phonetic category
perception, we used contexts in which all contextually
relevant referents were of the same gender in order to see if
referential context biased listeners’ interpretation of a
subsequent acoustically ambiguous pronoun. If listeners do
not combine pragmatic and phonetic information in
determining phonetic category membership, we would
expect to see category assignments based only on the
acoustic input of the pronoun, regardless of referential
context. On the other hand, if listeners can combine
pragmatic and phonetic cues and if pragmatic information is
available when listeners are making phonetic category
decisions as part of the interpretation of words in fullsentence discourse contexts, we would expect to see
category assignments that differ by context.

Procedure Participants listened to the items through
headphones while sitting in a sound-attenuating booth. For
each item, they were asked to indicate using a button box
whether the onset of the item sounded more h-like or more
sh-like on a 4-point scale.

Results and Discussion
As predicted, listeners were more likely to report hearing an
initial /∫/ for /∫/-biasing items (items on the sheik~heik,
sheen~heen, and sheaf~heaf continua; mean score=2.9,
where 1 is /h/ and 4 is /∫/) than for /hi/-biasing items (items
on the heeds~sheeds, heels~sheels, and heave~sheave
continua; mean score=2.4). There was a main effect of
lexical status with the data collapsed across steps
(F(1,33)=192.737, p<0.001). The results are shown in
Figure 1 with error bars for standard error of the mean.

Methods
Participants 26 native English-speaking Northwestern
undergraduates participated. All individuals went also
participated in Experiments 1 and 3 during the same session.
Materials 40 sentences were constructed consisting of two
clauses connected by because. The first clause introduced
two individuals of the same gender and the second clause
contained an acoustically ambiguous pronoun, as in (1-2).
(1) he-biasing context:
Luis reproached Joe because  hadn’t done the work.
(2) she-biasing context:
Joyce helped Sue because  was up against a deadline.
If listeners infer that the discourse context is limited to the
two named individuals in the first clause, then the pronoun
in the second clause must be linked to an antecedent that is
matched for gender. Because the two available referents in
the discourse context were of the same gender, the sentences
strongly bias the interpretation of the acoustically
ambiguous pronouns to he in contexts like (1) or she in
contexts like (2). We normed a total of 20 steps along the
/hi/~/∫i/ continuum (using the /hi/~/∫i/ component in
isolation, not in sentential contexts) to find steps that were
centered around the point of maximum ambiguity for
listeners. From those 20, we selected a smaller set of 5 steps
for testing in order to increase the number of trials at each

Figure 1: Impact of lexical status on perceived phonetic
category for /hi/~/∫i/ continuum in Experiment 1

383

data point without repeating items. Each sentence contained
a pronoun consisting of one of the 5 /hi/~/∫i/ steps. We
manipulated gender bias within subjects and between items.
Participants heard all items once.

may be more likely to contain the word he. Given this
concern, Experiment 3 uses contexts in which a female
name and a male name are both present. Instead of relying
on a single-gender referential context, Experiment 3 uses
listeners’ pragmatic reasoning about event causality in order
to shift co-reference biases.

Procedure Participants listened to the sentences through
headphones while sitting in a sound-attenuating booth. For
each item, they were asked to indicate on a button box
whether the sentence mentioned he or she, using a 4-point
scale. After each sentence participants were asked a yes/no
comprehension question based on the sentence’s meaning
(but not the interpretation of the pronoun) to ensure they
were focused on understanding the sentence and not simply
focused exclusively on the ambiguous phoneme.

Experiment 3: Causal Reasoning
In order to construct contexts in which domain-general
aspects of pragmatic reasoning might influence sound
perception, we used sentences containing verbs from the
class of so-called implicit causality verbs (Garvey &
Caramazza 1974, inter alia). These verbs have been shown
to guide listeners’ coreference expectations by describing
events in which one participant (either the subject or object,
depending on the verb) is implicated as central to the
event’s cause and is thus likely to be re-mentioned in a
subsequent because clause.

Results and Discussion
Only trials where participants correctly answered the
comprehension question were included in the results. As
predicted by an interactive account, we found that items
with she-biasing contexts that contained only female
referents yielded higher she ratings (mean score=2.3 where
1 is he and 4 is she) than he-biasing contexts that contained
only male referents (mean score=1.6). There was a main
effect of gender context with the data collapsed across steps
(F(1,26)=37.860, p<0.005). The results appear in Figure 2.

Methods
Participants 26 native English-speaking Northwestern
University undergraduates participated. All individuals also
participated in Experiments 1 & 2 during the same session.
This experiment was completed as the first task.
Materials 40 sentences were constructed consisting of two
clauses connected by because. The first clause introduced
two individuals of opposite gender and an implicit causality
verb; the second clause contained an acoustically ambiguous
pronoun. Items were balanced for implicit-causality bias
(subject preference vs. object preference) and the position of
the male and female names (subject vs. object), as in (3-6).
(3) she-biasing context, object verb bias
Luis reproached Heidi because  was getting grouchy.
(4) he-biasing context, object verb bias
Joyce helped Steve because  was working on the
same project.
(5) she-biasing context, subject verb bias
Abigail annoyed Bruce because  was in a bad mood.

Figure 2: Impact of referential context on perceived
phonetic category in Experiment 2

(6) he-biasing context, subject verb bias
Tyler deceived Sue because  couldn't handle a
conversation about adultery.

These results support a model of processing in which
pragmatic biases are brought to bear on decisions regarding
phonetic category membership, at least to the extent that
referential context influences listeners’ expectations about
which individual will be mentioned next.
One question that can be raised regarding Experiment 2 is
whether the experiment actually tests listeners’ pragmatic
reasoning or whether the results can also be explained by
semantic neighborhood or co-occurrence effects. Sentences
that contain female names may simply be more likely to
contain the word she, and sentences that contain male names

Each sentence contained one acoustically ambiguous
pronoun (taken from the 5 steps on the /hi/~/∫i/ continuum
that were normed for the Experiment 2 materials).
Participants heard all items once. In order to ensure that any
measured effect was due to the pragmatic biases of the IC
verbs and not the plausibility of the sentence continuations
(e.g. he/she was getting grouchy), we normed the sentences
and confirmed that both he and she versions were judged to
be significantly more plausible than a set of implausible

384

passages (F(1,11)=770.95, p<0.001, with 12 subjects who
did not participate in Experiments 1, 2, or 3).

Existing models of phoneme identification currently
account for contextual effects such as the semantic
congruity effect in one of two ways. Highly interactive
models permit direct interaction between acoustic cues, the
lexicon, and contextual cues (contextual cues broadly
construed, e.g. visual cues, speaker information, acoustic
context) such that top-down biases can influence the
perceptual system itself (Goldinger 1996; Johnson 1997;
Luce & Pisoni 1998; McClelland & Elman 1985). On the
other hand, integrative models have been proposed that
specify the point of lexical decision as the stage at which
listeners combine higher-level information sources with
lower-level phonetic cues (Norris et al. 2000). Both types
of models could in principle be adapted to account for our
results, so long as the range of contextual cues is not
restricted to lexical or co-occurrence-based input. For
interactive models, an important question is whether
pragmatic information is integrated directly into the speech
perception process, adding an additional set of non-acoustic
cues into the lexical decision process, or whether pragmatic
context yields an expectation for a particular continuation,
which in turn makes the perceptual process more sensitive
to certain acoustic cues. For models that rely on postperceptual integration of information, however, context
serves as a check on an encapsulated perception process; for
those models, our results show that pragmatic biases can act
as relevant constraints, in addition to other biases that are
introduced by lexicality, syntax, or semantics. The
difference in effect size between Experiments 2 and 3 may
point to differences in the timecourse and strength of such
biases.
Just as existing models of phoneme identification could in
principle be extended to include higher-level top-down
biases, another option for modeling our results would be to
adapt existing sentence processing models to capture effects
at lower levels of processing. Existing constraint-based
sentence processing models have up until now primarily
targeted syntactic processes not phoneme decisions
(MacDonald 1994; Jurafsky 1996; Spivey & Tanenhaus
1998; McRae, Spivey-Knowlton, & Tanenhaus 1998; Levy
2008, among others). These models—crucially their
architectures for integrating multiple cues—could be
adapted to fit our data by incorporating discourse-based
constraints that interact fully with other processing biases,
including those generated at the phonetic level. The work
described in this paper attests to the importance of a unified
approach that models a range of information sources and
their influence on each other during processing.
Existing models have thus not fully addressed the
question of precisely which linguistic levels show
interactive effects and what mechanism would allow
phonetic and pragmatic information to be combined. Our
results, which present a new type of interaction, help
establish the extent of possible interactivity that must be
accounted for, though the results also raise questions
regarding the exact nature of these interactive effects.

Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion
Only trials in which the comprehension question was
answered correctly were included in the results. As
predicted, we found that she-biasing contexts yielded higher
she ratings (mean score=2.5) than he-biasing contexts (mean
score=2.0). There was a main effect of gender context with
the data collapsed across steps and across verb types
(F(1,26)=18.738, p<0.001). The results appear in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Impact of referential context on perceived
phonetic category in Experiment 3
These results support a model of language in which
listeners’ pragmatic reasoning regarding who is likely to be
implicated as the cause of an event influences their phonetic
category decisions.

General Discussion
As we described in the introduction, a body of
accumulating evidence points to the integration of multiple
information sources during language processing. The
results presented here suggest that the range of interacting
cues spans the conceivable range of linguistic information
sources and that phonetic information interacts with highlevel causal inferencing about events, event participants, and
the likelihood of co-reference across clauses in a discourse.
Our results are in keeping with work showing that the
larger discourse context can influence language processing
at lower levels. Furthermore, our results suggest that
current processing models—be they interactive or
integrative—which combine multiple cues from multiple
linguistic domains must be refined and better articulated to
capture the range of interactivity shown here.

385

Recent evidence on the neural bases of lexical effects on
phonetic perception points towards the interactive approach
(Myers & Blumstein, 2008). The contexts used here provide
an opportunity to explore whether different processing
systems make use of different strategies for incorporating
information from different levels. If multiple systems are in
operation, it is possible that the levels in closest proximity
interact in a more dynamic fashion. By identifying contexts
that induce interactive effects at quite disparate linguistic
levels, future work can explore whether the timecourse of
such effects are attributable to integrative or interactive
mechanisms. Future work must address these questions, and
the paradigm we have introduced here provides useful
contexts for such work precisely because these contexts
permit the manipulation of biases that may be active when
listeners are interpreting sounds in rich discourse contexts.

McClelland, J. L., & Elman, J. L. (1986). The TRACE
model of speech perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 186.
McClelland J. L., Mirman D., & Holt L. L. (2006). Are
there interactive processes in speech perception? Trends
in Cognitive Science, 10, 363-369.
McGuire, G. (2007). Phonetic Category Learning. Ph.D.
Dissertation, The Ohio State University.
McRae, K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(1998). Modeling the influence of thematic fit (and other
constraints) in on-line sentence comprehension. Journal
of Memory and Language, 38, 283–312.
Miller, J. L. & Dexter, E. R. (1988). Effects of speaking rate
and lexical status on phonetic perception. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 14, 369-378.
Miller, J. L., Green, K., & Schermer, T. M. (1984). A
distinction between the effects of sentential speaking rate
and semantic congruity on word identification. Perception
& Psychophysics, 36(4), 329-337.
Munson, B., & Coyne, A. C. (in press). The Influence of
Apparent Vocal-Tract Size, Contrast Type, and Implied
Sources of Variation on the Perception of American
English Voiceless Lingual Fricatives. Journal of the
Phonetic Society of Japan.
Myers, E.B & Blumstein, S.E (2008). The neural bases of
the lexical effect: An fMRI investigation. Cerebral Cortex
18(2), 278-288.
Ni, W., Crain, S., & Shankweiler, D. (1996). Sidestepping
garden paths: Assessing the contributions of syntax,
semantics and plausibility in resolving ambiguities.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 11(3), 283-334.
Norris, D., McQueen, J. M., & Cutler, A. (2000). Merging
phonetic and lexical information in phonetic decisionmaking. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 299-325.
Pitt, M. A. (1995). The locus of the lexical shift in phoneme
identification. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 21, 1037–1052.
Price, P. J. & Levitt, A. G. (1983). The relative roles of
syntax and prosody in the perception of the /š/-/č/
distinction. Language and Speech, 26(3), 291-304.
Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Invoking discourse-based contrast sets
and resolving syntactic ambiguities. Journal of Memory
and Language, 46:341–370.
Spivey, M.J . & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998). Syntactic
ambiguity resolution in discourse: Modeling the effects of
referential content and lexical frequency. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24(6),1521–1543.
van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C. M., & Hagoort, P. (1999).
Early Referential Context Effects in Sentence Processing:
Evidence from Event-Related Brain Potentials. Journal of
Memory and Language, 41, 147–182.
Willits, J. A., Sussman, R. S., & Amato, M. S. (2008).
Event knowledge vs. verb knowledge. In Proceedings of
the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 2227–2232. Austin, TX.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a Mellon
postdoctoral fellowship to Hannah Rohde and by NIH grant
T32 NS047987 to Marc Ettlinger. We thank Ann Bradlow
and Matt Goldrick for helpful discussion and research
assistant Ronen Bay for his help during data collection.

References
Altmann, G. & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction with
context during human sentence processing. Cognition 30,
191–238.
Ganong, W. F. (1980). Phonetic categorization in auditory
word perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 6(1), 110-125.
Garvey, C., & Caramazza, A. (1974). Implicit causality in
verbs. Linguistic Inquiry, 5, 459-464.
Goldinger, S. D. (1996). Words and voices: Episodic traces
in spoken word identification and recognition memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 22, 1166-1183.
Isenberg, D., Walker, E. C. T., & Ryder, J. M. (1980). A
top-down effect in the identification of function words.
Acoustical Society of America, Los Angeles, CA.
Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and
syntactic access and disambiguation. Cognitive Science,
20(2), 137–194.
Luce, P. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Recognizing spoken
words: The neighborhood activation model. Ear and
Hearing, 19, 1-36.
Marslen-Wilson, W. & Tyler, L. K. (1980). The temporal
structure of spoken language understanding. Cognition, 8,
l-71.
MacDonald, M.C. (1994). Probabilistic constraints and
syntactic ambiguity resolution. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 9(2), 157–201.
Magnuson, J. S., McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M. K., &
Aslin, R. N. (2003). Lexical Effects on Compensation for
Coarticulation: The Ghost of Christmas Past. Cognitive
Science, 27, 285-298.

386

