UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Egocentric and allocentric spatial references in children with Cerebral Palsy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2p10v5v0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Barca, Laura
Pezzulo, Giovanni
Castelli, Enrico

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Egocentric and allocentric spatial references in children with Cerebral Palsy
Laura Barca (laura.barca@istc.cnr.it)
Neuroscience and Neurorehabilitation Department
Children's Hospital Bambino Gesù - IRCCS
Lungomare G. Marconi 36, 00058 - Santa Marinella (Rome), Italy

Giovanni Pezzulo (giovanni.pezzulo@cnr.it)
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale ‘Antonio Zampolli’, CNR, Pisa, Italy
Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie della Cognizione, CNR – Roma, Italy

Enrico Castelli (enrico.castelli@opbg.net)
Neuroscience and Neurorehabilitation Department
Children's Hospital Bambino Gesù - IRCCS
Lungomare G. Marconi 36, 00058 - Santa Marinella (Rome), Italy

Abstract

arm-centered (Colby, 1998). Allocentric, or object-centered
frames, are external to the organism and usually centered on
objects in the environment. Such coding of space has an
important role in the processing of far space when objects
are out of reach. Among allocentric representation,
distinctions can be made when the point of reference is
centered on an object of interest (object-centered) or on the
environment (e.g., room-centered) (Colby, 1998). The
information derived by egocentric and allocentric maps is
usually integrated to allow proficient spatial processing
(Burgess, 2006). However, some tasks rely more on one
frame than the other. For example, pointing to a location in
space within arm reach or grasping an object are likely
accomplished within an egocentric framework, whereas
defining the fastest route between two destinations is likely
to involve an allocentric frame. Overall, selection of what
spatial frame(s) of reference to use is highly action-specific.

Spatial memory is supported by multiple parallel
representations of the environment. Egocentric perspective
(body-centered) and allocentric representations (objectcentered) are integrated to allow correct interaction with the
world. According to Milner and Goodale (1995, 2008), the
action-related dorsal system is specialized for location of
objects in space and visuo-motor integration, and uses an
egocentric frame of reference. The perception-related ventral
system is specialized for categorical recognition of objects
and forms, and supports an allocentric frame of reference.
Here we use a Distance Judgment Task to explore the use of
different spatial frames in children with Cerebral Palsy (CP).
Following the dorsal stream vulnerability hypothesis
(Atkinson et al., 2007) children with CP might have more
difficulties in egocentric judgments and in the processing of
peri-personal space than controls. No significant difference
emerged between CP children and controls in allocentric
judgments, whereas performance was worse in egocentric
judgment, indicating inefficient use of the body-centered
representations. Keywords: Egocentric-allocentric spatial
references; Distance Judgment task; Cerebral Palsy (CP).

A number of studies showed that several regions of the
cerebral cortex subserved functions involved in spatial
processing, having a reach network of reciprocal
connections and link with subcortical structures. In the
fMRI study by Zaehle et al., (2007) participants performed a
spatial judgment task based on verbal instructions. They
have to define the spatial relations between different objects
(allocentric condition), or the position of objects with
respect to the participants (egocentric condition). A frontoparietal network was involved in both egocentric and
allocentric judgments (e.g., superior occipital gyrus, medial
portion of superior parietal cortex, superior frontal gyri
bilaterally), but partly separated networks mediate different
spatial coding strategies. While egocentric spatial coding
revealed activation mainly within the medial parts of the
posterior superior parietal lobe, the use of the allocentric
reference frame revealed activation in right parietal lobe,
bilateral ventrolateral occipito-temporal cortex and bilateral
hippocampal formation. There is also increasing evidence of
the critical role of connecting circuits, and the vestibular

Introduction
Humans are provided with different reference systems to
code the environment and its physical attributes. For
example, if we have to specify the location of an object we
can make use of different frames of reference: we can define
its position with respect to our body (egocentric frame) or
we can refer to other objects in the environment or the
environment itself (allocentric frame). Egocentric
coordinates are based on the organism’s position, and then
linked to the specific perspective under which spatial
information has been processed. Hence, these
representations are particularly relevant in action planning
and motor control in near space, when there is a direct
interaction between body and objects. Egocentric frames
have been described in relation to the different body part
they are based on, such as head-centered, eye-centered, and

831

system (Paillard, 1991). Dysfunction of egocentric frames
appeared to be associated with damage in premotor cortex
involving frontal eye field, whereas allocentric impairments
are linked to lesions in more ventral regions near the
parahippocampal gyrus (for a recent review see Grimsen,
Hildebrandt, and Fahle, 2008). Patients with visual form
agnosia, which is associated with ventral stream damage,
have been reported to have selective impairments in
allocentric judgments of spatial coding, with spared
egocentric processing (Carey, Dijkerman, and Milner, 2009;
Carey et al., 2006; Dijkerman, Milner, and Carey, 1998).
The study from Galati et al. (2000) showed a different
lateralization of spatial coding networks across the cerebral
hemispheres, with body-centered frames more lateralized in
the right hemisphere. In line with this evidence are the
neuropsychological data from Iachini et al., (2009), were
patients with right parietal lesions failed in egocentric but
not allocentric distance judgments, whereas those with left
parietal damages have difficulties in both frames of
reference.

or worse, for their age on the motion coherence task (Gunn
et al., 2002). CP children often presents with visual
disorders comprising ophthalmological abnormalities and
impairments in higher visuofunctional skills, which are
considered a clinical manifestation of dysfunctions of visual
associative areas of the dorsal visual path (Barca et al.,
2010). The vulnerability of dorsal stream has been shown
also in healthy children born preterm with no sign of
neurological deficit, visual disturbances, or cognitive and
motor deficits (Santos et al., 2008). Such findings suggest
that the number of gestational weeks has an important
influence on the normal development of visual cognition.
Linking the vulnerability of the dorsal stream with the
association of this brain regions with egocentric spatial
representations, one can assume that mainly egocentric
representations would be impaired in spatial processing of
CP.
The aim of this study was to investigate the impact that
brain injuries occurring early in life (e.g., prenatal or
perinatal period) exert on the development of the different
coordinate systems used for the coding of space, by
studying the performance of hemiplegic CP children on a
distance judgment task. Specifically, our main research
question is: are egocentric (self-referred) and allocentric
(object-referred) distance judgments similarly impaired?
The dorsal/ventral distinction has been recently extended to
spatial processing, suggesting that the dorsal circuit
provides egocentric coding of space for motor control and
action planning whereas the ventral circuit is tuned with
allocentric coding of space (Medina et al. 2009). Hence, the
dorsal stream vulnerability hypothesis would predict
children with CP to have more difficulties in egocentric
judgments and in the processing of peri-personal space than
age matched controls. However, given the precocity of the
cerebral insult, they might develop compensatory
mechanisms that allow to correctly processing spatial
representations, as has been shown in patients with
idiopathic cervical dystonia (Ploner et al., 2005).
Neuropsychological adult literature provides evidence of a
link between dorsal stream lesions and impairments in
egocentric judgments (Berryhill, Fendrich and Olson, 2009).
However, patients with parietal damage having the opposite
deficit (i.e., allocentric impairments with spared egocentric
references) have also been reported (Carey et al., 2006),
thus questioning the direct link between parietal lesions and
body-centered perspective.

From a developmental point of view, the body is the
primary available spatial code for the infant and allocentric
references develops later in life, having a longer
maturational trajectory. However, Nardini et al., (2006)
suggests that object-centered coordinates and the integration
between different coding systems occur earlier than
previously thought. Using a task in which children have to
recall the location of hidden toys within an array, they
showed that spatial representations based on the
environment (allocentric frames) develop between years
three and six. Such experimental paradigm has been applied
also to the study of spatial localization in clinical population
(Nardini et al., 2008), however it might have limited
application to patients with motor and deambulation deficits
as one of its key components is the 'subject-move' condition.
Here we study spatial cognition in children with Cerebral
Palsy exploring their use of different spatial frames of
references. CP is defined as ‘‘a group of permanent
disorders of the development of movement and posture,
causing activity limitation, that are attributed to non
progressive disturbances that occurred in the developing
fetal or infant brain’’ (Rosenbaum et al., 2007). In the
framework of visual cognition, it has been shown that the
dorsal visual system (with its connections to parietal, frontal
and hippocampal areas and its relations to the egocentric
frame of reference) is more vulnerable to insult occurring
early in life than ventral visual system. Children with
hemiplegic CP (e.g., a motor deficit characterized by
paralysis of the arm, leg, and trunk on the same side of the
body) perform significantly worse than controls in dorsal
stream tasks (e.g., motion coherence task) than ventral
stream tasks (e.g., form coherence task). While a subgroup
of hemiplegic children performed better than the normal
median level for their age on the form coherence task, all
the hemiplegic children performed close to the median level,

To test the prediction of a major impairment in egocentric
than allocentric representations of space in children with
CP, we conducted a behavioral study in which egocentric
and allocentric stimulus coordinates were varied in order to
individuate their contribution in making spatial judgments.
The procedure of the experiment was motivated by the work
of Iachini and colleagues (Iachini, et al., 2006; Iachini et al.,
2009), as they were able to consistently and effectively
induce a differential involvement of spatial coding systems

832

with such procedure. However, several changes (which will
be described in the following section) have been introduced
to make the task feasible for a pediatric clinical population.

egocentric questions (‘‘Which object was closer/farther
to/from you?”), two allocentric questions (‘‘Which object
was closer/farther to/from the Cube (target)?”), and four
distractors questions about objects' shapes and colors. For
each judgment, accuracy was coded as dummy variable (1 =
correct, 0 = incorrect) and the mean accuracy by subject was
computed. The order of presentation of the questions was
first randomized and then balanced across subjects. Before
start with the session, the examiner spent some time to
familiarize with the child and explained the nature of the
experiment to the parents in order to have their consent.

Method and Materials
Participants
A group of seven children with CP participated in the study.
They were 3 male and 4 female, with mean chronological
age of 7 years (range 5-9 years), with no spatial neglect,
language or general intellectual impairments. Four child
presents with Hemiplegia, and 3 with Diplegia. A control
group of 5 children with typical development was used for
comparison. Children of this group had no history of visual,
motor or cognitive delay, and mean chronological age of 10
years (range 8-12 years),

Results
Neuropsychological assessment. CP children did not
present cognitive delay as measured with the CPM (the cutoff point for clinically significant impairment was the 25th
percentile) and have a visuospatial memory span adequate
to their age. Although some variation emerged among
patients, they did not present marked deficits in
visuoperceptual and visuomotor integration skills as
measured by the DTVP.
Regarding the controls group, parents’ questionnaire did not
report any difficulties in visuoperceptual or visuospatial
behavior (e.g., problems with shapes, objects and faces
recognition, simultaneous perception, perception of
movement, colors perception, and orientation).
Distance Judgment task. Patients and controls performance
at the Distance Judgment Task are presented in Figure 1.
Chi-square test was used to evaluate significance level of
observed differences.

Neuropsychological assessment
General cognitive level was assessed with the Raven's
Colored Progressive Matrices, CPM (Raven and Raven,
1986), which has been recently shown to be a valid tool in
the assessment of cognitive functioning in CP (Pueyo et al.,
2008). To assess visuoperceptual and visuomotor
integration skills we used the Developmental Test of Visual
Perception, DTVP (Hammill, Pearson, and Voress, 1994).
The Corsi block-tapping task (Corsi, 1972; Milner, 1971)
was used as a measure of visuospatial working memory.
Parents of the controls group fulfilled the questionnaire of
Houliston et al., (1999), adapted to Italian and used as a
screening measure of children's neurovisual behavior (e.g.,
questions regards child’s ability to recognize objects and
faces, finding way in home, distinguishing line from steps
and the perception of motion).

Figure 1: Results Distance Judgment task

Experimental task
A Distance Judgment Task, adapted from Iachini et al.
(Iachini et al., 2006; Iachini et al., 2009), has been used.
Children were presented with triads of 3D objects in peripersonal space (within arm reach) and were asked to give
egocentric and allocentric judgments. Materials comprised
eighteen graspable objects divided in triads. They were
geometrical shapes with different colors (e.g., cube,
pyramid, and wheel), animals (e.g., duck, rabbit, and horse),
vehicles (e.g., car, helicopter, and airplane) and everyday
objects (i.e., key, cork and clothes-peg). Objects within
triads had similar size. Each triad was spatially arranged so
that distance between objects was clearly discriminable, and
the amount of metric difficulty was the same for egocentric
and allocentric judgments. Participants sat at 30 cm from the
edge of the desk. Each triad was placed centrally on the
desk and with respect to the participants’ mid-sagittal plane.
A white cardboard measuring 50 x 50 cm was used to
arrange stimuli. Children were instructed to study and
memorize the position of the objects for 30 seconds. Then
the objects were covered with cups and data acquisition
started. There were eight judgments for each triads: two

Overall, both groups of children made few errors in
completing the task (no child exceeded the chance
threshold). The task resulted more difficult for CP than
controls in that they were less accurate (12% and 25%
errors, respectively in controls and patients). At the group

833

Findings of the study are preliminary as more
participants are needed to broaden our conclusions.
The extent to which our results generalize to other
aspect of spatial cognition and other types of CP are
important further questions. Nico and Daprati (2009)
propose a distinction between two separate egocentric
mechanisms: one allowing construction of the
immediate point of view and the other extracting a
required perspective within a mental representation.
This, for example, should be further addressed in our
sample of patients. Moreover, Cerebral Palsy is an
umbrella term which comprises different types of motor
limitations which differently affect how children
experience the external world and create internal
representation of it. Children of our study can be
considered ‘high functional’ cerebral palsied children in
that they do not present language delay, general
intellectual impairments and marked deficits in
visuoperceptual and visuomotor integration skills.
Notwithstanding such limitations, we believe the study
provides interesting findings relevant for the field of
spatial cognition in impaired population in
developmental age.
To summarize, children with CP were impaired in a
distance judgment task: Allocentric spatial representations
were present even in the context of impaired egocentric
coding. Further studies are needed to tackle this issue and to
understand how a unitary perception of the world is
achieved from its multiple representations.

level, controls have a Frame effect, with nearly no errors in
responding to egocentric vs. 18% errors in allocentric
condition (Chi-square = 5.2, p <.05). Differently, in CP
children the egocentric-allocentric difference was less
marked (20% and 30% of errors, respectively) and did not
reach the significance level (Chi-square = 2, p >.1). A
comparison between the two groups confirmed that CP
children were less accurate than controls in responding to
egocentric questions (Chi-square = 6.8, p <.01) whereas no
differences emerged in allocentric questions (Chi-square <
2.4, p >.1).

Discussion
In the present study, children with Cerebral Palsy were
asked to judge the position of graspable objects with respect
to their body (egocentric condition) or with respect to
landmarks (other objects) in the environment (allocentric
condition). The first evidence is that such paradigm proved
to be feasible to study spatial cognition in normally
developing children and children with CP. Such paradigm,
indeed, has been previously used with adult population
(Iachini et al., 2006; Iachini et al., 2009) and this is the first
time it is applied to developmental age.
Typically developing children were less accurate in
recalling the position of objects using allocentric spatial
coordinates then when using body-centered coordinates,
confirming the predominance of egocentric coding in the
developmental trend of spatial cognition (see Nardini et al.,
2006). This was not the case for the group of children with
CP. Indeed, they have similar performance when using
egocentric or allocentric coding. Given that no differences
emerged between groups with respect to the allocentric
judgments, results suggest a specific deficit in using bodycentered coordinates. One might argue that such difficulty
reflects a deficit in visuospatial memory. However, such
explanation is unlikely given that our sample of CP children
have adequate score in visuo-spatial working memory task.
Additionally, there is no reason to believe that (if present) a
similar limitation would selectively affect egocentric vs.
allocentric judgments. CP children’s performance reflects
preservation of categorical coding within the ventral stream,
despite a loss of coordinate coding which is consistent with
the hypothesis of dorsal stream vulnerability in such
population (Atkinson et al., 2007; Fazzi et al., 2007).
Deficits in spatial perception are usually matched with
deficit in generating spatially directed actions. Patients have
been described to neglect stimuli presented in peripersonal
space and correctly perceive them when located in
extrapersonal space, as well as the opposite pattern (Bisiach,
Perani, Vallar, and Berti, 1986). Thus, information about
how patients perceive the environment both in near and far
space has implications in rehabilitation treatments of
visuoperceptual and visuospatial impairments. We believe
that this is an important issue that needs to be further
explored in impaired population in developmental age.

Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results has been partially
founded by the European’s Community Seventh Framework
Programme under the grant agreement no. PERG02-GA2007-224919 to Laura Barca.

References
Atkinson, J. and Braddick, O. (2007). Visual and
visuocognitive development in children born very
prematurely. Progress in Brain Research, 164,123-149.
Barca, L., Cappelli, F.R., Di Giulio, P., Staccioli, S., and
Castelli, E. (2010). Outpatient assessment of neurovisual
functions in children with Cerebral Palsy. Research in
Developmental Disabilities, 31, 488-495.
Berryhill, M. E., Fendrich, R., and Olson, I. R. (2009).
Impaired distance perception and size constancy
following
bilateral
occipitoparietal
damage.
Experimental Brain Research, 194, 381-393.
Bisiach, E., Perani, D., Vallar, G., and Berti, A. (1986).
Unilateral neglect: personal and extra-personal.
Neurospychologia, 24, 759-767.
Burgess, N. (2006). Spatial memory: how egocentric and
allocentric combine. Trends Cogn Sci, 10, 551-557

834

Carey, D. P., Dijkerman, H. C., and Milner, A. D. (2009).
Pointing to two imaginary targets at the same time:
bimanual allocentric and egocentric localization in visual
form agnostic. Neuropsychologia, 47, 1469-1475.
Carey, D. P., Dijkerman, H. C., Murphy, K. J., Goodale, M.
A., and Milner, A. D. (2006). Pointing to places and
spaces in a patient with visual form agnosia.
Neuropsychologia, 44, 1584-1594.
Colby, C. (1998). Action-oriented spatial reference frames
in cortex. Neuron, 20, 15-24
Corsi, P.M. (1972). Human memory and the medial
temporal region of the brain. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation. McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
Dijkerman, H. C., Milner, A. D., and Carey, D. P. (1998).
Grasping spatial relationships: failure to demonstrate
allocentric visual coding in a patient with visual form
agnosia. Conscious Cognition, 7, 424-437.
Fazzi, E., Signorini, S. G., Bova, S. M., Piana, R. L., Ondei,
P., Bertone, C., Misefari, W., and Bianchi, P. E. (2007).
Spectrum of visual disorders in children with cerebral
visual impairment. Journal of Child Neurology, 22, 294301.
Galati, G., Lobel, E., Vallar, G., Berthoz, A., Pizzamiglio,
L., Le Bihan, D. (2000). The neuronal basis of
egocentric and allocentric coding of space in humans: a
functional magnetic resonance study. Experimental
Brain Research, 133, 156-164.
Grimsen, C., Hildebrandt, H., and Fahle, M. (2008).
Dissociation of egocentric and allocentric coding of
space in visual search after right middle cerebral artery
stroke. Neuropsychologia, 46, 902-914.
Gunn, A., Cory, E., Atkinson, J., Braddick, O., WattamBell, J., Guzzetta, A., and Cioni, G. (2002). Dorsal and
ventral stream sensitivity in normal development and
hemiplegia. Neuroreport, 13, 843-847.
Hammill, D., Pearson, N., and Voress, J. (1994).
Developmental test of visual perception; Edizione
italiana: TPV. Trento: Edizioni Centro Studi Erikson.
Houliston, M. J., Taguri, A. H., Dutton, G. N.,
Hajivassiliou, C., and Young, D. G. (1999). Evidence of
cognitive visual problems in children with
hydrocephalus: a structured clinical history taking
strategy. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology,
41, 298-306.
Iachini, T. and Ruggiero, G. (2006). Egocentric and
allocentric frame of reference: a direct measure.
Cognitive Processes, 7, S126-S127.
Iachini, T., Ruggiero, G., Conson, M., and Trojano, L.
(2009). Lateralization of egocentric and allocentric
spatial processing after parietal brain lesions. Brain and
Cognition, 69, 514-520.
Medina J, Kannan V, Pawlak MA, Kleinman JT, Newhart
M, Davis C, Heidler-Gary JE, Herskovits EH, Hillis AE.
(2009). Neural substrates of visuospatial processing in
distinct reference frames: evidence from unilateral
spatial neglect. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21,
2073-84.

Milner, A. D. and Goodale, M. A. (1995). The visual brain
in action. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Milner, A.D. and Goodale, M.A. (2008). Two visual
systems re-viewed. Neuropsychologia, 46, 774-785
Milner, B. (1971). Interhemispheric differences in the
localization of psychological processes in man. British
Medical Bulletin, 27, 272-277
Nardini, M., Atkinson, J., Braddick, O., and Burgess, N.
(2008). Developmental trajectories for spatial frames of
reference in williams syndrome. Developmental Science,
11, 583-595.
Nardini, M., Burgess, N., Breckenridge, K., and Atkinson, J.
(2006). Differential developmental trajectories for
egocentric, environmental and intrinsic frames of
reference in spatial memory. Cognition, 101, 153-172.
Nico D., Daprati E. (2009). The egocentric reference for
visual exploration and orientation. Brain and Cognition,
69, 227-235.
Paillard, J. (1991). Motor and representational framing of
space. In J. Paillard (Ed.), Brain and space. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Ploner, C. J., Stenz, U., Fassdorf, K., and Arnold, G. (2005).
Egocentric and allocentric spatial memory in idiopathic
cervical dystonia. Neurology, 64, 1733-1738.
Pueyo, R., Junquè, C., Vendrell, O., Narberhaus, A., &
Segarra, D. (2008). Raven’s Coloured Progressive
Matrices as a measure of cognitive functioning in
Cerebral Palsy.
Journal of Intellectual Disability
Research, 52, 437-445.
Raven, C. and Raven (1986). Coloured Progressive
Matrices. Giunti O.S.
Rosenbaum, P., Paneth, N., Leviton, A., Goldstein, M., Bax,
M., Damiano, D., et al. (2007). A report: The definition
and classification of cerebral palsy. April 2006.
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology.
Supplement, 109, 8–14.
Santos, A., Duret, M., Mancini, J., Gire, C., and Deruelle, C.
(2008). Preterm birth affects dorsal-stream functioning
even after age 6. Brain and Cognition, 69, 490-494.
Zaehle, T., Jordan, K., Wüstenberg, T., Baudewig, J.,
Dechent, P., and Mast, F. W. (2007). The neural basis of
the egocentric and allocentric spatial frame of reference.
Brain Research, 1137, 92-103.

835

