UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Emotion in Good Luck and Bad Luck: Predictions from Simplicity Theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0c41108j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Dessalles, Jean-Louis

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Emotion in Good Luck and Bad Luck: Predictions from Simplicity Theory
Jean-Louis Dessalles (dessalles@telecom-paristech.fr)
Telecom PARISTECH, 46 rue Barrault,
F-75013 Paris, France
&
ILCAA, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies,
Fuchu-shi, 183-8534, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
The feeling of good or bad luck occurs whenever there is an
emotion contrast between an event and an easily accessible
counterfactual alternative. This study suggests that cognitive
simplicity plays a key role in the human ability to experience
good and bad luck after the occurrence of an event.
Keywords: Kolmogorov complexity; simplicity; emotion;
luck; probability; unexpectedness.

Good Luck and Bad Luck
Situations spontaneously associated with good luck or bad
luck are an important source of emotion. They are frequent
in daily life: missing (or catching) the train by five seconds,
forgetting one’s cell phone the very day one is late for an
important appointment, finding a banknote on the ground,
etc. They are heavily used in popular fiction, precisely to
arouse emotion: the gun gets jammed just at the right (or
bad) time, the heroine defuses the bomb just before it
explodes, etc. Regarding oneself or someone else as lucky
or unlucky on specific occasions may induce gratitude or
guilt, and for those who downplay the role of chance,
intense feelings of good or bad luck may strengthen
supernatural beliefs (Teigen & Jensen, in press). Reasoning
about good luck and bad luck may also significantly
influence rational judgment (Roese, 1997; Wohl & Enzle,
2003).
The feeling of having good or bad luck is a clear-cut
phenomenon. Different individuals have consistent views of
which situations can be regarded as bad or good luck (what
the present study will confirm). This ability therefore gives
rise to a well-posed problem, worth investigating. Previous
studies have identified various parameters that control the
feeling of luck. These include physical or temporal
closeness (Kahneman & Varey, 1990; Teigen, 1996; Roese,
1997; Pritchard & Smith, 2004), deviation from norms and
expectations (Kahneman & Miller, 1986), mutability of
causes (Kahneman & Miller, 1986; Byrne 2002, 2007) and
controllability (Roese, 1997).
Many authors have acknowledged the prime importance
of counterfactuals in any situation that generates a strong
feeling of good or bad luck. Individuals systematically go
through thoughts such as “If only…” or “I almost…” when
regarding situations as (un)lucky. The theoretical treatment
of counterfactuals in general, and in emotional situations in
particular, remains however complex, as a multitude of
determining factors seem to be involved.

The purpose of the present study is to propose a new
perspective on the phenomenon, imported from two other
scientific domains. One is the study of narrative relevance
(Dessalles 2008a). Spontaneous conversations are replete
with stories about (un)lucky episodes, and the laws of
interestingness seem to apply to them. The other import is
the mathematical notion of complexity, which is involved in
several important cognitive phenomena (Chater 1999;
Chater & Vitányi, 2001).
After mentioning existing attempts to capture the
good/bad luck phenomenon formally, I will briefly present
the Simplicity Theory and its first predictions concerning
our problem. I will then present a study that seems to corroborate those predictions. Then, I will consider situations in
which individuals adopt causal thinking. The results and the
scope of the theory will be discussed in a last section.

Formal accounts of luck
Various determining factors have been identified that
control the intensity of luck. One of them is the low
probability of the (un)lucky event s. According to Rescher
(1995:211), the intensity of luck is given by L = E (1–p),
where E measures the difference that the occurrence of s
makes for the interests at stake, and p is its probability. This
formula has two major drawbacks. First, contrary to
intuition, it does not distinguish moderately unlikely
outcomes from highly unlikely ones, as both would provide
emotion roughly equal to u. Second, as pointed out by
Teigen (2005), it fails to capture the crucial presence of a
counterfactual. As shown by Teigen in various studies, the
amplitude of (un)luck is controlled by the ‘distance’ to an
alternative outcome that would have provided an emotional
contrast. Teigen (2005) represents these effects through the
formula: L = u / D, where u is the difference in ‘utility’
between the counterfactual s2 and the actual situation s1,
whereas D represents the ‘distance’ between s1 and s2.
This formula makes predictions that are much closer to
observation, and thus represents a significant progress in
comparison with Rescher’s initial proposal. It has, however,
its limitations. First, the influence of low probability, as
identified by Rescher, is lost. The problem is illustrated in
figure 1, where the feeling of unluck after missing the
winning sector (in color) in a wheel of fortune game is
stronger in (b) than in (a). Second, the notion of ‘utility’,
imported from economics, does not account for situations of
pure surprise (‘I almost got six on all dice’). Third, the

1928

notion of distance is not properly defined. Sitting next to a
lottery winner doesn’t make you feel unlucky; you might
however feel unlucky to have played her winning numbers,
but a week to soon. Lastly, Teigen’s formula fails to capture
one property of counterfactual s2 that contributes to
(un)luck, namely its simplicity. In figure 1(c), the winning
sectors (in color) of the wheel of fortune occupy the same
area as in (a) and the distance to the landing site is the same
in both cases. Judgment of bad luck is, however, stronger in
(a) than in (c). This phenomenon, due to the greater
complexity of the counterfactual in (c), is not predicted by
Teigen’s formula.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Three examples of near miss
We will propose an alternative account, based on
Simplicity Theory. It can be formulated in an informal way:
(Un)lucky events are situations that occurred despite of
simple, easily accessible alternatives.

Simplicity Theory
Simplicity Theory (ST) (formerly called ‘Complexity Drop
Theory’) has been developed to predict how people select
events worth to tell. It has applications in the study of
spontaneous conversations, of narratives, of news, and in the
definition of subjective probability (Dessalles, 2006;
2008a). ST’s main principle can be stated:
Interesting situations are those which are ‘too’ simple.
ST uses the notion of cognitive complexity, which is a
slightly modified version of the mathematical notion know
as Kolmogorov complexity.

objective world, but to the observer’s perception of the
world. ST’s central notion is unexpectedness, noted U(s).
U(s) = Cw(s) – C(s)

A situation is unexpected if it is ‘too’ simple, i.e. simpler
to describe than to generate. In the lottery example, a
‘remarkable’ lottery draw such as 22-23-24-25-26-27 is
unexpected, since C is much smaller than Cw. It only
requires to instantiate 22 and to mention that it is a
continuous series. C thus spares five instantiations by
comparison with Cw. Hence a strong feeling of
unexpectedness if such a draw actually occurs (Dessalles
2006). This definition of unexpectedness accounts for
various cognitive abilities, such as the perception of
coincidences (Dessalles, 2008b) and of interestingness
(Dessalles, 2008a; Dimulescu & Dessalles, 2009) (see
details on www.simplicitytheory.org). It is consistent with
the observation that ‘contrast’ (what we call
unexpectedness) is more relevant than (standard) probability
to explain surprise (Teigen & Keren, 2003).
Complexity is usually linked to probability p0 thanks to
the following formula p0=2–Cw0, where w0 is a blank world
(Solomonoff, 1978). This formula is, however, unsatisfactory, as it assigns a virtually zero probability to most
situations of daily life, as they depend on a huge quantity of
parameters. If we replace the blank world w0 by the
observer’s model w of the actual ‘world’, we get pw = 2–Cw,
which corresponds to the usual definition of ‘objective’
probability. In a lottery, for instance, pw is the same for all
draws. ST (Dessalles 2006) defines subjective probability p
by subtracting cognitive complexity C from Cw. We get:
p = 2–U

(the last restriction is crucial for the notion to be useful in
cognitive science). The concept is much less trivial than it
seems at first sight, and has given rise to a growing
literature since its definition in the years 1960.
ST uses two notions of complexity. The second notion is
generation complexity.
Cw(s) is the minimal size of the parameters
to be set for the ‘world’ w to generate situation s.
To compute Cw(s) of a lottery draw, for instance, one adds
up the descriptions of all drawn numbers, as the ‘world’ (in
this case, the lottery machine) had to ‘choose’ them
independently. Note that the notion refers, not to any

(2)

Hence the statement about unexpected events being ‘too’
simple. In ST’s framework, the concept of probability is a
derived notion and should be replaced by the notion of
unexpectedness to account for many aspects of cognition.
To account for good luck and bad luck, we must say how
emotion is related to simplicity (Dessalles, 2008a). Let’s
call E(s) the (always positive) intensity of the emotional
experience caused by situation s.
E(s) = Eh(s) + U(s)

The complexity C(s) of a situation s is the size of the ideal
minimal description of s that is available to the observer.

(1)

(3)

Eh(s) is the hypothetical emotional intensity attached to
the occurrence of s. It corresponds to a not unexpected
experience (when U = 0). In many cases, Eh(s) = V(s), where
V is a utility function. Events that were complex for the
world to produce (Cw large) arouse more intense emotion
when they occur, as they are more unexpected. Using (2),
(3) can be rewritten: e(s) = eh(s)/p(s), where eh and e stand
for non-logarithmic emotions. The cognitive complexity
C(s) decreases E(s) in (3). It acts like an emotional ‘tax’
paid for considering the event.1
1

In (2), U must remain positive. In (3), U may be negative, but
E must be positive. These constraints can be used to define the
relevance of events (Dessalles, 2008a).

1929

If s is not an event, but an anticipated situation, the
expected emotion can be expressed using utility function V:
Eh(s) = V(s) – U(s)

(4)

The perspective of a situation that is complex for the
world to produce (Cw large) arouses less emotion. In the
non-logarithmic domain, equation (4) reads eh(s) =
v(s)p(s).
In causal reasoning, we suppose that expected emotion
propagates through causal links (Dessalles 2008). If a
known emotional situation s is believed to result from
situation s', then Eh(s) = Eh(s'). Using conditional complexity, we may write:
U(s) = U(s') + Cw(s|s’)

(5)

By adding Eh(s) to both sides, we get:
E(s') = E(s) – Cw(s|s’)

(6)

ST’s Predictions
In the absence of any precise counterfactual, as when one’s
house is struck by lightning, (3) provides a definition of
luck, in line with (Rescher 1995):
L1 = Eh(s1) + U(s1)

(7)

To assess the expected emotion Eh(s1) in such case,
individuals may recall a known situation s of lightning on a
house (or imagine it), and consider Eh(s1) = Eh(s) = L1(s) –
U(s).
In wheel of fortune situations, the expected emotional
intensity Eh(s+) of winning corresponds to landing on a
winning site s+. The colored segment in figure 2 represents
the winning sector in a linear version of the wheel of
fortune. The complexity of landing on s+ is Cw(s+) = log2 l0.
This is the number of bits required by the ‘world’ to choose
a landing position. According to (4), the maximum value of
Eh(s+) is obtained for typical, i.e. maximally complex s+:
C(s+) = log2 l2. This is the number of bits required to
discriminate among all winning positions. We get:
max Eh(s+) = V(s+) – log2 l0/l2
This corresponds to the classical expected utility in the
non-logarithmic domain.
s1

l0

s2





l1
l2
Figure 2: Discrete bounded near miss
When playing with a wheel of fortune, individuals
acknowledge that the probability of landing in various
sectors of the roulette is constant, but that landing close to a
winning sector involves more intense bad luck (Teigen,

1996). Let us considered a linear version of the problem
(figure 2).
After the draw, possibly for (self-)narrative purposes,
individuals pick the situation s that maximizes emotional
intensity E(s). It may be the actual situation s1, as in (7), or a
counterfactual one s2. Individuals are supposed to opt for the
computation that gives the more intense emotion. In the
counterfactual case, s1 is seen as an intermediary step
toward s2. (3) and (6) give a new value for E(s1):
Ec(s1) = Eh(s2) + U(s2) – Cwc(s2|s1). Luck is measured by the
emotional gap between both emotions for s1:
L2 = Eh(s2|s1) + U(s2) – Cwc(s2|s1)

(8)

Conditional Eh(s2|s1) means that the expected emotional
intensity is assessed using the actual emotional intensity of
s1 as baseline. The counterfactual nature of s2 requires the
introduction of a fictitious world wc that is able to keep a
memory of s1 to generate s2. The term Cwc(s2|s1) is the
minimal price to pay for the ‘If…’. It represents the size of
the minimal parameter modifications that the observer can
imagine for the ‘world’ to have generated s2 instead of s1.
In the case of figure 2, Eh(s2|s1) = V(s+), and Cwc(s2|s1) =
1+ log2(+), which is the amount in bits needed to indicate
the (non zero) targeting shift to the right toward s2. On the
other hand, Cw(s2) = log2 l0 and C(s2) = 1 + log2(1+) (one
bit to choose the left edge of the winning region, plus the
representation in bits of the (possibly null) shift to reach s2).
We get: L2 = V(s+) + log2 l0 – log2(+)(1+) – 2. Taking
 = 0 to maximize the intensity of unluck:
L2 = V(s+) + log2 l0/ – 2

(9)

The experience of bad luck in this near miss experience is
an increasing function of the missed opportunity V(s+) and
of the number l0 of possibilities, and a decreasing function
of the miss .
If the counterfactual is assessed against the expected
emotion, here max Eh(s+), instead of s1, we get:
L3 = V(s+) + log2 l2/ – 2

(10)

This model accounts for the fact that when s2 is more
complex, as in figure 1(c), the intensity of (un)luck is
smaller. We have C(s2) = log2 k + 1 + log2(1+), where k is
the number of winning regions. The intensity of luck is thus
diminished by log2 k.
The extension to the continuous case is straightforward
(figure 3). We suppose that the space is bounded to the left
but not to the right. If we call  the landing precision, then
Cw(s2) = log2(l0/), as we need that number of bits to decide
where to stop.2 As previously, Cwc(s2|s1) = log2(+)/, and
C(s2) = log2(1+/). After taking the best choice  = 0, we
get:
L2 = V(s+) + log2 l0/ – 1

(11)

2
This supposes that there is a way to delimit numbers in the
algorithm.

1930

(the one-bit difference with (9) comes from the fact that
the winning region has only one edge). Equation (11)
accounts for emotions described by the expression: “fall
short of the goal”.
s1

l0

S5- Florence works in a biology lab. Her two-[year (84*) / month
(11) / week (5)] experiment on cell cultures was ruined by a
student who knocked over a shelf. This broke [all boxes
containing (35) / a bottle of formalin that fell on (45) / the
automatic device nourishing (20)] the cell cultures. Florence was
furious. She discovered that the student was the son of [her
neighbor (67*) / her former PE teacher (15) / the piano teacher
of her sister (18)].

s2



S4- Jacques was badly injured at his workplace by a defective
machine on November 7. The defect had been previously notified
and the machine was planned to be repaired on [November 8 (75*)
/ November 17 (12) / December 18 (12)].



Figure 3: Continuous unbounded near miss
Equations (9) and (11) define the intensity of luck, but not
only. They predict what the counterfactual situation s2 will
be (what many models of counterfactual thinking omit to
do). Individuals pick the alternative s2 that realizes the best
compromise between high emotion E(s2) and low
counterfactual complexity Cwc(s2|s1).

Nine Stories
The following experiment was conducted to validate the
predictions of the model. We tested 61 participants who
accepted to pass the test on a Web site
(www.dessalles.fr/expe/histoires). All contacted individuals
had a high level of academic education, though in domains
different from psychology or language sciences (mainly
students in engineering). Nine short stories were presented
to them (see Table 1). Each involved two or three choices.
Instructions invited participants to choose options that made
emotion maximal. Some choices irrelevant to the present
study (such as the age of the victim in story S9) have not
been exploited. Answers given after less than 20 sec. of
reading were automatically discarded (median answering
time per story was 90 sec.), which leaves us with a
minimum of 56 answers per story. Presentation order
(stories and options) was randomized.
Table 1: Abridged translation of the stories
(originals on www.dessalles.fr/expe/histoires).
S1- René is a railway worker. He works at the border, at a place
where signals must me manually transmitted between the two
networks. There is single-track line at [9 (71*) / 23 (21) / 15 (7)]
km from René’s post. That day, René forgot to send the signal as a
train crossed the border. He eventually did, but [ten (59*) / fifty
(21) / thirty (20)] seconds before that, another train had entered
the single-track line. The collision killed one of the two drivers.
S2- Lucas was heading for the metro station. At [30 (71*) / 100
(20) / 800 (9)] m from the station, he stopped to lace up his shoe.
As he arrived on the platform, the doors of the train closed in front
of him. He had to wait [25 (89*) / 15 (9) / 6 (2)] minutes for the
next train.
S3- Michèle has been playing lotto every week for [6 (84*) / 4 (11)
/ 2 (5)] years. On December [19 (70*) / 3 (18) / 12 (12)], she told
[two (60*) / four (32) / three (9)] friends of hers that she would
stop playing. They persuaded her to bet for the special Christmas
draw, on December 26. She did and won 62 000 Euros.

S6- A young writer is admitted to Magalie’s emergency
department at the hospital. Her condition deteriorates. [8 (66*) / 4
(21) / 6 (14)] infectious agents may explain the illness. Magalie
sends samples to the lab and tests are conducted in parallel. It takes
[seven (79*) / three (16) / five (5)] hours to get the result and the
patient is saved at the last minute. Magalie remembers that she saw
the name of the virus in [the media, as well-know singer recently
died of it (52*) / the record of another patient (28) / a
specialized journal (21)].
S7- For [four months (76*) / two months (21) / two weeks (3)] I
was thinking of changing my cell phone. I eventually went to SFR
Thursday at 1pm. I had to pay part of it because I was lacking 1000
points. [Thursday (74*) / Friday (21) / Tuesday (5)] evening, I
received an offer: “change your phone, SFR offers you [1500 (55) /
4000 (38) / 500 (7*)] points”.
S8- Ms Tsuda’s daughter had invited [two friends (71*) / all girls
in her class (17) / four friends (12)] to her house. One of them
was late. She had left her own house long ago. Ms Tsuda walked
toward the girl’s house and arrived at a level crossing, located at
[200 (55*) / 500 (24) / 900 (21)] m from Ms Tsuda’s house. There
was indeed an accident involving a young girl. It turned out that
the invited girl was not involved and was late because of a detour
caused by the accident.
S9- Helen, retired teacher, fainted as she was walking in the
woods. She was found by [a retired couple (49) / a colleague
teacher (26) / a member of her bridge club (25)] who called the
rescue team. Helen would not have survived if she had reached the
hospital [half an hour (77*) / one hour (16) / one hour and a
half (7)] later.
Note: Choices irrelevant to the present study are not shown here.
Numbers in parentheses indicate percentages. Asterisk indicates
significance (p < 0.001). Underlined numbers indicate model
predictions.

As shown in Table 1, most results were significant and 19
of the 21 majority choices are congruent with the model’s
predictions.

Analysis
Some results are commented now in the light of the
theory.
Emotions: The intensity of the actual event, E(s1), was tested
in story S2 (Lucas’s waiting time), and in story S5 (duration
of Florence’s lost experiment). Unsurprisingly, majority
choices make E(s1) maximal. In story S7, the third choice
(number of points offered) influences Eh(s2): option “500”,

1931

which would lead to a smaller value of Eh(s2), was discarded
by participants.
Counterfactual simplicity: In story S8, counterfactual s2
corresponds to the invited girl (G) being involved in the
accident (‘it could have been her’). Both majority choices in
S8 tend to make s2 simpler, in agreement with equation (8).
Participants clearly preferred that the invited girl (G) be one
among 2 (71%) instead of one among 5 (17%) or 30 (12%),
thus making the minimal description of G smaller by log2 n
– 1 in comparison with n = 5 and n = 30. Similarly, by
choosing the closest location (200m (55%)) instead of 500m
or 900m for the counterfactual accident, they saved bits on
C(s2) (log2(500/200) and log2(900/200)).
Duration before near miss: In story S7, participants judged
important that the hero hesitated four months (76%) instead
of two months or two weeks before buying her/his
telephone. We are in a case of unbounded near miss, and as
predicted by equation (11), participants preferred the largest
value for L. The same phenomenon explains the strong
preference for the fact that Michèle has been playing for 6
years (84%) in story S3 (in this case, the winning ‘sector’ is
s1 and it is reached, but the computation is identical).
Proximity in near miss: Equation (11) predicts that emotion
is maximum when one ends up close to the border between
‘winning’ and ‘loosing’ sectors ( small). Several stories
represent near miss situations. In S1, the train accident
would have been prevented if the signal had been sent
k×10sec before (k = 1 preferred (59%)); In S4, the worker
would not have been badly injured if the accident had
occurred k days later (k = 1 preferred (75%)); in S7, the cost
would have been saved if the purchase had been made k
days later (k = 1 preferred (74%)); in S9, Helen would have
died if her admission had been delayed by k×30min (k = 1
preferred (77%)).

Causal Thinking in Good or Bad Luck
When confronted with events they perceive as (un)lucky,
people tend to construct causal explanations for why these
events happened (Pritchard & Smith, 2004). Causal thinking
may produce counterfactuals by negating causes of the
actual event, but also by enabling conditions for the
counterfactual (Byrne, 2007). In what follows, we show
how causal thinking can be accounted for within the ST
framework.
Suppose that a cause s3 can be found to explain s1. If we
use (5) together with (7), we get:
L1 = Eh(s1) + U(s3) + Cw(s1|s3)

(12)

This relation shows that unexpected causes (U(s3) large)
and materially complex causal links will tend to increase the
feeling of (un)luck in the non-counterfactual case.
If s4 is a counterfactual alternative to s3 that would have
led to s2, we can compute L2 from s3. Using (8):
L2 = Eh(s2|s3) + U(s2) – Cwc(s2|s3)

We may decompose Cwc(s2|s3):
L2 = Eh(s2|s3) + U(s2) – Cw(s2|s4) – Cwc(s4|s3)

(13)

The term Cwc(s4|s3) measures the mutability of s3 (Byrne,
2007). Equation (13) can be used to find a cause that people
will be likely to select as mutable. Let us check these
predictions against the experimental results.
Cause simplicity: Relation (12) predicts that simple causes
(C(s3) small) will augment emotion since they are more
unexpected. This is verified in story S5, where participants
preferred the student responsible for the damage to be a
neighbor’s son (67%) instead of more complex individuals.
In story S6, they preferred the virus to have been mentioned
in the media (52%), rather than in a medical journal or a
medical record where it would have been more complex to
discriminate. Story S9 was also designed to test causal
simplicity. We expected participants to reject option ‘a
retired couple’, as these individuals would be more complex
to discriminate than in the two other options (‘a colleague
teacher’ and ‘a member of her bridge club’). However,
participants did not show the expected preference (49% vs.
26%+25%).
Causal link complexity: Relation (12) predicts that
materially complex causal links (Cw(s1|s3) large) are more
unexpected and thus will augment emotion. Story S6 has
been designed to check this point. Participants did prefer
Magalie’s eventual success to go through a seven hour
(79%) test to decide between 8 (66%) infectious agents,
rather than easier alternatives.
Causal link simplicity: Relation (13) conversely predicts
that in counterfactual thinking, simple causal links will be
preferred (Cw(s2|s4) small). In story S1, participants chose
the shortest distance between the railway worker’s faulty
action and its effect (71%); in story S2, they preferred Lucas
to lace up his shoe close to the station (71%). In both cases,
the material simplicity of the causal link diminishes the
counterfactual complexity from the cause (‘if he had sent
the signal…’, ‘if Lucas had not paused to lace his shoe…’)
to the counterfactual effect. We failed to show the same
effect in story S5, where we expected participants to chose
the simpler causal mechanism (‘broke all the boxes’) instead
of more complex ones (‘broke a bottle of formalin’; ‘broke
the nourishing device’). The probable reason is that a simple
causal link is preferable if one adopts Florence’s
counterfactual thinking, whereas a complex causal link is
preferable if we only consider the newsworthiness of the
story, what some participants seem to have done despite the
instructions.

Discussion
The strong point of this study was to show the relevance of
the notion of complexity in the study of the perception of
luck. Many judgments about (un)lucky situations are not
explained by variations of probability (even perceived
probability) (Teigen, 1996). However, they vary in a

1932

systematic way according to variations in complexity. We
tried to connect people’s attitude toward luck with
predictions from Simplicity Theory, with some positive
results.
Another positive aspect of the study is to highlight several
intervening factors that have gone unnoticed in previous
studies, such as the simplicity of the counterfactual situation
(story S8), the fact that proximity is measured on a relative
scale (stories S3, S7), or the simplicity of causes (stories S5,
S6). The model also provides quantitative laws, e.g. for the
wheel of fortune near miss.
We had two negative results in the experiment (story 5,
choice 2 and story 9, choice 1). Note, however, that both
consist in qualitative choices, which are more prone to
complex interpretations by participants. The failure in S5 is
likely to result from the bad design of the story; the failure
in story 9 remains a mystery (perhaps the association due to
word ‘retired’ being used twice is sufficient in rapid readers
to make the rescuers seem simple).
In its current state, this theory of luck is not as simple as it
should be. There are still some conceptual connections to be
done that will make the link between equations and the
processing of emotional intensities more transparent. The
present account is meant as an attempt to depart from mere
lists of factors and to outline an integrated model of the
human ability to perceive luck in events.
The research, initiated in the recent years, on the
cognitive role of descriptive complexity has already
produced valuable results. The model presented in this
paper is meant as a contribution to this enterprise. The
sensitivity to complexity differences, which is central to ST,
seems to be a general law, which applies across modalities
and at all levels of abstraction. Its importance in the
processing of some emotions that are involved in decision
processes, such as the feeling of being (un)lucky after the
occurrence of an event (Loomes & Sugden 1982), should
encourage further investigation in this domain.

References
Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Mental models and counterfactual
thoughts about what might have been. Trends in cognitive
sciences, 6 (10), 426-431.
Byrne, R. M. J. (2007). Précis of the Rational Imagination:
How people create alternatives to reality. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 30 (5/6), 439-480.
Chater, N. (1999). The search for simplicity: A fundamental
cognitive principle? The Quaterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 52 (A), 273-302.
Chater, N. & Vitányi, P. (2003). Simplicity: a unifying
principle in cognitive science? Trends in cognitive
sciences, 7 (1), 19-22.
Dessalles, J-L. (2006). A structural model of intuitive
probability. In D. Fum, F. Del Missier & A. Stocco
(Eds.), Proceedings of the seventh International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling, 86-91. Trieste,

IT: Edizioni Goliardiche.
www.dessalles.fr/papiers/pap.cogni/Dessalles_06020601.pdf

Dessalles, J-L. (2008a). La pertinence et ses origines
cognitives - Nouvelles théories. Paris: Hermes-Science
Publications. http://pertinence.dessalles.fr
Dessalles, J-L. (2008b). Coincidences and the encounter
problem: A formal account. In B. C. Love, K. McRae &
V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2134-2139.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
www.dessalles.fr/papiers/pap.conv/Dessalles_08020201.pdf

Dimulescu, A. & Dessalles, J-L. (2009). Understanding
narrative interest: Some evidence on the role of
unexpectedness. In N. A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 1734-1739. Amsterdam, NL:
Cognitive Science Society.
http://141.14.165.6/CogSci09/papers/367/paper367.pdf

Kahneman, D. & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory:
Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological
Review, 93 (2), 136-153.
Kahneman, D. & Varey, C. A. (1990). Propensities and
counterfactuals: The loser that almost won. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 59 (6), 1101-1110.
Loomes, G. & Sugden, R. (1982). Regret theory - An
alternative theory of rational choice under uncertainty.
The Economic Journal, 92, 805-824.
Pritchard, D. & Smith, M. (2004). The psychology and
philosophy of luck. New ideas in psychology, .
Rescher, N. (1995). Luck: The brilliant randomness of
everyday life. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.
Roese, N. J. (1997). Counterfactual thinking. Psychological
Bulletin, 121 (1), 133-148.
Solomonoff, R. J. (1978). Complexity-based induction
systems: Comparisons and convergence theorems. IEEE
transactions on Information Theory, 24 (4), 422-432.
http://world.std.com/~rjs/solo1.pdf

Teigen, K. H. (1996). Luck: The art of a near miss.
Scandinavian journal of psychology, 37 (2), 156-171.
Teigen, K. H. & Jensen, T. K. (2010). Unlucky victims or
lucky survivors: Spontaneous counterfactual thinking by
families exposed to the tsunami disaster. European
psychologist, , in press.
Teigen, K. H. & Keren, G. (2003). Surprises: low
probabilities or high contrasts?. Cognition, 87, 55-71.
Teigen, K. H. (2005). When a small difference makes a big
difference - Counterfactual thinking and luck. In D. R.
Mandel, D. J. Hilton & P. Catellani (Eds.), The
psychology of counterfactual thinking, 129-146. Oxon,
UK: Routledge.
Wohl, M. J. A. & Enzle, M. E. (2003). The effects of near
wins and near losses on self-perceived personal luck and
subsequent gambling behavior. Journal of experimental
social psychology, 39, 184-191.

1933

