UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Enactive Social Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53f5r92r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Schlicht, Tobias

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Enactive Social Cognition
Tobias Schlicht (tobias.schlicht@cin.uni-tuebingen.de)
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, Universität Tübingen
Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 15
72076 Tübingen, Germany

Abstract

The subject of intentional relations is best characterized as
an embodied agent, possessing a number of skills and
capacities, ranging from performing bodily actions, perceiving and grasping objects, to thinking and imagining complex and even counterfactual states of affairs. Conceptualizing the cognizing subject in this way provides a first motivation for understanding intentionality in a broader sense by
integrating sensorimotor forms of directedness. Motor intentionality has received much attention in recent investigations
of perception and social interaction and plays an important
foundational role in the enactive approach, as will be
elaborated below. This constitutes a radical shift of emphasis:
Whereas analytic philosophers of mind have been concerned
primarily with intentionality as a feature of mental states, it
is better construed as a feature of whole organisms (Thompson
2007, Hutto 2008). A second motivation for considering
sensorimotor forms of intentionality is based on recent
developments in the cognitive neurosciences and a more
general transformation of paradigmatic cognitive science.
Regarding the latter, the traditional computational paradigm
is currently being replaced by an embodied-embedded cognitive science that does not consider the computational brain
in isolation but investigates mental phenomena in the
broader context of an embodied agent being situated in her
environment, which itself constraints the agent's cognitive
projects. Regarding the former, data from animal studies
suggest that perceptual capacities are grounded in motor
capacities quite generally. More specifically, the discovery
of mirror neurons has fostered an ongoing debate about the
role of motor intentionality in the overall cognitive architecture of human agents (Sinigaglia 2008). Consequently, this
leads to the following general structure of intentionality:
An embodied agent (or organism) is directed towards an
object or content by way of one among several sensorimotor, affective, or cognitive attitudes.
Since this structure can be realized in various ways, the
task of a comprehensive theory of intentionality is to provide an adequate account for the different varieties of intentionality, differing in complexity and sophistication (Barresi
& Moore 1996, Schlicht 2008). In broad strokes, such a
framework may look something like this:
1. The most basic and biologically primary forms of
intentionality are perception and action (Searle 1983). They
are essentially dyadic relations to single existing objects or
agents and depend on being situated and embedded in an
environmental context. We share these forms of intentionality with many animals. Ontogenetically, human infants
first make use of sensorimotor skills in order to perceive,

In this talk, I extend the enactive approach to cognition to the
social domain within a larger framework of varieties of intentionality and argue for a second-person approach to understanding others, emphasizing a difference in our understanding of others depending on whether we are directly engaged
with them in interaction or merely observing them. The enactive account is especially persuasive in developmental respects,
suggesting that sophisticated forms of cognitive intentionality
(e.g. believing) are grounded in motor intentionality (e.g. perception and action): Our own sensorimotor skills are partly
constitutive of cognition, and other people’s expressions of
their sensorimotor skills in turn modulate our cognition of
objects and our social understanding. The enactive account
explains how young infants acquire the capacities that allow
them to move from dyadic to triadic intentional relations at
around their first birthday, and it claims that our basic form of
social understanding is neither based on theoretical inference
nor a kind of simulation, but constituted by an embodied
implicit know-how displayed in online interaction.
Keywords: social cognition; embodied cognitive science;
enactive approach; intentionality; social neuroscience.

1. Varieties of Intentionality
Intentionality is a technical term referring to the capacity
to be directed towards an object, where ‘object’ is broadly
construed: artefacts, events, people, states of affairs in the
world, abstract or fictitious entities and mental states of others
and of oneself can be the goal of an intentional activity
(Brentano 1874). Moreover, there are a multitude of intentional attitudes via which one may be so directed: sensorimotor, affective and cognitive ways of dealing with the
world (Barresi & Moore 1996, Crane 2001). One can think
about, hope or doubt that it might rain tomorrow and one
can perceive or desire a glass of wine or just intentionally
grasp it with their hands. At the same time, one can be
intentionally directed at something without having a sophisticated understanding of such intentional directedness in
oneself and in others.
Searle (1983) and Crane (2001) have provided thorough
analyses of intentionality, but it is odd that (1) they largely
ignore what we may call motor intentionality—a directedness towards an object manifested in grasping and manipulating it, and that (2) they do not even attempt to characterize the subject being intentionally directed at objects,
although this is an essential element in the structure of
intentionality. My first claim is that a proper integration of
these two aspects motivates a thoroughly embodied and
enactive account to cognition and intentionality:

272

grasp and manipulate objects in their vicinity. Only later are
they capable of more sophisticated and detached forms like
beliefs.
2. On a second level, in scenes of joint attention, intentional relations become triadic: either an additional subject
enters the subject-object-relation or an object enters the
relation between two subjects (mother and child, say). True
joint attention is not coincidental, i.e. both agents have to be
mutually aware of their coordination of different perspectives on the world and actively track and manipulate the
attention of each other. Merely looking at the same object
coincidentally does not suffice. Joint attention involves a
cognitive aspect—being directed on the world—and a social
aspect (being engaged in social interaction with another
subject). Numerous studies show that infants are capable of
such "triangulation" (Davidson 2001) only from around nine
to twelve months of age (Carpenter et al. 1998). Even these
complex intentional relations strongly depend on the existence and presence of the object and person one is directed at.
All relata being agents constitutes a special case of triadic
relations, e.g. two adults attending to the infants’ actions.
This not only seems to occur a few months earlier but also
does not involve a proper external object.
3. A third level is marked by the partial use of the imagination in the second year of life, for example in pretend
play, where functional properties are detached from one
object, a telephone say, and assigned to another, a banana
say (Leslie 1987). It has also been shown that pretend play
mark the onset of truly collective intentionality, where two
agents pursue a common goal and coordinate their actions
accordingly. This also involves an understanding of norms
(e.g. rules of a game), and two-year olds have been shown
to reinforce these norms (Rakoczy 2006). But even then
infants still partly depend on the existence and presence of
objects in their immediate environment, although they are
already capable of representing an object in its absence.
4. Finally, a fourth level is characterized by an explicit
directedness towards mental states like beliefs, desires and
intentions of others. At around 4 years, infants display an
understanding of other people and have acquired the concept
of belief, which is reflected in their passing false-belief-tasks
(Wimmer & Perner 1983). That is, they can now explain
other people's actions on the basis of what the other believes
to be the case rather than in terms of what really is the case.
It may be necessary to modify this model by adding
further levels or more fine-grained distinctions, so this first
sketch of a theory of intentionality needs to be worked out
in much greater detail (see Schlicht 2008). But the approach
to intentionality recommended here can be contrasted on the
one hand to traditional approaches pursued by many analytic philosophers of mind, who try to explain it from the top
down by focusing on propositional attitudes presupposing
language and concept possession (Dennett 1971, Fodor 1987,
also Brandom 1994), and to reductionist approaches on the
other hand, which attempt to reduce everything mental to a
different level, e.g. neural processing. The present approach
treats intentionality as a "moving target", taking on different

forms and recommends to explain it neither from the top
down nor from the bottom up, but following Gallagher (2005),
developmentally from the beginning onward. By integrating
insights from the neurosciences as well as adequate phenomenological descriptions and distinctions, this strategy
promises to account for the 'developments' of the intentional
attitude towards cognitive sophistication and of the target
object from existing to fictitious and purely mental objects.
Because of its complexity, joint attention may be seen as
a "primitive state of consciousness" (Campbell 2005, Eilan
et al. 2005): One is at the same time directed at an object of
interest and at another subject, with a cognitive and a social
dimension. Thus, it is not only interesting with respect to
our cognition of worldly objects but also with respect to our
understanding of others. It has to be emphasized that joint
attention as a complex form of intentionality does not come
out of nowhere but has important precursors from the point
of view of cognitive development, namely dyadic intentional relations. In the context of investigating the neural correlates of engaging in joint attention, Schilbach et al. (in press)
developed an interactive paradigm in which participants’
gaze behavior as measured by an eye-tracking device was
used to contingently control the gaze behavior of a computer-animated character. Test persons interacted with the
virtual other while undergoing fMRI. It was found that in
contrast to merely following the other’s gaze, actively establishing joint attention by directing the other’s gaze was
correlated with a differential increase of neural activity in
the ventral striatum, known to be a part of reward-related
neurocircuitry (Rolls, Grabenhorst, Parris, 2008). These findings may be interpreted as the neural correlates of an
intrinsic motivation to engage in triadic intentional relations
and of sharing experiences. But a natural question to ask is
what allows infants to move forward to triadic forms of
intentionality at the end of their first year of life, apart from
this natural inclination to share something with someone. In
the following, the aim is to outline central elements of an
enactive approach to cognition and transfer them to the
social domain, to show that it provides a plausible account
of the capacities needed for this cognitive development.
Along the way, additional empirical support from developmental psychology and the neurosciences will be integrated.

2. Enactive Cognition
As has been pointed out above, an embodied-embedded and
enactive approach to cognition in general is recommended
by a proper understanding of the subject being engaged in
intentional relations as being an embodied agent. Such agents
are in possession of a number of capacities that allow them
to be intentionally directed towards objects of all kinds. It is
claimed here that such an agent’s cognitive intentional relations are grounded in her motor intentional activities. Motor
intentionality is systematically, phylogenetically and ontogenetically prior to cognitive intentionality. What this claim
amounts to can be illustrated by referring to essential sources
that feed into the enactive account: Husserl and Heidegger.
Both of them criticized Brentano for giving too much

273

prominence to the cognitive intentionality of beliefs and
desires, and in general to the problem of how it is possible
for our mental states to be about or directed to non-existent
objects. In contrast, they claimed that "the manner in which
things are given initially is not theoretically, disinterestedly,
neutrally to our sight, as it were, rather things are given as
items involved in our various tasks and practical engagements, our ‘comportments’" (Moran 1996, p.58). That is,
according to these phenomenologists, we are primarily
directed towards existing objects in practical, embodied and
sensorimotor ways.
Embodied sensorimotor skills. This central phenomenological idea has been revived in the so-called ‘enactive’
approach to cognition, according to which the whole embodied organism embedded in its environment is the fundamental subject of experience and intentionality (Thompson
2007, Hutto 2008). One central claim of enactive accounts is
that cognition is not merely achieved by neural activity alone,
but to some extent by bodily and environmental factors,
which play not only a causal but constitutive role in cognition (Clark 1997; Noë 2004, 2009; Wheeler 2005; Thompson
2007). On this view, cognition is an activity, enabled by the
exercise of skillful know-how in the agent’s active exploration of and coupling with its environment.
The enactive approach to perception emphasizes the
importance of sensorimotor skills exercised in the dyadic
interaction with objects. This can be illustrated in an analysis of perception: Husserl already argued that a perceived
object is never given in its full detail. Since we always
perceive it from some point of view, we always only perceive some specific profile of it. We see the side facing us,
while the other sides are hidden. Yet, although we do not
directly see these other sides, phenomenologically speaking
we have a distinctly perceptual sense of their presence in
our actual experience of the side facing us (Hua 16, 176).
For example, when you see a yellow lemon, a yellow round
object is presented to you; and the correct description of
your phenomenal content is not that of a flat two-dimensional screen, although you are only presented with exactly that
from where you are standing. What you perceive is a round
voluminous object. When you encounter this object for the
first time and explore it, then you have to perform certain
actions, e.g. eye- or head-movements, in order to make the
hidden profiles visible. For example, in order to see the
reverse side of the lemon, you must either go around it, or
grasp it and turn it around. In this way, in comprehending an
objects' complete profile you draw on your know-how, i.e.
on a set of sensorimotor skills you are equipped with and
which you can refine in your ongoing exploration of the
world. Alva Noë (2009, 60) puts this central idea of the
enactive approach to perception this way: "Seeing involves
moving the eyes and head and body. ... Movements of your
eyes or your head or your body actively produce changes in
sensory stimulation to your eyes. Or, put differently, how
things look, depends, in subtle and fine-grained ways, on
what you do. Approach an object and it looms in your visual
field. Now turn away: it leaves your field of view. Now shut

your eyes: it is gone. Walk around the object and its profile
changes. ... There are patterns of dependence between
simple sensory stimulation on the one hand and your own
bodily movement on the other. ... Seeing is a kind of skillful
activity."
Affordances. In all these activities necessary for perception, your body plays a constitutive role. For one thing,
spatial objects can only be experienced by embodied subjects,
which are situated and embedded in their environment.
Moreover, your body constitutes the point of view from
which you perceive objects in the environment, and thus
functions as an egocentric principle of experience; and
finally, as the analysis above has revealed, every perception
of an object is mediated and made possible by the body.
Your body is first and foremost not experienced as one
object among others but with respect to its potential for
action as an experiencing organ. Thus, the kinesthetic experience of your body is correlated with your object experience
and, moreover, it presents objects as providing you with
various possibilities for action. Thus, new emergent properties arise from the sensorimotor coupling with the environment: affordances (Gibson 1979). These are opportunities
for perception and action offered by objects in the environment. A surface, say, may be horizontal and rigid such as to
allow you to walk on it. That makes it ‘walk-on-able’; it
may also be ‘sit-on-able’ and ‘stand-on-able’ etc. At the
same time, the features of the surface may prevent other
actions and they may provide organisms of a different kind
with yet other affordances. That is, such possibilities for
action are not fixed properties, but vary as a function of the
successful coupling between this specific agent and its
environmental niche. They may differ for other organisms.
Quite often, we even perform certain actions and use tools
to change environmental structures in order for them to
afford various other actions. In this respect, the coupling
between agent and environment displays a certain dynamics.
Online intelligence. All this is especially plausible developmentally, since an infant’s primary encounter with objects in
the world is characterized by what they can do with objects
rather than what these objects are exactly. Experiments by
Sommerville and Woodward (2005) suggest that active
experience also modulates an infants’ understanding of
simple actions. One of their studies shows that active
experience using tools may enable infants to build motor
representations of tool use events that subsequently guide
action perception and support action understanding. Children can more easily detect and understand actions they
have performed themselves than actions they have only
observed being performed by someone else. Their understanding of the intentional actions of others may be facilitated by sensorimotor action representations that have been
produced during their own performance of the same or
similar actions. In this sense, Husserl was right to claim that
in our dealings with the world, the practical I can is more
fundamental than the cognitive I know (or the I think). And
it is in this sense that one should understand the claim that
cognitive intentionality is grounded in motor intentionality.

274

Another way to put this point is by emphasizing the important function of perceptual experience of enabling successful
navigation in the environment. Wheeler (2005, p.12f) calls
this online intelligence: “A creature displays online intelligence just when it produces a suite of fluid and flexible realtime adaptive responses to incoming sensory stimuli”. Online
intelligence is to be contrasted with offline intelligence,
exhibited when pondering on a mathematical problem or
deliberating about whether to move to another city. The
present framework argues for the primacy of online intelligence over offline intelligence.
To sum up, the enactive account to cognition emphasizes
the foundational and constitutional role of embodied sensorimotor skills for cognitive acts like perception. The
corresponding kind of knowledge that is brought to bear in
these situations is not propositional knowledge-that but rather
a skillful know-how to cope with the environment in online
cognition. Such know-how is implicit rather than explicit
and can seldom be spelled out by those who possess it (Ryle
1949). A paradigm example is knowing-how to ride a bicycle.
Affordances, the final notion that has been emphasized, are
properties that emerge from the successful coupling of agent
and environment and change in accordance with their dynamic relationship. In the next section, these ideas are applied
to the social domain.

but essentially embodied and revealed to others in expressive behaviors like gestures and facial and other bodily
expressions (Gallagher 2001, Ratcliffe 2007). Not only do
we ourselves convey our feelings to others through facial
expressions, we also use their bodily expressions as cues to
what they feel and intend to communicate. Video-replay
studies demonstrate that young infants have a good sense
for appropriate bodily and facial responses from the caregiver to her own communicative signals since they respond
when they are out of synchrony.
Moreover, my own eye- and head-movements are not
only crucial for my own perceptual states. They also play an
important role as cues for another subject to find out where I
am looking and/or to establish joint attention with me. Consequently, Corkum and Moore (1995) found that it was easier
for infants to locate a target if this was activated on the same
side as an adult model's head turn than when it was activated on the side opposite to the adult's head turn. They also
investigated the origins of the gaze-following response
necessary for joint attention and found that head orientation
information is more important for infants below twelve months
than eye orientation information. Only at eighteen months
gaze following is reliably produced when eye movement is
the only cue. Thus, it seems that such bodily cues are important to different degrees in the course of development.
Earliest forms of social understanding are proto-conversations and dyadic emotional engagements between infant and
caregiver. They are clearly based on embodied practices,
which the infant can engage in from the very beginning. In
numerous studies, Meltzoff & Moore (1977) as well as
Kugiumutzakis (1998) have established that neonates can
imitate simple facial expressions. This has been interpreted
as demonstrating an intimate connection between proprioception of one’s own bodily actions and one’s perception of
the bodily actions of others, mediated by an innate body
schema (Gallagher & Meltzoff 1996). But it also demonstrates an early form of social coupling, i.e. the fact that adult
and infant can form a conversational unit from the beginning.
Partly, the spectacular finding of mirror neurons may also
be interpreted in support of the claim that we can detect
intentional states with a kind of immediacy, since perceiving
other’s actions activates one’s own motor program responsible for that particular action (Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia 2008).
Mirror neurons also fire differentially depending on which
action chain a bodily movement is embedded in. Interestingly, they fail to be activated for observed actions that are
not part of the observer’s own motor repertoire (Buccino et
al. 2004). I take it that these sensorimotor neurons support
and enable the perceptual understanding of intentional action,
and that the activation of one’s own motor system reflects
the foundational role of motor intentionality for cognitive
intentionality.	   This interpretation is anticipated in MerleauPonty’s phenomenological claim that one can see one’s own
possible bodily actions in the actions of the other (MerleauPonty 1964, p.117).
That infants take pleasure in directing the attention of the
caregiver to oneself or to one's actions can be seen in the

3. Enactive Social Cognition
Although it is easy to see how these ideas translate to the
social domain, there is as yet no comprehensive account of
enactive social cognition, apart from some noteworthy yet
sketchy attempts (De Jaegher & DiPaolo 2007; Thompson
2007; Hutto 2008). Consider first the primacy of embodied
and sensorimotor skills: Due to the dominance of theorytheory and simulation-theory, social cognition has often
been interpreted in a very sophisticated way, based on the
passing of false-belief tasks at around the age of four or five
years. Everything that goes on before that age has (unjustifiably) been considered as a mere precursor to the real thing
(cf. the modules distinguished by Baron-Cohen 1995, Ch.
4). According to the enactive approach, not only object perception is essentially embodied in the way specified. Social
cognition is also fundamentally embodied and embedded,
since the most intimate and basic encounter between two
subjects is that in direct social interaction where gestures
and facial expressions play a dominant role. Many critics
have recently suggested that when we are actively and
directly engaged with another, we do not need to draw theoretical inferences or engage in mental simulation. Instead,
we have more basic and simple means for getting a grip on
other minds: Once we drop the questionable separation between an inner (meaningful mental) and an outer (meaningless behavioral) realm and reject the premise that mental
states are abstract entities hidden in someone’s mind, there
is room for the alternative view that we can often directly
perceive other people’s mental states, e.g. feelings and intentions, since mental states are not abstract theoretical entities,

275

still-face procedure: Between two and three months they
already actively seek to re-engage a parent's attention when
it has been disrupted (Murray & Trevarthen, 1985). Reddy
(2003) argues that infants acquire an understanding of attention already in the first few months of life, primarily on the
basis of the caregiver's attention towards some aspects or
actions performed by the infant or the infant as a person.
That is, the infant is first confronted with attention to the
self and then to some aspect of the self or the self’s actions.
She argues that in scenes of dyadic mutual attention infants
already demonstrate a capacity for and an interest in dealing
with other's attention and that this provides the infant with
the experience required for further developing her intentional repertoire. In the context of joint attention, attention is
best characterized as an act of attending rather than an information-bearing mental state that arises passively. Focal attention is a continuous process executed by the human agent.
The infant’s alternation of attention on the object and the
other subject (which is constitutive for joint attention) is
essentially active and embodied since it involves head and
eye movements, and possibly pointing gestures as communicative signals to direct the others' attention.
Gaze and Engagement with other agents. Direct interaction
with another agent in joint attention also modulates our own
processing of that object. Becchio et al. (2008) found that
objects under the gaze of others "acquire properties that they
would not display if not looked at", namely the gaze "enriches
that object of motor, affective and status properties that go
beyond its chemical or physical structure" (2008, 254). The
authors call this "intentional imposition". – Other studies
have shown that by twelve to fourteen months of age infants
can use the gaze of others to predict a person's subsequent
actions (Phillips, Wellman, Spelke 2002), can interpret a
person's emotional expressions as being about the object at
which she gazes (Repacholi 1998), and can interpret the
words a person utters as naming the object at which she directs
referential behaviors (Woodward 2003). Finally, Moll et al.
(2007) demonstrated that one-year olds can attribute knowledge and ignorance to others but that such knowledge-ignorance understanding strongly depends on the joint engagement between infant and adult. Such knowledge could not be
demonstrated independently of such engagement. These data
support the interplay between object perception and social
interaction. They also support the notion that embodied practices and active engagement with another agent plays a
crucial role for (social) cognition.
Reciprocity and social affordances. Primary intersubjectivity in direct face-to-face social interaction between infant and
caregiver displays an important dynamics and reciprocity
that is crucial for online social cognition quite generally.
Understanding others is typically not a unidirectional process:
My own efforts to engage with the other prompt reactions
feeding into a communication ‘loop’ characterized by reciprocity (Frith 2007, p.175). The importance of this is underestimated by theory-theory and simulation theory: Since
they presuppose a detached observational stance towards the
other (offline social cognition) instead of a more engaged

interaction, they fail to account for this reciprocity. Basic
social understanding is based on a sensitivity to “expressions of intentional and affective attitudes, as revealed in
another’s gaze, gesture, facial comportment” etc. (Hutto
2008, p.117). But in addition, perceiving the meaning of
another’s bodily expression requires processing the social
affordances (Costall 1995) provided by them, analogous to
the affordances provided by objects we perceive. The coupling between two agents in direct interaction is even more
complex than the coupling between agent and environmental object. Due to the general flexibility and unpredictability of others in social interaction and a higher degree of
uncertainty, social affordances are richer and more complex
than affordances provided by objects. But they can prompt
appropriate actions and reactions in a conversational context,
culminating in the maintenance and extension of reciprocal
relations. And healthy human beings can distinguish and
pick up deliberate as well as inadvertently emitted communicative signals and to intuitively grasp the communicative
context in which to make sense of another’s behaviour
(Senju & Csibra 2008). The studies mentioned earlier suggest
that infants already possess this skill.
Autism. All this is crucial for the interpretation of autism
as a social cognitive impairment. The enactive approach offers
an interpretation of autism different from the traditional
diagnosis as a lack of theory of mind based on a failure in
false-belief tasks (Baron-Cohen 1995). It has recently been
demonstrated that autistic patients can indeed pass such
tasks when prompted to do so explicitly. Yet, this does not
improve their social skills in direct interaction. As Senju et
al. (2009) conclude from their study, patients with Asperger’s
are impaired in the “automatic online computation of others’
mental states”. They are not impaired in mindreading generally, but lack the more basic social skill to spontaneously
encode socially relevant information and understand gestures
and facial expressions as expressions of emotions (see Lee,
Meyer, Hobson 1997). Thus, if autism is seen as a more
general deficit in the sensorimotor, embodied and implicit
know-how to deal with other people, this account can also
explain other peculiarities significant for autism that have
nothing to do with social cognition, e.g. the problems in
lying, righting, sitting, crawling, and walking (Gallagher 2001).

4. Conclusion
In accordance with the enactive approach, it has been
argued that cognition is based on sensorimotor skills executed
by the organism as a whole in its exploration of objects in the
immediate environment. It has been shown how central ideas
from enactive cognition can be transferred to the social
domain. The primacy of embodied sensorimotor skills is
obvious in online social cognition when two agents are directly engaged in social interaction. Social affordances emerge
from the coupling between two agents. Picking them up can
prompt appropriate reactions, which in turn culminate in the
dynamics and reciprocity characteristic of online social cognition. Displaying and perceiving bodily expressions of feelings, intentions etc. allows for a skillful know-how to deal

276

with other people, a spontaneous social understanding below
and before mindreading which is impaired in autistic subjects.
Direct engagement in online interaction also modulates object
cognition. In this sense, it has been demonstrated that motor
intentionality is more basic than cognitive intentionality both
for object cognition and social cognition. Thus, if this foundational role can be spelled in more detail, then it promises to
lead to a comprehensive account of intentionality.

T.M. Field & N.A. Fox (Eds.) Social perception in infants.
Norwood, NY: Ablex.
Noë, A. (2009). Out of our heads. Hill & Wang.
Phillips, A., Wellman, H., & Spelke, E. (2002). Infants'
ability to connect gaze and emotional expression as cues to
intentional action. Cognition, 85(1), 53-78.
Rakoczy, H. (2006). Pretend play and the development of
collective intentionality. Cognitive Systems Research 7,
113-127.
Reddy, V. (2003). On Being an Object of Attention:
Implications for self-other-consciousness. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 7 (9), 397-402.
Reddy, V. (2008). How infants know minds. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press.
Repacholi, B.M. (1998). Infants' use of attentional cues to
identify the referent of another person's emotional
expression. Developmental Psychology, 34, 1017-1025.
Rizzollatti, G., Sinigaglia, C. (2008). Mirrors in the brain.
Oxford: OUP.
Rolls, E. T., Grabenhorst, F., & Parris, B. A. (2008). Warm
pleasant feelings in the brain. Neuroimage, 41, 1504–1513.
Schilbach, L., Wilms, M., Eickhoff, S. B., Romanzetti, S.,
Tepest, R., Bente, G. et al. (in press). Minds made for
sharing. Initiating joint attention recruits reward-related
neurocircuitry. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. doi:10.
1162/jocn.2009.21401.
Schlicht, T. (2008) Ein Stufenmodell der Intentionalität.
In P. Spät (Ed.) Zur Zukunft der Philosophie des Geistes.
Paderborn: Mentis, pp. 59-91.
Searle, J.R. (1983) Intentionality: an essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Senju, A., Csibra, G. (2008). Gaze following in human
infants depends on communicative signals. Current Biology
18, 668-671.
Senju, A., Southgate, V., White, S., Frith, U. (2009).
Mindblind eyes: An absence of spontaneous theory of mind
in Asperger syndrome. Science 325, 883-885.
Sinigaglia, C. (2008). Enactive understanding and motor
intentionality. In F. Morganti, A. Carassa, G. Riva (Eds.)
Enacting Intersubjectivity: A Cognitive and Social Perspective
on the Study of Interactions. Amsterdam: IOS Press, pp. 17-32.
Sommerville, J., Woodward, A. (2005). Pulling out the intentional structure of human action: The relation between
action production and processing in infancy. Cognition 95, 1-30.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life. Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of the Mind. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Univ. Press.
Wimmer, H. & Perner, J. (1983) Beliefs about beliefs:
representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs in
young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition, 13,
103-128.
Woodward, A.L. (2003). Infants' use of action knowledge
to get a grasp on words. In D. G. Hall and S. R. Waxman
(eds.) Weaving a lexicon (pp. 149-172). Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.

Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness. An Essay on
Autism and Theory of Mind. Cambridge, Mass.
Barresi, J., Moore, C. (1996). Intentional relations and social
understanding. Behavioral & Brain Sciences 19, 107-122.
Becchio C., Bertone C., Castiello U. (2008). How the gaze
of others influences object processing. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 12, 254-258.
Brentano, F. (1874) Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt. 2 Vols. Ed. by O. Kraus. Leipzig 1924.
Campbell, J. (2005). Joint Attention and Common Knowledge". In: N. Eilan et al. (eds.), Joint Attention: Communication and Other Minds (pp. 287-297). Oxford: OUP.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social
cognition, joint attention, and communicative competence
from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 63 (4, Serial No. 255).
Corkum, V. & Moore, C. (1995). Development of joint
visual attention in infancy. In C. Moore & P. Dunham
(Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Crane, T. (2001) Elements of Mind. Oxford: OUP.
Davidson, D. (2001) Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
De Jaegher, H. & Di Paolo, E. (2007). Participatory sensemaking. An enactive approach to social cognition. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 6, 485-507.
Eilan, N., Hoerl, C., McCormack, T., Roessler, J. (eds.)
(2005) Joint attention: Communication and other minds.
Oxford : OUP.
Gallagher, S. (2005) How the body shapes the mind.
Oxford: OUP.
Gibson, E.J., Rader, N. (1979). Attention: The Perceiver as
Performer? In G.A. Hale & M. Lewis (eds.). Attention and
cognitive development (pp. 1-21). New York: Plenum Press.
Husserl, E. Gesammelte Werke (Abbr. as Hua). The
Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff, 1980
Hutto, D. (2008). Folk-psychological narratives. The sociocultural basis of understanding reasons. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Leslie, A.M. (1987) Pretense and Representation: The origins of ,Theory of Mind’. Psychological Review, 94, 412-426.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964). Phenomenology of Perception. New York: Humanities Press.
Moran, D. (1996). The Inaugural Address: Brentano’s
Thesis. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Suppl. Vol.
LXX, 1-27.
Murray, L.,Trevarthen, C. (1985). Emotional regulation of
interactions between two-months olds and their mothers. In

277

