UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Enhancing Acquisition of Intuition versus Planning in Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/546552g5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Chen, Dawn
Holyoak, Keith

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Enhancing Acquisition of Intuition versus Planning in Problem Solving
Dawn Chen (sdchen@ucla.edu)
Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
Abstract
The acquisition of intuition, which guides problem solving by
pruning unpromising strategies, is essential to the
development of expertise in any domain. Problem-solving
intuition may be viewed as analogous to search heuristics in
artificial intelligence. One prediction inspired by this analogy
is that practicing on subproblems and relaxed problems
(versions of a problem with fewer constraints on the goal state
and on the possible moves, respectively) may enhance the
development of intuition for the full problem. Using the npuzzle, we found that practice on relaxed problems did
promote intuition compared to practice on the full problem,
but impaired performance on solving the full problem. More
detailed analyses suggest that practice on relaxed problems
may discourage planning and encourage reliance on intuition.
Planning is slower but more likely to produce optimal
solutions if given enough time, whereas relying on intuition is
faster but may lead to suboptimal solutions.
Keywords: Problem solving; intuition; planning; learning;
heuristic search; n-puzzle.

Introduction
When encountering a problem in an unfamiliar domain for
the first time, the novice may feel lost among what seems to
be an indefinitely large number of possible actions that seem
about equally promising, and end up pursuing some
arbitrary path that leads nowhere. But after solving some
number of problems from the same domain, the solver will
eventually learn to consider only a limited number of
approaches, those that are likely to prove effective. In
commonsense terms, the learner has acquired intuition about
the problem domain: an implicit sense of what to do in
various types of situations that arise during problem solving
(Gobet & Philippe, 2009). How is such intuition acquired
through practice?
The standard account of general problem solving is
Newell and Simon’s (1972) proposal that the problem solver
performs search within a problem space. A problem space
can be visualized as a graph or tree in which the nodes
represent possible states in the problem and each edge
represents a legal move transforming one state into another.
The legal moves in a problem are defined by its operators,
or possible types of actions. The problem solver can search
the problem space by starting at the node representing the
initial state of the problem and moving to adjacent nodes by
applying operators, until one of the nodes representing a
goal state is reached. The solution to the problem is the
successful path that the solver took through the problemspace graph.

Importantly, the problem solver may search the problem
space not only by physically manipulating the external
representation of the problem state (external search), but
also by mentally transforming an internal representation
(internal search or planning). During internal search, the
problem solver need not always move from the current state
to an adjacent node.
For most realistic problems, the problem-space tree is
enormous, so that it is terribly inefficient even for a
computer to solve the problem by using brute-force search
algorithms that traverse the entire tree until a goal state is
found. Heuristic search algorithms, on the other hand, are
much more efficient because they use domain-specific
knowledge to prune branches of the tree that never lead to
the goal state or do not do so in an optimal way (i.e., in the
minimum number of moves). A search heuristic may guide
search by estimating the distance (minimum number of
moves required) from any state to the goal so that, for
example, a search algorithm can always choose to explore
next the state that is closest to the goal (i.e., the greedy bestfirst search algorithm). This form of a search heuristic,
commonly used in artificial intelligence, is called a heuristic
function.
In many ways, the formal concept of a search heuristic is
closely related to the commonsense concept of intuition in
problem solving. Search heuristics prune branches in the
problem-space tree that are unlikely to lead to the goal
efficiently, just as problem-solving intuition focuses
attention on just those paths that are likely to lead to a
solution quickly. Search heuristics are usually fast to
compute, but may lead to suboptimal solutions. Similarly,
intuitive judgments arise quickly, but are fallible and may
result in diminished accuracy or optimality compared to a
solution strategy based on systematic analysis or careful
planning. Furthermore, just as search heuristics rely on
domain-specific knowledge, problem-solving intuition is
restricted to a particular domain and is acquired only
through multiple experiences with solving problems in that
domain. Nonetheless, certain search heuristics are more
general than others and apply to several domains with
overlapping structure, just as the intuition gained from
solving problems in one domain may apply to a related
domain (see Hatano & Inagaki, 1986, for a discussion of
routine vs. adaptive expertise). Finally, and most
importantly for the present study, heuristic functions yield
estimates analogous to the intuitive sense of closeness to the
goal available to experienced problem solvers. The task we
use to assess intuition will be based on subjective judgments
of distance to the goal state.

1875

The analogy between problem-solving intuition and
search heuristics provides insights into how it might be
possible to facilitate the acquisition of intuition in human
problem solving. AI researchers have discovered that the
solution lengths of subproblems and relaxed problems often
provide good heuristic functions for the original problem
(Prieditis, 1993). A subproblem removes one or more
constraints on the goal state from the original problem,
whereas a relaxed problem removes one or more constraints
on the legal moves (i.e., it adds one or more operators).
Thus, an instance of the original problem can be solved in
fewer moves when translated into a corresponding
subproblem or relaxed problem.
Applying the results from AI to the domain of human
problem solving, solving subproblems and relaxed problems
may facilitate the acquisition of intuition for the original
problem. Therefore, learners who practice solving
subproblems or relaxed problems may acquire better
intuition for the original problem than those who receive the
same amount of practice on only instances of the original
problem. At the same time, planning may seem less
necessary when solving subproblems and relaxed problems.
Thus, the kind of learning experience that fosters
development of intuition the most may also have a
detrimental impact on planning. We will elaborate on these
points in discussing our experimental findings.

Method
Participants
Seventy-two undergraduates from the University of
California, Los Angeles participated for course credit.
Participants were randomly assigned to either the control
condition (n = 24), the subproblem condition (n = 24), or the
relaxed problem condition (n = 24).

Materials
The n-puzzle Participants solved a computer version of the
n-puzzle, which is illustrated in Figure 1. The n-puzzle
consists of a square bounded space containing a smaller
empty square and n initially misplaced square tiles
numbered 1 to n. A legal move consists of sliding any tile
into the empty square, and the goal state contains all the
tiles in ascending order.
4

1

3

1

2

3

2

5

4

5

6

7

8

6

7

8

initial state

goal state

Figure 1: An 8-puzzle with a 5-step solution: Move 4 down,
1 left, 2 up, 5 left, and 6 up.
Subproblems and Relaxed Problems In the subproblems
for the n-puzzle, participants were required to move only
some of the tiles into their correct places. In the relaxed

problems, participants could swap some of the tiles with
adjacent tiles, in addition to sliding any tile into the empty
square. These swappable tiles were displayed in a lighter
color than the non-swappable tiles. Defined in this way, a
subproblem that removes k goal constraints requires moving
tiles 1 through n – k into their correct places, and a relaxed
problem that removes k move constraints contains one
empty square and k tiles that can be swapped with
neighboring tiles.
Generation of Puzzles All puzzles were generated
randomly. The optimal A* search algorithm was used to
ensure that each puzzle had the desired minimum solution
length.

Procedure
All instructions and stimuli were presented on a computer,
and participants responded using a mouse. In each
condition, the participant was first given instructions on
how to solve the type of puzzles (full, subproblem, or
relaxed problem) in that condition. The participant then
attempted to solve an initial 8-puzzle of the appropriate
type, solvable in a minimum of three moves. An
experimenter ensured that the participant understood the
instructions and could solve the initial puzzle. In the
subproblem condition, the initial puzzle required tiles 1-4 to
be moved into place. In the relaxed problem condition, tiles
5-8 were swappable. That is, the number of constraints
removed, k, was four for the initial puzzle in both the
subproblem and relaxed problem conditions. After solving
the initial puzzle, the participant took part in a training
phase, a test phase, and finally an intuition assessment
phase.
Training Phase The participant was told that more puzzles
would now be given for practice, with a time limit of one
minute and 30 seconds for each. The participant was told to
solve each puzzle in as few moves as possible, and that
there would be a penalty for every extra move made. These
instructions were designed to discourage external search
(the usual strategy for solving n-puzzles) and encourage
internal search, which has been shown to enhance learning
(O’Hara & Payne, 1998).
The participant then attempted to solve a sequence of 12
8-puzzles. In all conditions, the minimum solution lengths
(a measure of difficulty) of the puzzles increased from 4 to
10 (i.e., the puzzles in the experimental conditions were not
subproblem or relaxed versions of those in the control
condition). In the experimental conditions, k also decreased
from four to zero across the puzzles. During the presentation
of each puzzle, the minimum solution length and the
number of moves the participant had made so far were
shown above the puzzle. After the participant solved each
puzzle or the time limit expired for that puzzle, a dialog box
informed the participant which event had occurred, the
number of extra moves the participant made (if the puzzle
was solved), and in the subproblem condition, the tiles to

1876

slide into place for the next puzzle. The participant could
then take a break and click on a button to start the next
puzzle when ready.
Test Phase After all 12 puzzles in the training phase had
been presented, participants were told that there would now
be a test, with the same instructions as for the practice
puzzles. In the subproblem condition, participants were told
to slide all tiles into place. Participants in all conditions then
attempted to solve the same sequence of 12 full n-puzzles.
The first six were 8-puzzles and the last six were 15puzzles, and all puzzles could be solved in 12 moves. After
each puzzle had been solved or had timed out, the next
puzzle was presented without any feedback or time to rest.
During both the training and test phases, the computer
recorded for each puzzle whether it was solved, the solution
time, the moves the participant made, the initial latency (the
amount of time the participant took to make the first move),
and the inter-move latencies (the time to make each
subsequent move).
Intuition Assessment Phase After the test phase,
participants made a series of 40 pairwise distance
comparisons. In each comparison, they were presented with
two different puzzle states and had to click on the one that
they believed was closer to the goal within a short time
limit. No feedback was given. The short time limit was
designed to elicit a quick, intuitive judgment and prevent
participants from solving the puzzles mentally and then
counting the number of moves used. Because experts in a
domain often have an intuitive sense of how close they are
to solving a problem, and heuristic functions estimate the
distance of any given state to the goal, this distance
comparisons task serves to assess participants’ intuition on
the n-puzzle.
The first 20 pairs to be compared were 8-puzzles, with 10
seconds each, and the last 20 pairs were 15-puzzles, with 12
seconds each. The true distances of the puzzles ranged from
1 to 28, and the ratio of the shorter distance to the longer
distance in each pair was between .2 and .91. For each
comparison, which puzzle was chosen and the time taken to
make that choice were recorded.

Results and Discussion
Dissociation of Performance on Solving Puzzles and
Comparing Distances
The mean percentage of full n-puzzles solved during the test
phase in each condition is shown in Figure 2. The relaxed
problem group solved a significantly lower percentage of
puzzles during the test phase (M = 57.99, SD = 23.25) than
the control group (M = 69.79, SD = 14.08), F(1, 69) = 5.18,
p = .026, and also the subproblem group (M = 68.75, SD =
15.20), F(1, 69) = 4.30, p = .042. The latter two groups did
not differ reliably.
However, as shown in Figure 3, the relaxed problem
group correctly solved the most problems on the distance
comparisons task, which assesses intuition. The percentage

Figure 2: Mean percentage of n-puzzles solved by
participants in each training condition during the test phase.
Error bars in all data figures represent 1 standard error of the
mean.

Figure 3: Mean percentage of comparisons solved correctly
on the distance comparisons task in each condition.
of comparisons correct was significantly higher for the
relaxed problem group (M = 68.33, SD = 6.94) than for the
control group (M = 63.44, SD = 10.47), F(1, 69) = 4.22, p =
.044. Performance of the subproblem group on the
comparisons task fell between that of the other two groups,
but did not differ significantly from either.
To further investigate the difference in performance on
the distance comparisons task, we divided the pairwise
distance comparisons into an “easy” set and a “hard” set
based on the overall performance of the participants on each
comparison. For each comparison problem, we calculated
the proportion q of participants (over all three conditions)
who solved that problem correctly. We then calculated the
median value of q over all comparisons. A comparison that

1877

Figure 4: Mean percentage of hard comparisons solved
correctly on the distance comparisons task in each
condition.
had a q-value higher/lower than the median was assigned to
the “easy”/“hard” set. All groups performed about the same
on the easy comparisons, but as Figure 4 shows, the relaxed
problem group performed the best on the hard comparisons.
In particular, the relaxed problem group correctly solved a
significantly higher percentage of the hard comparisons (M
= 57.71, SD = 10.63) than the control group did (M = 49.79,
SD = 13.47), F(1, 69) = 6.00, p = .017. Thus, the relaxed
problem group performed very well on the intuition task,
especially the harder problems, compared to the control
group.
How could participants in the relaxed problem group have
apparently acquired such good intuition on the full n-puzzle,
and yet perform relatively poorly in actually solving it? A
possible explanation is that because planning (internal
search) is harder and seemingly less necessary when solving
the relaxed problems, participants in the relaxed problem
group learned to plan less and rely more on their intuition
during the training phase. Thus, even though their intuition
became more developed (as evidenced by their performance
on the distance comparisons task), their decreased use of
planning caused them to perform poorly on solving the
puzzles in the test phase. Participants in the control group,
on the other hand, learned to rely more on planning and less
on their intuition during the training phase, because they
were trying to minimize the number of moves they made
and it was easier for them to plan. Increased planning led
them to perform better on the test puzzles, but their intuition
was less developed. We will now present evidence to
support each of these claims.

The Relaxed Problem
Discourages Planning

Training

Condition

Planning is Harder on Relaxed Problems This is true for
two reasons. First, internally visualizing the move of

swapping two tiles in the relaxed problem imposes a greater
working memory load, because the participant must now
keep track of the new locations of both tiles, rather than just
one tile in the sliding move. Manipulating an internal
representation of the puzzle state to reflect a swapping move
might take longer as well. Second, the introduction of
additional legal moves in the relaxed problem also makes
planning harder because participants have to consider more
moves at each state (that is, the branching factor is higher).
In order to plan, participants must also remember more
information about which paths they have already mentally
explored to some depth and have determined to be
unpromising.
The hypothesis that the swapping move consumes more
working memory is supported by the finding that the
average length of unbroken sequences of backtracking
moves during the training phase was significantly lower in
the relaxed problem group (M = 1.34, SD = .36) than in the
control group (M = 1.88, SD = 1.11), F(1, 61) = 4.66, p =
.035, and also the subproblem group (M = 2.04, SD = .82),
F(1, 61) = 8.93, p = .004. In contrast, no reliable differences
among conditions were observed in the test phase.
Backtracking for a number of moves requires remembering
all those previous moves, and participants solving relaxed
problems may have backtracked for fewer moves because
they could not remember as many past moves, since storing
a single move requires more working memory capacity on
average.
Planning Seems Unnecessary on Relaxed Problems
Because relaxed problems have a higher branching factor,
the problem-space graphs for relaxed problems are more
connected and so there are more ways to reach the goal
state. Thus, it may seem unnecessary to plan one’s moves
before executing them, since no matter how far away one
wanders from the goal, there is always some way to get
back onto the right track. In other words, local minima do
not exist in the problem space, so a greedy (hill-climbing)
search algorithm that always chooses the state with the
shortest estimated distance to the goal to explore next
cannot become trapped, and is thus sufficient. Accordingly,
participants in the relaxed problem group probably learned
to use a greedy search algorithm, which does not look ahead
and thus requires little effort. Moreover, a greedy search
algorithm relies heavily on the heuristic function, so its use
would foster development of intuition for participants in this
condition.
One piece of evidence that participants in the relaxed
problem group planned less than those in the other
conditions is that they made extra moves more often during
the training phase. The percentage of solved puzzles in the
training phase that were solved with extra moves was
significantly higher in the relaxed problem group (M =
49.99, SD = 19.76) than in the control group (M = 20.92, SD
= 13.67), F(1, 69) = 34.53, p < .001, and also the
subproblem group (M = 25.97, SD = 17.43), F(1, 69) =
23.58, p < .001. Furthermore, the relaxed problem group
had significantly higher average solution times during the

1878

training phase (M = 35.23s, SD = 9.07s) than did the control
group (M = 27.68s, SD = 8.29s), F(1, 69) = 9.86, p = .002,
and also the subproblem group (M = 24.64s, SD = 7.53s),
F(1, 69) = 19.41, p < .001. Participants in the relaxed
problem condition may have found planning harder and thus
took longer on average to plan a single move (when they did
plan); in addition, their longer, less optimal solutions took
more time to execute. These differences indicate that the
relaxed problem participants did not or could not plan as far
ahead as did the participants in the other conditions, and
tended to meander around the problem space for a while
before reaching the goal.
The average initial latency on a puzzle, or the average
amount of time a participant spent thinking before making
the first move on a puzzle, is a clear indicator of how much
a participant plans voluntarily. (While the average intermove latency is also an indicator of planning, higher intermove latencies could also indicate that the participant was
stuck in the middle of solving a puzzle and was forced to
think carefully about what to do next.) The average initial
latency was not significantly lower for the relaxed problem
group during the training phase, as might be expected if
these participants were planning fewer moves ahead;
however, the lack of a difference could reflect the offsetting
effect of planning each move being harder for the relaxed
problems and thus taking longer. During the test phase,
when all participants were solving the full n-puzzles, the
average initial latency was indeed significantly lower for the
relaxed problem group (M = 10.37s, SD = 4.46s) than for
the control group (M = 14.75s, SD = 6.02s), F(1, 69) = 7.33,
p = .009, indicating that the relaxed problem group
continued to plan fewer moves ahead during the test phase.

Increased Planning is Associated with Better
Puzzle-Solving Performance
Not surprisingly, increased planning is associated with
better puzzle-solving performance. The average initial
latency was not correlated with the number of puzzles
solved during the training or test phase, perhaps because
some participants tended to get stuck at the very beginning
and could not solve many puzzles, or were just too slow in
general to solve many puzzles. However, average initial
latency was negatively correlated with performance
measures such as the average number of extra moves made
on solved puzzles [r(70) = –.37, p = .002 for the training
phase and r(70) = –.46, p < .001 for the test phase], and the
percentage of backtracking moves [r(70) = –.26, p = .026
for the training phase and r(70) = –.31, p = .007 for the test
phase]; and positively correlated with the percentage of
moves that decreased the true distance of the problem state
to the goal [r(70) = .33, p = .005 for the training phase and
r(70) = .47, p < .001 for the test phase]. These results
indicate that the more the participant planned before making
the first move, the better the moves the participant made
later on.
Recall that on relaxed problems, which do not have many
local minima, a greedy search algorithm is sufficient.

However, greedy search may get stuck in local minima on
the full n-puzzle, for which the problem-space graph is not
as well-connected. Accordingly, if participants in the
relaxed problem group did indeed use a greedy search
algorithm, they would perform poorly during the test phase.
The control group, on the other hand, may have learned to
use a more effective search algorithm involving greater
look-ahead. Such a search algorithm could achieve an
acceptable level of performance with a relatively poor
heuristic function. Thus, participants in the control
condition would not acquire intuition during the training
phase to the degree that those in the relaxed problem group
did.

Planning and Intuition are Dissociated
For every participant, we calculated a composite score on
the intuition task by summing the values of 1 – q for all
comparison problems that the participant solved correctly.
Recall that for each comparison, q is the proportion of all
participants who solved that comparison correctly. Thus, 1
– q is the estimated probability of choosing the incorrect
response on a given comparison, an empirical measure of its
difficulty. Therefore, the composite score on the intuition
task gives greater weight to more difficult problems.
We calculated correlations between the composite
intuition score and measures of planning for each training
condition separately to test whether planning and intuition
are dissociated within each group. The following
correlations appeared for measures of planning during the
training phase: The composite intuition score for the control
group was negatively correlated with the average initial
latency, r(22) = –.41, p = .047, as well as the average intermove latency, r(22) = –.47, p = .021. For the subproblem
group, the composite intuition score had a negative
correlation with the average inter-move latency, r(22) = –
.50, p = .013, and a near-significant positive correlation with
the percentage of puzzles that were solved with extra
moves, r(22) = .40, p = .055. Finally, for the relaxed
problem group, there was a weak negative correlation
between the composite intuition score and the percentage of
moves that decreased the true distance of the problem state
to the goal, r(22) = –.35, p = .098.
During the test phase, the composite intuition score for
the control group had a near-significant negative correlation
with the average initial latency, r(22) = –.39, p = .061, as
well as a slight positive correlation with the average number
of extra moves, r(22) = .36, p = .082.
These findings indicate that participants in our study
mainly took one of two approaches to solving the puzzles
and comparison problems. One was a more analytic or
algorithmic approach based on planning, and the other was a
more holistic or heuristic approach based on intuition.
While the first approach was more effective for solving the
full n-puzzles, the second approach was more effective on
the task requiring speeded comparison of distances to the
goal state. The control training condition encouraged the
more analytic problem-solving style, and participants in this

1879

contrast, the need for decisions may be so urgent that the
only possible approach is to rely on intuition or “gut
feelings.” An important direction for future research will be
to determine whether the present findings using the toy
example of the n-puzzle in fact generalize to real-world
problem solving (cf. Gobet & Philippe, 2008).

condition developed a more effective search algorithm. In
contrast, the relaxed problem training condition encouraged
the more intuitive problem-solving style, and participants in
this condition developed a more accurate heuristic function.

Conclusions
The present study demonstrates a dissociation between two
core mechanisms on which expertise in problem solving
depends: internal search (planning) and use of a heuristic
function to evaluate locally available moves (intuition).
Training on problems with fewer possible moves at each
choice point (full n-puzzles) encouraged a more analytic
problem-solving style, whereas training on relaxed versions
of the same problem type that allow more possible moves
encouraged a more intuitive problem-solving style. In the
present study, the analytic style led to better performance on
actually solving the full n-puzzles, but the more intuitive
style led to better performance on a task requiring fast
evaluations of how close a problem is to being solved.
Our results should not be construed as evidence that the
development of analytical thinking and intuition are
mutually exclusive. In fact, true experts in solving problems
in complex domains such as chess (Chase & Simon, 1973;
Gobet & Charness, 2006) appear to rely heavily on both
intuition and planning, with the relative importance of
intuition increasing when performance is time-constrained
(Gobet & Simon, 1996). The time frame of the present study
was far shorter than the years required to develop true
expertise (Ericcson, 1996). Even by the end of the
experiment, our participants remained novices on the npuzzle. An expert solver of the n-puzzle would no doubt
plan ahead more as well as make better intuitive judgments
relative to a novice. The ability to quickly evaluate problem
states should allow the problem solver to plan more moves
ahead, just as heuristic functions reduce the branching factor
and thus allow the search algorithm to search to a greater
depth within the same amount of time. In fact, Charness
(1981) found that skilled chess players search more deeply
than novice players do, indicating that good intuition aids
planning in problem solving.
What our findings do indicate is that these two basic
approaches to problem solving may not be acquired in lockstep fashion, and to some extent constitute competing
problem-solving strategies. Moreover, the two different
approaches may be maximally effective for different types
of problems. The systematic, analytic approach is slower
and places a greater burden on working memory, but is
more likely to lead to optimal solutions, and thus may be
preferable for problems that can be solved slowly with the
assistance of external aids to memory. In contrast, the
holistic, intuitive approach is faster and less dependent on
working memory, and hence will often be preferable when
the problem must be solved under severe time constraints.
One example of this dichotomy is battlefield versus
hospital triage. In the hospital, medical personnel may take
a more analytic approach, carefully considering the
consequences of each possible action. On the battlefield, by

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a University Fellowship and a
Chancellor’s Prize from the Graduate Division at the
University of California, Los Angeles, and by ONR grant
N000140810186.

References
Charness, N. (1981). Search in chess: Age and skill
differences. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 7, 467–476.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). The mind’s eye in
chess. In W. G. Chase (Ed.), Visual information
processing. New York: Academic Press.
Ericsson, K. A. (1996). The acquisition of expert
performance: An introduction to some of the issues. In K.
A. Ericsson (Ed.), The road to excellence: The acquisition
of expert performance in the arts and sciences, sports,
and games. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gobet, F., & Charness, N. (2006). Expertise in chess. In K.
A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J. Feltovich, & R. R.
Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of expertise
and expert performance. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Gobet, F., & Philippe, C. (2008). Towards an alternative to
Benner’s theory of expert intuition in nursing: A
discussion paper. International Journal of Nursing
Studies, 45,129-139.
Gobet, F., & Philippe, C. (2009). Expertise and intuition: A
tale of three theories. Minds and Machines, 19, 151-180.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H. A. (1996). The roles of recognition
processes and look-ahead search in time-constrained
expert problem solving: Evidence from grandmaster-level
chess. Psychological Science, 7, 52-55.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of expertise.
In H. Stevenson, H. Azuma, & K. Hakuta (Eds.), Child
development and education in Japan. San Francisco:
Freeman.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
O’Hara, K. P., & Payne, S. J. (1998). The effects of operator
implementation cost on planfulness of problem solving
and learning. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 34-70.
Prieditis, A. E. (1993). Machine discovery of effective
admissible heuristics. Machine Learning, 12, 117-141.

1880

