UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Expertise in Visual Art is Associated with Altered Perceptual Strategies Within and Across
Domains: Evidence from Eye Tracking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/18z5663j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Glazek, Kuba
Weisberg, Robert

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Expertise in Visual Art is Associated with Altered Perceptual Strategies Within and
Across Domains: Evidence from Eye Tracking
Kuba J. Glazek (kglazek@temple.edu)
Temple University Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Robert W. Weisberg (robert.weisberg@temple.edu)
Temple University Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Abstract
Eye-movement research on expert visual artists suggests that
experts in this particular domain differ from novices in their
strategies for encoding to-be-rendered stimuli. However, it
remains unclear if such differences are specific to the domain
of expertise or independent of it (i.e., if the different strategies
are utilized only in relation to perception with goals specific to
rendering, or if they generalize to visual perception of any
stimulus with perceptual goals other than rendering).
Experiment 1 examined eye-movement strategies utilized by
experts and novices when rendering familiar and novel
stimuli. Experiment 2 examined performance in a recognition
task that also utilized novel stimuli. Results suggest that
experts possess both domain-specific and domain-independent
advantages, in that they have more efficient visual encoding
abilities both when rendering and not. The results of a
concurrent analysis suggest a link between the encoding
advantage and schizotypy, which is correlated with creative
advantage, as well as with a neural profile of left
hypofrontality. Implications for a two-stage model of
creativity are discussed.
Keywords: Expertise; far transfer; schizotypy; visual art;
creativity.

Introduction
Only in the presence of a meaningful configuration of
stimulus features do experts in various domains, including
chess (Chase & Simon, 1973), cars (Curby, Glazek, &
Gauthier, 2009), and digit strings (Ericsson & Kintsch,
1995) outperform novices in terms of recall performance.
Theoretically, long-term memory plays a role in such a
domain-specific expert advantage (Ericsson & Delaney,
1999): Repeated practice yields a hierarchically organized
memory structure for a class of stimuli, into which a
stimulus representation can easily be encoded, provided that
the stimulus generally fits the pattern with which an expert is
familiar. Furthermore, as expertise increases, so does the
number of features, or chunks, that the structure can
accommodate. Such a structure would, ipso facto, not exist
for a novel stimulus. Based on this account of expertise
development, expert visual artists (henceforth experts)
should perform as poorly as control participants (henceforth
novices) when rendering novel stimuli and when performing
perceptual tasks independent of rendering.
However, there is evidence that expertise unique to the
domain of visual art confers an advantage that transfers

417

outside of what is familiar, e.g., mathematics performance
in elementary school (Luftig, 1994), math and verbal SAT
scores (Vaughn & Winner, 2000), visual analysis of out-offocus pictures and novel stimuli, and mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects (Kozbelt, 2001). Expertise in
visual art may transcend a rendering-specific advantage, as
creating drawings or paintings from life (henceforth
renderings) requires visual analysis of objects in one's
environment. Such visual analysis may generalize to visual
perception in general (i.e., to situations where there is no
rendering requirement, just streams of visual stimulation).
In addition to examining rendering performance, the current
experiments are designed to shed light on how experts and
novices process novel stimuli under the perceptual goal of
recognition.
A potential mechanism underlying an expert advantage in
encoding visual information is also examined. Divergent
thinking is considered a mechanism central to creativity
(e.g., Burch, Pavelis, Hemsley, & Corr, 2006; Mednick,
1962; Miller & Tal, 2007; Schuldberg, 2000-2001; but see
Weisberg, 2006, for a different view). It benefits from
access to multiple associates (i.e., thoughts, ideas, etc. that
come from memory and/or the environment) as starting
points for creative synthesis; the more qualitativelydifferent associates a person has access to, the more likely it
is that she will find a meaningful, novel combination in
them (insight), then create a tangible product (elaboration).
In normal participants, environmental sources of
stimulation outside of a point of focus are attenuated or
blocked from consciousness (e.g., Lubow & Gewirtz,
1995). However, such blocking has been shown to be
detrimental to creativity; individuals who were less likely to
block out a task-irrelevant stream of stimuli were more
likely to be creative, as measured by lifetime creative
achievement (Carson, Peterson, & Higgins, 2003). If
experts encode visual stimuli more rapidly than novices,
they might then have access to more of them as associates
in working memory, thus potentially boosting their
divergent thinking capacity.
Individuals with schizotypic personality disorder (SPD),
an attenuated form of schizophrenia, are also more likely to
not attenuate irrelevant streams of stimulation (Baruch,
Hemsley, & Gray, 1988). This population has a particular
pattern of cortical activity: Left hypofrontality, whereby left

prefrontal cortical (PFC) function is attenuated (Buchsbaum
et al., 1997; Raine et al., 2002). Left PFC activity is
associated with two types of processing pertinent to the
current study. First, left PFC function has been shown to
play a role in translating modality-specific information into
abstracted information (e.g., Anderson, Qin, Yung, & Carter,
2007). Normal left PFC function is associated with a lack of
accuracy in rendering, and accurate rendering emerges when
left PFC function is suppressed using transcranial magnetic
stimulation (Snyder et al., 2003). These findings strongly
suggest that left hypofrontality plays a major role in accurate
rendering, potentiating it via a lack of interference in the
signaling among sensory pathways and motor control
centers. Second, increased bilateral PFC function is
associated with creativity. Jung et al. (2010) found a
negative correlation between lifetime creative achievement
and left prefrontal cortical thickness. Carlsson, Wendt, and
Risberg (2000) found that highly creative participants (as
judged by the Creative Functioning Test) utilized right PFC
to a significantly larger extent than low-creative participants,
who utilized only left PFC, when coming up with alternate
uses for a brick. The responses in that study were not rated
as varying in creativity between the groups, implying that
creative individuals utilize the right hemisphere to a greater
extent than non-creative individuals in any kind of task.
Elevated levels of SPD in experts would be consistent
with a pattern of left hypofrontality, which may underlie
both rendering and creative abilities.

Experiment 1: Domain-Specific Performance
Several inferences can be made regarding cognitive
processing on the basis of tracking eye movements.
Theeuwes, Olivers, and Chizk (2005) showed that
maintenance of the spatial location of an item in working
memory only (i.e., without its presence in the field of vision)
causes saccades (i.e., eye movement trajectories) to deviate
in the direction of the maintained item. Tremblay, SaintAubin, and Jalbert (2006) showed that participants' use of
eye movements as overt rehearsal was not only a default
strategy used to maintain spatial position and serial order of
dots presented on a computer screen, but also that denying
subjects use of such a strategy caused a significant decrease
in accuracy of recall of order of presentation. Under
unconstrained conditions, experts reference (i.e., move their
eyes from paper to stimulus during rendering) to-berendered stimuli significantly more frequently than novices
(Cohen, 2005; Tchalenko, 2009). Experimentally
manipulating the refresh rate (i.e., alternately illuminating
either the stimulus or drawing pad every 1, 5, or 15 s)
affected blindly-judged accuracy of experts’ renderings;
lower refresh rates (i.e., stimulus visible only every 15 s)
yielded significantly less accurate renderings (Cohen, 2005).
The manipulation had no effect on novices' accuracy.
However, these results apply only to relatively complex
stimuli, including faces (Cohen, 2005) and standing nudes
(Tchalenko, 2009). For rendering straight and curved
individual lines and squares, there do not appear to be

418

differences in eye movement patterns between experts and
novices under unconstrained conditions (Tchalenko, 2007).
Therefore, in addition to the dimension of novelty, the
content of a stimulus can be operationalized along a
continuum of complexity. This experiment is the first to
explicitly manipulate novelty and complexity in a rendering
task and record the effect on eye movement strategies of
experts and novices. If experts possess a visual encoding
advantage, they should encode familiar and novel stimuli
by utilizing the same cognitive strategy (as evidenced by
similar eye movement patterns), while novices should
utilize distinct strategies for encoding familiar and novel
stimuli of varying complexity.

Method
Stimuli and Apparatus Stimuli rated as most familiar
(Snodgrass & Vanderwert, 1980), and ones that are entirely
novel (Chinese ideograms) were used. Within each of these
categories, complexity was manipulated. Stimuli rated as
most familiar were sorted according to rated complexity
and the 10 simplest and 10 most complex were selected.
The 10 familiar simple stimuli had a mean complexity
rating of 1.60 out of 5 (SD = 0.25), and the 10 familiar
complex stimuli had a mean complexity rating of 3.78 out
of 5 (SD = 0.31), a significant difference (p < 0.001).
Unique Chinese ideograms were selected as novel
stimuli, and their features (i.e., number of line segments)
counted. The set of 10 novel simple stimuli had a mean of
5.50 features (SD = 0.51), and the set of 10 novel complex
stimuli had a mean of 13.85 features (SD = 1.66), a
significant difference (p < 0.001).
Thus, complexity was explicitly controlled for both novel
and familiar stimuli in order to examine its effect on eye
movement behavior.
Stimuli were presented using E-Prime software, version
2.0 on a Tobii 1750 eye tracker (Psychology Software
Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) set to 1024 x 768 pixels screen
resolution, sampling eye position at 50 Hz and with a
screen refresh rate of 50 Hz. The eye tracker was calibrated
at the outset of each session prior to data collection to
ensure reliable eye tracking. Participants rendered using a
stylus on the screen of a tablet PC running CogSketch
software, version 1.131 with a simplified graphic user
interface (SILC, Chicago, IL).
Participants Novices (n = 8, mean age = 19.9 years, three
males) were recruited from Temple University's
undergraduate subject pool, and given the option of course
credit or cash for their participation. Experts (n = 8, mean
age = 30.1 years, two males) were recruited using flyers
posted around the Philadelphia community, and had to meet
the following criteria: Have at least five years of formal art
training, be at least 18 years old, and must draw or paint
more than once a week, all this information being gathered
via e-mail or telephone interviews prior to participation.
Experts were compensated with cash.

All novices were screened for art expertise following their
experimental session. All participants were screened for
proficiency in reading, writing, and speaking Chinese 1.

*

0.2

0.2

Simple
stimuli

0.1

0.1

Complex
stimuli

0.0

0.0
Novices

0.6

Familiar
Novel
Stimulus type

Experts

*

C
Mean epoch duration
(in seconds)

Procedure Factor 1 (between-subjects) was expertise
(novice or expert participant). Factor 2 (within-subjects) was
stimulus familiarity (familiar or novel), which pertains to the
presence or absence of long term representations: No
subjects possess long-term representations of novel stimuli,
and all subjects possess representations of familiar stimuli.
Factor 3 (within-subjects) was stimulus complexity (simple
or complex stimulus). Participants were informed that they
had 60 s to render each of the 40 stimuli as accurately as
possible, with the opportunity to rest between trials. If a
participant finished rendering before 60 s elapsed, she
pressed the space bar on the keyboard in front of the
monitor. If she did not finish, the stimulus disappeared once
60 s elapsed. Following a practice trial to provide
familiarization with the drawing stylus and tablet, all
participants rendered all 40 stimuli in randomized order. The
dependent variables were percentage of time spent per trial
with eyes on the on-screen image (i.e., visual encoding of a
stimulus), and mean duration of eyes on the on-screen
stimulus. An on-screen epoch was operationalized as 60
consecutive ms or more of the eyes looking at the
rectangular area subsuming a stimulus.

B 0.3

*

0.3

Proportion of time spent
encoding stimulus

A

*

*

D
0.6

*
Familiar
stimuli
Novel
stimuli

Simple
0.4
stimuli
Complex
0.2
stimuli

0.4
0.2
0.0

0
Experts

Novices

Experts

Novices

Figure 1: Effects of A) expertise, and B) stimulus type on
total encoding time; C) stimulus complexity, and D)
familiarity on epoch duration. Error bars represent one
standard error.
by expertise (F(1, 14) = 7.08, p < .05). Essentially, as
stimulus complexity and novelty changed, so did the
novices' encoding strategy, which was also the case for
experts, albeit to a significantly lesser extent (see Figures
1C and 1D).

Discussion

Results
An examination of eye movements to and away from to-berendered stimuli during rendering yielded a significant main
effect of expertise (F(1, 14) = 6.43, p < .05), with novices'
total encoding time significantly longer than experts' (see
Figure 1A). A significant main effect of stimulus complexity
was evidenced, as well (F(1, 14) = 46.08, p < .001; see
Figure 1B). There was also a significant interaction between
stimulus complexity and stimulus novelty (F(1, 14) = 6.96, p
< .05), which resulted from a significant difference between
familiar complex and novel complex stimuli (t(15) = 2.47, p
< .05), and a lack thereof between familiar simple and novel
simple stimuli (see Figure 1B).
In order to examine the above effects in more detail,
individual epoch durations were analyzed. There was a
significant main effect of expertise (F(1, 14) = 7.79, p <
.05); experts' epochs were significantly shorter than novices'
(see Figure 1C). As with overall encoding time, there was a
significant main effect of stimulus complexity (F(1, 14) =
56.85, p < .001), with longer epochs for complex stimuli
(see Figure 1C). There was also a main effect of stimulus
novelty (F(1, 14) = 79.29, p < .001), with shorter epochs for
novel stimuli (see Figure 1D). Of central importance were
three significant interactions. The first of these was
complexity by expertise (F(1, 14) = 4.67, p < .05; see Figure
1C); the second was novelty by expertise (F(1, 14) = 21.16,
p < .001 see Figure 1D), and finally, complexity by novelty

The results support the hypothesis that stimulus novelty and
complexity have differential effects on processing strategy.
The significant three-way interaction is of most interest, in
that the effects of stimulus complexity and novelty on
encoding strategy were different for experts and novices.
As can be seen in Figure 1 C and D, both experts' and
novices' encoding strategies were affected by stimulus
complexity and novelty in a similar fashion. However, the
experts evidenced an attenuation of the differences caused
by novel and complex stimuli. These results suggest that
visual art training is associated with an advantage in
encoding novel and complex stimuli when the goal of
perception is rendering.
The absence of long-term representations affected experts
less than novices, suggesting that experts use less top-down
processing (associated with PFC), or use it more efficiently,
than novices when rendering.
The results suggest that experts approach equal efficiency
at encoding familiar and novel visual stimuli regardless of
complexity when visual encoding is linked to the goal of
domain-relevant action. In fact, these results indicate that
experts encode novel stimuli as though they are familiar, at
least when compared to novices.

Experiment 2: Domain-Independent
Performance
Experiment 1 showed that novices require longer epochs
than experts in order to effectively encode novel and
complex stimuli when rendering. The experts' advantage

1
One participant fluent in Chinese, excluded from analyses,
evidenced patterns very similar to the expert group.

419

Method
Stimuli and Apparatus Eighty Chinese ideograms were
used as novel stimuli. Forty were simple and 40 complex.
The stimuli used in this experiment were unique (i.e., none
overlapped with the stimuli used in Experiment 1). Stimuli
were presented on the same computer monitor used in
Experiment 1. Eye movements were not recorded in this
experiment.

Results
The results of Experiment 2 are summarized in Figure 2.
Non-parametric tests were used due to violations of
normality and homogeneity of variance in some of the
distributions. There was a significant difference for
complex stimulus recognition between experts and novices
at 125 ms (U = 46.5, p < .01). Likewise, for simple stimuli,
there was a marginally significant difference between
experts and novices at 200 ms (U = 67.0, p = .06).
Furthermore, experts attained above-chance performance
for all but the shortest encoding duration, whereas novices
did not.
Proportion of correct responses

may or may not disappear if the domain-specific task of
rendering is absent.
In order to examine whether this expert advantage can be
observed in a task that does not entail an expertise-based
motor component, in Experiment 2 the domain-specific
requirement of rendering was removed from the perceptual
task, and replaced by a binary stimulus recognition task. It
was hypothesized that experts require less encoding time
than novices to correctly identify a stimulus as being the
same as or different from a briefly-encoded novel stimulus.
However, there may be a complexity-based limit on this
encoding advantage; thus, the advantage was predicted to be
more pronounced for simple novel stimuli than for complex
novel stimuli.

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4
50
125
200
275
Encoding duration (in milliseconds)

Participants The same participants that took part in
Experiment 1 took part in Experiment 2. The order of
experiments was counterbalanced across participants.

Expert
simple
Novice
simple
Expert
complex
Novice
complex
Significant
difference
Non-significant deviation
from chance

Figure 2: Rates of correct recognition of novel stimuli. 0.5
indicates chance performance.

Procedure Experiment 2 consisted of a binary judgment
recognition task, as follows. At the outset of each trial,
explicit written instructions appeared on the computer screen
for the participant to keep her eyes focused on the screen so
as to avoid missing the briefly-presented stimulus, which
appeared upon her pressing the space bar. The stimulus was
on-screen for a variable amount of time (50, 125, 200, or
275 ms)2, randomly selected by the computer. Then,
following a 1500 ms interval, a second stimulus appeared,
which was either the same ideogram, or the same ideogram
with one of four slashes superimposed over it. The first
ideogram may have had a superimposed slash, as well. The
presence of a slash was randomly selected by the computer.
This randomization yielded relatively equal numbers of trials
for same and different conditions, as well as for all four
encoding durations. Participants responded as to whether the
second ideogram was the same as or different from the first
ideogram by pressing "F" or "J" on the keyboard,
respectively (the keys' meanings were displayed on-screen),
with explicit instructions to use one index finger for each
key. There were four practice trials, followed by eight sets of
10 trials each, with a prompt to take a rest between each set.
Sets of trials alternated between simple and complex
ideograms. The dependent variable was the proportion of
correct answers (same or different) for each encoding
duration.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 extended the results of
Experiment 1, in that experts significantly outperformed
novices at shorter encoding durations. The fact that a
difference emerged at 200 ms for simple stimuli indicates
that experts' advantage is somewhat limited; experts and
novices were equally poor at encoding simple novel stimuli
at short durations. Nevertheless, experts were able to
encode simple novel stimuli significantly better than
novices when given 200 ms or more, whereas novices
required at least 275 ms to close the gap. Furthermore,
when encoding complex novel stimuli, experts at least
evidenced the ability to deviate from chance performance,
whereas novices did not. This indicates that, although the
experts' advantage appears to be limited, it does confer an
advantage when encoding dense, unfamiliar patterns.
Clearly, experts' visual encoding advantage is not limited
to rendering, insofar as in Experiment 2, experts were
denied any synergistic boost from perceiving with the goal
of rendering. Even with a lack of the rendering component,
experts' encoding was superior, as evidenced by their higher
performance on the recognition task.

Relation of Expertise to Schizotypy:
Implications for the Neuroscience of Creativity
The question remains: What cognitive operations can
experts perform while novices are still encoding?

2

Pilot data obtained from a sample of novices (n = 23) indicated
that these intervals should yield meaningful variation.

420

Consistent with left hypofrontality in experts, novices
encode visual information and abstract it, while experts use
the same time to encode the same information and either
plan motor commands (Experiment 1), or perform other
cognitive tasks (Experiment 2), potentially including
divergent thinking. In order to lend support to the theory that
left hypofrontality underlies experts' more efficient
encoding, self-report data on SPD were obtained, with the
hypothesis that experts would evidence higher levels of
SPD, an indirect measure of left hypofrontality.

Method
Stimuli, Apparatus, and Participants The schizotypal
personality questionnaire, form B (SPQ-B; Raine &
Benishay, 1995) was administered to assess schizotypic
traits in the expert and novice samples. The SPQ-B is a
reliable, 22-item binary judgment questionnaire that assesses
three factors: Cognitive-perceptual aberrations, (ideas of
reference, magical thinking, unusual perceptual experiences,
and paranoid ideation), interpersonal dysfunction (social
anxiety, lack of close friends, blunted affect, and paranoid
ideation), and disorganization (odd behavior and odd
speech). It was presented on the same computer as used in
Experiments 1 and 2. Twenty eight novices and 18 experts
filled out the questionnaire as part of ongoing investigations.

Results
For the disorganized factor, experts responded affirmatively
to significantly more questions than novices (t = 2.46, p <
.05). For questions that load onto the cognitive-perceptual
factor, experts responded affirmatively marginally
significantly more than novices (t = 1.86, p = .09). There
was no difference between the groups on the interpersonal
factor.

Discussion
Experts evidenced a pattern of elevated SPD relative to
novices. There was no difference between experts and
novices on the interpersonal factor, but there was a
significant difference found on the disorganized factor, and a
marginally significant difference on the cognitive-perceptual
factor. These data provide a potential mechanism for experts'
ability to render accurately, despite requiring less time to
encode visual information. Hypoactive left PFC does not
over-abstract stimulus representations (i.e., its functioning is
attenuated) in expert cognition, allowing experts to perform
well at modality-specific tasks (drawing is visual, writing is
verbal, etc.).
This finding also has implications for creativity. Not only
does left hypofrontality allow for modality-specific stimulus
representation, it allows for attentional disinhibition. Thus,
experts have better access to more visual associates upon
which they can perform divergent thinking operations, and
thus make creative modality-specific products.

421

General Discussion
Visual artists encode novel visual information more
efficiently than control participants, both within the domain
of rendering and in at least one task outside of it. This
ability to transfer an encoding advantage outside of a
domain of expertise implies that expert visual artists are
prepared to perceive the unknown similarly to the way that
novices perceive the familiar. However, novices' variable
encoding strategies are only attenuated in experts,
suggesting that training in visual art may allow for
perceiving novel information in a manner only similar to
that for familiar information. More extensive training may
be associated with encoding strategies for novel and
familiar stimuli that are indistinguishable. This possibility is
of importance to the field of education, as students can be
trained to encode novel information potentially as
efficiently as familiar information. Neural plasticity caused
by musical training has been demonstrated (Hyde et al.,
2009), so there is potential for advantageous left
hypofrontality to be an effect of visual art training.
With less time required to fully encode a novel stimulus,
cognitive resources are free to be utilized for additional
operations upon it and previously-encoded or recalled
stimuli, including divergent thinking operations. In
Experiment 1, experts encoded stimuli on average 157 ms
faster than novices. In Experiment 2, experts attained levels
of recognition that novices required an additional 75 ms to
attain. Ecologically speaking, that additional processing
time can be used to attend to other streams of stimulation,
then make a creative connection. This process can be
referred to as insight, and is distinct from elaboration, the
phase during which the creative insight is turned into a
tangible product. Martindale and colleagues (Martindale &
Hasenfus, 1978; Martindale, Hines, Mitchell, & Covello,
1984) showed distinct brain activation patterns (as
measured by electroencephalogram) during each of these
two phases. The current results extend this two-stage theory
of creativity; insight may be dependent upon processing on
the scale of tens or hundreds of milliseconds, time made
available by efficient encoding.
The results of the SPQ-B are consistent with the
hypothesis that experts' creativity is based on attentional
disinhibition, which allows them to make connections
between far-flung associates; making distant connections on
the basis of rapid encoding may be responsible for experts'
self-reports of their speech or behavior being perceived by
others as odd, as well as for having unusual perceptual
experiences.
In order to more fully understand expert cognition, work
currently under way by the authors examines experts'
abilities to retain and manipulate novel visual information.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Temple
University Research Incentive Fund. Shannon Fitzhugh
provided technical assistance with data analysis. Dr.
Thomas Shipley provided access to eye tracking equipment.

References
Anderson, J.R., Qin, Y., Jung, K-J., Carter, C.S. (2007).
Information-processing modules and their relative
modality specificity. Cognitive Psychology 54, 185-217.
Baruch, I., Hemsley, D.R., & Gray, J.A. (1988). Latent
inhibition and “psychotic proneness” in normal subjects.
Personality and Individual Differences, 9, 777-784.
Buchsbaum, M.S., Yang, S., Hazlett, E., Siegel, B.V.,
Germans, M., Haznedar, M., O’Flaithbheartaigh, S., Wei,
T., Silverman, J., & Siever, L.J. (1997). Ventricular
volume and asymmetry in schizotypal personality disorder
and schizophrenia assessed with magnetic resonance
imaging. Schizophrenia Research, 27(1), 45-53.
Burch, G.J., Pavelis, C., Hemsley, D.R., & Corr, P.J. (2006).
Schizotypy and creativity in visual artists. British Journal
of Psychology, 97, 177-190.
Carlsson, I., Wendt, P.E., & Risberg, J. (2000). On the
neurobiology of creativity. Differences in frontal activity
between
high
and
low
creative
subjects.
Neuropsychologia, 38, 873-885.
Carson, S.H., Peterson, J.B., & Higgins, D.M. (2003).
Decreased latent inhibition is associated with increased
creative achievement in high-functioning individuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(3), 499506.
Chase, W.G., & Simon, H.A. (1973). The mind’s eye in
chess. In W.G. Chase (ed.), Visual information processing
(pp. 215-281). New York: Academic Press.
Cohen, D.J. (2005). Look little, look often: The influence of
gaze frequency on drawing accuracy. Perception &
Psychophysics, 67(6), 997-1009.
Curby, K.M., Glazek, K., & Gauthier, I. (2009). A visual
short-term memory advantage for objects of expertise.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 35(1), 94-107.
Ericsson, K.A., & Delaney, P.F. (1999). Long-term working
memory as an alternative to capacity models of working
memory in everyday skilled performance. In A. Miyake &
P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory: Mechanisms
of active maintenance and executive control (pp. 257297). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working
memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.
Hyde, K.L., Lerch, J., Norton, A., Forgeard, M., Winner, E.,
Evans, A.C., & Schlaug, G. (2009). Musical training
shapes structural brain development. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 29(10), 3019-3025.
Jung, R.E., Grazioplene, R., Caprihan, A., Chavez, R.S., &
Haier, R.J. (2010). White matter integrity, creativity, and
psychopathology: Disentangling constructs with diffusion
tensor imaging. PLoS ONE, 5(3), 1-7.
Kozbelt, A. (2001). Artists as experts in visual cognition.
Visual Cognition, 8(6), 705-723.
Lubow, R.E., & Gewirtz, J.C. (1995). Latent inhibition in
humans: Data, theory, and implications for schizophrenia.
Psychological Bulletin, 117, 87-103.

422

Luftig, R.L. (1994). The schooled mind: Do the arts make a
difference? An empirical evaluation of the Hamilton
Fairfield SPECTRA+ Program, 1992-93, Center for
Human Development, Learning, and Teaching, Miami
University, Oxford, Ohio.
Martindale, C., & Hasenfus, N. (1978). EEG differences as
a function of creativity, stage of the creative process, and
effort to be original. Biological Psychology, 6, 157-167.
Martindale, C., Hines, D., Mitchell, L., & Covello, E.
(1984). EEG alpha asymmetry and creativity. Personality
and Individual Differences, 5(1), 77-86.
Mednick, S.A. (1962). The associative basis of the creative
process. Psychological Review, 69(3), 220-232.
Miller, G.F., & Tal, I.R. (2007). Schizotypy versus
openness and intelligence as predictors of creativity.
Schizophrenia Research, 93, 317-324.
Raine, A., & Benishay, D. (1995). The SPQ-B: A brief
screening instrument for schizotypal personality disorder.
Journal of Personality Disorders 9(4), 346-355.
Raine, A., Lencz, T., Yaralian, P., Bihrle, S., LaCasse, L.,
Ventura, J., & Colletti, P. (2002). Prefrontal structural
and functional deficits in schizotypal personality
disorder. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 28(3), 501-513.
Schuldberg, D. (2000-2001). Six subclinical spectrum traits
in normal creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 13(1),
5-16.
Snodgrass, J.G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized
set of 260 pictures: Norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory, 6(2), 174-215.
Snyder, A.W., Mulcahy, E., Taylor, J.L., Mitchell, D.J.,
Sachdev, P., & Gandevia, S.C. (2003). Savant-like skills
exposed in normal people by suppressing the left frontotemporal lobe. Journal of Integrative Neuroscience, 2(2),
149-158.
Tchalenko, J. (2007). Eye movements in drawing simple
lines. Perception, 36, 1152-1167.
Tchalenko, J. (2009). Segmentation and accuracy in
copying and drawing: Experts and beginners. Vision
Research 49, 791-800.
Theeuwes, J., Olivers, C.N.L., & Chizk, C.L. (2005).
Remembering a location makes the eyes curve away.
Psychological Science,16(3),196–199.
Tremblay, S., Saint-Aubin, J., & Jalbert, A. (2006).
Rehearsal in serial memory for visual-spatial information:
Evidence from eye movements. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 13(3), 452-457.
Vaughn, K., & Winner, E. (2000). SAT scores of students
who study the arts: What we can and cannot conclude
about the association. Journal of Aesthetic Education,
34(3-4), 77-89.
Weisberg, R. W. (2006). Creativity: Understanding
innovation in problem solving, science, invention, and the
arts. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.

