UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Eye-Movements of Dyslexic Children Reading in Regular Orthography: Exploring Word
Frequency and Length Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7nc0x00m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hristova, Evgenia
Gerganov, Alexander
Todorova, Ekaterina
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Eye-Movements of Dyslexic Children Reading in Regular Orthography:
Exploring Word Frequency and Length Effects
Evgenia Hristova (ehristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Alexander Gerganov (agerganov@cogs.nbu.bg)
Ekaterina Todorova (e.todorova@nbu.bg)
Severina Georgieva (severina.georgieva@cogs.nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology
New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Abstract
Eye-movements represent a great interest in studying the
specificity of the reading difficulties that individuals with
developmental dyslexia have. In the present study dyslexic
children were pair-matched with control children in a
sentence reading task. The children read sentences in
Bulgarian – a Cyrillic alphabet language with regular
orthography. Target nouns with controlled frequency and
length were embedded in the sentences. Eye movements
revealed highly significant group differences in the gaze time
and the total fixation times, word frequency and word length
effects as well as interaction for both frequency and length
with the group factor. These results, especially the frequency
effect found in the dyslexic children, are discussed in the
context of previous studies.
Keywords: development dyslexia; eye movements; reading.

Introduction
Developmental dyslexia is described as a condition found in
children as young as 6-7 years that impairs their reading
skills, while their IQ, reasoning and communication abilities
are intact. Still, there is large variability in both the
symptoms that dyslexic children demonstrate and in the
experimental findings that give support to several theories
explaining the underlying causes for dyslexia (see Vellutino,
Fletcher, Snowling & Scanlon, 2004 for a review).
Usually, dyslexic children are given non-verbal,
phonological or single word reading tasks, which aim to
distinguish between different theories. While the rationale
behind these experiments is very sound, classical reading
experiments are also of great interest. For many years eye
movements during reading provide insight into
psycholinguistic research. During reading, dyslexic readers
exhibit more and longer fixations and a higher percentage of
regressions than normal readers. It is still a matter of debate,
whether these divergent eye movement patterns of dyslexic
readers reflect an underlying problem in word processing or
whether they are – as the proponents of the oculomotor
deficit hypothesis claim (e.g. Pavlidis, 1981) – associated
with deficient visual performance that is causal for dyslexia.
It is a well-documented (and undisputed fact) that eye
movements of dyslexic readers differ from those of normal

readers. During reading, dyslexic readers exhibit more and
longer fixations, shorter saccades and a higher percentage of
regressions than normal readers (for review, see Rayner,
1998).
Hutzler, Kronbichler, Jacobs and Wimmer (2006) used a
string processing task that imposes the same requirements as
reading to visual perception (letter identification) and
oculomotor control (moving the eyes in the same pattern as
during reading). The task is different from reading as it does
not require linguistic or language processing of the visual
information beyond letter identification. In the study above
the authors found no differences between the eyemovements of dyslexic and normal readers and concluded
that differences in eye-movements during reading are not
the cause for the impaired performance.
Hyona & Olson (1995) also tested the hypothesis that the
specificity of eye-movements of dyslexic readers is the
cause for their reading difficulties. They found word length
and word frequency effects on eye-movement
characteristics of dyslexic readers. The conclusion they
made was that the eye-movement patterns of dyslexic
readers are affected by the properties of the linguistic
material encountered during reading and therefore eyemovement patterns of dyslexic readers are reflection of the
difficulties these readers have during linguistic processing
(and not vice versa).
Still, there are few studies of text- or sentence-level
reading with dyslexic children. An eye-movement study on
reading German text passage found word length effects for
both dyslexic and normal readers as well as interaction
between the groups (Hutzler & Wimmer, 2004). The words
taken from the text passage, however, could not be
controlled for possibly confounding factors like
predictability and frequency. In a similar task of reading
short text passages in Italian, De Luca, Di Pace, Judica,
Spinelli and Zoccolotti (1999) found once again strong
length effects but much smaller frequency main effect that
was marginally significant and did not interact with the
group factor. Finally, Hyona & Olson (1995) compared a
group of dyslexic children with younger ones and found
highly significant word frequency and word length effects

1986

for both groups in a somewhat similar task – reading aloud
of English texts. Although there was no main effect of the
group factor, an interaction between length and group was
still observed (but only in the subject means).
These experiments show an interesting pattern of results.
Dyslexic children seem to show strong length effects and
weaker frequency effects in text reading but the differences
between normal readers and the dyslexic ones resembles the
difference between experienced and average readers or in
the children case – of younger, less trained in reading
children (Olson, Conners, & Rack, 1991). School practices
show that children diagnosed with Dyslexia tend to resent
reading and as a result of their reading difficulties, they are
less exposed to written text than normal children. Whatever
the underlying reason for the various symptoms may be, it is
clear that reading practice plays some important role in the
later reading behavior of dyslexic children and adults.
Indeed most theories predict the length effects which can be
explained by difficulties in grapheme-phoneme decoding,
oculomotor control, attention. The word frequency effect,
however, is closely related to reading experience. It could be
argued, that for languages with irregular orthography the
grapheme-phoneme decoding could be more problematic for
less frequent words than for languages with regular
orthography – an explanation suggested by De Luca et al.
(1999) for their results that showed much stronger length
effects than frequency effects for Italian dyslexic readers
when compared to the Hyona & Olson study (1995) on
English readers (English is a language with irregular
orthography, while Italian – with regular).
Clearly, a further investigation of word frequency and
word length effect in reading is necessary in order to
explore these inconclusive results.

Experiment
This experiment aims to study word length and word
frequency effects in Bulgarian language (a Cyrillic language
with regular orthography). Target nouns were embedded in
sentences that were controlled for the preceding context
(neutral) among other possibly confounding factors, thus
providing much more reliable results than words selected
from text passages.

Stimuli and design
Before conducting the study there was a preparatory
phase. As a first step, we collected a large corpus of children
texts in Bulgarian. The corpus contains children books, fairy
tales, etc. representative for the age groups studied. It
consists of 931 320 words in total, among them 58 605
unique.
From this corpus we selected short (5 letters) and long (8
letters) concrete nouns (animals, objects, flowers, etc.) that
were either high- or low-frequency. To calculate word
frequencies we first computed the raw frequency (number of
occurrences per million words) and then we performed a
logarithmic transformation. After this we chose 16 short
words (5 letters) and 16 long words (8 letters) that have

similar low frequency. We also chose 16 short words (5
letters) and 16 long words (8 letters) that have similar high
frequency. Summary of the frequencies of the words chosen
is presented in Table 1.
Table 1: Summary of the words used in the study.
Frequency was assessed as normalized number of
occurrences in a 1 million words corpus of texts that are
usually read by children (fairy tales, novels, etc.).
Frequency per million (ln)
min
Max
average
5letter
words
8letter
words

low
frequency
high
frequency
low
frequency
high
frequency

0

2.26

1.27

3.29

4.6

3.85

0

2.01

1.32

2.96

5.97

3.9

In this way, we were able to vary both word length and
frequency in a 2x2 design with factors: word length (short
vs. long words) and word frequency (high vs. low
frequency).
Each of the 64 target words were embedded in a sentence
with neutral preceding context. The target word was never
the first word in the sentence. The sentences were with
content appropriate for children. Example sentences are as
follows (the target words are in bold):
• 5-letters, high-frequency: ‘Подробна карта на
океаните е нужна на всеки пират’. (A detailed map of
the oceans is a necessity for every pirate).
• 5-letters, low-frequency: ‘Добрият бобър живееше
край омагьосаната река’. (The good beaver lived near
the enchanted river).
• 8-letters,
high-frequency:
‘Хитрото
чудовище
пресрещаше пътниците и им задаваше гатанки’. (The
clever monster stopped passengers and gave them
riddles).
• 8-letters, low-frequency: ‘Червеният карамфил беше
във високата ваза на земята’. (The red carnation was
in the tall vase on the ground).
The sentences were counterbalance in two lists, so that
each participant saw 32 sentences (8 sentences from each
condition).

Procedure and apparatus
Sentences appeared one by one on a screen and were read
silently. The task of the children was to read each sentence
and to understand it. After reading the sentence, the
participant had to press the space bar on a standard
computer keyboard. The sentence stayed on the screen until
the space bar was pressed and then it disappeared. In order
to assure careful reading, control questions appeared after

1987

some of the sentences (the questions were related to the
content of the sentence). The questions required a ‘yes’ or
‘no’ answer. After reading the question, the participant had
to press one of two keys on the keyboard marked with labels
‘YES’ and ‘NO’. There was a fixation cross between the
sentences and the participants were instructed to look at it
when it appeared.
Each participant had to read 32 sentences, which were
presented in a pseudo-randomized order. In the beginning
there were 8 practice trials. Data from the practice trials
were not included in the analysis. The practice trials were
intended to provide an opportunity for the participants to get
used to the task.
Eye-movement data were recorded with a Tobii 1750
remote eye-tracker and ClearView 2.7.1 software. The eyetracker looks like a computer screen with in-built cameras
and sensors. That allowed for comfortable and completely
unobtrusive recording of eye-movements. Each participant
was seated at a distance of approximately 55 cm from the
screen. The sentences were presented in black letters on
white background. The sentences were presented in Tahoma
font (a sans-serif typeface). The size of the letters was
chosen to space 3 letters per degree of visual angle. The
screen was an integrated 17’ TFT monitor set to its native
resolution (1280 x 1024).
The equipment recorded gaze coordinates on the screen
every 20 ms. ClearView algorithms were used to compute
fixation duration and location from these raw data (the
fixation analysis filter was set to 40 pixels fixation radius
and 100ms minimal fixation duration). ClearView was also
used to control stimulus presentation and to collect
participants’ answers.

Participants
Seven dyslexic children and seven children with normal
reading skills were matched (in pairs) on age and nonverbal
IQ. Full matching data are presented in Table 2. Children
with attention disorders were excluded from the sample. All
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.

Data analysis and results
Participants performed well on the control questions – all
reported participants had above 80% correct answers (see
Table 2 for individual scores).
One of the items (8-letters, high-frequency word) was
excluded from the analyses due to typo in the stimulus
material.
First-pass durations (gaze duration) and total times were
selected as dependent measures that reflect well both word
frequency and length effects in reading (Rayner, 1998).
First-pass duration is calculated as the sum of all fixation
durations beginning with the first fixation in a region (the
target word) until the reader’s gaze leaves the region, left or
right. Total time is calculated as the sum of all fixation
durations in a region (the target word), regardless of their
order.

The eye-movement data were analyzed using two separate
analyses of variance (ANOVA): using subjects (F1) and
items (F2) as cases.
Table 2: Participants in the study. Each dyslexic child is
matched with the child in the row below. The column IQ
represents the raw score on a non-verbal Raven test with 36
questions (a point is granted per correct answer). The
column “Correct Answers” gives the percentage of correct
answers for the comprehension questions during the reading
task.

Group

Age
(months)

Gender

Dyslexia
Norm
Dyslexia
Norm
Dyslexia
Norm
Dyslexia
Norm
Dyslexia
Norm
Dyslexia
Norm
Dyslexia
Norm

103
106
120
120
123
125
128
128
130
131
136
142
141
144

Male
Female
Male
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Female

IQ
(raw
score)
29
33
33
32
32
35
32
32
33
35
34
30
20
27

Correct
Answers
(%)
95
100
90
95
100
100
100
100
90
100
95
85
80
90

First-pass duration
First-pass durations (Table 3) were analyzed as a function of
word length, word frequency, and group (dyslexic or normal
readers).
Comparison between dyslexia group and control group
The subjects analysis (repeated-measures ANOVA) on firstpass duration was performed with two within-subjects
factors: word length (short and long) and word frequency
(low and high), and group (dyslexic or normal readers) as a
between-subject factor. The item analysis on first-pass
duration was performed with word length and word
frequency as between-item factors, and group as within-item
factor.
The main effect of group (dyslexic vs. normal readers) on
first-pass duration is significant: F1(1, 12) = 20.28, p ≤
0.001; F2(1, 59) = 150.9, p < 0.001. In general, dyslexic
readers showed much longer first-pass durations (means
were 2044 ms for the dyslexic readers vs. 467 ms for the
normal readers).

1988

Table 3: Mean first-pass duration (in ms) as a function of
word length and word frequency in dyslexia and control
groups.

Dyslexia
group
Control
group

Word
length
short
long
M
short
long
M

Word frequency
high
low
1418
2068
2072
2620
1745
2344
405
421
441
600
423
511

M
1743
2346
2044
413
520
467

Additional tests on simple effects in items analysis reveal
that word frequency effect is significant in dyslexia group (p
< 0.05) and not significant in the control group (p = 0.13).
The interaction reflects the fact that low frequency words
(compared to high-frequency words) lead to greater increase
in first-pass duration only in the dyslexia group.

The main effect of word length (short vs. long) on the
first-pass duration was significant in the items analysis
(F2(1, 59) = 6.02, p < 0.05) and marginally significant in the
subjects analysis (F1(1, 12) = 4.44, p = 0.057). Longer (8letters) words lead to longer first-pass durations compared
to the short (5-letter) words. Length by group interaction did
not reach statistical significance (F1(1, 12) = 2.16, p = 0.17;
F2(1, 59) = 2.65, p = 0.11). Long words (8-letters) received
longer first-pass durations both in the dyslexia and in the
control group (see Figure 1).

Figure 2: Average first-pass duration (in ms) as a function
of word frequency in dyslexia and control groups. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.

Figure 1: Average first-pass duration (in ms) as a function
of word length in dyslexia and control groups. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.
The main effect of word frequency (high vs. low) on firstpass duration was significant in the subjects analysis and in
the items analysis: F1(1, 12) = 10.1, p < 0.01; F2 (1, 59) =
8, p < 0.01. Low-frequency words lead to longer first-pass
durations compared with the high-frequency words.
Frequency by group interaction was also statistically
significant in both subjects and item analysis: F1(1, 12) =
5.6, p < 0.05; F2(1, 59) = 5.86, p < 0.05 (see Figure 2).

Summary of the results for first-pass duration The
comparison between dyslexia group and control group
demonstrates that dyslexic children have much longer firstpass duration in general. Their first-pass durations are
approximately 4-5 times longer than for the control group.
There was also main effect of word frequency. However, the
frequency by group interaction and the additional analysis
revealed that the increase in first-pass duration for lowfrequency words is present only for the dyslexic group.
Main effect of word length on first-pass duration is also
found: long words receive longer first-pass durations both in
the dyslexia and in the control groups.
Dyslexic children show longer first-pass durations for the
long words compared to the short words (word length
effect) and for low-frequency words compared to highfrequency words (word frequency effect). So, it seems that
eye-movements of dyslexic children are affected by such
lexical factors as word length and word frequency.
First-pass durations for dyslexic readers seem to be
affected to a greater extend by word-frequency, unlike in
some of the previous studies.

1989

Total time
Total times (see Table 4 for means) were analyzed as a
function of word length, word frequency, and group
(dyslexic or normal readers).

significant in the control group (p = 0.43). The interaction
reflects the fact that low frequency words lead to greater
increase in total time duration only in the dyslexia group.

Table 4. Mean total time duration (in ms) as a function of
word length and word frequency in dyslexia and control
groups.

Dyslexia
group
Control
group

Word
length
short
long
M
short
long
M

Word frequency
High
low
1928
2783
3063
3671
2495
3227
545
556
620
747
583
652

M
2355
2346
2861
551
683
617

Comparison between dyslexia group and control group
The subjects ANOVA on total time was performed with two
within-subjects factors: word length (short and long) and
word frequency (low and high), and group (dyslexic or
normal readers) as a between-subject factor. The item
analysis on total time was performed with word length and
word frequency as between-item factors, and group as
within-item factor.
The main effect of group (dyslexic vs. normal readers) is
significant in the subjects and in the items analysis: F1(1,
12) = 28.4, p < 0.001; F2(1, 59) = 154.3, p < 0.001. In
general dyslexic readers showed longer total time gaze
durations compared to the normal readers (means are 2861
ms for the dyslexic readers vs. 617 ms for the normal
readers).
The main effect of length on total time was significant in
both subjects analysis and items analysis (F1(1, 12) = 5.52,
p < 0.05; F2(1, 59) = 6.66, p < 0.05). Longer words (8letters) led to longer total time gaze durations compared to
the shorter (5-letters) words. Length by group interaction
did not reach statistical significance in both analyses (F1(1,
12) = 3.25, p = 0.096; F2(1, 59) = 3.31, p = 0.074).
Additional tests on simple effects reveal that word length
effect is significant in dyslexia group (p < 0.05) and in the
control group (p < 0.01). Reading for long words had longer
total time durations both in the dyslexia and in the control
group (see Figure 3).
The main effect of frequency was significant in both
analyses: F1(1, 12) = 6.47, p < 0.05; F2 (1, 59) = 6.68, p <
0.05. Low-frequency words led to longer total time
durations compared with the high-frequency words.
Frequency by group interaction was statistically significant
in the items analysis (F2(1, 59) = 5.71, p < 0.05) and
marginally significant in the subjects analysis (F1(1, 12) =
4.44, p = 0.057) The interaction between word frequency
and group is presented in Figure 4. Additional tests on
simple effects revealed that word frequency effect is
significant in the dyslexia group (p < 0.05) and not

Figure 3: Average total time duration (in ms) as a function
of word length in dyslexia and control groups. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.

Figure 4: Mean total time (in ms) as a function of word
frequency in dyslexia and control groups. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.
Summary of the results for total time The comparison
between dyslexia and control groups showed that dyslexic
children had generally longer total time for viewing the
target words than the controls. There was main effect of
frequency. However, the frequency by group interaction and
the additional analysis revealed that the increase in total
time for low-frequency words is present only for the

1990

dyslexic group. Long words receive longer total time
durations both in the dyslexia and in the control groups.
The dyslexic children show word length and word
frequency effects in eye-movements.

General Discussion
The overall gaze duration and total time for the target words
were much longer than the reported by Hutzler & Wimmer
(2004) and Hyona & Olson (1995). This could be explained
by the age of the dyslexic children – in this study they were
between second and fourth grade, while in the abovementioned studies, the dyslexic children were about 7th
grade (about 14 years old). As many dyslexic children tend
to develop different strategies with age which help them
overcome their reading problems, thus we reason that
studying eye-movements of younger dyslexic children give
us the possibility to study the specificity of the their reading
difficulties without the confounding effect of such
strategies.
Another possible explanation for the results lies in the
silent reading for comprehension task. The children were
highly motivated to reply accurately, which can be seen by
the very high number of correct answers (see Table 2). We
argue that this task is more natural than reading aloud,
which sometimes can be done without any comprehension.
Using sentences with embedded target words allowed
better controlling for confounding factors and successfully
varying word length and word frequency as independent
factors.
The main effect of word length replicated most of the
previous findings. The interaction between length and group
(well-established in previous research) failed to reach
significance probably due to the small number of
participants. Word frequency, however, showed somewhat
different pattern than former studies. Word frequency
effects were very weak for Italian dyslexic readers (De Luca
et al. 1999) and did not interact with the group factor in
neither De Luca at al. (1999), nor Hyona & Olson (1995).
This discrepancy once again can be explained by both the
age of the participants and the task - the later, however,
seems more probable, since frequency effects reflect not
only lexical access but also some comprehension and
integration processes that take important part in reading for
comprehension unlike reading aloud for example. These
results contradict previous findings that claim there is no
frequency effects in dyslexic children in regular
orthography, or that these effects are much weaker than the
length effects. The explanation that is suggested is that the
frequency effects stem from the irregular orthography. Our
data show that this is not the case and that frequency effects
are well manifested in the dyslexic population even in a
language with regular orthography.

by frequency – an effect that usually marks good reading
skills. The interaction between frequency and group implies
that there is some higher-level processing impairment that
inhibits the recognition of rare words or that the children
simply do not have the same vocabulary range as the
controls.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all participants in the current study.
We also like to thank 151st School, Sofia, for their support
during the study in granting us access to participants in the
control group. And finally, we would like to thank Veronika
Penkova, Kalina Seksenova, Stanislava Borisova, and
Yoana Vergilova for their help in data collection.

References
De Luca, M., Di Pace, E., Judica, A., Spinelli, D., &
Zoccolotti, P. (1999). Eye movement patterns in linguistic
and non-linguistic tasks in developmental surface
dyslexia. Neuropsychologia, 37, 1407–20.
Hyona, J. & Olson, R. K. (1995). Eye fixation patterns
among dyslexic and normal readers: effects of word
length and word frequency. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21 (6),
1430-40.
Hutzler, F., & Wimmer, H. (2004). Eye movements of
dyslexic children when reading in a regular orthography.
Brain and Language, 89, 235-242.
Hutzler, F., Kronbichler, M., Jacobs, A.M., & Wimmer, H.
(2006). Perhaps correlational but not causal: No effect of
dyslexic readers’ magnocellular system on their eye
movements during reading. Neuropsychologia, 44, 637648.
Olson, R., Conners, F., & Rack, J. (1991). Eye movements
in dyslexics and normal readers. In Stein, J. (ed.). Vision
and visual dyslexia. Houndmills: Macmillan Press.
Pavlidis, G. (1981). Do eye movements hold the key to
dyslexia? Neuropsychologia, 19, 57-64.
Ramus, F., Rosen, S., Dakin, S. C., Day, B. L., Castellote, J.
M., White, S., & Frith, U. (2003). Theories of
developmental dyslexia: Insights from a multiple case
study of dyslexic adults. Brain, 126, 841-865.
Rayner, K. (1998), Eye Movements in Reading and
Information Processing: 20 Years of Research,
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372-422
Vellutino, F. R., Fletcher, J. M., Snowling, M. J., &
Scanlon, D. M. (2004). Specific reading disability
(dyslexia): what have we learned in the past four decades?
Journal of Child Psychiatry, 45, 2-40.

Conclusion
The results from the current study show that young dyslexic
children have extremely slow, but otherwise normal reading
patterns that are governed not only by word length but also

1991

