UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Facilitating Educator Evaluation of Online Instructional Materials: Does Conceptual Browsing
Impact Cognitive Processing?
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tn4h0rn
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Butcher, Kirsten
Zheng, Robert
Cook, Anne
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                    Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                       University of California

    Facilitating Educator Evaluation of Online Instructional Materials:
            Does Conceptual Browsing Impact Cognitive Processing?
                                                 Kirsten Butcher
                                                   University of Utah
                                                   Robert Zheng
                                                   University of Utah
                                                     Anne Cook
                                                   University of Utah
                                                    Lisa Ferrara
                                                   University of Utah
                                                    Sarah Davies
                                                   University of Utah
                                             Ashley Crockett Mazal
                                                   University of Utah
                                                   Aaron Dewald
                                                   University of Utah
Abstract: A key challenge for beginning educators is finding high-quality online materials that will support deep
learning in their classrooms. Identifying and evaluating effective digital resources requires careful attention to the
match between domain learning goals and the conceptual information contained in resources, but preservice teachers
often lack strong prior knowledge that would facilitate such processing. Conceptual browsing interfaces may support
deeper cognitive processing by providing a visual representation of the conceptual relationships between domain ideas
and by providing a direct retrieval mechanism to find specific online resources related to key domain ideas. Using
a combined think-aloud and eye-tracking study, we are examining the effects of conceptual browsing vs. keyword
searching on the cognitive processes of preservice teachers performing educational tasks. In this poster, we summarize
preliminary results and discuss how keyword search vs. conceptual browsing interfaces can impact the depth with
which beginning educators process online information.
                                                          665

