UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fortune Favors the Bold (and the Italicized): Effects of Disfluency on Educational Outcomes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4wd1s7hj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Oppenheimer, Daniel
Diemand-Yauman, Connor
Vaughan, Erikka

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fortune Favors the Bold (and the Italicized): Effects of Disfluency on Educational
Outcomes
Daniel M. Oppenheimer (doppenhe@princeton.edu)
Princeton University, Department of Psychology
Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

Connor Diemand Yauman (cdiemand@princeton.edu)
Princeton University, Department of Psychology
Green Hall, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

Erikka B. Vaughan (ebvaugha@umail.iu.edu)
Indiana University, Department of Psychology
1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405

Abstract
Research has shown that disfluency – the metacognitive
experience of difficulty associated with a cognitive task –
engenders deeper processing.
Since deeper processing
typically leads to better retention, this paper examined
whether decreasing perceptual fluency of educational
materials would improve retention. Study 1 found that
harder to read fonts led to increased retention in a controlled
laboratory setting. Study 2 extended this finding to realworld classroom environments.
It appears as though
perceptual disfluency can function as a desirable difficulty
in education. Implications and caveats are discussed.

Introduction
It seems logical that to effectively communicate an idea,
one should present it in a manner which is clear and easy to
follow. Educators follow this principle when designing
textbooks—the order, wording, and formatting is designed
to help students read the information with minimal effort.
Indeed, there is evidence to support the notion that students
benefit from decreased cognitive demands when learning
new concepts (Sweller and Chandler, 1994).
While it is commonly accepted that reducing extraneous
cognitive load is beneficial to student learning, there is some
research that seems to suggest there are exceptions to this
rule. In fact, research shows that in certain instances, it may
be beneficial to increase extraneous cognitive load (e.g.
Bjork 1994). These aptly named ―desirable difficulties‖
create additional cognitive burdens but nonetheless improve
learning.
For example, in one experimental paradigm (Hirshman &
Bjork, 1988), participants are asked to remember pairs of
words, such as ―bread : butter.‖ Hirshman and Bjork found
that requiring subjects to mentally generate missing letters
in a word pair, such as ―bread : b_tt_r,‖ leads to improved
recall performance over participants who read the word pair
without any missing letters. Bjork extended this strategy to
realistic educational settings, finding that students who
complete simple fill-in-the-blank sentences are better able to

retain information than students who read the same
sentences with the key words filled in and underlined for
them (Richland, Bjork, Finley, & Linn, 2005).
It seems counterintuitive that imposing unnecessary strain
on students’ limited cognitive capacity would actually
improve performance, yet desirable difficulties seem to
exploit nuances in our cognitive systems. Importantly, these
instructional techniques appear sub-optimal.
Without
conscious recognition and implementation on behalf of
cognitive psychologists and educators, it is likely that these
techniques would not even be considered for use.
It is important to explore such techniques and seek out
new methods of presentation that better reflect or utilize the
way we process information. One such technique may
come from explorations on the metacognitive experience of
fluency—the subjective feeling of ease or difficulty which is
associated with almost any mental task (Alter &
Oppenheimer, 2009). For instance, a blurry photograph is
disfluent because it is difficult to discern, a whisper is
disfluent because it is difficult to hear, and a foreign word
may be disfluent because it is difficult to pronounce.
Fluency has been shown to influence our judgments in a
variety of ways, including our judgments of truth,
confidence, intelligence, or familiarity (for a review, see
Alter & Oppenheimer, 2009). Importantly, recent studies
have begun to explore how fluency influences cognitive
processing in ways that might yield positive educational
outcomes.
Recent work in fluency has demonstrated that when a
problem is disfluent, people adopt a more deliberate
processing strategy (Alter, Oppenheimer, Epley, & Eyre,
2007). In one experiment, participants were asked to read
logical syllogisms and indicate whether they were true or
false. Participants who read the syllogisms in a difficult to
read (i.e. disfluent) font performed significantly better on the
task than those who read the syllogisms in a clear, easy to
read font. The authors replicated this result in three distinct
cognitive domains. In this way, disfluency may be
categorized as a desirable difficulty and can be used to
improve student learning by encouraging them to select
more accurate problem solving strategies.

2739

Contemporary educational reform measures strive to
create learning environments that encourage students to
engage deeply with course content because of the numerous
forms of evidence suggesting that deep processing increases
learning. Most importantly, deeper processing facilitates
later recall. For example, participants who are asked
whether words appear in capital or lower case letters (low
level of processing) do worse at later recall than participants
who construct a rhyme for the words (moderate processing)
or are asked to define the words (deep processing) (Craik &
Tulving, 1975). Therefore, if disfluency facilitates deeper
processing, then there is reason to expect that disfluent
educational materials will lead to improved retention in the
classroom.
The simplest and most standard fluency manipulation is a
font manipulation. Information presented in an easy to read
font is more fluent than information presented in a difficult
to read font. The beauty of this manipulation is that it is so
easy and cost effective to implement. To the extent that
disfluency yields better learning outcomes, the intervention
could be implemented on a wide scale with limited
logistical or financial challenges.
The purpose of the present research is to empirically
examine whether fluency can operate as a desirable
difficulty to improve retention in classroom environments.

Study 1
First we aimed to show that disfluency led to better
retention in a highly controlled laboratory environment.
Twenty eight participants were recruited through the
Princeton University paid subject pool and compensated $8
for their time. Participants’ ages ranged from 18-33.
Participants were given 90 seconds to learn about three
species of aliens. Each alien species had seven features, for
a total of 21 features that needed to be learned (see Figure 1
or examples of the features to be learned). This task was
meant to approximate taxonomic learning that might occur
in a biology classroom; fictional alien species were used so
that participants had no prior knowledge that might
contaminate results.
In the disfluent condition, the stimuli were presented in
either 12 point Comic Sans MS 75% greyscale (see Figure
1a) or 12 point Bodoni MT 75% grayscale font. In the fluent
condition, the stimuli were presented in 16-point Arial
100% black font (See Figure 1b). A between-subjects
design was used, such that each participant was only
exposed to one font. As is evident from the examples
below, while the disfluent text is obviously harder to read
than the fluent text (when they are presented side by side) in
a between subject design reader’s in the disfluent condition
were unlikely to even consciously notice the added
difficulty the disfluent text engendered.

The pangerish
 Ten feet tall
 Eats green, leafy vegetables
 Has blue eyes

The norgletti
 Two feet tall
 Eats flower petals and pollen
 Has brown eyes
Figure 1: Example stimuli from Study 1. The top panel
shows the disfluent font, and the bottom panel shows the
fluent font.
After studying the material for 90 seconds, participants
were distracted for 15 minutes with unrelated tasks.
Participants’ memory for the material was then tested. For
each participant, seven of the features were randomly asked
about. For example ―how tall is the pangerish?‖ or ―what
color eyes does the norgletti have?‖
One outlier was eliminated from consideration for being
more than 3 standard deviations from the mean.
Participants in the fluent condition were accurate 72.8% of
the time. Meanwhile, participants in the disfluent condition
successfully remembered the information 86.5% of the time.
This difference was statistically significant (t(26) =2.3, p <
.05). There were no differences in retention between the
different disfluent fonts (Comic Sans vs. Bodoni),
suggesting that it was not the specific font that led to the
difference, but rather the disfluency. In sum, after a 15minute delay, participants in the recalled nearly 15% more
information when the material was presented disfluently
than fluently. Moreover, as learning time was constrained,
this cannot be due to longer study times for the disfluent
materials, which suggests that instead more effective
learning strategies were adopted.
While this provides strong preliminary evidence that
fluency could be a desirable difficulty in education, there
are several reasons why we might be concerned about its
generalizability to actual classroom environments. First, the
materials we used, while tightly controlled, were not the
sorts of materials that would be used in real classroom
settings. Different types of materials might elicit different
effects. Second, while the effects in Study 1 persisted for
15 minutes, the time between learning and testing is
typically much longer in the real world.
Further, while paid laboratory participants may be willing
to persist in the face of challenging fonts for 90 seconds,
added difficulty may undermine motivation for actual
students. Students may just give up, rather than deeply
processing the material – particularly as the semester
progresses and stress levels rise. Therefore, we ran a large

2740

field study to determine whether these results would persist
outside of the lab.

Study 2
222 high school students (ages 15-18) from a public
school in Chesterland, Ohio participated in the study. This
school accommodates approximately 930 students from
grades 9-12 and reported a 98.6% graduation rate in 2008.
The school’s grades 9-12 are taught by 54 teachers.
Classes were selected for this research using the
following criteria: the same teacher must have been teaching
at least two classes of the same subject and difficulty level
with the same supplementary learning material (PowerPoint
presentations or handouts). Six classes met these criteria and
agreed to participate. These classes were AP English,
Honors English, Honors Physics, Regular Physics, Honors
US History, and Honors Chemistry.
The different sections of each class were randomly
assigned to either a disfluent or control category. Teachers
were instructed to send all relevant supplementary learning
materials to the experimenters prior to distributing them to
students. At no point did the experimenters ever have faceto-face contact with the students or teachers; editing was
done by proxy in Princeton, New Jersey. The fonts of the
learning material in the disfluent category were either
changed to Haettenschweiler, Monotype Corsiva, or
Comic Sans Italicized or copied disfluently (by moving
the paper up and down during copying) when electronic
documents were unavailable. In the control category, no
edits were made to the materials before returning them to
teachers. The font size of the supplementary material was
not changed unless the original size when converted to
disfluent font made the font illegible, in which case the font
size was increased until it was readable. One teacher
refused to administer Haettenschweiler and so that class was
changed to Comic Sans Italicized.
No other changes were made to the students’ learning
environments, materials, curricula, or to the teachers’
classroom routine. To determine the effects of disfluency,
the results of the normal assessment tests for the class were
collected and analyzed.
The z-scores of the students’ test performance were used
as a common metric to compare students across different
courses. As shown in table 1, average z-scores of the
students were higher in the disfluent condition than in the
control.
An independent samples t-test of the average z-scores
revealed a significant improvement of the students’ test
scores in the disfluent condition (t(220) = 3.38, p < .001):
students in the disfluent condition scored higher on their
tests (M= .164, SD = .1.03) than those in the control (M =
-.295, SD = 1.05). There were no reliable differences
between the different disfluent fonts. That is, it was not the
specific of the font that mattered, but rather the fact that it
was disfluent.

AP English
Honors English
Physics Honors
Physics Normal
History
Chemistry
Total

Control
-.058
-.175
-.251
-1.13
-.177
.023
-.295

Disfluent
.135
.131
.215
.42
.112
-.017
.164

Table 1: Average z-score for fluent and disfluent
supplementary materials across the 5 usable classrooms.
Note that the z-scores do not sum to 0 across conditions
because of unequal sample sizes by condition.
The effects of different kinds of disfluent material were
examined using a two-level ANOVA to compare the effects
of disfluent worksheets and PowerPoint presentations. This
test revealed that the PowerPoint presentations were
significantly more effective than the documents in
improving student performance when presented in a
disfluent format (F(1, 184) = 9.38, p < .01). However it is
difficult to read too deeply into this latter finding, as the
only classes that used powerpoint materials were the physics
classes. As such, we cannot know if the difference was due
to the type of material that was being studied, or the manner
in which it was presented. Nonetheless, the difference
highlights possible future avenues of exploration.

Discussion
In two studies we showed that making the text disfluent
by using a hard to read font improved learning. In Study 1,
participants recalled 14% more material when the material
was initially presented in a disfluent font. In Study 2,
students performed better on exams in actual classrooms the
fonts of the supplementary materials were harder to read.
This occurred for both science and non-science courses, and
for different difficulty levels (AP, honors, and regular).
This provides strong preliminary evidence that disfluency
can indeed function as a desirable difficulty in educational
settings.
There are, however, some important caveats that need to
be considered in relation to these findings. First, while a
small amount of disfluency was able to improve
performance, at some level disfluency will necessarily
impair functioning. After all, if the font is impossible to
read, then the information cannot be encoded, let alone
retained. It is unclear from these studies what the optimal
level of disfluency is, nor the relative detriment that being
overly disfluent might engender.
Secondly, there is the issue of adaptation. One reason that
disfluent text might lead to better retention is that it serves
as an alarm signal that this material is challenging and
merits extra consideration (c.f. Alter et al., 2007). To the
extent that students become used to disfluency, they might

2741

no longer adopt deeper processing strategies when exposed
to hard to read font. Study 2 was limited to a single
semester’s worth of materials for logistical reasons. It is
unclear whether these effects would persist over longer
periods of time.
Third, a large literature has demonstrated that disfluent
materials are liked less than fluent materials (for a review
see Alter and Oppenheimer, 2009). It may be that while
students retained the information better under disfluency,
they also liked the material less. This could mean that they
are less likely to pursue further studies in the topic (e.g. in
college) or are otherwise demotivated in subsequent
educational situations. Of course, it is also possible that the
increased effort necessary to engage with this material will
create cognitive dissonance, which will cause them to like
the material more (c.f. Cooper, 2007). This is an empirical
question, that will require additional research to resolve.
Fourth, it is quite possible that there are moderators for
this effect that these initial studies did not detect. Other
forms of desirable difficulties have been shown to be
moderated by factors such as the nature of the materials
(McDaniel et al., 2000) the nature of the testing (Thomas &
McDaniel, 2007), and the abilities of the learner
(Macnamara et al., 1996). One could imagine that less
motivated students from a less successful school might be
more inclined to give up on the material rather than persist
and encode it more deeply. Future investigation should look
into these issues.
Despite these potential drawbacks, disfluency is a
promising form of desirable difficulty because it requires no
retraining of teachers, no restructuring of curricula, and can
be implemented with minimal cost. Given the results of the
present studies, it seems worthwhile to investigate
disfluency as an educational intervention further.

Acknowledgments

Knowing about knowing (pp.185-205). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Cooper, J. (2007). Cognitive dissonance: 50 years of a
classic theory. London: Sage publications.
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing
and retention of words in episodic memory. JEP:
General, 104, 268-294
Hirshman, E., & Bjork, R. A. (1988). The generation effect:
Support for a two-factor theory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 484494.
McDaniel, M.A., DeLosh, E.L., & Merritt, P.S. (2000).
Order information and retrieval distinctiveness: Recall of
common versus bizarre material. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 10451056.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Butler-Songer, N., and
Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better?
Interactions of text coherence, background knowledge,
and levels of understanding in learning from text.
Cognition and Instruction , 14 (1), 1-43.
ODE
Home.
Web.
<http://www.ode.state.oh.us>.

21

Jan.

2010.

Richland, L. E., Bjork, R. A., Finley, J. R., & Linn, M. C.
(2005). Linking cognitive science to education:
generation and interleaving effects. In B. G. Bara, L.
Barsalou and M. Bucciarelli (Eds.) Proceedings of the
Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1994). Why some material is
difficult to learn. Cognition and Instruction, 12, 185-233.

Thanks to Dr. Beth Yauman, a Princeton Undergraduate
research fellowship and the PSURE research fellowship for
supporting the second and third authors respectively.
Thanks to Michelle Ellefson, Alan Castel , Adam Alter,
Anuj Shah, Jeff Zemla, and the Opplab for advice and
support.

Thomas,
A.K.,
&
McDaniel,
M.A.
(2007).
Metacomprehension for educationally relevant materials:
Dramatic effects of encoding-retrieval interactions.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 14,212-218.

References
Alter, A.L., & Oppenheimer, D.M. (2009). Uniting the
tribes of fluency to form a metacognitive nation.
Personality and Social Psychology Review. Personality
and Social Psychology Review. 13(3), 219-235.
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N., & Eyre, R. N.
(2007). Overcoming intuition: Metacognitive difficulty
activates analytic reasoning. JEP: General, 136, 569-576.
Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metamemory
considerations in the training of human beings. In J.
Metcalfe and A. Shimamura (Eds.), Metacognition:

2742

