UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Framing and Resource Activation: Bridging the Cognitive-Situative Divide Using a Dynamic
Unit of Cognitive Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/13z5s44h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Conlin, Luke David
Gupta, Ayusha
Hammer, David

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Framing and Resource Activation: Bridging the Cognitive-Situative Divide Using a
Dynamic Unit of Cognitive Analysis
Luke David Conlin (luke.conlin@gmail.com)
Department of Curriculum & Instruction, 2226 Benjamin Building
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Ayush Gupta (ayush@umd.edu)
Department of Physics, Toll Building
College Park, MD 20742 USA

David Hammer (davidham@umd.edu)
Departments of Physics and Curriculum & Instruction, Toll Building
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Abstract

postulating that the connection between spirit and body
occurs in the pineal gland near the center of the brain.
Modern cognitive science has shown that Descartes was
wrong not only about the function of the pineal gland, but
that the very concept of a ‘center’ can apply to
consciousness and cognition—there is apparently no single
place or time in the brain where it all ‘comes together’
(Dennett & Weiner, 1993). Vision provides a case in point:
we have moved away from the assumption that the visual
cortex functions something like a neural correspondence of
our visual field, finding instead that vision is hierarchically
distributed over various parts of the brain (Felleman & Van
Essen, 1991)1.
This decentralized view of mind has been highlighted by
researchers working within the traditions of situated and
distributed cognition.
Situativity theorists claim that
cognition cannot be defined apart from the situation in
which it takes place and so take the appropriate unit of
analysis the individual-in-a-setting (Greeno, 1997; Greeno
& Moore, 1993; Lave, Murtaugh, & de la Rocha, 1984). In
a commonly cited example, Lave et al. (1984) argued that
whether or not a person knows how to find 3/4 of 2/3 a cup
of cottage cheese depends critically on how the person takes
up the affordances of the situation at hand; whereas the
person may be unable to solve the problem via manipulation
of symbolic fractions, they may still get the correct result by
manipulating the physical objects. Theorists of distributed
cognition have decentralized the mind even further by
considering how information processing can be distributed
across multiple individuals as well as artifacts. Hutchins
(1995) has detailed a paradigmatic example by arguing that
it is the cockpit—not any individual pilot—that remembers
the safe landing speed of an airplane.

Theory in cognitive science often splits into those who treat
cognition as occurring in individual minds those who treat it
as situated or distributed, as irreducibly a matter of an
individual-in-a-setting or of multiple individuals and artifacts.
Prominent accounts have treated this split as between
incommensurable paradigms (Sfard, 1998), competing
theories (Greeno, 1997), and as complementary perspectives
(Cobb, 1994). In the present paper, however, we argue that
the accounts can be seen as theoretically continuous, differing
in the scale of dynamics, such that a "society of mind"
(Minsky, 1988) model of individual cognition is theoretically
continuous with a "mind of society" model of social
cognition. We sketch our framework and show how it leads to
this continuity. We also argue that the relevant scale in any
instance should be guided by the evidence, rather than based
on purely a priori commitments.
Keywords: Modeling
distributed cognition;
collaborative learning

cognition; situated
resources; framing,

cognition;
education,

Theoretical Backdrop
Cognitive science has undergone dramatic advances that
have forced us to question our basic assumptions of the
nature of mind and its relation to the world. This progress
has followed a path analogous to the conceptual changes in
astronomy over the centuries.
As astronomers have
extended their gaze outward into the cosmos, they have
revolutionized our view of the world and our place in it.
These revolutions have been patently decentralizing—the
Copernican revolution displaced the Earth from the center
of the universe, and Einstein’s cosmology went so far as to
remove the very concept of ‘center’ from the universe.
A similarly decentralizing pattern of revolutions has also
been the fruit of our gaze inward, using the tools and trade
of cognitive science. While ancient views of consciousness
assumed a central role for the heart, neuroscience has
followed Hippocrates in focusing on the brain as lexis of
mental life (Finger, 2001). Descartes in particular placed
the “center of consciousness” squarely between the ears by

1

Even if one of the area of cortical ‘projection’ is damaged, so
that a blindsight patient reports seeing nothing at all, their ‘visual
location’ capabilities can be quite intact, as evidenced by their
ability to ‘guess’ well above the level of chance where an object is
in their field of ‘vision’.

19

Meanwhile, researchers in the ‘cognitivist’ tradition have
resisted extending the border of cognition past the most
intuitively obvious one—the brain. Where we draw the line
around cognition has important consequences for how
educational research is carried out, the conclusions we can
draw from such research, and the recommendations we can
then provide to practitioners. Anderson, Reder, and Simon
(1996), for example, argued that the educational
implications of situated theories of learning are often
misguided. They advocated for the importance of training
by abstraction, in contrast to training purely through
concrete examples as situated theories would seem to favor.
In his counter, Greeno (1997) took issue with this
characterization but did point out a specific instructional
consequence of situated cognition: teaching algorithmic
skills is insufficient for achieving one of the main goals of
education, namely getting students to “reason successfully
in their everyday activity outside of school” (p. 7).
The cognitivist, situated, and distributed perspectives
appear to have drastically different ontologies of mind.
After all, there seems to be a vast ontological divide
between claiming that it is a person who is remembering,
rather than a cockpit. Such conceptual differences have
contributed to the miscommunication between these camps,
as several researchers have noted (e.g., Greeno, 1997; Sfard,
1998).
In this paper, we sketch a framework for cognitive
analysis that has the potential to bridge these major
ontological rifts in cognitive science. This is afforded, in
part, by the dynamic unit of cognitive analysis we adopt in
our model. We suggest heuristics for basing the unit of
analysis on the data, rather than prescribing the cognitive
unit based purely on theoretical commitments. Our account
thus has the potential to unify or coordinate these
perspectives.

fine-grained cognitive elements – “dying away” in one
instance and “balancing” in the other (diSessa, 1993) – and
the contextual features that cue these different resources.
On this view, the phenomenology of reasoning is
understood in terms of the activations of resources, of which
there must be many kinds, including conceptual resources
such as for understanding causal mechanisms (diSessa,
1993) or mathematical expressions (Sherin, 2001), as well
as epistemological resources (Hammer & Elby, 2002),
which will be of more central concern here. Resources
often activate in stable patterns, and in what follows we will
be concerned with the dynamics and patterns of resource
activations, in particular with what the evidence suggests is
involved in their formation and stabilities.
We refer to these patterns as “frames,” (Hammer, et. al.
2005), building from accounts in the literature of frames as
structures of expectation (Bateson, 1955; Minsky, 1988;
Tannen, 1993) that undergird our sense of “what is it that is
going on here” (Goffman & Berger, 1974). In the analyses
below, we focus on the dynamics of how students, as
individuals or as groups, frame what they are doing
primarily with respect to knowledge, which we refer to as
epistemological framing (Redish, 2004).
Phenomenological and ontological views of framing
Describing a frame as a sense of ‘what is going on’ may be
called a phenomenological view of framing. Most accounts
in the literature on framing are phenomenological, focused
on evidence of how individuals or groups understand what
is taking place, as well as how individuals send
“metamessages” (Bateson, 1955; Redish, 2004) to signal
how they are framing the situation, in order to help each
other interpret the accompanying message. For instance, a
student who uses a rising intonation while offering an idea
may convey more uncertainty than if they had delivered the
idea with a falling intonation (Ward & Hirschberg, 1985).
Our account also incorporates an ontological view of
framing by describing frames in terms of coherent activation
patterns of resources. For instance, Rosenberg, Hammer, &
Phelan (2006) found that when students framed their
discussion of the rock cycle as “storytelling” they stably
activated a set of epistemological resources including
‘knowledge as fabricated stuff’, ‘knowledge as mental
imagery’, and ‘knowledge as connectable through causal
relations.’

Our Theoretical Framework
We work from a view of mind as a complex, dynamic
system involving manifold cognitive resources, a
generalization in line with schema theory (Bartlett, 1932,
Rumelhart, 1980), Minsky’s (1988) “society of mind” in
which cognition is distributed within the mind across
manifold “agents,” and diSessa’s “knowledge in pieces”
(1993). "Resources" is a generic term for cognitive elements
at various grain sizes that may be in different states of
activation at any given moment (Hammer, et. al. 2005). For
example, a student might explain the motion of a ball tossed
into the air by saying it slows down as the force from your
hand ‘dies away,’ but a moment later claim that it stops at
the top of the trajectory because gravity has exactly
balanced by the force from your toss2. Rather than assume
the student is utterly confused, we find it productive to
explain the dynamics of reasoning in terms of activation of

Dynamics of framing. The phenomenological accounts in
the literature cited above emphasize the dynamic nature of
framing—Tannen (1993) prefers the gerund to emphasize
the dynamic process, citing Bartlett’s account of schemas as
“active organized settings.” The ontological view suggests
models of framings as emergent patterns in a complex
system. We may ask, then, what contributes to the
dynamics of the system?
We suggest that the stability of a framing, as a pattern of
activations, may just as easily involve manifold resources
within an individual mind as across minds or across minds

2

Phenomenological primitives (DiSessa, 1993) are examples of
resources, but this by no means exhausts the set nor scale of
resources.

20

and materials. That is, given an ontology of mind as
comprised of manifold resources—a society of agents or a
complex system of conceptual primitives—it is natural to
expect dynamics that involve particular resources of one
mind interacting with particular resources of others. To put
this succinctly, a “society of mind” view of individuals
(Minsky, 1988) should be consistent and continuous with a
“mind of society” view of social cognition. It is a question
of the scale of the relevant system (or subsystem) that is
involved in the particular phenomena under study.
Thus we look for evidence of what contributes to the
dynamics, and we expect that the relevant unit of analysis
may vary from the individual (or perhaps even smaller) to
much larger groups. Here, we limit ourselves to groups of
four. We look for evidence, as we elaborate below, in the
data for the scale of the dynamics involved for any
particular instance.

Physics provides many illustrative examples: The electron,
for instance, is considered a spatially integrated unit in some
circumstances (e.g. a point charge, or a small sphere of
charge), but becomes an inseparable part of a dynamically
integrated unit called a “Cooper pair” within a
superconductor. Although such an ontological commitment
violates some of our intuitions about what an “object” is, it
is underwritten by the explanatory and predictive success of
the BCS theory of superconductivity.
A dynamic unit of analysis also has explanatory and
predictive power in the social sciences. It is often noted that
people can form groups that are more (or less) than the sum
of their parts, and although this may sound like mere
rhetoric, it becomes a matter of practical significance when
considering the differences between how individuals and
groups act and make decisions. That crowds behave
coherently as a unit and in ways that differ substantially
from how the individuals that comprise them might
otherwise act has long been noted (see McPhail &
Wohlstein, 1983 for a review), and has important
consequences in many areas including, for example, fire
safety (Cocking & Drury, 2008). Research on small groups
has found important differences between how individuals
and groups make decisions, something that has important
consequences for some of our most influential decision
makers, such as juries. Studies of simulated juries suggest
that juries are, as Moscovici & Doise (1994) have put it,
“something other than a dozen jurors” (p. 110) since they
polarize towards the majority opinion regardless of what
that opinion is (e.g., Myers & Kaplan, 1976). Although
such research is far removed from our own work, it does
highlight the need for a way of incorporating multiple units
of analysis into a theoretical framework of decision-making,
behaviors, and cognition.

Dynamic Unit of Analysis
Since both resources and frames exist at many different
grain sizes, and may be activated on many levels at once, it
makes little sense to limit our empirical studies to one level
of analysis. Roth (2001) has also argued for the need to
dynamically focus on multiple ‘zoom’ levels while
analyzing cognition, and has provided some of the
epistemological justification for doing so. Mandelblit &
Zachar (1998) have laid out ontological considerations that
allow for a dynamic unit of analysis, and have discussed
how such a tack may be useful in bridging disparate
traditions in cognitive science.
Epistemological considerations One good reason to seek
out a dynamic unit of analysis is to avoid the temptation of
doing a priori science. By rigidly adhering to only one
cognitive unit, we may be effectively telling the world how
it ought to be. If the individual is the unit of cognition, this
is something that should be empirically supported, not just
theoretically presumed.
Perhaps the gravest risk of such myopia is that of missing
salient data. We all know that our perceptions are
contingent on our attention. So if we focus our attention
merely on the individual as the cognitive unit, we risk
missing critical data relevant not only to the behavior of that
individual, but also the group or situation of which she is a
part (e.g. a jury in deliberation, a romantic couple in an
argument, or a group of students working on a problem).
As Roth (2001) puts it, “[b]y changing focus and by
zooming, phenomena pertaining to different fields of
attention become visible and are of different grain sizes and
time scales” (p. 55).

Empirical considerations Our empirical work has led us to
posit a set of heuristics for identifying the cognitive unit,
which is to say the scale at which the evidence suggests the
dynamics of framing occur: clustering, persistence,
resistance, and transitions. Each of these guides us in
making a reliable identification of the unit of cognitive
analysis at various grain sizes and time scales. We describe
these heuristics in greater detail elsewhere (Conlin, Gupta,
& Hammer, forthcoming).
Scherr & Hammer (2009) provides an illustrative example
of the work that motivated these heuristics. They found that
in small student groups working on physics tutorials,
various behaviors tended to cluster together both within and
across the students. They identified four distinct clusters,
which were sufficient to account for most of the time spent
in tutorial. These clusters can be stable for several minutes
on the level of the student group. Scherr & Hammer also
provided instances in which a cluster was resilient to bids
from students to change clusters. The groups, when they
did transition, tended to do so abruptly and synchronously.
These clusters and the timing of the transitions were coded

Ontological considerations In motivating the concept of a
dynamic unit of analysis, Mandelblit & Zachar (1998)
describe several varieties of fundamental unity. Each of
these various forms of unity “is formed under different
environmental restrictions and is characterized by different
patterns of correlation” (p. 234, emphasis in original).

21

with over 90% inter rater reliability, within 5 seconds
accuracy.
These four behavioral clusters indicated four distinct
epistemological frames (Scherr & Hammer, 2009). One
frame corresponded with disproportionate quality of
evidence for a measure of scientific reasoning (Conlin,
Gupta, Scherr, & Hammer, 2009,). We will now offer two
brief analyses of video data from these tutorials in order to
illustrate the utility of having a dynamic unit of cognitive
analysis.

Data & Discussion

(a)
(b)
Figure 1: (a) and (b) Two different behavior clusters for an
individual

The data comes from an algebra-based introductory physics
course in which the students participated in worksheetguided inquiry discussions (i.e., ‘tutorials’). The students
were mostly pre-med majors, and the worksheets focused on
conceptual and epistemological issues in physics.
The students get many conflicting metamessages from the
tutorials—messages about how to interpret what sort of
activity they are engaged in and how to act accordingly. For
example, students are given a worksheet, and this document
can be framed in many contrasting ways. For instance, they
may see the worksheet as “something to be completed,” an
interpretation they have long associated with worksheets in
their school experience. On the other hand, they may see
them as “something to guide them through their discussion,”
which was explicitly encouraged in several ways. One
metamessage meant to encourage such a framing is the
seating arrangement: there are four stools placed around a
table so that the students faced inward, which is a common
way of setting up a classroom for a discussion.
The tension between these alternate interpretations is
typically never resolved once-and-for-all by the students.
Rather, what we have found is that their behaviors indicate
that their framing of the tutorial changes over multiple time
scales—over the course of a few minutes, or over the whole
hour of tutorial, or over the course of the semester. We
have focused primarily on the minute-to-minute dynamics in
framing.

Clustering heuristic applied to the group
The same clusters of behaviors that are found on the
individual level also are found at the group level. In fact, it
was at the group level the behavioral clusters first drew
Scherr’s attention via abrupt and synchronous transitions by
the group from one cluster to another. The clusters persist
across individuals from tens to hundreds of seconds and just
four distinct group-level behavioral clusters were enough to
account for about 86% of time spent in a single tutorial
session.
The tutorial groups’ behavioral clusters serve as a robust
and reliable indicator of the group’s framing of the activity.
There is a high degree of inter rater reliability (95% on the
cluster code, 90% on the timing of the transitions). The
coding is done without a transcript3 and the analysis of
discourse confirms the nature of the frame. The fact that the
group spends most of the tutorial transitioning back and
forth synchronously between the same set of activities
indicates that it is appropriate to take the group (as well as
the individual students) as the unit of analysis.
In what follows, we present two cases from our corpus of
data and analyze them in light of our empirical heuristics.
The first case supports taking the group to be the unit of
cognitive analysis, while the second does not.

Clustering heuristic applied to the individual
Throughout the course of the tutorial, the students exhibit
a range of behaviors. It has been observed that a small set
of behaviors tend to cluster together for each individual
student in the tutorial. For instance, a student’s gaze angle,
hand position, and posture do not vary independently from
each other but rather consistently cluster together in a few
distinct sets. Two such sets are depicted in Figure 1. A
downward gaze tends to cluster with hands on the table
(often writing or resting) and a hunched-over posture (Fig
1a), while a horizontal gaze angle clusters with hands off the
table (often gesturing) and an upright posture.

Case of group level cognitive analysis
This case comes from a tutorial on Newton’s third law,
during which the students are to find the speed a car gains
when hit by a truck of twice the mass that loses 5m/s. In the
first part of clip, the students are all looking down, so there
is clustering of gaze angle across students. They are also
hunched over, speaking softly, with their hands on their
desks and their eyes on their worksheet. This is what Scherr
and Hammer (2009) called the blue behavioral cluster (Fig
2a).
There is a sharp transition in behavior, in which the
students all sit up, make eye contact, use animated voices,
and gesture prolifically. This is what Scherr & Hammer
(2009) called the green behavioral cluster (Fig 2b).
3

The coding can be reliably done without even listening to the
content of the speech.

22

making it too complicated,” Jan explains that she is “just
trying to make it more physics oriented.” Veronica retorts,
“It is physics oriented. It’s just how it is.” Even though
they both report taking part in a ‘physics oriented’ activity,
through their activities and speech they express very
different notions of what ‘physics oriented’ entails. For
Veronica it apparently means explaining ‘how it is,’ while
Jan thinks using words like “vectors” and “polarized” make
it more ‘physics oriented.’ Their individual behaviors
cluster with individualized epistemological and conceptual
stances, and thus do not warrant a group level of analysis
(for this interaction).

(a)
(b)
Figure 2: The blue (a) and green (b) behavioral clusters.
Analysis of the group’s discourse also falls in line with
this transition. While in the blue cluster, the students are
making intuitive guesses of the answer to a tutorial question
(e.g., “Car speeds up by five”), with little or no justification
provided. Along with the transition to the green behavioral
cluster comes a corresponding transition in the substance of
their discourse. They begin to describe the mechanism at
work in the physical situation described in the worksheet
question, as evidenced by metaphorical gestures of the
collision as well as an analysis of the group’s mechanistic
reasoning (Russ, Scherr, Hammer, & Mikeska, 2008).
When taking the behavior and discourse in conjunction, it
becomes apparent that the group as a whole is changing
activities from what might be called completing the
worksheet to one of having a discussion. This transition
also comprises a shift in activated conceptual and
epistemological resources that are distributed across
individuals, such that the activities of completing the
worksheet and having a discussion are frames definable at
the group level.

A Common Basis for Cognition in Action
There has been disagreement over the nature of the
distinction between cognitivist, situated, and distributed
accounts of cognition. This disagreement has fueled debate
over how the debate can be settled, whether it can be settled,
and even whether it should be resolved. While Anderson,
Reder, and Simon (1996) have suggested the debate largely
concerns the use of language, Greeno (1997) has contended
that the issue can be settled as it becomes clear which
tradition is better equipped for doing productive empirical
work.
Others have argued that the distinction between cognitive
and situated accounts of cognition lie with their preferred
metaphors for learning.
According to Sfard (1998)
cognitivists follow a long tradition of viewing learning as an
acquisition of knowledge, while situativity theorist view
learning as an evolution of participation within a
community of knowing.
Rather than resolve their
apparently incompatible ontological claims, she argues that
they should be considered incommensurable and
complementary. She thereby advocates for the peaceful
coexistence of the paradigms, since “empirical evidence is
unlikely to serve as an effective weapon in paradigm wars”
(1998, p. 12).
We argue that our alternative account affords an
ontological continuity between the cognitivist and
situated/distributed traditions. Thus, in our account we can
avoid the metaphorical paradigm war by distilling the
choice of metaphor to an empirically informed decision
about the unit of analysis. We therefore avoid surrendering
to incommensurability, which if taken seriously leads to
formidable methodological problems (and if taken too
seriously descends into naïve relativism). Cobb and Bowers
(1999) have also noted the need for a common basis for
communication between these paradigms in order to avoid
methodological problems. We hope that our account will
provide such a basis, since it is founded upon established
theories of cognition and is compatible with the
connectionist principles that undergird both sides of the
cognitivist/situativist divide.

Case of individual level cognitive analysis
A contrasting example comes from a different group,
working on a shadows and light tutorial, in which they are
asked whether the light made by a bulb shining through a
through an aperture onto a screen will move up or down
when the bulb is lifted, and why (Lising & Elby, 2005).

Figure 3: Lack of clustering of behaviors across students.
In this clip, there is no cohesive clustering of behaviors
across students, and there is a lack of cohesion in their
speech. Although their discourse centers on the same
conceptual content , they are at this moment engaged in very
different epistemological activities.
One student, Veronica, provides an intuitive explanation
for why the light would go down as the bulb goes up, using
gestures and colloquial speech. Another student, Jan,
provides an ‘explanation’ that amounts to a gerrymandered
list of physics vocabulary. When Veronica objects, “you’re

Conclusion
We have described an account of cognition, in terms of
resources & framing (Hammer, et. al., 2005), that provides

23

an ontological and epistemological basis for connecting
these traditions within cognitive science. This connection is
made possible by adopting a dynamic unit of analysis that
can be grounded in the data, rather than based on entrenched
theoretical commitments. We have provided empirical
heuristics for assessing the unit of analysis. Finally, we
have shown two contrasting empirical analyses to
demonstrate the empirical nature of the unit of analysis as
afforded by the resources & framing account.
One of the most remarkable aspects of cognition that
science has uncovered is its decentralized nature—we have
learned that there is no one place where our perception,
thought, and conscious experience all ‘come together.’
Given the decentralized, distributed, and contextually
sensitive functioning of the brain during cognition, it is not
such a stretch to extend the distributed nature of cognition
past the skull and into the surrounding environment.
Although this may seem counterintuitive, the empirical and
theoretical gains made by doing so may warrant the
refinement of that persistent intuition that our minds reside
in—and are confined to—our heads.

Goffman, E., & Berger, B. M. (1974). Frame analysis: An
essay on the organization of experience. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong
questions. Educational researcher, 26(1), 5.
Greeno, J. G., & Moore, J. L. (1993). Situativity and
symbols: Response to Vera and Simon. Cognitive
Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 17(1), 49–59.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 19(3),
265–288.
Lave, J., Murtaugh, M., & de la Rocha, O. (1984). The
dialectic of arithmetic in grocery shopping. Everyday
cognition: Its development in social context, 67–94.
Lising, L., & Elby, A. (2005). The impact of epistemology
on learning: a case study from introductory physics.
American Journal of Physics, 73(4), 372-382.
Mandelblit, N., & Zachar, O. (1998). The notion of dynamic
unit: Conceptual developments in cognitive science.
Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 22(2),
229–268.
McPhail, C., & Wohlstein, R. T. (1983). Individual and
collective behaviors within gatherings, demonstrations,
and riots. Annual Review of Sociology, 9(1), 579–600.
Minsky, M. (1988). The society of mind. New York: Simon
and Schuster.
Moscovici, S., Doise, W., & Halls, W. D. (1994). Conflict
and consensus. London: Sage Publications.
Myers, D. G., & Kaplan, M. F. (1976). Group-induced
polarization in simulated juries. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 2(1), 63.
Rosenberg, Hammer, & Phelan, (2006). Multiple
epistemological coherences in an eighth-grade discussion
of the rock cycle. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,
15(2), 261-292.
Roth, W. M. (2001). Situating cognition. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 10(1), 27–61.
Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J.
(2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in student
scientific inquiry: A framework for discourse analysis
developed from philosophy of science. Science
Education, 92(3), 499.
Scherr, R. E., & Hammer, D. (2009). Student behavior and
epistemological framing: Examples from collaborative
active-learning activities in physics. Cognition and
Instruction, 27(2), 147–174.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the
dangers of choosing just one. Educational researcher,
27(2), 4.
Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in discourse. New York:
Oxford University Press, USA.
Ward, G., & Hirschberg, J., (1985). Implicating
uncertainty: the pragmatics of fall-rise intonation.
Language, 61(4), 747-776.

References
Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (1996).
Situated learning and education. Educational researcher,
25(4), 5.
Bateson, G. (1955). A theory of play and fantasy.
Psychiatric research reports, 2(39), 39–51.
Cobb, P. (1994). Where is the mind? Constructivist and
sociocultural perspectives on mathematical development.
Educational Researcher, 23(7), 13-20.
Cobb, P., & Bowers, J. (1999). Cognitive and situated
learning perspectives in theory and practice. Educational
researcher, 28(2), 4.
Cocking, C. , & Drury, J. (2008). The mass psychology of
disasters and emergency evacuations: A research report
and implications for practice. Fire Safety, Technology and
Management, 10, 13-19.
Conlin, L. D., Gupta, A., & Hammer, D. (forthcoming).
Where to find the mind: Identifying the scale of cognitive
dynamics. To appear in the Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference of the Learning Sciences
(ICLS), Chicago, IL.
Conlin, L. D., Gupta, A., Scherr, R. E., & Hammer, D.
(2009). The dynamics of students’ behaviors and
reasoning during collaborative physics tutorial sessions.
Red, 24(15), 4.
Dennett, D. C., & Weiner, P. (1993). Consciousness
explained. London: Penguin Press.
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics.
Cognition and Instruction, 10(2), 105–225.
Felleman, D. J., & Van Essen, D. C. (1991). Distributed
hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex.
Cerebral cortex, 1(1), 1.
Finger, S. (2001). Origins of neuroscience: a history of
explorations into brain function. New York: Oxford
University Press, USA.

24

