UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Frequent Frames as Cues to Part-of-Speech in Dutch: Why Filler Frequency Matters

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/20r0100n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Leibbrandt, Richard
Powers, David

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Frequent Frames as Cues to Part-of-Speech in Dutch:
Why Filler Frequency Matters
Richard Eduard Leibbrandt (Richard.Leibbrandt@flinders.edu.au)
David Martin Ward Powers (David.Powers@flinders.edu.au)
School of Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics,
Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
The Frequent Frames model (Mintz, 2003) attempts to assign
words to word categories based on their distributional patterns
of usage. This model is highly successful in categorizing
words in child-directed speech in English, but has been shown
by Erkelens (2008) to be less effective with Dutch material.
We show that extending the amount of contextual information
in a frame by making use of the full utterance context does
not improve categorization performance, but that constraining
the fillers of Frequent Frames to be relatively less frequently
occurring words does improve categorization significantly.
We connect the latter result to a basic dichotomy in some
languages between function words and content words, and
conclude that, at least for English and Dutch, paying attention
to this dichotomy is of greater importance for distributional
bootstrapping proposals than the specific distributional
contexts that are used to categorize words.
Keywords: Language learning; Distributional bootstrapping;
Parts-of-speech; Function words; Frequent frames

Introduction
The parts-of-speech of a language (word classes such as
nouns, verbs and adjectives) are of crucial importance in
describing the grammar of the language. A vast amount of
research has aimed to delineate the processes by which
children learn to categorize words into the parts-of-speech
of their native language. Researchers favouring semantic
bootstrapping approaches (Grimshaw, 1981; Pinker, 1984)
have proposed that early word categories are formed by
grouping together words that refer to the same dimensions
of concrete meaning, such as actions or objects. On the
other hand, following early proposals by Maratsos &
Chalkley (1980), proponents of distributional bootstrapping
have argued that word categories can be induced by
observing that certain groups of words are used in similar
linguistic contexts, whether these contexts are defined at the
level of words, morphemes, or even phonological or
prosodic phenomena.
In recent years, it has become feasible to implement
specific distributional bootstrapping proposals as computer
algorithms that attempt to categorize words purely by
analysing distributional patterns in large corpora of natural
utterances (Cartwright & Brent, 1997; Redington, Chater &
Finch, 1998). For instance, Redington et al. (1998) found
that words in child-directed English speech could be
categorized with a high level of success by considering only

very local utterance contexts made up of words that occur in
close proximity to the target word.
A particularly successful distributional model has been
the Frequent Frames model of Mintz (2003, 2006a, 2006b).
Frequent frames are defined as a disjunct frame occurring
around a target word, made up of the word immediately
preceding and the word immediately following the target, so
that all frequent frames have the form a _ b, with a and b
standing for specific words, and the underscore representing
a slot that can accept a variety of filler words. For example,
in the three-word sequence “a house and”, the frame is “a _
and”, and the filler is “house”. Once all frames of this form
have been collected from a corpus, only the most frequent
ones are retained for the purpose of categorization. This
reflects the intuition that, if two words co-occur frequently
on either side of another word across several utterances, this
is likely to be due to some meaningful linguistic relationship
between them. All words occurring in the same frequent
frame are assigned to the same category, and frames that
have more than 20% overlap in their set of slot fillers have
their categories amalgamated into larger, more general
categories. This amalgamation step is crucially important:
by grouping together frames that accept similar sets of
words, the child may be able to hypothesize that a word
used in one verb frame may also be legitimately used in
another verb frame; without amalgamation, this kind of
generalization is not possible.
Frequent Frames provide a very successful categorization
of the words that occur in them, with Mintz (2003) reporting
values greater than 0.9 for the evaluation measures accuracy
and completeness when the model was implemented on a set
of English corpora. However, recently Erkelens (2008) has
shown that, in the case of child-directed speech in Dutch,
Frequent Frames provide a less accurate basis for part-ofspeech categorization than they do for English: whereas the
use of Frequent Frames in English yielded an accuracy
figure that exceeded the random baseline by 0.52 for tokens
and 0.46 for types, a replication with a Dutch corpus could
attain an improvement in accuracy over baseline of only
0.33 for tokens and 0.25 for types.

Full-Utterance Frames As Distributional Contexts
An important issue in distributional bootstrapping is to
decide on the most appropriate usage contexts to consider
for the purpose of categorization. One possible reason for
the purported lower utility of Frequent Frames in Dutch

2680

may be that Dutch simply allows a greater amount of
flexibility in the range of structures in which particular
words are able to occur. This raises the possibility that the
contextual window employed by Frequent Frames may
simply have been too small, and that it may be necessary to
consider a wider amount of lexical context around a word in
order to distinguish between different constructions. The
maximum amount of context for a word used in an utterance
is arguably the entire utterance, and so from a practical point
of view it may be useful to explore the use of frames that
comprise a full utterance at a time.
Tomasello (2006) has suggested a prominent role in
language development for utterance-level constructions,
expressions that can be used as complete utterances and are
associated in a routinized way with certain communicative
functions. Pine & Lieven (1993) provide evidence that some
children assemble their earliest multi-word utterances by
starting with “frozen”, unanalysed phrases and proceeding
to analyse these into fixed parts with variable slots into
which various elements can ultimately be inserted (although
some children instead form multi-word utterances by
combining familiar single words together).
Given both these pragmatic and theoretical
considerations, Leibbrandt and Powers (2008) evaluated a
distributional bootstrapping proposal that makes use of
schematic representations of complete utterances, with most
words in the utterance lexically specified and one or two
additional word positions serving as slots, for example “Are
you going to X it?” or “That’s the X”. Under Leibbrandt &
Powers’s proposal, words that occur in the same fullutterance frame slot are categorized as belonging to the
same word category. This approach was highly effective for
categorizing word tokens in a natural corpus of childdirected English speech, attaining levels of correctness in
part-of-speech classification that were comparable to those
achieved by Frequent Frames (Mintz, 2003).

Function words are potentially useful in segmentation
because recognizing the relatively small number of function
words makes it easier to separate out the far more
heterogeneous open-class words that are interspersed
between them. Function words could also aid labeling,
because they occur in very stereotypical positional relations
to open-class words, for instance, “the” is often followed by
a noun (or sometimes by an adjective which is followed by
a noun), and “-ing” is usually preceded by a verb root.
Because it cannot be assumed that children know a priori
which words are function words and which are content
words, this distinction would have to be learned on the basis
of perceptible cues in the language spoken to children.
English function words can be identified by a number of
phonological cues, including syllable complexity, stress and
vowel quality (Morgan, Shi & Allopenna, 1996), and even
newborn infants are able to distinguish English function
words from content words (Shi, Werker & Morgan, 1999).
Another feature of the distributional approach of
Leibbrandt and Powers (2008) that may have contributed to
its successful categorization performance is that it attempts
to take the function word - content word dichotomy into
account by making use of another cue that may plausibly be
available to children: most function word types occur more
frequently in speech than most content word types.
Leibbrandt and Powers attempted to approximate the
distinction between function words and content words in
English by sharply distinguishing between the two sets of
frequent and less frequent words, defined as respectively the
set of the top N most frequently-occurring words in a
corpus, and the set of all other words. When creating fullutterance frames for their distributional analysis, they
applied the constraint that only frequent words could be
used as the lexically-specific words in a frame, and only
less-frequent words could be used as the slot fillers that
were embedded in the frames.

The Function Word - Content Word Dichotomy

Adapting The Frequent Frames Model

Another important factor in distributional bootstrapping
proposals is the basic dichotomy that exists in many
languages between content word classes (the classes that
carry lexical meaning, such as nouns, verbs and adjectives)
and function word classes (the classes that are more closely
involved with grammar, such as determiners, conjunctions
and prepositions).
Attending to the positional relationships between function
and content words has been proposed to be of importance to
the language-learning child. For instance, Valian and
Coulson (1988) found that learning an artificial language is
made easier by increasing the frequency of function words
that can serve as anchor points for distributional analysis,
and suggest that children may seek out the most frequent
elements in language in order to learn about the patterns in
which parts-of-speech are allowed to occur in a language.
Gerken, Landau & Remez (1990) point out that function
words could be crucial in the two tasks of word
segmentation and word labeling (category assignment).

Erkelens (2008) argues that different cues are useful to
differing extents in different languages, and that the
occurrence of a word in a frequent frame is not as useful a
cue to part-of-speech for the Dutch-learning child as it is for
English. While we agree with the former point, we will
attempt to show that the utility of Frequent Frames for
categorization in Dutch may have been underestimated.
In the remainder of this paper, we report on a series of
four experiments intended to investigate whether the
Frequent Frames model can be modified to deal successfully
with Dutch material. In Experiment 1, we replicate the
results of Erkelens (2008) with a larger corpus and Frequent
Frame set, and confirm that the unmodified Frequent
Frames model is less useful for categorization in Dutch than
in English. In Experiment 2, we investigate whether the
distributional model of Leibbrandt & Powers (2008) is able
to improve over the categorization results of Frequent
Frames (we preempt our results here by confirming that it
does). As Leibbrandt and Powers’s approach differs in two

2681

ways from the Frequent Frames approach, it then becomes
important to investigate whether this improved performance
is due to both differences, or only one. In Experiment 3,
therefore, we modify the Frequent Frames approach to use
the complete utterance as the context for categorization, and
in Experiment 4, we constrain Frequent Frames to be
composed of only frequent (function) framing words, and to
take only less-frequent (content) filler words.

Experiment 1
Method
The corpus used in these experiments was the Groningen
corpus (Wijnen & Bol, 1993), taken from CHILDES
(MacWhinney, 2000), and consisting of data from seven
Dutch-learning children in the Groningen area, recorded
between the ages of 1;05 and 3;07. The corpus was
minimally preprocessed for computer-readability, and all
sentences uttered by adults were used. Data from all seven
children were merged together in order to increase the data
set size for the purpose of data clustering.
Frequent Frames were extracted according to the method
used by Mintz (2003). Candidate frames were extracted
from each utterance in the corpus, by forming a frame from
every three consecutive words in each utterance and
replacing the middle word with a slot marker. The frames
with the highest frequency of occurrence in the corpus were
retained as the set of frequent frames. Frequency statistics
were collected on how often each word occurred in the slot
position of each frequent frame throughout the corpus.
The studies by Mintz (2003) and Erkelens (2008) made
use of a set size of 45. Because it was desirable in the
present work to apply clustering to the data, a slightly larger
frame set of 250 frames was used. These top 250 frames
were grouped into clusters of frames by means of averagelinkage hierarchical clustering (Sokal & Sneath, 1963), with
the initial distances between frames given by Spearman’s
ranked correlation coefficient. Frames were clustered
together if they occurred in the corpus with similar sets of
slot-filler words.
Clustering makes it possible to make generalizations
about the acceptability of words in frames in which they
have not been attested in the corpus. If the clustering
algorithm produces K clusters of frames, these clusters
correspond to K hypothesized categories. Any word token
which occurs in any frame belonging to a particular cluster
is then assigned to the category corresponding to that
cluster.
Evaluation Measures And Significance
All the experiments reported here involve the task of
categorizing words into word categories based on the
context in which they are used. In each case, there is an
empirical allocation of words to unlabelled categories,
which needs to be evaluated by a comparison with the
“true” distribution of word tokens into their parts-of-speech.
This “true” distribution was created by us after manually
inspecting each of the particular word tokens in contextual

usage. We made use of the same categories that were used
by Erkelens (2008) in her “standard analysis”, namely:
verbs (including auxiliaries and copula), nominals (nouns,
proper names and pronouns), adjectives, prepositions,
adverbs, determiners, WH-words, conjunctions and
interjections.
Unsupervised categorization models such as Frequent
Frames are usually evaluated by means of the mathematical
measures accuracy and completeness, using a pair counting
approach. A formal definition of these two measures falls
outside the scope of this paper, but they can be intuitively
understood as expressing the extent to which word tokens
assigned to the same category by the model do in fact
belong to the same part-of-speech, and the extent to which
word tokens which belong to the same part-of-speech were
in fact categorized together by the model, respectively.
It is possible to report accuracy and completeness both in
terms of the number of word tokens correctly categorized
and in terms of the number of word types correctly
categorized; results reported here are based on word type
categorization only.
It should be noted that one cannot simply compare
accuracy and completeness scores between experiments that
make use of different sets of data. Any comparison has at
least to take into account the magnitude of the difference
between accuracy (or completeness) attained by the model,
and the baseline accuracy (or completeness) attained by
randomly allocating of words to categories.
In order to address this difficulty, we make use of
permutation tests to assess the significance of differences
between evaluation measures, both within and between
experiments. Within an experiment, it is possible to assess
whether the value of an evaluation measure is significantly
higher than the baseline value, by generating a randomized
sample of values for that measure and determining how
often an equal or higher value occurs in the sample.
Between experiments, it is possible to determine whether an
obtained value for an evaluation measure in one experiment
is significantly better than a value for the same measure in
another experiment, by generating a random sample for each
experiment separately, taking the differences between pairs
of values from the two samples, and comparing this sample
of differences to the difference between the originally
obtained values.
There is also typically a trade-off between accuracy and
completeness, and it is possible to artificially inflate one
measure at the expense of the other. For this reason, it is
necessary to considered both values together when
evaluating the results of an experiment. In addition, we will
also report values for the F measure, calculated as the
harmonic mean of accuracy and completeness, which
summarizes both measures and takes on a high value only
when they are both high in value.

Results
Firstly, an analysis of the 250 most frequent frames in the
pooled corpus confirmed the conclusion drawn by Erkelens

2682

(2008) that frequent frames are not as reliable a basis for the
categorization of Dutch words as they are for English
words. The categorization accuracy for the top 250 frames
from the pooled corpus (displayed in Table 1) was 0.60,
against a random baseline of 0.31, i.e. categorizing on the
basis of frequent frames rather than by randomly assigning
categories improved accuracy by only 0.29. This result is
comparable with Erkelens’s (2008) 0.25 increase in
accuracy, suggesting that the differences between that study
and the current experiment (a different corpus and a larger
set of frequent frames) did not materially affect the results.
As might be expected, completeness was almost equal to the
random baseline (and near zero), as frame clusters have not
yet been created. These results confirm that the individual
frames have some utility in predicting the part-of-speech of
their slot-filler words, but that their accuracy is far from
perfect.
Table 1: Accuracy and completeness for the top 250
frequent frames before clustering, against results from
Mintz (2003) and Erkelens (2008). Random baseline figures
in italics.
Study
Language
Measure
Mintz (2003)
English
Accuracy
Erkelens (2008)
Dutch
Accuracy
Experiment 1
Dutch
Accuracy
Experiment 1
Dutch
Completeness

Value
0.93 (0.47)
0.58 (0.33)
0.60 (0.31)
0.01 (0.01)

Hierarchical clustering was applied to the frames based on
the distributional patterns of their filler words 1. The results
are shown in Table 2. Accuracy decreased sharply, as
should be expected, as assigning every frame to its own
unique category corresponds to the maximum attainable
accuracy value. While completeness increased by a large
amount in absolute value, it did not exhibit a large
advantage over the random baseline completeness value.
Table 2: Evaluation of word token categorization after
hierarchical clustering of the top 250 frequent frames
into 12 clusters. Random baseline figures in italics.
Accuracy
Completeness
F

Experiment 2
Method
As in Experiment 1, we made use of the Groningen
corpus. Here, however, we attempted to apply the lexicallyspecific frame approach proposed by Leibbrandt and Powers
(2008). A list was compiled of the most frequently
occurring word types in the Groningen corpus. This
requires a choice of an arbitrary frequency cutoff point, and
in this experiment the top 300 most frequent words were
selected as the frame-building words. This set included the
most common function words in Dutch, including pronouns
(ik, hij, ze), determiners (een, de, het, deze, dat), and forms
of the copula (ben, zijn) as well as a number of common
content words.
All utterances were rewritten as lexically-specific frame
candidates, by replacing every word that was not on the
frequent-word list by a placeholder symbol X. From this set
of candidate dichotomous full-utterance frames, the 250
frames with the highest frequency of occurrence were
retained for analysis.
As in Experiment 1, co-occurrence data was collected
about the frequency with which different words occurred in
each of the frames, and the set of frames was clustered
based on similarity in their sets of filler words. Note that,
because of the way in which the frames were constructed,
all slot fillers were taken from the set of less-frequent
words.

Results
A number of intuitively sensible Dutch full-utterance
frames were produced by this process, for example “Daar is
de X” (“There’s the X”), “Gaat ie X?” (“Is he going to X?”)
and “Heel X” (“Very X”), frames which could reasonably
be expected to take noun, verb and adjective fillers
respectively. Note that none of these example utterance
structures could have been covered by the Frequent Frames
approach, as the slot word occurs at the end of the frame in
each case.
Table 3: Evaluation of word token categorization after
hierarchical clustering of the top 250 dichotomous fullutterance frames. Random baseline figures in italics.

0.429 (0.327)
0.405 (0.308)
0.417 (0.317)

Accuracy
Completeness
F

Discussion
These results replicate the findings of Erkelens (2008)
that frequent frames have some utility as a basis for the
prediction of the part-of-speech of Dutch words, but that
they are not nearly as reliable as they are in English.
1

The number of clusters produced by hierarchical clustering
affects the obtained results. Procedures exist for choosing an
optimal number of clusters, but for the sake of consistent
comparison across the four experiments described here, the
number of clusters produced was fixed at 12 in each experiment.

0.752 (0.431)
0.407 (0.233)
0.528 (0.302)

The results of categorization evaluation after clustering
are shown in Table 3. Accuracy, completeness and F were
all significantly higher than baseline, as assessed by a
permutation test (p < 0.01). Furthermore, categorization
performance was significantly better than in the Frequent
Frames approach of Experiment 1, as assessed by a
permutation test of F value differences (p < 0.01).

2683

Discussion
This experiment has shown that the frame selection
approach used by Leibbrandt and Powers (2008) produces
frames that are far more reliable indicators of the part-ofspeech of a word in Dutch than the standard Frequent
Frames proposed by Mintz (2003). As stated, this approach
differs from Frequent Frames in two ways, making use of
full-utterance contexts and accepting only less-frequent
word (content word ) fillers. In the next two experiments,
we attempt to determine whether the improved performance
shown here is due to one, or both, of these properties.

Experiment 3
Method
From each utterance in the corpus, candidate frames were
extracted that contained all the words in the utterance except
for one target word, which was turned into a variable slot
(so that each utterance yielded as many candidate frames as
there were words in the utterance). For example, the
utterance “Dat is het vliegtuig” yielded the frames “X is het
vliegtuig”, “Dat X het vliegtuig”, “Dat is X vliegtuig” and
“Dat is het X”. The most frequently occurring of these
candidate frequent full-utterance frames were selected for
evaluation. As before, word occurrence frequencies were
calculated for each frame, and frames were clustered
together based on the patterns of words that occurred in
their slots.

Experiment 2, and it seems that the success of those frames
had nothing to do with their being based on full utterances.

Experiment 4
Method
Candidate frames were extracted from the corpus in the
same way as for Experiment 1, i.e. the candidate frames
were all Frequent Frames. However, following the approach
taken in Experiment 2, we retained frames for the final
evaluation set only if both the frame-building words (i.e. the
first and third words) occurred in the list of the most
frequent words in the corpus. Equally importantly, only
words that were not in the frequent-word list were accepted
as slot fillers for the frames. The most frequent such
frequent dichotomous frames were selected and clustered as
in the previous experiments.

Results
Evaluation results are shown in Table 5. It is immediately
noticeable that the values of all measures are higher than for
any of the other 3 experiments. For instance, comparison
with Table 1 reveals that accuracy in this experiment is
similar to the level of accuracy attained by Mintz (2003)
with English frames. All measures are significantly above
their baseline (p < 0.01), and categorization performance is
significantly greater than for Experiments 1 and 3 (p <
0.01), but not significantly different from Experiment 2.
Table 5: Evaluation of word token categorization after
hierarchical clustering of the top 250 frequent dichotomous
frames. Random baseline figures in italics.

Results
Evaluation results are shown in Table 4. While all
evaluation measures were significantly greater than baseline
(p < 0.01), the full-utterance frames did not provide a better
basis for categorization than Frequent Frames; on the
contrary, the categorization using Frequent Frames in
Experiment 1 performed significantly better than the
categorization with full-utterance frames, as assessed on a
permutation test of differences in F measures (p < 0.01).

Accuracy
Completeness
F

Discussion

Table 4: Evaluation of word token categorization after
hierarchical clustering of the top 250 frequent full-utterance
frames. Random baseline figures in italics.
Accuracy
Completeness
F

0.921 (0.611)
0.513 (0.340)
0.659 (0.437)

0.428 (0.267)
0.249 (0.156)
0.315 (0.197)

Discussion
Clearly, the relatively low utility of Frequent Frames in
categorizing Dutch words shown in Experiment 1 was not
merely due to an insufficient amount of contextual
information. In this experiment, increasing context to
comprise the whole utterance did not improve
categorization, as one might have expected from the
superior results with dichotomous full-utterance frames in

In this experiment, we have seen evidence that, contrary
to the results of Erkelens (2008), Frequent Frames may
yield high accuracy and completeness in categorizing Dutch
words, provided that the frames are composed of the set of
frequent words in Dutch (usually function words) while the
categorization targets are taken from the relatively less
frequent words, i.e. essentially content words.
Every one of the 250 frames in Experiment 1 was already
composed of two frequent words. However, only 105 of
those frames were retained in the evaluation set for
Experiment 4. Therefore, the large improvement in
categorization performance was due to the requirement that
fillers should be less-frequent words, thereby effectively
dropping function word fillers from the categorization. This
seemed to result in a great number of frames being added to
the evaluation set that were strongly associated with only
one content word class (verbs, nouns, or adjectives).

2684

General Discussion

References

The experimental results in this paper show that a simple
distributional approach is effective in categorizing words in
Dutch child-directed speech. Both the dichotomous fullutterance frame approach of Leibbrandt & Powers (2008)
used in Experiment 2 and the Frequent Dichotomous
Frames approach of Experiment 4 yielded significantly
better categorizations than either Frequent Frames or
Frequent Full-Utterance Frames, with no significant
difference between the two models relative to their random
baselines (although Frequent Dichotomous Frames achieved
a higher F value in absolute terms, and so may arguably be
preferred). By contrast, extending the context used for
distributional analysis to a full utterance as in Experiment 3,
paradoxically decreased performance. This suggests that the
extent of context used in distributional bootstrapping may
be less crucial than the kinds of words used for frames and
fillers respectively
A simple modification to the Frequent Frames model is
therefore able to overcome the shortcomings with Dutch
material identified by Erkelens (2008). We suggest that the
reason why the Frequent Dichotomous Frames model yields
such a successful categorization is that the less-frequent
words being categorized are mostly content words. In other
words, it may be the case that the only useful targets for
distributional analysis are the content word classes such as
noun, verb, adjective and adverb. While pronouns, auxiliary
verbs, etc. can also be identified by their distribution, these
words may simply be learned on a one-by-one basis.
The weaker results of the original Frequent Frames model
may have been due to a conflation of legitimate content
word contexts with other cases where a function word in the
frame slot indicates a different linguistic construction. For
instance, the Frequent Frame “die _ wel” accepts a variety
of verbs, and the pronoun “die” serves as the subject of the
verb. When the slot is filled by the adverb “ook” to form
“die ook wel”, however, this is a different construction
where “die” is the object of a verb outside the frame, or else
the subject of an unstated verb. Eliminating function-word
fillers avoids the conflation of contexts.
While the results from this corpus analysis speak less
directly to how children actually learn parts-of-speech than
the results of an experimental study would, they
demonstrate the feasibility of exploiting a particular form of
information in child-directed language. In concurrence with
the proposal by Valian & Coulson (1988) that function
words serve as anchor points indicating the structure of an
utterance and facilitating distributional analysis, we suggest
that it would be useful for children to make a distinction
between function and content words, based on various cues
such as phonology, greater occurrence frequency, etc. When
children encounter a function word occurring in the slot
position of what would normally be a distributional frame,
they would then be able to avoid carrying out the normal
process of categorizing the word on the basis of the frame,
and to treat the function word as part of the structural
information in the utterance only.

Cartwright, T. A., & Brent, M. R. (1997). Syntactic
categorization in early language acquisition: formalizing
the role of distributional analysis. Cognition, 63, 121-170.
Erkelens, M. (2008). Restrictions of frequent frames as cues
to categories: the case of Dutch. Supplement to the
Proceedings of the 32nd Boston University Conference on
Language Development (BUCLD 32).
Gerken, L., Landau, B., & Remez, R. E. (1990). Function
morphemes in young children's speech perception and
production. Developmental Psychology, 26(2), 204-216.
Leibbrandt, R. E., & Powers, D. M. W. (2008).
Grammatical category induction using lexically-based
templates. Supplement to the Proceedings of the 32nd
Boston University Conference on Language Development
(BUCLD 32).
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk. (3 ed. Vol. 2: The database). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mintz, T. H. (2003). Frequent frames as a cue for
grammatical categories in child directed speech.
Cognition, 90(1), 91-117.
Mintz, T. H. (2006a). Finding the verbs: Distributional cues
to categories available to young learners. In K. HirshPasek & R. M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Action meets word: How
children learn verbs. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mintz, T. H. (2006b). Frequent frames: Simple cooccurrence constructions and their links to linguistic
structure. In E. V. Clark & B. F. Kelly (Eds.),
Constructions
in
acquisition.
Stanford:
CSLI
Publications.
Morgan, J. L., Shi, R., & Allopenna, P. (1996). Perceptual
bases of rudimentary grammatical categories: Toward a
broader conceptualization of bootstrapping. In J. L.
Morgan & K. Demuth (Eds.), Signal to syntax (pp. 263283). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pine, J. M., & Lieven, E. (1993). Reanalysing rote-learned
phrases: Individual differences in the transition to multiword speech. Journal of Child Language, 20, 551-571.
Redington, M., Chater, N., & Finch, S. (1998).
Distributional information: A powerful cue for acquiring
syntactic categories. Cognitive Science, 22(4), 425-469.
Shi, R., Werker, J. F., & Morgan, J. L. (1999). Newborn
infants' sensitivity to perceptual cues to lexical and
grammatical words. Cognition, 72, B11-B21.
Tomasello, M. (2006). Acquiring linguistic constructions. In
D. Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of Child
Psychology. New York: Wiley.
Valian, V. & Coulson, S. (1988). Anchor points in language
learning: the role of marker frequency. Journal of
Memory and Language, 27, 71-86.
Wijnen, F. & Bol, G. (1993). The escape from the optional
infinitive stage. In A. de Boer, J. de Jong & R.
Landeweerd (Eds.) Language and Cognition 3, University
of Groningen, Dept. of Linguistics.

2685

