UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gesture in language: How sound symbolic words are processed in the brain

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1bp5b266

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Arata, Mamiko
Imai, Mutsumi
Okuda, Jiro
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gesture in language: How sound symbolic words are processed in the brain
Mamiko Arata (arata@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Media and Governance, Keio University at Shonan-Fujisawa, Japan

Mutsumi Imai (imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies, Keio University at Shonan-Fujisawa, Japan

Jiro Okuda (jokuda@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp.ac.jp)
Faculty of computer Science and Engineering, KyotoSangyo University, Japan

Hiroyuki Okada (h.okada@eng.tamagawa.ac.jp)
Department of Engineering, Tamagawa University, Japan

Tetsuya Matsuda (tetsuya@lab.tamagawa.ac.jp)
Tamagawa University Brain Science Institute, Tamagawa University, Japan

Abstract
In traditional linguistics, it has been assumed that the sounds
of words are not related to their semantic contents, and that
meanings of words are not directly linked to sensory systems.
Nevertheless, many languages have a word class in which the
sound and meaning of words are systematically related. In
this study, by using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), we scanned brain activity in adult Japanese-speakers
while they were seeing locomotion videos together with
sound symbolic mimetic words, non-sound symbolic adverbs
or verbs. Mimetic words were neurally processed differently
from non-sound symbolic adverbs and verbs: We identified
extensive bi-hemispheric activations in the regions typically
associated with nonverbal cognitive processes for mimetic
words but not for non-symbolic verbs or adverbs. The
results suggest that mimetic words, by their direct soundmeaning link, have dual neural status both as linguistic
symbols and non-linguistic iconic symbols that are directly
linked to sensory experience.
Keywords: sound symbolism, brain imaging, symbol
grounding in language

Introduction
In the tradition of formal linguistics, language is regarded as
an encapsulated system which is functionally separated from
other cognitive functions. In this tradition, word meanings
are assumed to be represented as a set of universal atomic
semantic features that are amodal and not connected
todirect sensory experiences. Here, sound symbolism, in
which the sound and meaning of words are systematically
related, is considered to be a marginal phenomenon in
language. However, such a statement seems to be too strong
when one looks beyond Indo-European languages. Many
languages of the world have a large grammatically-defined
word class in which sound symbolism is apparent. For
example, in Japanese, mimetic words include not only
onomatopoeias for animal sounds but also words referring to
motion, tactile sensation and emotional states in which sound

is not essential. Mimetic words constitute a large open class
of words, and new words can be easily created.
These words are frequently used in everyday conversations
and newspaper articles, as well as in various forms of verbal
arts, from comic books to novels and poems. Japanese is by
no means an exception among languages of the world.
Many languages of the world have a similar grammatical
class of words with clear sound symbolism (Hinton, Nichols,
& Ohara,1994; Nuckrolls, 1999; Voetlz & Kilian-Hatz
2001), including most sub-Saharan African languages
(Childs,1994) , and many of the South East Asian languages
(called Diffloth, 1972; Watson, 2001; Enfield, 2005) and
East Asian languages (Lee, 1992; Mok, 2001; Bodomo,
2006). Even in Indo-European languages that do not have a
distinct grammatical class for sound symbolic words (e.g.,
English), linguists (e.g., Bloomfield, 1933/1984; Bolinger,
1950;Firth, 1935/1957) have pointed out that there is clear
sound symbolism in some words (e.g., squeeze, squirt,
squint, bump, thump, and plump in English).
Starting with Köhler (1929), there has been a body of
empirical work, which demonstrates psychological realit y
of sound symbolism. Köhler found that, when presented
with a curvy round shape and a spiky angular shape, one has
the intuition that baluma is a better name for the former and
takete is a better name for the latter (see also Ramachandran
& Hubbard, 2001; Westbury, 2004). Sapir (1929) also
demonstrated that English speakers associate novel words
containing the vowel /i/ with smallness more frequently than
words containing /a/.
More recently, empirical evidence for the role of sound
symbolism in language processing and novel word learning
has been accumulated. For example, sound-shape correlates
facilitate category learning involving novel objects both
in English-speaking children (Maurer, Pathman and
Mondloch, 2006) and adults (Kovic, Plunkett, & Westermann,
2009; Nygaard, Cook & Namy, 2009). Imai and colleagues
demonstrated that Japanese 25-month-olds and English

1374

speaking adults who had no exposure to Japanese could
detect the sound symbolism underlying novel mimetic
words expressing human locomotion (Imai, Kita, Nagumo &
Okada, 2008; Kita, Kantartzis & Imai, in press). They further
demonstrated that Japanese- as well as English-reared
children were greatly helped by sound symbolism in mimetic
verbs when they needed to extend a novel verb.
These effects of sound symbolism are not harmonious with
formal theories of linguistics. However, when considered
from the neurological perspective (e.g., Maurer & Mondloc,
2005; Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001), researchers may
find sound symbolism much less problematic. However,
theneural substrate of the phenomena of sound symbolism is
still at a stage of speculation. For example, Ramachandran
and Hubbard speculated that sound symbolism involves
cross-domain mappings between sound contours and motor
patterns in or close to Broca’s area (possibly mediated by
mirror neurons), and between hand gestures and articulatory
gestures in the motor area. Also, if sound symbolism is
considered as mimicry of the environment by sound, we
might expect the activation in the area responsible for
integration between sound and other sensory domains such as
vision, motion, and touch (cf. Maurer & Mondoch, 2005) .
There are a few existing studies in the literature that
examined neural representation of mimetic
words
(Hashimoto et al., 2006; Osaka, 2004). For example,
Osaka (2004) compared mimetic words expressing pain and
nonsense words. He identified the activation of anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) -the region known to be active when
people experience pain-- when the pain mimetic words were
processed.
Hashimoto et al. (2006) examined the pattern of neural
activations when Japanese speakers processed mimetic words
for animal sounds (e.g. wan-wan, bow-wow) as well as actual
animal sounds (dog barking). These researchers showed that
Japanese mimetic words for animal sounds (e.g. dog barking)
elicited the bilateral activation in the superior temporal sulcus
(STS) areas.
Importantly, Thierry et al (2003) demonstrated that there is
a functional dissociation between the left and right STS: The
left STS is mainly responsible for linguistic sound, whereas
the right STS is used when environmental sound is processed.
The bilateral STS activation may thus suggest that mimetic
words expressing animal sounds have dual nature, being
processed both as a linguistic sound (word) and
environmental sound. Importantly, in this study, both
mimetic words and actual animal sounds were presented
auditorily. Hashimoto et al reasoned that mimetic words were
processed as environmental sounds because mimetic words
sounded like actual animal sound, in connection to Thierry
et al.’s results,.and argued that the bilateral activation in the
STS area reflected the prosodic property of the mimetic
words.
These two studies suggest two important characteristics of
mimetic words: (1) they are directly anchored to sensory
experiences; (2) mimetic words have dual nature, being

processed both as a linguistic sound(word) and
environmental sound. However, they leave some important
questions concerning the nature of sound symbolism
unanswered.
First, it is difficult to determine whether the result by Osaka
reflect the sound symbolism in the mimetic words per se, as
recent neuro-imaging studies have shown that a word could
activate the corresponding sensory area in the brain. For
example, several studies revealed that verbs encoding face
actions (e.g., lick), arm/hand actions (e.g., pick), and leg/foot
actions (e.g., kick) differentially engage their corresponding
sensory area in the primary motor and premotor regions (e.g.,
Hauk et al., 2004; Hauk & Pulvermüller, 2004). Thus, all or
most words may be anchored to the sensory experience in
some degree, whether or not they carry sound symbolism
(Barsalou et al., 2003; Kemeler & Tranel., 2008).
Still, it
is possible that sound symbolic words, especially mimetic
words, are tied to sensory experience more strongly and
extensively than non- sound symbolic words due to the
iconicity they carry.
Concerning the possibility for the cross-domain mappings
between auditory and other sensory modalities in sound
symbolic words, it is interesting to see whether or not the
bilateral STS activations are also seen for sound symbolic
words other than animal sound onomatopoeia. If the sound is
strongly tied to the meaning in mimetic words, we might
expect to see the bilateral STS activations not only for
mimetic words expressing actual sounds but for those
representing other sensory domains (e.g. motion) which do
not directly involve environmental sound. Furthermore, we
might expect to see the same activation pattern even when a
mimetic word is presented orthographically instead of
auditorily.
To uncover these questions, in this research, we compared
the neural representation of mimetic words to that of nonsound symbolic verbs and adverbs, all of which express
aspects of human locomotion. We scanned brain activities in
Japanese speakers while they were presented with locomotion
videos together with sound symbolic mimetic words, nonsound symbolic adverbs or verbs. Here, the words were
presented orthographically, and the participants were asked to
judge how the word semantically matched the locomotion.
As discussed above, mimetic words are expected to be more
strongly tied to perceptual experience than non-sound
symbolic verbs and adverbs because of their iconicity in the
meaning. In fact, it is possible that mimetic words are
processed as “gesture in language” by their sound symbolic
nature (Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001). If so, at a broad
level, we may expect activations in the right as well as left
hemisphere for the mimetic words, as is the case with nonlinguistic gesture (e.g., Kita & Lausberg, 2008). When
considering specific regions involved with processing
mimetic words for locomotions, if they are in fact tied to
sensory experiences more strongly than verbs and adverbs, we
might expect stronger activations in the middle temporal
(MT), motor, and premotor areas for mimetic words than

1375

for verbs and adverbs. Furthermore, if the sound-meaning
link is a part of the meaning for mimetic words but not for
adverbs or verbs, stronger activation is expected in the STS
and superior temporal gyrus (STG) in both hemisphers, as if
linguistic sound and environmental sound are both processed
(Hashimoto et al., 2006; Thierry et al., 2003).

Method
Participants
Sixteen native Japanese speakers who were either
undergraduates or graduates students (mean age =23.7; age
range = 22-25; 7 women) participated in the study.
All subjects were right-handed and had normal or correctedto-normal vision and had no histories of neurological or
psychiatric deseases. The data of five participants were
excluded from analyses due to artifact components (e.g. head
movements) and inadequate performance in the task. The rest
of the data from eleven subjects (mean age = 23.4; age range
= 22-25; 4women) were used for analyses. All participants
gave a written informed consent for participation, and the
study was approved by the local ethics committee.

Design and procedure
All participants went through the main experiment
(comparing mimetic words, verbs and adverbs) first. After a
break, they went through a control experiment, in which the
same locomotion videos were presented without words. For
the main experiment, we used 16 video clips showing
different manners of locomotion, in which an agent moved
from left to right on the screen. Each locomotion video was
presented together with sound symbolic mimetic words, nonsound symbolic adverbs, or verbs. In half of the trials, the
word and the locomotion semantically matched, while in the
other half, they did not (e.g., the verb “aruiteiru” (to walk)
was shown together with a skipping locomotion). At the end
of each block, a fixation point was inserted for 10 seconds to
separate the blocks. In each trial, the stimulus (a video clip
with a written word) was represented on the screen for 5
seconds. During the stimuli presentation, the participants
were instructed to think about the degree of match between
the word and the locomotion, but they were asked not to
make a response during this period. After the stimuli
presentation, the fixation point appeared on the screen for 3
seconds, during which the participants were asked to
respond on a scale from 1 to 5 by pressing an appropriate
button. There were 4 blocks for each word class and each
block consisted of 4 video-word pairs from the same word
class. The order of blocks was rotated in the order of mimetic
words, verb, and adverb.
All words were shown at the bottom of the video in
hiragana (a type of orthography each of which represents a
syllable). A block design was employed. In each trial, the
participants were asked to judge the degree of matching on
the scale of 1-5.
In the control experiment, in addition to the videos used for
the main
experiment,
videos
showing
unnatural

biological motions (which were created by morphing videos
of natural biological motions) were also shown. The
procedure of the control experiment parallels to that of the
main experiment except that a word was not presented with
the video. During the stimuli presentation, the participants
were instructed to think whether the locomotion of the video
clip was natural or unnatural as a human movement. After
the stimuli presentation, the fixation point appeared on the
screen for 3 seconds, during which the participants were
asked to respond either 1 (natural) or 2 (unnatural) by
pressing the an appropriate key. There were 8 blocks, each of
which consisted of 4 video clips. The “natural” trials in
which the videos used in the main experiments served as
the baseline for visual recognition of the locomotion without
verbal description (words).

Stimuli and stimuli validations
Three rating tests were carried out before the fMRI scanning
to check whether words representing the three word classes
(mimetic words, verbs, adverbs) do not differ in
terms of imaginability, familiarity, and age of acquisisition
(AOA). All participants were native speakers of Japanese,
and none participated in the scanning experiment.
Including the words we used for fMRI scanning task, we
prepared 120 words. Twenty-eight participants rated how
imaginable each word was. Twenty-seven participants rated
how familiar each word was, with a scale from 1 to 7.
Finally, we asked other 22 participants to judge around what
age they had learned the words to obtain AOA for each word.
They were instructed to select the answer from 8
categories; infant period / pre-school age / lower-grade at
elementary school/higher-grade at elementary school /
junior high school / high school / university or college / do
not know the meaning.
The results of the three rating tests indicated that there were
significant differences among the three word classes with
respect to imaginability (Mimetic words= 5.276 ; Verbs=
6.404 ; Adverbs= 5.616 ;F(2,81)=3.11, p<0.05) and
familiarity (Mimetic words=5.423;Verbs= 6.511 ; Adverbs=
6.08 ；F(2,78)=3.11, p<0.05). However, importantly, there
was no significant difference between mimetic words and
adverbs (t(1,54)=-1.192 p=0.119). Also, the result of
Friedman test indicated that there was no significant
difference between the mimetic words and the verbs with
respect to AOA (Mimetic words=1.523;Verbs=1.545 ;
Adverbs=2.932 ,p=0.763), although adverbs were judged to
have been acquired later than verbs and mimetic words.

Imaging parameters and analysis
Scanning of fMRI data was performed with a 1.5 Tesla MRI
scanner. The fMRI images were obtained using multislice
gradient-echo planner imaging (EPI) and were used to
produce 20 contiguous, 6-mm thick axial slices covering the
whole brain [echo time (TE), 50 ms; repetition time (TR),
2000 ms; flip angle, 90 degree; field of view (FOV), 192
mm; 64 × 64 matrix].

1376

The fMRI data were analyzed using SPM2 software (SPM2;
Welcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, UK). The EPI
images for each time series were realigned with reference to
the first image to correct for head motion. The anatomical
images were co-registered with the mean functional images
and normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI) brain template. Functional data were then normalized
using the same transformation parameters and were smoothed
in the spatial domain (isotropic Gaussian kernel of 8 mm
full width half maximum, FWMH).
Statistical analyses were based on general linear model and
activations were modeled using a simple delayed box- car
reference vector convolved with a hemodynamic
response function (HRF). Low-frequency drifts were
removed using a high-pass filter (Holmes et al., 1997) and a
first order autoregressive model (AR1) (Friston et al., 2000)
was applied for eliminating the temporal autocorrelation of
the fMRI time-series data.

perceptual/sensory experiences, in keeping with the
embodiment view of concepts and word meanings (e.g.,
Barsalou et al., 2003, Kemerer, 2010) and in contrast to the
formal view of language, which asserts that words are
arbitrary symbols.
Interestingly, processing of the mimetic words elicited much
broader and stronger activation of the brain than verbs and
adverbs. In particular, extensive bi-hemispheric activations
were observed when the mimetic word was processed
together with the locomotion video, consistent with our
hypothesis that mimetic words have dual natures, both as
linguistic and non-linguistic gesture-like symbols (Figure 1).
Note that the difference between the mimetic words and the
other two types of words could not be attributed to familiarity
or task difficulty, because the results of pre-ratings and the
behavioral results inside the scanner found no difference
across them.

Results

mimetic
word

Behavioral Results Inside the Scanner
The reaction times for making judgments about the degree
of match between the word and the locomotion during the
scanning were analyzed. The results indicated that the
reaction times for the judgments did not differ across the
three word classes, F(2,20)=0.272, p>0.05.
We also checked if the judged degree of match between the
word and locomotion itself differed across the three word
classes. No differene was found among mimetics, verb, and
adverb conditions.
These results together with the results of the pre-scanning
rating studies suggest that the three types of words did not
differ in the task difficulty. Hence, if we see differences in
the pattern of activations across the three word classes, it
cannot be attributed to the task difficulty or processing
difficulty of the words.

verbs

adverbs

R

Figure1. Unique activations for each word class. The
activation map is overlaid onto a rendered SPM
normalized brain. Height threshold at p<0.001,
uncorrected and 0 voxel extend threshold for one
sample t-test were applied).

f-MRI Results
Activation pattern for each word class compared to
the baseline
To identify the areas of activation due to processing each
type of words, the gross activation for the mimetic, adverb,
and verb condition1 was subtracted by the activation obtained
from the motion only (without words) control1 . The usual
left hemisphere dominance was observed for the adverbs and
verbs. It is important to note that, for all word types
including the verbs and adverbs, after removing the
activation
responsible for perceptual
processing of
locomotion video, the activation of the motor-premotor areas
was identified. This result suggests that, whether the word is
sound symbolic or not, words are anchored
to
direct
1

Here, we only used the blocks of the ”natural” motion because we
use only “natural” motions for the main experiment. The data from
the unnatural motion blocks were discarded from the analysis.

L

Unique areas of activation for each type of words
Next we examined the unique areas of activation for verbs,
adverbs, and mimetic words. For this purpose, the activations
observed for the target word class was subtracted by the other
two word classes. For example, in order to see the unique
regions for the mimetic words, the activations observed for
the verbs and adverbs were subtracted from the activations
elicited in the mimetic condition.
As is clearly seen in Figure 2, the verb and the adverbs
showed virtually no unique regions left, when the activations
for mimetics processing were subtracted. In contrast, as
expected, activations of the bilateral STG/STS and the MT
areas were shown as the specific regions for the mimetics.
Also, the mimetics elicited stronger and broader activation in

1377

the motor and pre-motor regions than the verbs and adverbs
(Figure 2). This finding further supports the hypothesis that
mimetic words are more strongly tied to sensory experience
than non-sound symbolic verbs and adverbs, and that crossdomain integration between auditory and other (e.g., motor
and motor perception) sensory domains are particularly
important for processing of mimetic words.

words per se, independent of whether the word semantically
matched the motion or not.

Figure3. The activations in the right hemisphere as a
function of matching (Left) and mismatching (Right)
mimetic words. The activation map is overlaid onto a
rendered SPM normalized brain. Height threshold at
p<0.001, uncorrected and 0 voxel extend threshold for
ANOVA were applied).

mimetic
word

verbs

Discussion and Conclusion

adverbs

R

L

Figure2. The specific regions identified for each
word class. The activation map is overlaid onto a
rendered SPM normalized brain. Height threshold
at p<0.001, uncorrected and 3 voxel extend
threshold for one sample t-test were applied).

Correlation between the strength of activation and
the degree of semantic match
We further examined if the pattern of brain activity varied as
a function of the word-video match or mismatch. The
strength of activation in the motor, premotor, and STS areas
was correlated with the degree of word-locomotion match.
This analysis revelaed that when the meaning of mimetic
words matched the locomotion, the right motor area was
activated more strong (r =.554, p <.05); when they did not
match, the right pre-motor area was activated (r =.-555, p
<.05) (Figure 3).
The shift of the areas of activation between the motor and
pre-motor regions along with the change in the degree of the
mimetic-locomotion match was intriguing: When the
locomotion and the mimetic word semantically matched, the
participants presumably mimicked the action easily in the
brain; but if the mimetic word and locomotion did not match,
the participants might have tried to model the action
themselves, and as a result, the activation shifted to the
primotor area. In contrast, no such correlation was found in
the right STG/STS area, suggesting that the activation of the
right STS region was related to the processing of mimetic

This research investigated the neural representation of
mimetic words, verbs and adverbs in the domain of human
locomotion using fMRI.
In the traditional formal
linguistics, sound symbolism has been considered as an
unimportant aspect of language (e.g., Saussure, 1986; Sapir,
1921). However, recently, this view has been revisited in
linguistics, psychology, language development, and
neuroscience.
Researchers have demonstrated that certain phonological
and prosodic properties are correlated with the meanings of
words (e.g., voicedness are correlated with heaviness), and
that people are able to detect this sound-meaning correlates
from very early developmental stages (e.g., Maurer and
Mondoch, 2005). It has also been suggested that sound
symbolism may play a role in language development within
a child (Imai et al., 2008; Kita et al., 2010) as well as
evolution and origin of language (Ramachandran & Hubbard,
2005). In spite of the accumulating evidence for the presence
of universal sensitivity to the sound-meaning correspondence,
the neural mechanism behind it has been still at a stage of
speculation.
This research was conducted to uncover the neural
mechanism of sound symbolism by comparing the
activation patterns for sound-symbolic mimetic words, (nonsound symbolic) verbs and adverbs in the domain of
locomotion. The results largely support the hypothesis that
mimetic words have dual natures, somewhat in between
linguistic symbols and non-linguistic gesture, as not only the
regions relevant to language processing but also those
relevant to non-linguistic iconic gestures were activated. The
stronger activation of the MT, motor and pre-motor areas also
suggest that mimetic words invoke stronger attention to the
motion and invites speakers to mentally simulate the action
more strongly than regular, non-sound symbolic verbs.
Ramachandran and Hubbard (2005) speculate that
processing of sound symbolic words involves cross-domain
mappings in the brain between sound contours and motor
patterns. The bilateral activation of the STS area found for the

1378

mimetic word processing strongly indicates cross-domain
mappings and integration between sound and motion, and
provide support for their speculation. In future research, it is
important to see if the pattern is replicated for mimetic words
expressing other sensory domains (e.g., touch).
The results are also in great harmony with the embodiment
view of language and cognition, demonstrating that words in
general invoke activations of relevant sensory areas,
consistent with previous neuro-imaging studies (e.g. Martin
et al, 1995; Huak & Pulvermüller, 2004; Kemmerer&
Tranel, 2008). However, they also suggest that the degree
of embodiment depends on word types, with highly
sound- symbolic words like mimetic words are most directly
and strongly bound to sensory experience.
The issue of the origin of the sensitivity to sound symbolism
is extremely interesting. Maurer and Mondoch speculate that
sensitivity to sound symbolism is universally present prior to
language learning, reasoning that it occurs as a bi-product of
over-connectivity among different sensory areas in infants. In
our lab, we are currently testing whether pre-semantic infants
are sensitive to the sound-vision (shape) correlates and how
this can be manifested in the brain. This may open the door
to the big quest concerning the origin of language.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by MEXT Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology)
Kakenhi grant (#15300088) to Imai and MEXT Global
Center of Excellence (GCOE) program
awarded to
Tamagawa University.

References
Barsalou, LW., Simmons, W., Barbey, AK., & Wilson, CD.
(2003). Grounding conceptual knowledge in modalityspecific systems. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 84-91.
B. K. Bergen. (2007).
Experimental
methods
for
simulation semantics. In Methods in Cognitive Linguistics,
Gonzalez-Marquez,
M., Irene Mittelberg, S. Coulson and
Michael J. Spivey (eds.), 277-301.
Bloomfield, L. (1984). Language. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. (Original Work published 1933).
Bolinger, D. (1950). Rime, assonance, and morpheme
analysis. Word, 6, 117-136.
Hashimoto, T., Usui, N., Taira, M., Nose, I., Haji, T., &
Kojima, S. (2006). The neural mechanism associated with
the processing of onomatopoetic sounds. Neuroimage, 31,
1762-1770.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in human motor
and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 301-307.
Hauk, O., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004). Neurophysiological

distinction of action words in the fronto-central cortex.
Human Brain Mapping, 21, 191-201.
L. Hinton, J . Nichols, & J . Ohala. (eds, 1994). Sound
Symbolism. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008).
Sound symbolism facilitates early verb learning.
Cognition, 109, 54-65.
Kemmerer, D., & Tranel, D. (2008). Searching for
the elusive neural substrates of body part terms: a
neuropsychological study. Cognitive neuropsychology, 25,
601-29.
Kita, S., Kantartzis, K., & Imai, M. (in press). Children
learn soundsymbolic words better: Evolutionary vestige of
sound symbolic protolanguage. Proceedings of the 8th
conference of Evolution of Language.
Kita, S., & Lausberg, H. (2008). Generation of cospeech gestures based on spatial imagery from the
right- hemisphere: evidence from split-brain patients.
Cortex, 44, 131-9.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt psychology. New York:
Liveright Publishing Corporation.
Kovic, Plunkett, & Westermann. (2010). The shape of
words in the brain. Cognition, 114, 19-28.
Martin, A., Haxby, JV., Lalonde, FM., Wiggs, CL., &
Ungerleider LG. (1995). Discrete cortical regions associated
with knowledge of color and knowledge of action. Science,
270, 102-5.
D. Mauer, & C. J. Mondloch. (2005). Neonatal
synesthesia: A re-evaluation. In L. C. Robertson & N.
Sagiv(eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: Sound-shape correspondences in toddlers
and adults. Developmental Science, 9(3), 316-322.
Nuckolls, J. B. (1999). The case for sound symbolism.
Annual Review of Anthropology, 28, 225-252.
Osaka, N., Osaka, M., Morishita, M., Kondo, H., &
Fukuyama, H. (2004). A word expressing affective pain
activates the anterior cingulate cortex in the human brain: an
fMRI study, Behav Brain Res, 153, 123-7.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Hubbard, E. M. (2001).
Synaesthesia - a window into perception, thought, and
language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, 3-34.
Sapir, E. (1929). A study in phonetic symbolism. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 12, 225-239.
de Saussure, F. (1983). Course in general linguistics. La
Salle, IL: Open Court. (Original work published in 1916.
Translated by R. Harris).
Thierry, G., Giraud, A.L. & Price, C. (2003). Hemispheric
dissociation in access to the human semantic system.
Neuron, 38, 499-506.

1379

