UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Does Anxiety Influence Analogical Mapping?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8g2937w8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Feldman, Veselina
Hristova, Penka
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Does Anxiety Influence Analogical Mapping?
V. Feldman (vfeldman@nbu.bg), P. Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg), B. Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
This paper presents an experimental study of the influence
that the anxiety state may have on analogical mapping.
Contrary to the well-known study of Tohill & Holyoak
(2000), where the anxiety state impeded the analogical
mapping, in this study participants in the anxiety state were
significantly more inclined to produce a relational choice
which is structurally consistent with the target, even though
this alternative was more superficially dissimilar to the target.
This result was obtained in a match-to-sample paradigm. The
implications for the theory of how anxiety influences
analogy-making are discussed and it is argued in favor of a
more detailed and specific approach to studying the influence
of anxiety on each component mechanism of analogy-making.

Introduction
Imagine that you are in a stressful situation and you feel
anxious. Will that make you more or less successful in
making good analogies? Some researchers believe that this
emotional state will impede the analogy-making process
(Tohill & Holyoak, 2000), while others (Richert,
Whitehouse, Stewart, 2005) argue that you will make more
or better analogies and that is why some religious rituals are
deliberately designed to increase your anxiety. This
controversy has motivated our study.
The interplay between analogy and emotions has been
studied from two opposite perspectives.
Thagard and Shelley (2001) have argued that analogy
may influence emotions, since people may use analogies to
convey emotions to others like in the famous “Saddam is
like Hitler” example (Spellman & Holyoak, 1992). This
theoretical account was empirically supported in a recent
study using simple proportional analogies (Bliznashki &
Kokinov, 2009) which demonstrated that the negative or
positive attitude towards an item in one domain can be
transferred to the corresponding item in the other domain
via the analogy and that this transfer is bidirectional.
Several researchers explored the influence of emotions on
the analogy-making process itself. Thus a series of studies
was devoted to the influence of anxiety on analogy (Leon
and Revelle, 1985; Keinan, 1987; Tohill and Holyoak,
2000). Why anxiety? The specific line of reasoning was that
since it is well known that anxiety influences several
cognitive processes, including working memory, one should
expect also an influence on analogy. Thus Tohill and
Holyoak (2000) provided evidence that state anxiety
impedes the relational mapping and anxious participants
prefer a more superficial attributive mapping. In their study
anxiety was induced prior to the task by a serial subtraction
task with a negative feedback. Participants were instructed

to count aloud from 1000 backwards with a decrement of
13. One experimenter corrected participants’ mistakes and
another – urged participants to count faster. Moreover,
participants in the anxiety group were informed that they
would have to repeat this task at the end of the experiment,
i.e. after the analogy-making task. The influence of anxiety
on analogy-making was tested with a cross-mapping task,
where participants were asked to indicate which object,
presented on one of the pictures “goes with” the object,
pointed to by the experimenter. The trick was that the object
pointed to in the first picture could “go with” two different
objects in the second picture for two different reasons, i.e.
with the object which is similar in its physical appearance to
the pointed object or with the object that participates in
similar relations as the pointed one. Based on Eysenk’s
working memory restriction theory (Eysenk and Calvo,
1992) it was assumed that anxiety restricts working memory
capacity which in turn impedes higher-order relational
mapping needed for finding the relational mappings in the
cross-mapping task used in this particular study.
Correspondingly, anxious participants1 indicated fewer
relational mappings than non-anxious participants
(Experiment 1) even in the presence of explicit instruction
to find them (Experiment 2) (Tohill and Holyoak, 2000).
It was also shown that state anxiety impedes the range of
generated analogies to a given base problem (Feldman and
Kokinov, 2009). Anxious participants generated a
significantly smaller amount of drastically different
analogies, i.e. most of their analogies belonged to one
domain, while non-anxious participants were more flexible
and generated analogies belonging to two or three different
domains. In addition, non-anxious participants produced
analogies with remote domains, while anxious ones
produced mainly close analogies. At the same time no
difference was found between the quality of mapping and
convincingness of the analogies produced. So, no direct
evidence was produced neither in favor, nor against the
hypothesis that anxiety impedes analogical mapping. It was
only demonstrated that anxiety impedes analogical retrieval
(in an analogy generation task).
On the other hand, it has been shown that people in
negative mood are more likely to choose the relational
match rather than the attribute matches compared to people
in positive mood in a simple matching-to-sample task
(Hristova, 2009). In this study both the relational and the
attribute mappings were possible, but curiously people in
negative mood prefer the former ones, i.e. they choose the
1

1453

state anxiety is used here, not trait anxiety.

relationally similar target as being more similar to the base
stimulus. Hristova (2009) argues that the triples of figures
used as stimuli in this experiment presuppose that the
relational mappings were harder than the attribute ones,
since they require an extra effort for encoding of relations,
which were not explicitly drawn between figures. Hence
participants in negative mood invested more effort while
doing the task than participants in positive mood, consistent
with the cognitive tuning hypothesis (Schwarz, 2002) that
has inspired this experimental work. Since the core of
analogy-making is exactly the mapping between relations,
rather than attributes (Gentner, 1983) the straightforward
inference from this work is that negative, rather than
positive mood may enhance analogy-making by facilitating
the encoding of relations.
In conclusion, it seems that there is controversial evidence
for the role of emotions on analogical mapping. Tohill and
Holyoak (2000) have found that state anxiety may change
analogical mapping from relational toward attribute based
one, while Hristova (2009) has found that negative mood,
which can be considered as similar in valence to the state of
anxiety (i.e. anxiety is a kind of negative emotional state)
facilitates relational mapping compared to positive mood.
It could be that anxiety exerts a completely different
influence on analogical mapping than negative mood: an
interesting hypothesis that insists on fine grade distinction
between the negative emotions themselves and therefore,
between the cognitive mechanisms that these emotions may
change. This hypothesis however, cannot fully explain the
variety of results obtained in the field of analogy-making,
since two experiments that manipulate state anxiety report
different results with respect to analogical mapping: Tohill
and Holyoak, (2000) demonstrated less relational mappings
due to anxiety, while Feldman and Kokinov (2009) did not
report any effect of anxiety on analogical mapping.
The present research aims to further explore the influence
of anxiety on analogical mapping by exploiting the anxietyinducing procedure used by Feldman and Kokinov (2009)
and the analogical mapping task used by Hristova (2009). If
anxiety impedes relational choices in this task rather than
facilitate them, as shown under negative mood (Hristova,
2009), then it would be relatively safe to conclude that the
diverse negative emotions (to be more specific, anxiety
compared to negative mood) exert different effects on
analogy-making. If the opposite trend is observed then the
picture of influence of anxiety on analogical mapping is
more complicated.

Design
This experiment has a between-subject design with one
independent variable – the state of anxiety (an anxiety and a
non-anxiety group), and one dependent variable the
proportion of relational choices made. Two other variables
were used for control purposes only – the state of anxiety as
measured by a self-report on a scale and the response times.
Stimuli
22 stimuli were used in this experiment. Each of them was
a match-to-sample-triple consisting of a base item B and
two target items T1 and T2. The question that the
participants had to answer was “whether T1 or T2 is more
similar to B”. The stimuli were prepared in such a way that
one of the targets was sharing the same objects or the same
color of the objects as the base, i.e. was superficially similar
to the base, while the other one shared some spatial or
transformational relations but consisted of different objects,
i.e. was structurally similar. Both choices make perfect
sense. Three groups of stimuli were used in the experiment
and representatives of each group are presented in Figure 1.
There is a forth group of stimuli which are only partially
analogous (i.e. none of the two is a good match) since only
some of the relations/attributes are shared (Figure 2). These
stimuli were used by Hristova (2009) and are variations of
the stimuli used by Medin, Goldstone, and Gentner (1990)
and Sloutsky and Yarlas (submited). We have used them for
replication purposes.
B

T1

T2

B

Experiment
Method
The main idea of this experiment is to test whether an
induced state of anxiety will change the type of relational
processing performed by the participants and in particular
whether the proportion of relational choices will be higher
or lower than in a non-anxiety state.

T1

1454

T2

B

T1

T2

Figure 1. Three examples of items from the Match-toSample task, one example from each category of stimuli. In
all three cases T1 is the relational choice, while T2 is the
superficially similar one. Of course, in the experiment the
order of T1 and T2 presented as relational/superficial choice
has been contra balanced.

to induce state anxiety in a number of other studies
(Graeff1, Parente, Del-Ben, Guimarães, 2003; Pertaub,
Slater & Barker, 2002; Feldman & Kokinov, 2009). The
participants in the Anxiety group when invited were
instructed that at some point they will be interrupted and
will be asked to make a presentation on a topic that they will
not know in advance. The task will be to argue in favor of a
specific claim. They will have to talk spontaneously and
without interruption for 5 minutes. Their presentation will
be video recorded and then later on their communication
skills will be evaluated. In that moment the experimenter
installed a camera in front of the participant, but no
recording was initiated. They were asked meanwhile to
participate in another experiment and they were given the
match-to-sample task described above. The participants
were never asked to make the public speech and were never
recorded, however, they were constantly expecting that this
was going to happen. At the end the participants were
debriefed about how they were feeling and they also rated
on a 5 point scale how nervous they were during the
experiment.
Participants

B

T1

T2

38 participants (15 male and 23 female) took part in the
experiment. All of them were students at the New Bulgarian
University some in psychology and some in other programs.
Their age varied from 17 to 37 years and the average was
22.95. The participants were randomly assigned in equal
numbers to the two conditions, maintaining equal ratios
between female and male participants in each group.
Results

Figure 2. An additional type of examples used in the Matchto-Sample task for replication purposes. Neither T1, nor T2
makes perfect analogy to B, but T2 keeps the spatial
relationships, while T1 keeps the relations between textures.
Procedure
The participants were tested individually by an experienced
experimenter in a sound proof booth on a personal computer
running e-Prime automated script.
Participants were enrolled in a matching-to-sample
experiment for about 5 minutes. Their task was to judge
whether “T1” or “T2” are more similar to the standard “B”
by pushing the respective button on a BBOX: the left button
“T1” and the right button for “T2”. When participants gave
their answer the next stimulus appeared on the screen. The
presentation order of the stimuli was randomized across
participants. A fixation cross was presented for 50 ms
before each trial.
In the Experimental group the state anxiety was induced
by a “public speech” procedure which was used successfully

First of all, our manipulation of anxiety seems to be
successful. The two groups differed significantly on their
self-evaluation of how nervous they had felt during the
experiment on a 5 point scale (t(36)=4.624, p<0.001,
d=1.50) – the Control group (M=0.79, SD=1.134) and the
Anxiety group (M=2.32, SD=0.885).
The mean proportion of the relational choices was higher in
the anxiety group (35%) than in the control group (24%)
and this difference turned out to be significant tested with a
t-test when the data were aggregated by item – t(42)=5.695,
p<0.001, d=0.31 (Figure 3). At the same time importantly,
RT did not differ significantly between the two
experimental conditions: t(42)=0.397, p=0.693, (Figure 4).
Thus, the influence of anxiety cannot be attributed to
spending more time and more careful inspection of the task
in the anxiety group.

1455

Proportion of relational choices
0.4

Error Bars show 95.0%
CI of Mean

D

0.35
0.3

Bars show Means
D

0.2

0.24

0.1

0.0

control

anxiety
group

Figure 3. Mean proportion of relational choices per
condition.
RT
4000

D

D

3910

4009

Error Bars show
95.0% Cl of Mean
Bars show Means

3000

2000

1000

control

anxiety

group

Figure 4. Mean RT per condition.
The same trend was observed for the six stimuli of Hristova
(2009), included in the item pool of this experiment: the
anxiety group made significantly more relational choices
(38%) than the control group (25%) (t(10)=0.424, p=0.016,
d=1.78), while the difference in the mean RT was again not
significant (t(10)=0.782, p=0.452). This result is comparable
to the one obtained by Hristova (2009) with the same task
and stimuli, where people in negative mood also made
significantly more relational choices than people in positive
mood.

Discussion
The goal of this research was to clarify the role of anxiety
for analogical mapping. Two conflicting findings were
discussed at the beginning: anxiety may impede relational
mapping (Tohill and Holyoak, 2000) or anxiety, as a kind of
negative emotional state, may facilitate relational mapping
(Hristova, 2009). The present research supports the latter
prediction, i.e. anxiety facilitated relational mappings.
The question now is why we have obtained results
opposite to the ones by Tohill and Holyoak (2000)? There
are two important differences between the two studies: the

procedure of anxiety inducement and the tasks of the
participants. Each of them could potentially cause the
difference.
With respect to the anxiety inducement procedure there
are a number of differences. It could be that one of them is
inducing stronger anxiety than the other. We cannot say this
with certainty, since we have not used the same instrument
for measuring the anxiety state of the participants, however,
there are reasons to believe that the current procedure
induces stronger anxiety since making a public speech and
being recorded and then your communication skills being
analyzed seems more stressful than counting backwards at
high speed and being corrected. In addition, in the current
procedure the participants were warned that they can be
interrupted any time and asked to make the public speech,
while the participants in the Tohill & Holyoak (2000) study
knew that they will be counting again only after the analogy
task is over. Of course, these are only speculations, it is also
possible that the current procedure has produced much less
anxiety than the Tohill & Holyoak (2000) study and the
results are due to the classical Yerkes-Dodson law (1908)
that describes the inverted U shaped relationship between
arousal and performance: maybe we have found the optimal
level of arousal for the matching-to-sample task used in our
experiment, while Tohill and Holoak (2000) did not. In
other words anxiety may both increase and decrease
relational mappings depending on the degree of arousal.
This explanation is unconvincing since the very same
procedure has been applied by Feldman & Kokinov (2009)
and it has significantly reduced the number of different
analogies generated and their scope. Also additional
analysis of the data shows that there is a trend: the higher
the self-reported anxiety is, the more relational choices
participants make, i.e. there is no point above which the
relational choices have declined.
Alternatively, the difference might be due to the
difference in the analogy tasks used in both experiments.
This would be an interesting avenue for research since it
would require task analysis and decomposition of the
“analogy-making process” into simpler mechanisms and
exploring the role of anxiety for each of these components.
Thus, for example, in both tasks – the cross-mapping
corresponding task used by Tohill & Holyoak (the subject
has to point to the corresponding object of a hinted one) and
the match-to-sample task used in the current study (the
subject has to chose which of two alternative situations is
more similar to the sample) – the participants have to
encode certain relations and attributes of the objects and
than build the two alternative mappings, and finally chose
the better one. According to some models of analogymaking like ARCS (Holyoak & Thagard, 1989), AMBR
(Kokinov, 1994, Kokinov & Petrov, 2001), CopyCat and
TableTop (Hofstadter, 1995), LISA (Hummel & Holyoak,
1997) there are at least 3 subprocesses of analogy-making:
perceiving (encoding) the relations, forming hypotheses of
possible correspondences, and competition between them
(constraint satisfaction), other models like SME (Gentner,

1456

1983, Falkenheiner, Forbus, Gentner, 1989) offer alternative
but analogous subprocesses. Anxiety may influence each of
these subprocesses specifically. Since Tohill & Holyoak
(2000) allow their subjects to observe the two pictures for
15 sec before the question was asked, this would mean that
all relations are already encoded and possibly also most of
the hypotheses are formed and after the query mostly the
constraint satisfaction process continues. Thus the influence
of anxiety would be mainly on the constraint-satisfaction
outcomes. In our study participants used on average 4 sec
for the whole task of encoding, hypotheses building, and
constraint satisfaction. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume
that they do not have the time for full relational encoding,
building all possible hypothesis, etc. Most probably they
encode only a few relations and form a few hypotheses and
therefore the constrain-satisfaction process is quite
straightforward. Thus most probably the anxiety state
influences mostly the process of relational encoding in this
case. According to the DUAL architecture and the AMBR
model (Kokinov, 1994, Kokinov & Petrov, 2001) anxiety
concentrates the activation over a smaller area of LongTerm Memory thus causing a smaller search space but faster
processing within this space (Feldman & Kokinov, 2009).
Thus maybe the anxiety state in our task causes a speeded
search for relational encoding (especially given the
restricted number of relations used in the stimuli) and
hypotheses formation and that is how anxiety enhances
relational choices.
Such a possibility is potentially and indirectly backed up
by neuroscience approaches to anxiety and its influences on
cognitive processes. Posner, Rueda, and Kanske (2007)
distinguished 3 main attentional neural networks – alerting
network (associated with the right frontal and parietal brain
areas which contributes to the maintenance of the sensitivity
level needed for perceiving and processing stimuli),
orienting network (associated with the superior parietal
lobe, frontal eye fields, and temporoparietal junction which
contributes to the selection of information from among
numerous sensory stimuli), and executive control network
(associated with midline frontal areas, anterior cingulate
gyrus, and lateral prefrontal cortex which contributes to the
conflict resolution and voluntary action control) which
could be somehow related to the three processes described
above: encoding relations, building hypotheses, and
constraint satisfaction. The encoding of relations would
depend on the alerting network allowing bottom-up
recognition of relations; the hypotheses formation – on the
orienting network selecting potential correspondences; and
the constraint satisfaction depending on the inhibitory
capacity of the executive control. A recent study by
Pacheco-Unguetti, Acosta, Callejas, Lupianez (2010) found
that the anxiety state enhances the work of the alerting and
orienting networks, while no significant effect was found on
the executive network, while the trait anxiety has no effect
on the alerting and orienting networks, but severely
diminishes the executive control and its possibilities for
inhibition. Thus “state anxiety is related to greater orienting

and alerting effects, thus making participants more sensitive
to bottom-up processing” (Pacheco-Unguetti et al., 2010).
This might mean that in an anxiety state people are more
rapidly encoding the relations which are otherwise difficult
to be perceived and this could explain why the anxietyinduced subjects made more relational choices in our
experiment. This hypothesis can be potentially backed up
also by the study of Becker (2009) who found that in the
presence of threatening stimuli people are faster in visual
search also for non-threatening stimuli, i.e. faster encoding
is performed. It is true that the search he has studied is for
objects, not relations, but we plan an experimental study to
test whether this speeded processing will also be extended
to relations as we assume. At the same time the anxietyinduced subjects in the Tohill and Holyoak (2000) study had
the necessary time to encode all relations in advance and
therefore the effect could be due either to the limited
capacity of working memory (Eysenck & Calvo, 1992) or to
impoverished constraint satisfaction. Of course, all these are
wild speculations and further studies are necessary to test
these hypotheses.
The main conclusion from this study is that the influence
of anxiety on analogical mapping is much more subtle and
complicated than previously thought and that we need to
study more carefully the influence of anxiety on each of the
components of the analogy-making process before jumping
to bold conclusions.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported financially by the EXREL
project (NEST program, contract 43225) funded by the EC.
We would like to specially thank Simona Dobrinova for
helping us with the data collection process.

Reference
Becker, M. (2009). Panic Search: Fear Produces Efficient
Visual Search for Nonthreatening Objects. Psychological
Science, 20(4), 435-437.
Bliznashki, S., Kokinov, B. (2009). Analogical Transfer of
Emotions. In: Kokinov, B., Holyoak, K., Gentner, D.
(eds.). New Frontiers in Analogy Research. Sofia: NBU
Press
Eysenck, M., Calvo M. (1992). Anxiety and performance:
The processing efficiency theory. Cognition & Emotion,
6, 409-434
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K., Gentner, D. The StructureMapping Engine: Algorithm and Examples. Artificial
Intelligence, 41(1): 1-63 (1989)
Feldman, V., Kokinov, B. (2009). Anxiety Restricts the
Analogical Search in an Analogy Generation Task. In:
Kokinov, B., Holyoak, K., Gentner, D. (eds.). New
Frontiers in Analogy Research. Sofia: NBU Press
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Graeff1, F., Parente, A., Del-Ben, C., Guimarães, F., (2003).
Pharmacology of human experimental anxiety. Brazilian
Journal of Medical and Biological Research, 36: 421-432.

1457

Hristova, P.(2009) People in Negative Mood May See
Relations Where People in Positive Mood May Not In B.
Kokinov, K. Holyoak & D. Getner (Eds.), New Frontiers
in Analogy Research (pp. 204-210). Sofia, Bulgaria: NBU
Series in Cognitive Science
Hofstadter, D. (1995). Fluid concepts and creative
analogies: computer models of the fundamental
mechanisms of thought, NY: Basic Books.
Holyoak, K., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Hummel, J., Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed Representations of Structure: A Theory of Analogical Access and
Mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Keinan, G. (1987). Decision making under stress: Scanning
of alternatives under controllable and uncontrollable
threats. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52,
639–644.
Kokinov, B. (1994). A hybrid model of reasoning by
analogy. In K. Holyoak & J. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in
connectionist and neural computation theory: Analogical
connections. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kokinov, B., & Petrov, A. (2001). Integration of Memory
and Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model.
In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leon, M., Revelle, W. (1985). Effects of anxiety on
analogical reasoning: A test of three theoretical models.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 49(5),
1302-1315.
Pacheco-Unguetti, A., Acosta, A., Callejas, A., Lupianez, J.
(2010). Attention and Anxiety: Different Attentional
Functioning Under State and Trait Anxiety. Psychological
Science OnlineFirst published on January 22, 2010:

& B. K. Kokinov (Eds.), The analogical mind:
Perspectives from cognitive science . Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. 335-362.
Tohill, J., Holyoak, K. (2000). 'The impact of anxiety on
analogical reasoning', Thinking & Reasoning, 6:1, 27 – 40
Yerkes, R. M., & Dodson, J. D. (1908) The relation of
strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. Journal
of Comparative Neurology and Psychology, 18, 459-482

http://pss.sagepub.com/content/early/2010/01/21/0956797609359624

Pertaub, D., Slater, M., Barker, B. (2002). An Experiment
on Public Speaking Anxiety in Response to Three
Different Types of Virtual Audience. PresenceTeleoperators and Virtual Environments 11(1), 68-78.
Posner, M., Rueda, M., Kanske, P. (2007). Probing the
mechanisms of attention. In Cacioppo J.T., Tassinary
J.G.,
Berntson
G.G.
(Eds.),
Handbook
of
psychophysiology (3rd ed., pp. 410–432). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Richert, R., Whitehouse, H., Stewart, E. (2005). Memory
and analogical thinking in high arousal rituals. In:
Whitehouse, McCauley, Eds., Mind and religion:
psychological and cognitive foundations of religiosity.
AltaMira Press: Walnut Creek, CA
Sloutsky, V. M., & Yarlas, A. S. (submited) Processing of
information structure: Mental representations of elements
and relations.
Spellman, B. & Holyoak, K. (1992). If Saddam is Hitler
then who is George Bush? Analogical mapping between
systems of social roles. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 62, 913-933.
Thagard, P., & Shelley, C. P. (2001). Emotional analogies
and analogical inference. In D. Gentner, K. H. Holyoak,

1458

