UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How to Foster the Integration of Text and Diagrams: An Eye Tracking Study on the Use of
Signals in Multimedia Learning
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4k7580k0
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Scheiter, Katharina
Eitel, Alexander
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

How to Foster the Integration of Text and Diagrams: An Eye Tracking
                 Study on the Use of Signals in Multimedia Learning
                                             Katharina Scheiter
                                        Knowledge Media Research Center
                                               Alexander Eitel
                                        Knowledge Media Research Center
Abstract: Learners studying text and diagrams (multimedia) often fail to integrate information from both sources.
Hence, signals that make explicit the relation between both representations should improve understanding. The
current study investigated which changes in information processing can explain improvements in comprehension
due to signals. In an eye tracking study 35 students learned about the functioning of the heart. In a no-signals
condition, a text and diagram were presented unaltered. In the signals-condition, correspondences between the
representations were highlighted by means of labels, color coding, and deixis. Signals improved understanding of
text-diagram correspondences and guided attention towards diagrams. Moreover, diagrams were fixated earlier in
the signals-condition. A mediation analysis showed that these changes in visual attention completely explained the
effect of signals on comprehension. Hence, signals improve learning from text and diagrams by fostering learners’
early reference to diagrams and by increasing the amount of attention devoted to them.
                                                       555

