UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ideal representations in a similarity space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1st4w90s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Voorspoels, Wouter
Vanpaemel, Wolf
Storms, Gert

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ideal representations in a similarity space
Wouter Voorspoels (wouter.voorspoels@psy.kuleuven.be),
Wolf Vanpaemel (wolf.vanpaemel@psy.kuleuven.be),
Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract

Kinds of concept representations

The present study provides an empirical evaluation of the
ideal representation view of concept representation. We
compared the ideal representation view with the more
established exemplar and prototype views both in common
taxonomic categories and in ad hoc categories. All three
views are modeled based on underlying spatial similarity
representations. Results suggest that the ideal representation
is the better representation in ad hoc categories, and that the
exemplar model is the better representation in the common
taxonomic categories.
Keywords: concepts; category representation; computational
models of concept representation; typicality; ad hoc concepts

An important and robust observation in concept
representation research is that not all members of a category
are equally representative of the category. For example,
while a platypus is a mammal, it is not a good example of a
mammal. It has many features that do not fit our image of
what a mammal should be like: it has webbed feet, a beak
and it lays eggs. A cow on the other hand, is a good
example of a mammal to most people. In the same way, a
spoon is a bad example of the category weapons, and a gun
is a good example.
Previous research suggests that people are in agreement as
to what are representative, good examples of a certain
category and which examples are not (Rosch & Mervis,
1975). This graded membership structure is often referred to
as the typicality gradient and has been reliably observed in a
broad range of natural language categories, including
common taxonomic categories (e.g. De Deyne et al., 2008)
and ad hoc categories, such as goal derived categories
(Barsalou, 1983, 1985)
Typicality is assumed to be closely linked to the
representation of a concept (e.g., Murphy, 2002; Rosch,
1978). Theories of concept representation should therefore
be able to explain the observation of a typicality gradient.
The observation of a typicality gradient in different kinds of
categories however, does not necessarily imply that the
same processes and the same kind of concept representation
underlies typicality judgments. The present study aims at
evaluating different views on concept representation in
different kinds of categories.

Two contrasting views on category representation have
dominated the computational research on categories and
concepts, each giving a different account of the graded
internal structure of categories. In both approaches
typicality is related to similarity of a category member to
the category representation. The two views differ in what
the category representation is assumed to consist of.
On the one hand, the prototype view states that a category
is represented by an abstract summary representation,
referred to as the prototype (e.g., Hampton, 1979; Posner &
Keele, 1968). In this view, the concept vehicle is a
represented by a summary of what vehicles are like on
average, abstracted from specific instances of vehicles,
containing information such as ‘moves people or cargo from
point A to point B’. The typicality of car for the category
vehicle then is the similarity of car to this abstract
prototype.
On the other hand, the exemplar view proposes that a
category is represented by previously encountered instances
of the category, instead of an abstract summary (e.g.,
Brooks, 1978; Medin & Shaffer, 1978). According to this
view, typicality is conceptualized as the summed similarity
of a category member to all stored members of the category.
For example, the concept vehicle consists of memory traces
of previously encountered instances of vehicles, such as
train, plane and metro (i.e. member-categories at a lower
level of abstraction). The typicality of car is then its
summed similarity to all stored instances of vehicle.
Barsalou (1985) has proposed a third approach to account
for the typicality gradient. Focusing on ad hoc categories –
categories constructed ad hoc to serve a specific purpose,
for example things you rescue from a burning house or
things you eat when on a die – he proposed the idea of an
ideal representation. Like a prototype representation, an
ideal representation is a summary representation. Unlike a
prototype which is based on average, central tendency
values on the stimulus dimensions, an ideal contains
extreme values on relevant dimensions. For example, a
typical member of the category things to eat when on a diet
has an extreme value on the ideal dimension ‘fat percentage’
– typical examples being at the extreme low end of that
dimension, with a zero percentage of fat as an extreme ideal
representation.

2290

Barsalou (1985) compared a number of determinants of
the typicality gradient in both common, taxonomic
categories and ad hoc categories – including a prototype
measure and an ideal representation measure. He found that
whereas in common taxonomic categories the prototype
measure was the dominant determinant of typicality, the
ideal measure determined the typicality gradient of the ad
hoc categories significantly.
This notion of ideal representation provides and excitingly
new perspective on concept representation, but, unlike the
exemplar and prototype views, it has not yet made its way
into a computational model of concept representation.
Recently we developed a model that attempts to translate
the idea of an ideal representation to a computational model
(Voorspoels, Vanpaemel & Storms, submitted) that is based
on an underlying spatial similarity representation. To test
whether this model is a proper translation of the notion of
ideal representations, we aim at replicating the findings of
Barsalou (1985) using computational models. We will
compare the performance of the model that implements
ideal representations to an exemplar model and a prototype
model (also based on underlying similarity spaces) in
common taxonomic categories and ad hoc categories. If our
model is a proper implementation of ideal representations,
we expect an interaction between the type of model and the
kind of category. The ideal representation model should be
the lesser model in the common taxonomic categories and
the better model in the ad hoc categories.

Models

features such as fat percentage, sweetness and calories. For
taxonomic categories, it is more difficult to articulate the
specific combination of features that might make up the
ideal. To put it somewhat trivially: a car is typical for the
category of vehicles if it has a lot of the combination of
features that make up “vehicle-ness”.
Formally, the IDM assumes that judging the typicality of
an item i for a category A comes down to evaluating the
value of i on a certain dimension VA. In an M-dimensional
space, the typicality of item i for category A, is then given
by:
M

∑x
TiA =

ik

x Ak

,

k =1


2 
 ∑ ( x Ak ) 
 k =1

M

(1)

1/ 2

where xAk are the coordinates spanning the ideal dimension
VA, xik are the coordinates of item i, and M is the number of
dimensions. We restrict xA to be at a fixed distance from the
origin. This does not pose a restriction for the ideal
dimension.
The model orthogonally projects item i on the ideal
dimension VA , and returns a dimensional value relative to
the origin that rises when the projection is farther in the
ideal direction (i.e., the direction determined by the vector
VA). This value is considered the typicality of item i for
category A.

Generalized Context Model

The models considered in the present paper are all based on
underlying spatial similarity representations. In a spatial
representation of a category, the members are represented
by points in a M-dimensional space, and the distance
between two members (i.e., between two points) is inversely
related to the similarity between the two members. Such a
representation is typically derived using multidimensional
scaling (MDS) techniques, based on pairwise similarity
data. The axes that span the similarity space of a category
can be considered dimensions that are important to
determine the similarity relations between members in the
category. In the present study, we do not attempt to interpret
the axes.

The generalized context model (GCM; Nosofsky, 1984,
1986) assumes that categorization decisions are based on
similarity comparisons with individually stored category
exemplars. Originally, the model was developed to account
for categorization decisions, but it has successfully been
adapted for typicality judgments (Nosofsky, 1991;
Voorspoels, et al. 2008a).
Typicality of an exemplar is calculated by summing the
similarity of that exemplar to all other exemplars in the
category. Formally, the typicality of an exemplar i for
category A is then given by:
n

TiA = ∑η ij

,

(2)

j =1

Ideal Dimension Model
The ideal dimension model (IDM) posits that an ideal
dimension exists in the underlying similarity space. Each
exemplar of a category has a certain value along the ideal
dimension, obtained by an orthogonal projection on this
dimension. The further this value is located along the
dimension in the ideal direction, the more typical an
exemplar is.
It is useful to think of the ideal dimension as a specific
combination of (unarticulated) features. The more a member
has of this combination of features, the more typical it is for
the category. In the case of things to eat when on a diet, the
ideal dimension possibly is made up by a combination of

where ηij is the similarity of exemplar i to exemplar j, with j
belonging to category A.
The similarity between two exemplars is a function of the
distance of the exemplars in the M-dimensional
psychological space, adjusted by attentional weights – that
specify which underlying dimensions are important in the
similarity calculation – and a sensitivity parameter – which
magnifies or shrinks the psychological space. Formally, the
scaled psychological distance between two exemplars i and j
is given by:

2291

d

ij

 M
= c  ∑ w k x ik − x jk
 k =1

r





1/ r

,

(3)

where xik and xjk are the coordinates of exemplars i and j on
dimension k, wk a parameter reflecting the attention weight
for dimension k, M is the number of dimensions, and c is the
sensitivity parameter. Since Euclidean distances are
generally accepted to be more appropriate for integral
dimensions (Shepard, 1964), we fixed r at 2 for the present
studies.
Similarity of a stimulus i to another stimulus j, is related
to psychological distance as follows:

η ij = exp(− d ij ) ,

Similarity measure Pairwise similarity ratings were also
available in de Deyne et al. (2008). Similarity of each
member pair within a category was rated by 15 to 25
participants (varying across categories, not within
categories). Estimated reliability of the ratings ranged from
.88 and .96 across categories.

Ad hoc categories

(4)

Ten ad hoc categories were constructed, including those of
Barsalou (1985): things you put in your car, things you
rescue from a burning house, things not to eat/drink when
on a diet, wedding gifts, things you use to bake an apple pie,
things you take to the beach, means of transport between
Brussels and London, properties and actions that make you
win the election, weapons used for hunting and tools used
when gardening.
For each of the categories, 80 participants generated at
least eight members. From the resulting potential members
pool, we sampled 20 to 25 members, covering the
production frequency dimension.

where dij is the scaled psychological distance between
exemplar i and j. The free parameters in the GCM consist of
M-1 dimension weights and a scaling parameter c.

MDS-based Prototype Model
Within the framework of the GCM, one can easily define a
prototype model (MPM; Nosofsky, 1992). Typicality of a
category member then is the similarity towards the
prototype of the category:

TiA = ηiPA ,

of the judgments was evaluated by means of split-half
correlations corrected with the Spearman-Brown formula,
and ranged from .91 to .98 across the 11 categories (De
Deyne et al., 2008, Table 1, p. 1033). The ratings were
averaged over participants.

(5)

where PA is the prototype of category A. The position of the
prototype in the similarity space is determined by averaging
the coordinates of all category members on each axis.
The free parameters in the model are identical to the free
parameters in the GCM (i.e., M-1 dimension weights and a
scaling parameter).

Data
Construction of the psychological space relies on similarity
data. Evaluation of the models relies on typicality data. For
the common categories we used data from a recent norm
study De Deyne et al. (2008). For the ad hoc categories, we
collected the data. We will discuss the data for both
category types in turn.

Common taxonomic categories
Eleven common taxonomic categories, from two semantic
domains (animals and artifacts) were used in the present
study (from de Deyne et al., 2008): birds, fish, insects,
mammals, reptiles, clothes, kitchen utensils, musical
instruments, tools, vehicles and weapons. The categories
contain between 22 and 30 members.
Typicality measure The exemplars of each category,
presented as verbal stimuli, were rated by 28 participants for
goodness-of-example for the superordinate category they
belonged to on a Likert-rating scale ranging from 1 for very
bad examples to 20 for very good examples. The reliability

Typicality measure The members of each category were
rated for goodness-of-example by 30 participants on a
Likert-rating scale ranging from 1 for very bad examples to
20 for very good examples. The reliability of the judgments
was evaluated by means of split-half correlations corrected
with the Spearman-Brown formula, and ranged from .94 to
.98.
Similarity measure Since the members of an ad hoc
category can be very divers and seemingly irrelevant to each
other (e.g., tissues and candy), we did not ask participants to
directly rate the similarity of each member pair within a
category. Participants performed a sorting task, an often
applied technique to arrive at a similarity measure for large
stimuli sets (e.g., Ameel & Storms, 2006; Van der Kloot &
Van Herk, 1991). We will briefly describe the procedure.
For each category, 60 participants sorted the members into
piles according to whatever principle they thought was
fitting, the only restriction being that there had to be more
than one pile and less than the number of members in a
category. Following their initial sort, they were asked to
either further divide the piles they made in subgroups (when
the number of piles in the initial sort was smaller than five),
or to join piles together (when the number of piles was
larger than five). This procedure resulted in 120 exemplarby-exemplar matrices (on for each separate sort) for each
category, each cell reflecting whether the pair was in the
same pile or not. We summed the 120 matrices, arriving at
one matrix per category, the summed scores in the cells
reflecting the similarity between two members.

2292

Results
The similarity measures for all 21 categories were used as
input for a SAS non-metric MDS analyses, resulting in
spatial representations in Dimensionalities 2 to 8. Stress
values, measuring the badness-of-fit for the resulting
geometric representation, showed a monotonically
decreasing pattern in each category, indicating that the
algorithm did not get trapped in a local minimum. Overall,
the stress values dropped below .1 from Dimensionality 4
onwards for the common taxonomic categories and from
Dimensionality 3 onwards for the ad hoc categories. Taking
into account stress and the number of members of the
categories, we will present results for the common
taxonomic categories in Dimensionalities 4 to 8 and for the
ad hoc categories from Dimensionality 3 to 6 (following
generally used rules of thumb regarding number of
dimensions and stress).
Recently, increasing attention has been drawn to the
importance of a model’s flexibility and complexity in model
evaluation, and the necessity to penalize models that are
more complex (any data pattern can be accounted for
perfectly by a sufficiently complex model). Comparing the
best fit a model can provide ignores this complexity, while
assessing the average fit of the model across all possible
parameter values balances model complexity and data fit
(e.g., Pitt, Kim & Myung, 2003). This average fit is
measured by the marginal likelihood. Given the differences
in functional form of the GCM and IDM, the model
evaluation in terms of marginal likelihoods is preferable.
The results of the model analyses are reported through
model weights. The model weight of a model reflects the
relative evidence that the data provide in favor of that
model, within the set of all models that are evaluated. The
evidence for a model is the marginal likelihood of the model
– calculated by sampling the parameter space. For each
sampled parameter value, one can calculate the likelihood
given the prior distributions of the parameters. After a
number of samples, the average of all samples will converge
into an estimate of the marginal likelihood of the model.
We relied on standard uninformative priors. For the IDM,
this translates to a uniform prior over all points at a certain
distance of the origin. For the GCM and the prototype
model, a uniform prior over the range 0 to 1 was used for
the dimensional weights, adding the restriction that the
dimensional weights have to sum to 1. The prior for the
sensitivity parameter followed a Gamma(.001,.001)
distribution.
We will first present the results of the analyses of the
common categories. Then we will present the results for the
ad hoc categories.

regarding these categories rather difficult. We will consider
the results of categories fish and tools to be consistent, since
only in Dimensionality 4 they deviate from the other
Dimensionalities. For tools, closer inspection of the
underlying representation revealed that stress-values
dropped below .1 from Dimensionality 5 onwards, possibly
explaining the anomaly in the Dimensionality 4.

Figure 1. Model weights for the GCM, MPM and IDM for
the common taxonomic categories.
It can be seen that for the 9 consistent categories, the
GCM gives the better account of the typicality gradient for 8
out of 9 categories. For only 1 out of 9 categories, birds, the
IDM clearly provides a better account. The MPM is not
competitive in the present evaluation. Only for the category
fish, it seems to provide a viable alternative in higher
Dimensionalities (but even there, the MPM is not
convincingly better).
In sum, the GCM seems to be the better model for the
typicality gradient of the common taxonomic categories.
The prototype model is never competitive, performing
worse than the GCM in all categories and nearly all
dimensionalities. This result confirms results of earlier
comparisons between the exemplar view and the prototype
view in common taxonomic concepts (e.g., Voorspoels et al.
2008) and artificial category learning (Nosofsky, 1992,
Vanpaemel & Storms, 2010). The IDM possibly drives the
typicality gradient of a small minority of common
taxonomic categories (only birds in our set).

Common taxonomic categories
Figure 1 presents the model weights for all three models for
the common taxonomic categories. For 9 out of 11
categories, the results are highly consistent across
dimensionalities. Results are not consistent for musical
instruments and vehicles, consequently making inferences

Ad hoc categories
Figure 2 presents the model weights of the three models for
the ad hoc categories. For 9 out of 10 categories, the results
are consistent across dimensionalities. Results are not
consistent across dimensionalities for things you take to a

2293

beach. Looking at the 9 consistent categories, the evidence
is overwhelmingly in favor of the IDM in 7 categories. Only
for the categories hunting weapons and things you use when
baking an apple pie the GCM (in close competition with the
MPM for the latter) is the best model. In sum, the ideal
representation view indeed seems to provide a better
account of the typicality gradient of ad hoc categories than
the prototype and exemplar view, yet the evidence is not
univocal.

Discussion
The present study focused on the IDM, a model that
provides a computational account of the notion of an ideal
representation in the context of spatial similarity
representations. The IDM was evaluated in its account of
the typicality gradient both common taxonomic categories
and ad hoc categories and compared to the GCM, arguably
the most successful exemplar model, and the MPM.
Following earlier findings by Barsalou (1985), we
hypothesized that the IDM would have difficulty accounting
for the typicality gradient of the common taxonomic
categories, but that it would give a better account of the
typicality gradient of ad hoc categories.

Figure 2. Model weights for the three models for the set of
ad hoc categories.
The model weights reported are a relative measure of
model performance, i.e., the model weight only reflects the
performance of a model relative to a set of competitive
models. To our knowledge however, the representational
mode and the computational models used in the present
study have not been applied to ad hoc categories. It is
therefore informative to evaluate whether the models can
give a sufficient account of the typicality gradient in
absolute terms.
To this end we calculated correlations between observed
and predicted typicality scores, using the optimal parameter
values for each model. Results of these analyses are
presented in Figure 3. It can be seen in Figure 3 that
correlations rise above .6 for all categories in which the
IDM is to be preferred based on the model weights, except
for properties and actions that make you win the election
and means of transport between Brussels and London. For
the categories in which evidence based on the model
weights was not in favor of the IDM, or the model weights
were not consistent across dimensionalities, the optimal
correlations are generally somewhat lower.

Figure 3. Optimal correlations between observed and
predicted typicality ratings as a function of Dimensionality
The results supported the hypothesis. While evidence was
not consistent across dimensionalities for 3 out of 21
categories, the overall pattern clearly showed the expected
interaction: in the common taxonomic categories, the GCM
was the better model – as can be expected based on earlier
findings – and in the ad hoc categories the IDM was the
better model. The evidence in any case strongly suggests
that the typicality gradient of common taxonomic categories
and of ad hoc categories is determined by a different
representation. Moreover, the results support the
reasonableness of the IDM as a formal implementation of
Barsalou’s (1985) notion of ideal representation.
It is unclear why this pattern broke down in 3 out of the 16
“consistent” categories. For fish, the IDM was the better
model. In hunting weapons and things you use to make an
apple pie, the GCM (MPM respectively) was the better
model. Note however that for things you use to make an

2294

apple pie, none of the models could give a good account of
the typicality gradient in terms of optimal correlations (see
Figure 3). This might suggest that the typicality gradient in
this category is driven by yet another process, different from
than the ones under consideration. For hunting weapons, the
category might be considered a well-established category,
rather than an ad hoc category.
To a certain extent, this study is a replication of Barsalou’s
work on ad hoc categories and ideal representations
(Barsalou, 1985). There are, however, three crucial
differences. First, we compared the ideal dimension
approach to (advanced implementations of) both a prototype
approach and an exemplar approach. This is important,
since in this study, and in previous studies (e.g., Voorspoels
et al., 2008) it is found that the exemplar approach is to be
preferred over the prototype approach in concept
representation.
Second, Barsalou (1985) used a priori ideals, which were
generated intuitively by the researchers, for which all
members of the relevant category were rated. No such
instruction takes place with the IDM.
Third, Barsalou (1985) evaluated the relative contribution
of different determinants of typicality, such as ideals and
central tendencies, using regression analyses and a number
of measures of these determinants. We tested and compared
computational models of typicality that are derived from
assumptions
concerning
concept
representation.
Importantly, we developed a computational model that
introduces the notion of ideal representation to the context
of underlying spatial representations in an intuitive way. An
important finding of the present study is that the IDM
indeed can be considered a computational model of ideal
representations, which can be usefully applied in the further
investigation of differences between concepts in terms of
concept representation.

Acknowledgments
The Research in this article is part of research project
G.0281.06 sponsored by the Belgian National Science
Foundation – Flanders, given to the third author. We want to
thank Sander Vanhaute for his help with collecting data.

References
Ameel, E., & Storms, G. (2006). From prototypes to
caricatures: Geometrical models for concept typicality.
Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 402-421.
Barsalou, L.W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 211-227.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 4,
629 - 654.
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., Ameel, E., Vanpaemel, W.,
Dry, M., Voorspoels, W., & Storms, G. (2008).
Exemplar by feature applicability matrices and other

Dutch normative data for semantic concepts. Behavioral
Research Methods, 40, 1030-1048.
Hampton, J. A. (1979). Polymorphous concepts in semantic
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 18, 441-461.
Medin, D. M., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207238.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Nosofsky, R. N. (1984). Choice, Similarity, and the context
model of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 10, 104114.
Nosofsky, R. N. (1986). Attention, Similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Nosofsky, R. N. (1991). Typicality in logically defined
categories: Exemplar-similarity versus rule instantiation.
Memory & Cognition, 19, 131-150
Nosofsky, R., N. (1992). Exemplars, prototypes, and
similarity rules. In A. F. Healy, & S. M. Kosslyn (Eds.),
Essays in honor of William K. Estes. Hillsdale, NJ,
England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Pitt, M., A., Kim, W., & Myung, J. (2003). Flexibility
versus generalizability in model selection. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 10, 29-44.
Posner, M.I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 3,
392-407.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch
and B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization
(pp. 27-48). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Shepard, R. N. (1964). Attention and the metric structure of
stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1,
54-87
Van der Kloot, W. A., van Herk, H. (1991).
Multidimensional scaling of sorting data: A comparison
of three procedures. Multivariate Behavioral Research,
26 (4), 563-581.
Vanpaemel, W., & Storms, G. (in press). Abstraction and
model evaluation in category learning. Behavior
Research Methods.
Voorspoels,W., Vanpaemel, W., Storms, G. (2008).
Exemplars and prototypes in natural language concepts:
a typicality based evaluation. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15, 3, 630-637.
Wagenmakers, E. J., & Farrel, S. (2004). AIC model
selection using Akaike weights. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 192-196.

2295

