UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Impact of placing icons next to hyperlinks on information-retrieval tasks on the web

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/27w0n9kc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Karanam, Saraschandra
Viswanathan, Janhavi
Theertha, Anand
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Impact of placing icons next to hyperlinks on
information-retrieval tasks on the web
Saraschandra Karanam (saraschandra@research.iiit.ac.in)
Cog Sci Lab, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India.

Janhavi Viswanathan (janu111989@gmail.com)
Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, India.

Anand Theertha (anand.dharoor@gmail.com)
Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, India

Bipin Indurkhya (bipin@iiit.ac.in)
Cog Sci Lab, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India

Herre van Oostendorp (herre@cs.uu.nl)
Center for Content and Knowledge Engineering, Institute of Information and Computing Sciences,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Abstract
Though several studies have demonstrated the usefulness of
pictures in multimedia learning, memory, cognitive load and
visual search, there have been very few attempts to study their
impact in the web-navigation scenario. Also, cognitive
models of web-navigation (like CoLiDeS, CoLiDeS+) ignore
the information from visual modality and focus solely on the
information from text. We conducted an experiment to study
the extent to which providing icons next to hyperlinks
facilitates information retrieval tasks on the web. Three
different versions of navigation styles were created:
Hyperlinks with Icons, Hyperlinks alone and Icons alone.
Users took significantly less time, were significantly less
disoriented and made fewer clicks to finish their tasks when
icons were provided along with hyperlink text. These results
suggest that it is important for a cognitive model on webnavigation to include information from pictures. An important
practical implication is to provide meaningful icons next to
hyperlinks for better navigation.
Keywords: Web-navigation, text, pictures, icons, webusability, cognitive model

Introduction
With the advancement of web-technology, the World Wide
Web (WWW) now has evolved into a complete hypermedia
environment, i.e. information is spread across all modalities
– text, picture, audio and video. This adds to the complexity
and the lost in hyperspace phenomenon of the users
(Conklin, 1987). Pirolli and Card (1999) found that a user
always follows the path that gives highest information scent;
i.e., a user estimates the cost and value of taking a particular
action like clicking on a hyperlink, and comparing several
such actions always picks the action that has the highest
value or information scent (Chi et al., 2000, 2001).
Inspired by this information scent model, several
cognitive models of web-navigation (CoLiDeS, CoLiDeS+,
SNIF-ACT and MESA) have been developed.
Comprehension based Linked model of Deliberate Search

(CoLiDeS) developed by Kitajima, Blackmon and Polson
(2000) divides the process of navigating a website into four
steps – parsing, focusing, comprehension and elaboration
and selecting. A user first parses the web page into 5-10 toplevel schematic regions, focuses on one of the sub-regions,
comprehends and generates an elaborated representation of
each object in the sub-region based on his or her
background knowledge and finally selects one object in that
sub-region. This final step of selection is based on the
computation of semantic similarity between the user’s goals
and the elaborated representations developed by the user.
CoLiDeS+ developed by Juvina and Oostendorp (2005,
2008) improved CoLiDeS by incorporating contextual
information, i.e. information from previously visited web
pages. It computes path adequacy as the semantic similarity
between the user goal and the navigation path. CoLiDeS+
selects the incoming information only if it increases path
adequacy. When the incoming hyperlink does not increase
path adequacy, other hyperlinks with lower information
scent are considered. Further, it considers backtracking to
other regions in the same page and then to other pages.
Miller and Remington (2004) proposed a Method for
Evaluating Site Architectures (MESA). This model focuses
on the quality of link labels and the effectiveness of various
link-selection strategies. By varying the link quality and
using links that are not fully descriptive of the target goals,
user behaviour is modelled. The common condition when
the user is not sure of his goal or is not knowledgeable
enough to assess the relevance of the link texts to the goal is
also modelled.
SNIF-ACT (Scent based Navigation and Information
Foraging in the ACT Architecture) developed by Pirolli and
Fu (2003), predicts user-navigation behaviours when they
perform unfamiliar information retrieval tasks. It also
predicts that users would leave a site when the information
scent falls below a threshold value. SNIF-ACT is based on
an algorithm called Web User Flow by Information Scent

2834

(WUFIS) developed by Chi et al. 2001. It combines both
information retrieval and spreading activation techniques to
arrive at the probabilities associated with each hyperlink
that specify the proportion of users who will navigate
through it.
All these models compute information scent by
calculating the semantic similarity between the user goal
and the hyperlink text. Although a web page contains much
more information than just hyperlink text, the models ignore
all of it. Actually, there has been very little research on the
impact of such complex hypermedia environments on
navigation in such web scenarios. However, extensive
research from the fields of multimedia learning, memory,
cognitive load and visual search give us an insight into the
positive impact of multimodal representations, and
potentially on web-navigation. We will present a study that
examines the extent to which providing icons next to
hyperlinks facilitate information retrieval.

Overview of research on impact of pictures
Mayer and Moreno (2003a, 2003b, 2004) demonstrated that
meaningful learning that involves attending to important
aspects of material, organizing it into a coherent structure,
comprehending and understanding it and integrating with
already known knowledge can happen better with content
that has both visual and verbal format. Their theory is based
on the dual-channel assumption of Paivio (1986), according
to which humans possess separate channels for processing
verbal and visual material, and the working memory theory
of Baddeley (1998), which states that only a limited amount
of processing can take place in any channel at any point of
time. Of the seven principles that Mayer came up with, three
are relevant to the web-scenario as well: coherence principle
(present relevant pictures and avoid unnecessary
information), spatial contiguity principle (present on-screen
text nearer to the corresponding picture) and personalization
principle (use words that are familiar to the user).
Larkin and Simon (1987) differentiate between
diagrammatic
and
textual
representations.
They
demonstrated that by preserving topological and spatial
relations, diagrammatic representations make it easier to
solve certain geometric problems. Scaife and Rogers (1996)
proposed that graphical representations bring advantages for
learning by reducing the amount of effort required to solve a
problem and reducing ambiguity by limiting the range of
inferences that can be drawn. It is known that students
develop deeper understanding of material through selfexplanations. Ainsworth and Loizou (2003) showed that this
phenomenon is stronger when material with diagrams is
presented. Sweller and Chandler (1994) showed that by
physically integrating text and corresponding pictures,
working memory load is reduced as it reduces redundancy
and the effort in integrating information from various
sources. Levie and Lentz (1982) have shown that
information is remembered and retrieved better when
accompanied by relevant pictures.

An eye tracking study by Namatame et al., 2008 showed
that for a directory-based search in a computer, fixation time
and number of saccades are the least for labelled pictogram
condition. This is also evident from the research on visual
attention (Desimone and Duncan, 1995, Treisman and
Galade, 1980), which demonstrated that any object
significantly different from its surrounding objects along
intensity, colour, orientation, and motion direction will be
perceived by the human brain at very early stages of visual
processing. Pictures, being the most salient objects on a web
page, are thus attended to by the user before text. Although
all this literature points to the positive influence pictures
have on learning, memory and cognitive load, little effort
has been put to study their impact in the domain of webnavigation.

Impact of graphics on web-navigation
Finding information on the web can at times be a daunting
task given its vastness and non-linear nature. Further, recent
research by Ruddle (2009) showed that even frequent
visitors remember very little of the content and structure of
a website. This further warrants the need to study factors
affecting web-navigation behavior in detail. It has been
found by Carnot et al., (2001) that using a concept-mapbased browser, which is a hierarchical organization of a set
of concepts and relations between the concepts gives much
more accurate search performance compared to a normal
browser. The position of the navigation bar was found to
significantly affect the mean time spent on a page (Petrie et
al., 2009).
Hinesley (2005) studied the impact of graphics in locating
web page widgets by taking two versions of a page – one
with original text intact and the other with all text replaced
with character ‘X’ (greeked pages). She found that it was
more difficult to find textual widgets on greeked pages than
graphical widgets. Also, Hinesley and Blackmon (2008)
investigated the interaction between location expectations
and graphics with greeked pages. They found yet again that
the performance detriment for graphical widgets was less
when location expectations were violated. Hinesley thus
claimed that it is graphics that play an important role in
identifying web page widgets.
We scrutinized this claim in Karanam et al., (2009) by
examining the interaction of text and graphics completely.
While Hinesley manipulated text with graphics intact in the
first experiment, she manipulated graphics on greeked text
in the second. We took four versions of each web page by
systematically varying text and graphics. Our major result
was that in the absence of graphics, having textual
information was better than having no text. When there
were no graphics, textual information significantly reduced
the user’s efforts in finding a widget. Thus, we argued that
both text and graphics play an equally important role in a
web page and it is important for cognitive models of webnavigation to take this into account.

2835

Both Hinesley and Karanam restricted the tasks in their
experiments to locating a widget on a web page. They did
not involve any navigation or information retrieval. All that
the user had to do was to locate the widget and click on it.
What is the impact of graphics on navigation performance?
Do graphics and text influence navigation for some
information retrieval in the same way as they influence the
task of locating a widget? Generally, we assume that users
would visit a website with a predefined goal in mind. Thus,
what would be the impact on their accuracy of finding the
correct target page? This formed the starting point of our
next study in which we wanted to investigate if providing
meaningful icons next to hyperlinks would aid the user in
navigating better. Would it help the user in finding their
answers to their goals quicker? Van Oostendorp and Holzel
(2005) for instance did find that presenting icons of the
participants next to labels of messages on a bulletin board
during collective problem solving had a positive effect on
communication and performance. We will examine these
questions by presenting participants with three different
navigation structures – hyperlinks with icons, only
hyperlinks and only icons. We will measure the influence of
these three different structures on task completion times,
number of clicks, task accuracy and user disorientation.

at least five icons were collected, and two authors of this
paper scored them for relevancy on a 7-point Likert scale.
The icons with highest scores for relevancy were chosen as
icons.

Figure 1: Three versions of a webpage with different
navigational styles

Method
Participants
Forty-five graduate and undergraduate students from
Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Technology participated in this
experiment. The mean age of the participants was 23. A pretest was administered before the experiment on the content
of the materials used. Three questions each on the country
“Georgia” and “Musical Instruments” were given. Each
question had four multiple choices, and the participants had
to choose one of them as the answer. Correct answers were
scored as 1 and wrong answers as 0. For each participant,
total score was then calculated by taking the sum of
individual scores of each question. All participants scored
low on the final scores. (M=1.31, SD=1.05). It can be
inferred that their prior knowledge of the subject was quite
low.

Information Retrieval Tasks A total of eight user goals
were generated: four for each website, one for each level.
An example user goal for Georgia website could be – “A
traditional Georgian confection made of caramelized nuts,
usually walnuts, fried in honey, is served exclusively on New
Year’s Eve and Christmas. Name it”.
Table1: Information Retrieval Tasks
“Georgia” Website
Level
1
2
3

4

Material and Apparatus
Website We used two topics for our websites:
“Encyclopaedia of Georgia” (25 pages) and “Musical
Instruments” (31 pages). Website on Georgia had content
describing its geography, society, culture and religion.
Website on Musical Instruments had content on different
methods of classifying musical instruments – the Western
System, the Hornbostel Sachs system and classification by
Nationality.
Each website was 4 levels deep. Three versions of each
website were created based on three different navigational
styles: only hyperlink text (L), hyperlink text with icons (LI)
and only icons (I), as shown in figure 1. For each hyperlink,

2836

Level
1
2
3

Task
The Georgian school system is divided into four
stages, what are they?
Name two traditional Georgian feast songs.
A traditional Georgian confection made of
caramelized nuts, usually walnuts, fried in
honey, is served exclusively on New Year’s
Eve and Christmas. Name it.
Name three trees that cover the northern slope
of Greater Caucasus Mountains?
“Musical Instruments Website
Task
According to Hornbostel Sachs system of
Musical Instruments Classification, which mode
of sound production do Idiophones use?
In the ancient system of musical instruments
classification, xylophone belongs to which
category of percussion instruments?
The Russian musical instrument – 'Ghusli' has
similarities with other instruments in China,
Japan and Baltic countries. What are they?

4

In Ancient system of classifying musical
instruments, saxophone is categorized as
woodwind instrument and not brass instrument.
Why?

Measures Our dependent variables were mean taskcompletion time, number of clicks, task accuracy and
disorientation.

order. Their task was to locate the target page that contains
the answer to these questions; type the answer in the box
provided and proceed to the next task. Figure 2 shows the
layout of the screen presenting information retrieval tasks.
Participants first saw the task description on the screen and
then the website was presented in a browser. The task
description was always present in the top-left corner, in case
the participant wished to read it again.

Results
Mean Task-Completion Time: The time taken by the user to
finish the task was measured. There was a time limit of 5
minutes for each task.
Number of clicks: The number of clicks made by the user
before reaching the target page.
Task Accuracy: Task accuracy was measured by scoring the
answers given by users. A correct answer from correct page
was scored 1. A wrong answer from correct page was scored
0.5. Wrong answers from wrong pages and answers beyond
time limit were scored 0.
Disorientation: An objective measure of disorientation was
used: It was computed using Smith (1996)’s L measure.
L = √((N/S – 1)² + (R/N – 1)²)
Where:
R = number of nodes required to finish the task successfully
(thus, the number of nodes on the optimal path);
S = total number of nodes visited while searching;
N = number of different nodes visited while searching.

Design

We did not find a significant impact of condition on task
accuracy (p>.05) and therefore we only report the results on
other variables – task-completion time, clicks and
disorientation.
We first did a mixed ANOVA analysis with our
experimental condition as a between-subjects variable and
Website as a within-subjects variable. We got a very strong
main effect of website for all three of our measures but the
interaction effect was not significant. We interpret that the
website on musical instruments was relatively unfamiliar
and new compared to the website on Georgia, to most of our
participants and therefore they took more time, more clicks
and were more disoriented in performing their tasks.
Task-Completion Time The number of time-outs in each
of the three conditions was computed. The time-out
percentages were: Hyperlinks with icons (7.5%), only
hyperlinks (10%) and only icons (12.5%). We considered
only the tasks for which participants gave correct answers
for this analysis. A between-subjects one-way ANOVA with
the three experimental conditions as independent variable
and mean task completion time as dependent variable was
conducted. Results show a main effect of condition (F(2,36)
=4.427, p<.05). Figure 3 shows the means plot.

We used a between-subjects design with fifteen participants
in each group. Every participant answered all eight
questions. The order of questions was randomized.

Figure 3: Mean Task-Completion Times

Figure 2: Layout presenting information retrieval tasks

Procedure
After the pre-test to check their prior knowledge about the
domain, participants were presented with eight information
retrieval tasks on the two different websites in random

Post-hoc tests reveal significant differences between the
groups – (LI)-(I) p<.01. That is, the task-completion times
were significantly less when both links and icons were
together when compared to only icons. The difference
between (L) and (I) groups was not significant p>.05.

2837

icons were provided, there was even more significant
decrease in disorientation. Figure 5 shows the graph.

Number of Clicks A similar between-subjects one-way
ANOVA with the three experimental conditions as
independent variable and the number of clicks taken to find
the target page with correct answer as dependent variable
was conducted. The main effect of Condition is highly
significant (F(2,36) =43.239, p<.001). Figure 4 depicts this
relationship for average number of clicks.

Figure 5: Disorientation

Discussion

Figure 4: Mean number of clicks
Post-hoc tests reveal significant differences between (LI)-(I)
p<.05 and (L)-(I) p<.05 groups. The number of clicks users
took when there were both icons and hyperlink text was
significantly less than when there were only icons.
Similarly, the number of clicks users took to finish their
tasks when there was only hyperlink text was also
significantly less than when there were only icons. In other
words, having only icons took the maximum number of
clicks to finish the tasks, suggesting that only icon-based
navigation might not be advisable. The difference in number
of clicks between (LI) and (L) groups was not significant
(p>.05).
Disorientation A between-subjects one-way ANOVA with
the experimental condition as independent variable and
mean objective disorientation measure as dependent
variable was conducted. Results reveal a very significant
main-effect of condition F(2,36)=33.598, p<.001.
Post-hoc tests reveal significant differences between the
pairs – (LI)-(I) p<.05 and (L)-(I) p<.05. Having only icons
induced the maximum disorientation in users. Users
deviated from the optimum path the most under this
condition. They took the maximum number of de-tours and
returned to the same page visited earlier frequently. Their
disorientation significantly reduced when icons were
replaced with corresponding hyperlink text. Users could
navigate much better compared to the condition when there
were only icons. Further, when both hyperlink text and

In this research, we focused on the impact of providing
icons next to hyperlink text in the main navigation menu of
a page on user’s search and information retrieval
performance. Overall, we found that providing icons next to
hyperlink text is very helpful for users in reducing the
amount of time they take to finish their task, number of
clicks they take to reach their target page and in optimizing
the path they take to the target page.
It has been found that users take significantly less time
when both hyperlink text and corresponding icons are
provided compared to the conditions when only hyperlink
text or only icons are present. Number of clicks also shows
a similar pattern: Users take significantly less number of
clicks to find their target pages with icons and hyperlink text
present when compared with the pages with only hyperlinks
or only icons. Users were disoriented the most when there
were only icons present. It was hard to navigate with only
icons. This phenomenon of disorientation decreased
significantly when there was only hyperlink text and further
decrease was effectuated by placing meaningful icons next
to the text.
In general, our results support the positive impact of
pictures found elsewhere in other domains like multimedia
learning, cognitive load and visual search. We have shown
that pictures / graphical information together with textual
information play an important role in improving overall
user-performance in not only locating their target on a web
page but also navigating through a website and finding their
target pages.
One practical implication of this study is to use
meaningful icons next to hyperlink text to improve the
overall usability of a website. Also, on basis of this study
and our previous study (Karanam et al., 2009), we argue
strongly for inclusion of pictorial and graphical information
in cognitive models of web-navigation. We have already

2838

shown that semantic information derived from pictures can
be included into CoLiDeS (Karanam et al., 2009). We also
demonstrated that such a model would predict the correct
hyperlink more frequently and more accurately.

References
Ainsworth, S., & Loizou, A.T. (2003). The effects of selfexplaining when learning with text or diagrams. Cognitive
Science, 27(4), 669-681.
Baddeley, A. (1998). Human Memory. Boston: Allyn &
Bacon
Carnot, M.J., Dunn, B., Canas, A.J., Gram, P., & Muldoon,
J. (2001). Concept maps vs. Web pages for information
searching and browsing. Institute for Human and Machine
Cognition, University of West Florida, USA.
http://cmap.coginst.uwf.edu.
Chi, E. H., Pirolli, P., Chen, K., & Pitkow, J. (2001). Using
information scent to model user information needs and
actions and the Web. Proceedings of CHI 2001, ACM
Press, 490–497.
Chi, E., Pirolli, P., & Pitkow, J. (2000). The scent of a site:
A system for analyzing and predicting information scent,
usage, and usability of a website. Proceedings of CHI
2000, ACM Press, 161–168.
Conklin, J., 1987. Hypertext an introduction and survey.
Computer September, 17-41.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J., (1995). Neural Mechanisms of
Selective Visual Attention, Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 18, 193-222.
Hinesley, G.A. (2005). The impact of graphical conventions
and layout location on search for webpage widgets.
Unpublished Dissertation, University of Colorado,
Boulder.
Hinesley, G.A., & Blackmon, M.H. (2008). The Impact of
Graphics and Location Expectations on the Search for
Webpage Widgets. Workshop on Cognition and the Web,
Granada, Spain.
Juvina, I., Oostendorp, H. van, Karbor, P., & Pauw, B.
(2005). Toward Modeling Contextual Information in Web
Navigation. XXVII Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, Stresa, Italy.
Juvina, I. & Oostendorp, H. van (2008). Modeling Semantic
and Structural Knowledge in Web Navigation. Discourse
Processes, 45(4-5), 346-364.
Karanam, S., Oostendorp, H. van, Puerta Melguizo, M.C., &
Indurkhya, B. (2009). Integrating graphical information
into cognitive modeling of web-navigation. 31st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
Kitajima, M., Blackmon, M.H., & Polson, P.G. (2000). A
Comprehension-based Model of Web Navigation and Its
Application to Web Usability Analysis. Proceedings of
CHI 2000, ACM Press, 357-373.
Larkin, J.H., & Simon, H.A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65–99.

Levie, W. H. & Lentz, R. (1982). Effects of text
illustrations: A review of research. Educational
Communication and Technology, 30(4), 195-233
Mayer, R. E. & Moreno, R. (2003a). Nine ways to reduce
cognitive load in multimedia learning. Educational
Psychologist, 38, 43-52.
Mayer, R.E. (2003b). The promise of multimedia learning:
using same instructional design methods across different
media. Learning and Instruction, 13, 125-139.
Mayer, R.E., & Moreno, R. (2004). Animation as an aid to
Multimedia Learning. Journal of Educational Psychology
Review, 14(1), 87-99.
Miller, C. S., & Remington, R. W. (2004). Modelling
Information Navigation: Implications for Information
Architecture. Human-Computer Interaction, 19(3), 225271.
Namatame, M., & Kitajima, M. (2008). Suitable
Representations of Hyperlinks for Deaf Persons: An Eyetracking Study. Proceedings of the 10th International
ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and
Accessibility, 247-248
Paivio, A (1986). Mental representations: a dual coding
approach. Oxford. England: Oxford University Press.
Petrie, H., Papadofragkakis, G., Power, G., & Swallow, H.
(2009). Navigational Inconsistency in Websites: What
does it mean to users? In T. Gross et al. (Eds.):
INTERACT 2009, Part I, LNCS 5726, pp. 423–427.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S.K. (1999). Information Foraging.
Psychological Review, 106(4), 643-675.
Pirolli, P., & Fu, W.T. (2003). SNIF-ACT: a model of
information foraging on the World Wide Web. 9th
International Conference on User Modeling (UM 2003);
Johnstown; PA. Berlin: Springer Verlag; LNCS 2702: 4554.
Ruddle, R. A. (2009). How do people find information on a
familiar website? Proceedings of the 23rd BCS
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (HCI'09),
262-268.
Scaife, M & Rogers Y. (1996) External cognition: How do
graphical representations work? International Journal of
Human Computer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Smith, P. (1996). Towards a practical measure of hypertext
usability. Interacting with Computer, 8 (4), 365-381.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1994). Why some material is
difficult to learn. Cognition and Instruction, 12, 185–233.
Treisman, A.M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A Feature Integration
Theory of Attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-136.
Van Oostendorp, H. & Holzel, N. (2005). Supportive
collective information processing in a web-based
environment. In H. van Oostendorp, L. Breure & A.
Dillon (Eds.), Creation, Use and Deployment of Digital
Information (pp. 145-155). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

2839

