UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Increasing Information Access Cost to Protect Against Interruption Effects during Problem
Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kp074gs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Morgan, Phillip
Patrick, John
Patrick, Tanya

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Increasing Information Access Cost to Protect Against Interruption Effects during
Problem Solving
Phillip L. Morgan (MorganP4@Cardiff.ac.uk)
John Patrick (PatrickJ@Cardiff.ac.uk)
Tanya Patrick (PatrickTP3@Cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building,
Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK

Abstract
The aim of this experiment was to examine whether
increasing the cost of accessing the goal-state during problem
solving would induce a more internalized strategy that would
protect against the negative effect of interruption. The soft
constraints hypothesis (Gray, Sims, Fu & Schoelles, 2006)
predicts that a more memory-based strategy will be developed
with increasing information access cost (IAC). Three levels of
access cost were used in the Tower of Hanoi (ToH) with three
types of interrupting task (simple ToH, mental arithmetic and
a blank screen control). Increasing access cost to a mouse
movement and a few seconds delay to view the goal-state
encouraged a strategy that not only improved resumption
from memory but also reduced the number of moves required
to solve the primary task. These effects came at no extra time
cost and occurred irrespective of the type of interrupting task.
The theoretical implications of these findings are discussed
together with issues of using access cost as a method for
alleviating the negative effects of interruption.
Keywords: Interruption; Problem Solving; Goal-State
Access Cost

Introduction
Interruptions are intrinsic to our everyday and working lives
(e.g., telephone calls, emails), and although often useful
(e.g., responding to another important task), they are also
often associated with performance decrements when
returning to the interrupted task. Difficulties include:
problems remembering what one was doing or intended to
do prior to being interrupted (e.g., Edwards & Gronlund,
1998; Morgan, Patrick, Waldron, King & Patrick, 2009);
and delays in resuming the interrupted task (e.g., Hodgetts
& Jones, 2006; Monk, Trafton & Boehm-Davis, 2008).
Whilst these issues are sometimes tolerable (e.g., when
taking a telephone call whilst buying groceries),
interruptions can be a nuisance, expensive or even life
threatening in many other contexts, including, offices,
aircraft flight-decks, and hospitals (see Trafton & Monk,
2008). Thus, investigating methods for minimizing
interruption effects has become an important topic. Methods
include: using an ‘interruption lag’ to briefly delay the onset
of an interruption and allow an opportunity to prepare for
resumption of a problem solving task (Hodgetts & Jones,
2006); and a reminder cue to support memory of a delayed
intention in a prospective memory task (McDaniel, Einstein,
Graham & Rall, 2004). A recent study by Morgan et al.
(2009) developed another method that involved increasing
goal-state access cost (the time, physical and mental effort

costs associated with accessing information). This
encouraged a more memory-based strategy that was
effective in protecting against forgetting following
interruption. The aim of this paper is to investigate the
efficacy of this method in a problem solving task rather than
the copying task used by Morgan et al. (2009).
The predicted advantage of increased access cost on
promoting a more internal cognitively-based strategy
derives from the soft constraints hypothesis (Gray et al.,
2006). This theory posits that whilst certain elements of a
task environment are fixed (i.e., hard constraints) and dictate
what behavior is possible, task strategies are flexible and
therefore adapt in a rational manner. People strive to
minimize the time spent performing tasks at a local rather
than global level (Gray et al., 2006), so strategy adjustments
are made at the 1/3 to 3-second level of task performance
favoring those that are more effective at this millisecond
level (Gray & Boehm-Davis, 2000). On one hand, if
information is readily available in the task environment, a
strategy that relies less on internal memory (which is fallible
and subject to error) will prevail (e.g., Anderson &
Douglass, 2001). In contrast, if there is an unacceptable cost
associated with accessing information in the task
environment, cognition will adapt and adjust to a more
memory-based strategy to minimize this cost.
Such strategy change has been demonstrated in a variety
of studies (Gray & Fu, 2004; Gray et al., 2006; Morgan et
al., 2009; Waldron et al., 2007) using the Blocks World
Task (BWT) developed by Ballard, Heyhoe & Pelz (1995),
that involves copying a target pattern of colored blocks to a
workspace window. Increasing the cost of accessing the
target pattern with a mouse movement and a brief time
delay induced a shift to a more memory-based strategy (e.g.,
Gray & Fu, 2000; Gray et al., 2006) and improved recall of
information (Waldron, Patrick, Morgan & King, 2007).
Morgan et al. (2009) found that such an induced memorybased strategy protected against forgetting following both
visuo-spatial copying and mental arithmetic interrupting
tasks. This was particularly effective when the interruption
occurred on approximately half of the trials.
In contrast, little is known about the effect of goal-state
access cost on problem solving. Some studies have
manipulated the availability and effort required to use the
task environment as an external memory resource. For
example, the use of internal memory increased when the
ability to make paper notes was made more difficult whilst

949

solving demanding mental arithmetic problems (Cary &
Carlson, 2001). Similarly, when the current-state had to be
requested during performance of ‘balls and boxes’
problems, participants tended to execute more moves per
request (Pfeiffer, 2004). Also, O’Hara and Payne (1998)
demonstrated how increasing the cost of implementing an
action during problem solving leads to improved planning.
The results from these studies suggest increased use of
internal memory to avoid additional costs of interacting with
the environment. One recent problem solving study found
that High goal-state access cost led to more ‘planning before
action’ as opposed to ‘planning during action’ (Waldron,
Patrick & Duggan, unpublished) although it had no effect on
number of moves to solution. However the effect of High
goal-state access cost on mitigating the negative effect of
interruption has not been examined during problem solving.

constraint (e.g., a larger disc cannot be placed on top of a
smaller disc). Also, the hierarchical nature of the ToH in
terms of goal and subgoals means that many moves are
interdependent, and therefore the goal-state does not need to
be re-visited as often as in the BWT. Furthermore, the
proposed benefit of High goal-state access cost in the ToH
is due to its encouragement to develop a more effective
problem solving strategy that should lead to fewer moves
and possibly reduced time to solve the problem.

Method
Participants
Fifty-four Cardiff University Psychology students
participated for course credit and were randomly assigned to
one of three goal-state access cost conditions. There were
six men and forty-eight women with an age range of 18 to
37 years (M = 20.56, SD = 2.95).

Experiment
To fill this research gap, the aim of the experiment was to
examine whether increasing goal-state access cost induces a
more memory-based strategy in a ToH task and whether
such a strategy can improve performance following
interruption. It was predicted that High access cost would
accomplish this by encouraging a more internalized rather
than display-based strategy with more planning before
action (Davies, 2003; Waldron, Patrick & Duggan,
unpublished).
There were two subsidiary aims. First, Morgan et al.
(2009, Experiment 3) demonstrated that High access cost
induced a memory-based strategy that was powerful enough
to abolish the effects of forgetting following different types
of interrupting tasks compared to a no interruption
condition, even when one task (another BWT) arguably had
similar processing requirements to the primary task. There
is mixed evidence regarding the effects of interruption
similarity on post-interruption performance. Some studies
report greater disruption following a similar interrupting
task (e.g., Edwards & Gronlund, 1998; Gillie & Broadbent,
1989) whereas others argue against this so called
‘interruption similarity’ effect (e.g., Latorella, 1996). Given
that it is difficult to unequivocally separate tasks on
dimensions of similarity, we examined the effects of
increasing goal-state access cost on performance following
two different types of interrupting tasks: one involving
another ToH (arguably similar to the primary task) and the
other involving mental arithmetic.
Second, we wanted to assess whether the typical cost of
High access cost on reducing speed of completing the BWT
(Morgan et al., 2009) would be less pronounced or even
eliminated in the ToH. Performing the BWT under a High
access cost places a high demand on memory and
participants spend time encoding and rehearsing block
information, suffering the time cost of uncovering the goalstate at each visit, and making more move errors that have
to be corrected. In contrast, the ToH is not as memory
demanding given that the goal-state often consists of a small
array of objects (e.g., 4-discs) that are bounded by a simple

Materials, Design & Procedure
There were 18 primary task four-disc ToH problems, each
with a different start and goal-state disc configuration (see
Figure 1 for an example start-state). Disc movement was
controlled by clicking on a disc on one peg (e.g., A),
holding down the mouse button, and dragging the disc to a
destination peg before releasing the mouse button (e.g., at B
or C). If a larger disc was dragged over a smaller disc, the
larger disc would be returned to its source peg and a
message reading ‘illegal move’ would appear on the screen.
All primary task ToH problems required a minimum of 15
moves for error-free completion and all major subgoals
occurred at the same point within the solution sequence (if
solved error-free: subgoal 1, moves 1 – 8; subgoal 2, moves
9 – 12; and subgoal 3, moves 13 – 15). The main subgoals
within the ToH task involve getting the largest-out-of-place
discs to their goal destination peg(s) in the order ‘largest
first’ through to ‘smallest last’.
Figure 1. An example of the start-state of a four disc ToH
task
Note. Disc numbers are used to represent colors (1 = green,
2 = blue, 3 = yellow, and 4 = red)

Goal-state access cost was manipulated between-subjects
on three levels: Low (goal-state always visible), Medium
(goal-state covered with a grey mask with a mouse
movement to uncover) and High (as Medium but with an
additional 2.5-second lockout cost to uncover). Each of nine
ToH problems was interrupted once with one of three
different interruption types (manipulated within-subjects).
The ToH interruption consisted of 3-disc ToH problems that
could be solved in a minimum of seven moves using the

950

same disc movement procedure as in the primary task. The
mental arithmetic (MA) interruption involved solving a
series of self-paced double-digit addition problems (e.g., 34
+ 45 = ??). Answers were entered using a keyboard. In the
control condition (referred to as blank screen interruption
hereafter), there was no task during the interruption. Each
interruption occurred immediately following the first move
of the first, second or third major subgoals, giving three
interruption points. Both interruption task type and
interruption position were counterbalanced.
Two types of measure were used to examine the effects of
goal-state access cost and interrupting task on the ability to
resume the primary task from memory. First, we calculated
the number of interrupted trials resumed without first revisiting the goal-state and, for those trials, the number of
moves executed subsequently. Second, we calculated both
the number of moves and the time required to complete the
ToH problem following interruption. Given that
interruptions were equally distributed across the three points
of interruption, fair comparisons could be made between
both the different levels of access cost and the different
interrupting tasks. Finally, it was important to confirm that
any benefit of increased goal-state access cost on
performance following interruption was due to increased use
of a more internalized problem solving strategy with
reduced reliance on the external problem space. For this we
used an important measure of planning in problem solving
(e.g., Davies, 2003, 2005; Ward & Allport 1997), which
was the amount of time spent at the beginning of a ToH
problem before the first move was executed. This was
predicted to increase with increasing access cost.
Participants were tested individually. They were
instructed on task procedures and informed that they could
be interrupted at any time. The main experiment started
after completion of one non-interrupted 15-move practice
trial and one attempt at performing each interrupting task.
The experiment lasted approximately 30 minutes.

Results and Discussion
First, the effects of goal-state access cost and interruption
type on the ability to resume the primary ToH task from
memory were considered, followed by an examination of
their effects on various post-interruption performance
measures. Finally, we assessed whether any beneficial effect
of High access cost on these performance measures could be
accounted for by participants using a more memory-based
problem solving strategy.

Effects of Goal-State Access Cost and Interruption
Task on Performance after Interruption
We predicted that the main benefit of a higher access cost
would be a tendency to adopt a more internalized problem
solving strategy with participants choosing to rely less on
the external problem space, even following interruption. As
such, it was anticipated that participants in the High access
cost condition would resume the primary task without
revisiting the goal-state (and suffering the associated time

cost) more often than the Medium access cost condition.
(Note that the Low access cost condition could not be
considered for any resumption measure because the goalstate was permanently uncovered.) The results supported
this prediction (Table 1) with a 2 (goal-state access cost:
Medium and High) x 3 (interruption type: blank screen,
ToH, MA) ANOVA revealing that more trials were resumed
from memory by participants in the High compared to the
Medium access cost condition, F(1, 34) = 67.43, MSE =
3.28, p < .001. There was also a main effect of interruption
type, F(2, 68) = 9.47, MSE = 6.57, p < .001, due to less use
of the goal-state to aid resumption following a blank screen
interruption compared to a ToH interruption. Furthermore,
and as predicted, Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed that
participants in the High access cost condition resumed more
often without first viewing the goal-state than those in the
Medium access cost condition following all interruption
types (ps < .001).
Table 1. Effect of goal-state access cost and interruption
task on resumption performance

Number
of
trials resumed
without
revisiting
the
goal-state (max
= 3)
Number
of
participants
resuming
at
least one trial
without viewing
goal-state
Number
of
moves executed
without
revisiting
the
goal-state

Goal-State
Access Cost
Med
M
SD
High
M
SD

Med
High

Interruption Type
Blank
ToH
MA
1.17
.11
.61
.86
.32
.78
2.56
1.46
2.28
1.17
.94
.83

Med

13/18

2/18

8/18

High

17/18

16/18

17/18

4.19
1.56
6.78
3.30

-

2.57
1.97
6.55
3.87

M
SD
M
SD

Therefore it is evident that participants in different access
cost conditions adopted different resumption strategies
involving the need to view (or not) the goal-state to resume.
For example, most participants in the Medium access cost
condition were unable to resume at least one ToH
interruption trial without first revisiting the goal-state
window (Table 1). In contrast nearly all participants in the
High access cost condition resumed at least one ToH trial
from memory. This demonstrates the protective effect of
High goal-state access cost on memory for the goal-state
and/or a future move(s) following a ToH interruption and
the ineffectiveness of Medium goal-state access cost
following the same type of interruption. This beneficial
effect of High access cost was reduced with the two other

951

interrupting tasks although it was still apparent for an MA
interruption (Table 1).
Another indicator of participants relying less on the
external display and more on an internal representation to
continue an interrupted task is the number of moves they
make before re-inspecting the goal-state (Table 1). A 2
(goal-state access cost) x 2 (interrupt type: blank screen and
MA) ANOVA revealed a main effect of goal-state access
cost, F(1, 22) = 7.09, MSE = 7.54, p < .05, with participants
in the High access cost condition making more moves after
interruption before goal-state re-inspection than those in the
Medium access cost condition. There was no effect of
interruption type and goal-state access cost and interruption
type did not interact (ps > .05).
These results are testimony to the marked effect of High
goal-state access cost on the ability to maintain an internal
representation of the goal-state and/or a future move or
series of moves throughout the course of an interruption,
even when interruption involved a different task.
Whilst the above measures concerned interruption trials
that were resumed without first viewing the goal-state
window (and are thus restricted to the Medium and High
goal-state access cost conditions), it is also important to
establish the effects of all three levels of access cost on postinterruption performance (Table 2). Specifically, we were
interested whether High access cost with its more internal
memory-based strategy (1) led to fewer moves and (2)
affected the time to complete interrupted ToH problems.
Participants in higher access cost conditions completed
interrupted ToH problems in fewer moves (Table 2). A 3
(goal-state access cost: Low, Medium and High) x 3
(interruption type: blank screen; ToH, MA) ANOVA
confirmed a significant main effect of goal-state access cost
F(2, 51) = 4.35, MSE = 2.53, p < .05, f = .41 with
participants in the High access cost condition completing
problems in fewer moves than participants in the Low
access cost condition (p < .05). However, participants in the
High access cost condition did not perform significantly
better than those in the Medium access cost condition (p >
.05), and participants in the Medium access cost condition
did not perform better than those in the Low access cost
condition (p > .05). There was a non-significant main effect
of interruption type (p > .05) and a non-significant
interaction (p > .05).
Time to complete problems following interruption was
similar across goal-state access cost conditions (Table 2),
and there was a non-significant main effect (p > .05). There
was, however, a significant effect of interruption type, F(2,
102) = 7.77, MSE = 52.77, p < .01, f = .39. Not surprisingly,
participants were significantly faster to complete following
a blank screen than a ToH interrupting task (p < .01) and
were marginally faster following mental arithmetic than a
ToH interrupting task (p = .06). Goal-state access cost and
interruption type did not interact (p > .05).

Table 2. Effect of goal-state access cost and interruption
type on performance following resumption

Number
of
moves
to
complete
the
primary
task
following
interruption
Time
to
complete
the
primary
task
following
interruption (s)

Goal-State
Access Cost
Low
M
SD
Med
M
SD
High
M
SD
Low
M
SD
Med
M
SD
High
M
SD

Interruption Type
Blank
ToH
MA
10.39 11.70 11.26
2.98
3.49
3.05
9.52
10.93 10.19
1.57
3.20
2.33
9.28
9.89
9.52
2.25
1.93
2.29
20.65 25.79 22.16
9.28
8.84
8.18
19.09 23.19 21.36
7.79
9.23
9.52
17.28 24.42 19.74
7.38
12.76
5.97

Thus, the more memory-based strategy associated with
High goal-state access cost was sufficient to effect an
improvement in problem solving efficiency following
interruption compared to a Low access cost. In contrast, the
cost of a mouse movement in the Medium access cost
condition was not sufficient to improve performance
compared to the Low access cost condition. Furthermore,
the improvement under a High access cost on resumption
and performance thereafter comes at no extra time cost
compared to lower access cost conditions. This is especially
encouraging given the extra time cost associated with such a
condition in a more memory-demanding visuo-spatial
copying task (e.g., Morgan et al., 2009).

Effects of Goal-State Access Cost on Planning
It is important to confirm that the improvements in
performance following interruption during High goal-state
access cost can be accounted for by a change of task
strategy. One important measure of planning is the amount
of time taken to execute the first move at the start of a ToH,
which we predicted would be greatest in the High access
cost condition. A significant main effect of goal-state access
cost, F(2, 51) = 4.82, MSE = 4.59, p < .05, f = .44, revealed
that participants in the High access cost condition indeed
took more time to execute the first move (M = 6.31, SD =
2.7) than those in Medium and Low access cost conditions,
ps < .05 (M = 4.53, SD = 1.45 and M = 4.27, SD = 2.08
respectively). Time spent planning in the Medium and Low
access cost conditions did not differ statistically (p > .05).

General Discussion
The current experiment demonstrates the efficacy of
imposing higher costs on accessing the goal-state in
problem solving to promote a more efficient memory-based
strategy that protects against the negative effects of different
types of interruption. High goal-state access cost was
superior to lower access cost conditions on nearly all
measures following any type of interrupting task. The

952

benefit of a High access cost to induce a more memorybased strategy to protect against forgetting following
interruption has been demonstrated with a simple BWT
copying task (Morgan et al., 2009), but this paper highlights
for the first time how these effects extend to a problem
solving task. This is especially interesting given the
different nature of the BWT and a ToH problem solving
task. The BWT has a relatively flat and repetitive goal
structure (e.g., locate a block in one position and move it to
another position), whereas the ToH has a hierarchical goal
structure and can be performed using a variety of different
strategies that usually become more sophisticated with
practice (e.g., Anzai & Simon, 1979).
The findings provide further support for the soft
constraints hypothesis (e.g., Gray et al., 2006), particularly
its claim that strategy selection is dependent upon the time
costs imposed by interacting with the external task
environment. We have shown that when the ToH goal-state
is masked and cannot be viewed without suffering a mouse
movement and a brief time cost, problem solving strategy
becomes more internalised and less display-based. Whilst
this strategy selection is based upon a very subtle change to
the task environment, it is powerful enough to protect
against forgetting following interruption and improves
problem solving efficiency.
The results can also be interpreted within the theoretical
framework of the memory for goals model (Altmann &
Trafton, 2002). This is a model of goal suspension and
resumption that posits: for a goal to govern behaviour it has
to be repeatedly strengthened so that its activation level
within internal memory exceeds that of an interference
threshold set by all other goals in memory. A goal must be
primed, that is, associatively linked to a reminder cue (either
externally or internally based) that must be available both
immediately prior to and following interruption, otherwise
the goal will decay and become forgotten. Upon
encountering this cue again, the decaying representation of
the suspended goal will be reactivated such that it again
governs behavior. Our data suggest that suspended goals
may have undergone a greater amount of strengthening in
the High access cost condition and we may speculate that
the current-state disc configuration might have provided
adequate priming cues. However, the memory for goals
model suggests that an interruption lag is a critical period to
strengthen and prime a to-be-suspended goal so that it can
be retrieved from memory after interruption. The current
findings, together with those reported in Morgan et al.
(2009), suggest that an interruption lag may not be critical if
the task performer is equipped with a more memory-based
strategy throughout performance of the primary task. High
goal-state access cost is a subtle yet powerful method to
induce such a strategy and thus may either be an alternative
method to an interruption lag or a complementary method to
support its proposed benefit.
The findings are also important from a practical
perspective, especially regarding principles relating to
cognitive engineering and display design. These principles

stress the importance of making available as much
information as possible to perform a task (see Wickens &
Hollands, 2000), at least within the realm of human
capabilities (e.g., Rasmussen & Vicente, 1989). For
example, ecological interface design recommends that
complex relationships between variables should be made
immediately available and information within the interface
should be easily extractable (Vicente & Rasmussen, 1992).
Similarly, information fusion involves synthesising
information from a wide range of sources and displaying it
to the user in an immediately available format (e.g.,
Dasarathy, 2001). Whilst adopting these principles has
benefit in many situations, they also risk a passive and more
display-based approach to monitoring and processing
information that may ultimately result in the user moving
‘out-of-the-loop’ (e.g., Bainbridge, 1987). A recent study by
Waldron et al. (2008) using a flight simulation found that
making positional information temporarily rather than
permanently available improved memory for aircraft
location. Given the additional findings of the current
experiment and related studies (e.g., Morgan et al., 2009;
Waldron et al., 2007) we perhaps radically suggest that
paradoxically making information harder to access may
sometimes improve performance, such as when resuming
some tasks following interruption. This will depend on what
is the criterion measure of performance and the advantage
will be greatest when recall is important to post-interruption
performance. There are of course exceptions to this
suggestion. For example, it is unlikely that the benefits of
increased goal-state access cost would outweigh the costs of
having to continually access information in fast-paced,
safety-critical task environments such as an aircraft flightdeck.
Future experiments will be necessary to fully test the
boundary conditions associated with the benefit of increased
goal-state access cost in problem solving and other task
environments, both with and without interruptions.
Furthermore, it is practically important to compare the
advantages and disadvantages of using access costs with
other methods for mitigating interruption effects.

References
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, G. J. (2002). Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39-83.
Anderson, J. R., & Douglass, S. (2001). Tower of Hanoi:
Evidence for the cost of goal retrieval. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 27, 1331-1346.
Anzai, Y., & Simon, H. A. (1979). The theory of learning
by doing. Psychological Review, 86, 124-140.
Bainbridge, L. (1987). Ironies of automation. In J.
Rasmussen, K. Duncan, & J. Leplat (Eds.), New
technology and human error (pp. 271-283). New York:
Wiley.
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., & Pelz, J. B. (1995).
Memory representations in natural tasks. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 7(1), 66-80.

953

Cary, M., & Carlson, R. A. (2001). Distributing working
memory resources during problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27, 836-848.
Dasarathy, B. V. (2001). Information Fusion – what, where,
why, when, and how? Information Fusion, 2, 75-76.
Davies, S. P. (2003). Initial and concurrent planning in
solutions to well-structured problems. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A(7), 1147-1164.
Davies, S. P. (2005). Planning and problem solving in welldefined domains. In R. Morris & G. Ward (Eds.), The
cognitive psychology of planning (pp. 35-51). Hove:
Psychology Press.
Edwards, M. B., & Gronlund, S. D. (1998). Task
interruption and its effects on memory. Memory, 6, 665687.
Fu, W.-T., & Gray, W. D. (2000). Memory versus
perceptual-motor tradeoffs in a blocks world task.
Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 154-159). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gillie, T., & Broadbent, D. (1989). What makes
interruptions disruptive? A study of length, similarity, and
complexity. Psychological Research, 50, 243-250.
Gray, W. D., & Boehm-Davis, D. A. (2000). Milliseconds
matter: An introduction to microstrategies and their use in
describing and predicting interactive behavior. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 6, 322-335.
Gray, W. D., & Fu, W.-T. (2004). Soft constraints in
interactive behaviour: The case of ignoring perfect
knowledge in-the-world for imperfect knowledge in-thehead. Cognitive Science, 28, 359-383.
Gray, W. D., Sims, C. R., Fu, W.-T., & Schoelles, M. J.
(2006). The soft constraints hypothesis: A rational
analysis approach to resource allocation for interactive
behaviour. Psychological Review, 113, 461-482.
Hodgetts, H. M., & Jones, D. M. (2006). Contextual cues
aid recovery from interruption: The role of associative
activation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 32(5), 1120-1132.
Latorella, K. A. (1996). Investigating interruptions:
Implications for flightdeck performance. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation. State University of New York at
Buffalo.
McDaniel, M. A., Einstein, G. O., Graham, T., & Rall, E.
(2004). Delaying execution of intentions: Overcoming the
cost of interruptions. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
18(5), 533-547.
Monk, C. A., Trafton, J. G., & Boehm-Davis, D. A. (2008).
The effect of interruption duration and demand on
resuming suspended goals. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 14, 299-313.
Morgan, P. L., Patrick, J., Waldron, S. M., King, S. L., &
Patrick, T. (2009). Improving memory after interruption:
Exploiting soft constraints and manipulating information
access cost. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 15(4), 291-306.

O’Hara, K. P., & Payne, S. J. (1998). The effects of operator
implementation cost on planfulness of problem solving
and learning. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 34-70.
Pfeiffer, T. (2004). Problem solving with a simple
transformation problem with and without continuous
external support. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 555-572.
Rasmussen, J., & Vicente, K. J. (1989). Coping with human
errors through system design: Implications for ecological
interface design. International Journal of Man-Machine
Studies, 31, 517-534.
Trafton, J. G., & Monk, C. M. (2008). Task interruptions. In
D. A. Boehm-Davis (Ed.), Reviews of Human Factors and
Ergonomics, Vol. 3. Human Factors & Ergonomics
Society.
Vicente, K. J., & Rasmussen, J. (1992). Ecological interface
design: Theoretical foundations. IEEE Transactions on
systems, man, and cybernetics (pp. 589-606). SMC-22.
Waldron, S. M., Patrick, J., & Duggan, G. B. The influence
of information access cost during problem solving:
consequences for memory and planning. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Waldron, S. M., Patrick, J., Duggan, G. B., Banbury, S., &
Howes, A. (2008). Designing information fusion for the
encoding of visual-spatial information. Ergonomics,
51(6), 775-797.
Waldron, S. M., Patrick, J., Morgan, P. L., & King, S. L.
(2007). Influencing cognitive strategy by manipulating
information access costs. The Computer Journal, 50(6),
694-702.
Ward, G., & Allport, D. A. (1997). Planning and problem
solving in the five disk Tower of London. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A, 49-78.
Wickens, C. D., & Hollands, J. G. (2000). Engineering
psychology & human performance (3rd Ed.). New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall Inc.

Acknowledgments
Phillip, L Morgan & John Patrick are at the School of
Psychology, Cardiff University, UK, CF10 3AT.
This work was supported, in part, by the UK MoD
Defence Technology Centre: Data and Information Fusion
(MIMEX Cluster Project, DTC112) awarded to the second
author. The views and conclusions contained in this
document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the official policies, either
expressed or implied, of the UK Ministry of Defence, or the
UK Government. We would also like to thank Olivier
DeCondappa and Sophia King for assisting with running
participants and data coding.
Correspondence should be addressed to Phillip L.
Morgan, School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower
Building, Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT. E-mail may be
sent to MorganP4@cardiff.ac.uk.

954

