UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual Differences in Successful Second Language Learning: The Roles of Working
Memory and Intelligence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4s6087wv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
McCarthy, Brendan
Faretta, Mandy
Wong, Francis
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual Differences in Successful Second Language Learning: The
Roles of Working Memory and Intelligence
Brendan McCarthy
University of Illinois at Chicago

Mandy Faretta
University of Illinois at Chicago

Francis Wong
Northwestern University

Patrick Wong, Ph.D.
Northwestern University

Kara Morgan-Short, Ph.D.
University of Illinois at Chicago
Abstract: Individual Differences in Successful Second Language Learning: The Roles of Working Memory and
Intelligence
B. McCarthy, M. Faretta, F. Wong, P. Wong, & K. Morgan-Short
Poster Abstract
Learning a second language (L2) in adulthood is notoriously difficult. Some learners, however, seem to learn with
ease. In order to understand the characteristics of successful learners, research has explored the role of individual
differences. The current study examines the role of two individual cognitive abilities: working memory and intelligence. Participants complete a battery of cognitive tasks, including a listening span test and the Kaufman Brief
Intelligence Test. They subsequently learn an artificial language, which is meaningful, productive and consistent
with natural languages, over the course of four training sessions. Language proficiency is assessed within subjects
at the end of the first and final session, and a multiple regression analysis is conducted to probe the contribution of
working memory and intelligence to successful L2 development. Implications for theories of L2 learning and for L2
learners are discussed.
Words (137)

596

