UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Infants expect others to help one another achieve a goal

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/91d4x2v5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Lee, Woo-yeol
Kim, Eun Young
Won, Jeong-ae
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Infants Expect Others to Help One Another Achieve a Goal
Woo-yeol Lee (wlee@yonsei.ac.kr)
Department of Psychology, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea

Eun Young Kim (majilake@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea

Jeong-ae Won (bloom1015@naver.com)
Department of Psychology, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea

Yoonha Lee (una3263@hotmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea

Yoon Kim (alsey07@naver.com)
Department of Psychology, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
What makes people help each other? To explore the origin of
human altruism, we tested whether 16-month-old infants have
an expectation of helping behavior when they observe an
interaction between others. Infants watched videos in which one
(capable) agent had achieved a goal while the other (incapable)
one could not. In a subsequent situation, the capable agent
either helped the incapable agent achieve the goal (helping
event), or ignored the incapable agent and achieved the goal
alone (ignoring event). Infants looked longer at the ignoring
event, suggesting that they expected helping behavior rather
than ignoring behavior. The results are discussed in terms of
infants’ understanding of the connection between goals and
altruistic behaviors.
Keywords: altruism, helping behavior, violation of expectation
paradigm, goal understanding, infants

Introduction
In everyday life, we often help others not necessarily
expecting rewards in return. We willingly donate money to
charities when we hear news about people on the other side
of the earth suffering from hunger and distress due to a
tragic natural disaster. We hear about doctors and rescue
teams rushing into places of catastrophe to save others’
lives. These behaviors cannot be explained from an
economic perspective because expending resources without
profits could be viewed as irrational. What makes people
benevolent toward others? The origin of human altruism
has been a major interest of philosophers for a long time.
Recently, developmental psychologists have begun to
examine infants in order to discover the development of
human altruism.
Recent research with toddlers and infants demonstrates
that they take some actions to help others under certain
circumstances. In Warneken and Tomasello (2006), for
example, when 18-month-old children observed that an
adult accidentally dropped a marker pen, they picked up the
pen and brought it to the adult. Infants do such behaviors

spontaneously without external rewards. Another study
showed that children’s motivation to help others was in fact
decreased by material rewards (Warneken & Tomasello,
2008). Meanwhile, it is difficult for younger children to
give instrumental aid to others through actions because they
have yet to master control of their bodies. Nevertheless,
there is some evidence that even 12-month-old infants give
relevant information to others by using pointing actions
(Liskowski, Carpenter, Striano, & Tomasello, 2006;
Liskowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2008).
Infants also discriminate helping behaviors from
hindering behaviors (Hamlin, Wynn, & Bloom, 2007;
Kuhlmeier, Wynn, & Bloom, 2003). In studies by
Kuhlmeier and her colleagues, 12-month-old infants
watched a series of computer-animated videos including a
social interaction between geometric shapes. In the videos,
an agent (e.g., a triangle) helped a circle climb up a hill,
whereas another agent (e.g., a square) hindered the circle
from climbing the hill. In the following test trials, infants
observed scenes in which the circle approached one of the
two agents. The looking time of the infants was longer
when the circle approached the helper than hinderer. This
result indicates that infants are able to make a distinction
between a helper and a hinderer. In addition, infants
themselves show preference for agents who have helped
others over agents who have not (Hamlin et al., 2007).
In summary, infants often show and prefer helping
behaviors and distinguish helpers from hinderers. The
present study further investigated infants’ expectation of
others’ helping behaviors. More specifically, it asked: Do
infants anticipate someone would help another when that
other is in trouble or need? For instance, consider the
following situation. A person sees another person
repeatedly fall down while hiking. We may expect the first
person to offer some help to the second person. If the first
person simply passes by the second, we may be surprised.
The current research examined what 16-month-old
infants expect of an agent when they watch a similar

1881

situation. We employed the violation of expectation
paradigm using computer-animated videos as stimuli (see
Figure 1). The violation of expectation paradigm measures
infants’ looking time patterns to evaluate their reasoning
about an event, where infants show longer looking times for
surprising or unexpected scenes (e.g., Gergely, Nadasdy,
Csibra, & Biro, 1995; Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Song,
Baillargeon, & Fisher, 2005; Woodward, 1998). The infants
were randomly assigned to either the experimental or
control condition.
In the experimental condition, infants first received
familiarization trials in which they watched videos about
two agents, a square and a circle. The videos showed that
the square was able to achieve the goal of climbing a tall
hill whereas the circle was not. During test trials, the infants
watched two events. In the helping event, the square helped
the circle achieve the goal of climbing the hill by pushing
the circle to the top of the hill. In the ignoring event, the
square did not help the circle; it simply passed by the circle
as if completely ignoring the circle striving to climb the hill.
If infants expect the square to help the circle, they should
look longer at the ignoring event than at the helping event
because their expectation would be violated in the ignoring
event.
To rule out the possibility that infants would look longer
at the ignoring event than at the helping event simply
because the agents’ movements are more interesting or
perceptually salient in the ignoring event, another group of
infants were tested in the control condition. The control
condition was identical to the experimental condition
except that the circle did not show an intention to climb the
tall hill during the familiarization trials. Instead, it simply
moved around aimlessly. If infants reason that the circle
does not have the goal of climbing the tall hill, and thus that
the square does not have to help the circle achieve the goal,
infants should look for equal amounts of time at the helping
and ignoring events. However, if the ignoring event is
simply more interesting than the helping event, infants in
both the control and experimental conditions should look
longer at the ignoring event than at the helping event.

Experiment
Participants
A total of 31 infants initially participated in the study.
However, 7 infants were excluded from the data analyses
because of parental interference (1), distraction (1),
experimental error (2), and fussiness (3). So, 24 16-monthold infants (12 boys, 12 girls, M = 16;12, range 15;8 –
17;22) were kept for data analyses. They were randomly
assigned to the experimental condition or the control
condition.

Materials and procedure
Figure 1 shows examples of the stimulus videos. In the
videos, a red circle and a yellow square-like geometric

shapes climbed small and tall hills. The shapes had some
personifying features, i.e., eyes and a nose.
In the experimental condition, the infants received 4 trials
during the familiarization phase. In the first two trials, only
the square was in the video and infants watched it climb the
two hills successfully.
At the beginning of the third and fourth familiarization
trials, the square was on top of the tall hill and the circle
was at the bottom left corner of the scene. The circle
approached the small hill and successfully climbed it. It
then tried, but failed, to climb the tall one—it moved up the
tall hill until it reached the middle, slid down, and ended up
stuck between the two hills. It attempted to climb the tall
hill twice more, but continued to fail. The square watched
all of these attempts from the top of the tall hill.
In the following test phase, infants received 2 test trials
comprising the helping and ignoring events. At the
beginning of each trial, infants saw a static scene in which
the square was now at the bottom left corner of the scene
and the circle was stuck between the two hills. In the
helping event, the square pushed the circle up the tall hill
and they successfully reached the top together. In the
ignoring event, by contrast, the square simply passed by
behind the circle and climbed up the tall hill alone, as if
ignoring the circle.
In the control condition, the infants watched videos that
were identical to those in the experimental condition, with
the exception of the movement of the circle in the third and
fourth familiarization trials. At the beginning, the circle was
at the bottom middle of screen, between the hills. The circle
rolled only half up the tall hill, and then reverted to the
valley. After that, it moved to the left corner of the scene
over the small hill and returned to the original place. The
circle stopped at the valley between the two hills. Thus, the
circle did not show the intent to climb the tall hill.
The duration of each video was 6 seconds, and these
videos were played repeatedly until the end of each trial.
Each trial ended if the infants looked away from the
monitor for 2 consecutive seconds after watching at least 6
cumulative seconds, or if they looked at the videos for 60
cumulative seconds.
Half of the infants in each condition saw the helping
event first, and half saw the ignoring event first. Infants sat
on a parent’s lap, approximately 45 cm away from a 20inch computer monitor. The parents were asked to close
their eyes and remain silent during the experiment.
Two observers monitored each infant’s looking behavior
through peepholes in cloth-covered frames on either side of
the apparatus. The primary observer’s responses determined
the end of each trial. Interobserver agreement averaged 93%
per trial per infant.

Results
The infants’ looking times during the familiarization and
test trials were analyzed. Preliminary analyses did not
reveal any effect of gender or order of test events

1882

Figure 1: Video stimuli used in the experiment.
(helping event first or ignoring event first) for the looking
times during these trials, Fs(1, 16) < 3.34, ps > .086.
Therefore, these factors were collapsed in further analyses.
During the 4 familiarization trials, the mean looking time
of the infants was 23.9 seconds (SD = 10.4) in the
experimental condition and 23.1 seconds (SD = 11.1) in the
control condition. A single-factor analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with condition (experimental or control) as a
between-participants factor demonstrated no main effect of
condition, F(1, 22) < 1, indicating that the infants in the two
conditions did not significantly differ in their mean looking
times during the familiarization trials.
The infants’ looking times during the test trials were
analyzed with a 2 X 2 ANOVA with condition

(experimental or control) as a between-participants factor
and event (helping or ignoring) as a within-participants
factor (see Figure 2). The results revealed no significant
main effect of condition or event, Fs(1, 22) < 1. However,
the interaction between condition and event was significant,
F(1, 22) = 5.26, p < .05. A planned comparison indicated
that the infants in the experimental condition looked
reliably longer at the ignoring event (M = 34.0 seconds, SD
= 19.6) than at the helping event (M = 23.2 seconds, SD =
15.7), F(1, 22) = 4.77, p < .05, whereas those in the control
condition did not show a difference in looking times
between the events (ignoring event, M = 24.3 seconds, SD =
18.1; helping event, M = 30.2 seconds, SD = 19.8), F(1, 22)
= 1.22, p > .2.

1883

A non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-ranks test revealed
the same pattern as above. In the experimental condition, 11
of the 13 infants looked longer at the ignoring event than at
the helping event (Z = 2.13, p < .05), whereas in the control
condition, 4 of 11 infants looked longer at the ignoring
event than at the helping event and one of them looked
equally at both events, Z = .66, p > .5.

Figure 2: Mean looking times of the infants during the test
trials. Error bars denote standard error.

Discussion
This study demonstrates that 16-month-old infants expect
an agent to be helpful when the agent sees another in need
of aid. In the experimental condition, infants looked reliably
longer at the ignoring event than at the helping event. This
result indicates that the infants expected the competent
agent to help the less competent agent achieve the less
competent agent’s goal.
The infants in the control condition, by contrast, looked
for comparable durations at the helping and ignoring events.
The results of the control condition confirmed that the
results of the experimental condition are not simply due to
infants’ perceptual preference for movement of the agents
in the ignoring event. Note that infants’ understanding of
basic physics such as solidity and continuity emerges very
early in life (Spelke, 1994). Therefore, the ignoring event
could have been more interesting simply because it seems
to defy a law of physics, i.e., that solid objects cannot “pass
through” one another. However, this possibility was not the
case because the infants in the control condition did not
show the difference in their looking times between the
events. The only difference between two conditions was the
motion of the circle during the third and fourth
familiarization trials. The circle showed an intention to
climb the hill only in the experimental condition. Thus, the
infants could have expected that the square would help the
circle in the experimental condition, but not in the control
condition. The square pushing the circle to the top of the
tall hill hence could have been viewed as helping the circle
achieve the goal in the experimental condition. In contrast,
the same motion in the control condition could not have

been viewed as helpful because climbing the hill was not
the circle’s demonstrated goal.
The present study thus supports and extends previous
studies that investigated infants' understanding and showing
of helping behaviors. According to previous findings,
infants show spontaneous helping behavior (Warneken &
Tomasello, 2006), distinguish helpers from hinderers
(Kuhlmeier, Wynn, & Bloom 2003), and prefer helpers to
hinderers (Hamlin, Wynn, & Bloom, 2007). In addition, our
findings suggest that infants expect an agent to willingly
help, rather than neglect, others. In our study, infants
expected to see helping behavior even though (1) they did
not observe interactions between the agents before the test
trials, and (2) they were not informed about the
characteristics of the agents beyond the agents’ competence
to achieve the goal.
Furthermore, our findings extend previous findings that
infants of this age can attribute goals to nonhuman agents.
Previous research has found that infants are able to notice
the goal of a nonhuman agent when several cues to animacy
are provided (Biro & Leslie, 2007; Luo & Baillargeon,
2005). In Biro and Leslie (2007), for instance, 9-month-old
infants can reason what an object’s goal is when it moves
freely, as though its movements are being directed by its
free will. In our experiment, agents’ actions through selfpropelled movements and personifying features such as
eyes and a nose may have helped the infants detect goals of
the agents.
Our results also suggest that infants can infer an agent’s
goals or intentions even when it fails to accomplish the goal.
That is, infants in the experimental condition did not see the
circle reach the top of the hill during the familiarization
trials, but they were able to infer the goal of the circle. The
findings are consistent with previous evidence that infants
can infer an agent’s goal when observing others’ failed
actions (Bradone & Wellman, 2009; Hamlin, Newman, &
Wynn, 2009).
What do the current findings suggest about the
developmental origin of human altruism? Where does the
expectation about others’ helpful actions come from? On
the one hand, the propensity to expect helping behavior
could be acquired from interaction with others. Attachment
with parents in infancy may especially influence the
development of their social models. A recent study suggests
that 12- to 16-month-old infants have different expectations
of others’ behavior in a social context depending on the
infants’ experiences with their mothers (Johnson, Dweck, &
Chen, 2007). On the other hand, the possibility exists that
the expectation of helping behavior is an innate tendency
since 16-month-old infants are not old enough to have had
extensive social interactions in groups. In either case, our
findings suggest that the expectation of altruistic behavior
emerges in a very early period of human life. To further
investigate the root of this altruistic mechanism, future
studies can examine the relationship between these results
and social factors such as parenting styles, daycare systems,
or presence of siblings.

1884

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the Students' Association of
the Graduate School of Yonsei University and by the Brain
Korea 21 Project in 2010.

References
Biro, S., & Leslie, A. M. (2007). Infants’ perception of
goaldirected actions: Development through cues-based
bootstrapping. Development Science, 10, 379–398.
Brandon, A. C., & Wellman, H. M. (2009). You can’t
always get what you want: Infants understand failed goaldirected actions. Psychological Science, 20, 85-91.
Gergely, G., Nadasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Biro, S. (1995).
Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age.
Cognition, 56, 165–193.
Hamlin, J. K., Newman, G, E., & Wynn, K. (2009). Eightmonth-old infants infer unfulfilled goals, despite
ambiguous physical evidence. Infancy, 14, 579-590.
Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K, & Bloom, P. (2007). Social
evaluation by preverbal infants. Nature, 450, 557-559.
Johnson, C., Dweck, C. S., & Chen, F. S. (2007). Evidence
for infants’ internal working models of attachment.
Psychological Science, 18, 501-502.
Kuhlmeier, V., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2003). Attribution
of dispositional states by 12-month-olds. Psychological
Science, 14, 402–408.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2008).
Twelve-month-olds
communicate
helpfully
and
appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners.
Cognition, 108, 732-739.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Striano, T., & Tomasello, M.
(2006). Twelve and 18-month-olds point to provide
information. Journal of Cognition and Development, 7,
173–187.
Luo, Y., & Baillargion, R. (2005). Can a self-propelled box
have a goal? Psychological reasoning in 5-month-old
Infants. Psychological Science, 16, 601-608.
Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old
infants understand false beliefs? Science, 308, 255–258.
Song, H., Baillargeon, R., & Fisher, C. (2005). Can infants
attribute to an agent a disposition to perform a particular
action? Cognition, 98, B45–B55.
Spelke, E. (1994). Initial knowledge: six suggestions.
Cognition, 40, 431-445.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006) Altruistic helping in
human infants and young chimpanzees. Science, 311,
1301–1303.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008) Extrinsic rewards
undermine altruistic tendencies in 20-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 44, 1785–1788.
Woodward, A. L. (1998). Infants selectively encode the
goal object of an actor’s reach. Cognition, 69, 1–34.

1885

