UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Infants’ Visual Processing of Faces and Objects: Age-Related Changes in Interest, and
Stability of Individual Differences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8nt3z9x9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Robledo, Marybel
Deak, Gedeon
Kolling, Thorsten

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Infants’ Visual Processing of Faces and Objects: Age-Related Changes in Interest,
and Stability of Individual Differences
Marybel Robledo (marobledo@ucsd.edu)1
Gedeon O. Deák (deak@cogsci.ucsd.edu)1
Thorsten Kolling (T.Kolling@psych.uni-frankfurt.de)2
1

2

Department of Cognitive Science, University of California
San Diego, San Diego, CA 92093-0515 USA

Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, Institut für Psychologie
D-60054 Frankfurt/Main Germany

Abstract
Longitudinal measures of infant visual processing of faces
and objects were collected from a sample of healthy infants
(N=40) every month from 6 to 9 months of age. Infants
performed two habituation tasks each month, one with novel
female faces as stimuli, and another with novel complex
objects. Different individual faces and objects served as
habituation (i.e., visual learning) and dishabituation (i.e.,
novelty response) stimuli. Measures included overall looking
time to the habituation stimuli, slope of habituation, and
recovery to the dishabituation stimuli. Infants were more
interested in faces than objects, but this was contextualized
by task order. The order effect suggests a “habituation of
habituation” effect. Infants showed an age-related decrease
in interest in objects, but no decrease in interest in faces.
This contradicts claims that infants shift around 6-7 months
from interest in faces to interest in objects. The results
showed modest between-month stability of interest in faces,
but little stability in any other behavioral measures. This
implies that habituation is driven more by unexplained
subject x session x stimulus variance than by “infant IQ.”
Keywords: Infant habituation; face processing; longitudinal
studies; object perception; infant cognition; stimulus effects;
visual preferences.

Introduction
Visual stimulus processing in infants is typically studied
in a habituation paradigm. An infant is presented with a
stimulus repeatedly until she or he habituates (i.e., meets
some criterion of diminished looking time). A novel
stimulus is then presented. If the new stimulus is perceived
as different, the infant increases the duration of looking at
the stimulus. This paradigm is a robust, reliable way to
assess visual discrimination in the first year (Fagan, 1970;
Fantz, 1964).
Habituation is used to assess more than stimulus
discrimination. Psychologists commonly use habituation to
estimate infants’ cognitive capacity. Total looking time, or
longest look to a stimulus, are considered inversely related
to cognitive efficiency (Borstein, Pêcheux, & Lécuyer,
1988). Whereas processing speed in children and adults is
used as a proxy for overall cognitive efficiency (Salthouse,
1996), there is no analogous measure of cognitive speed in
infants. Thus, speed of habituation is taken to indicate how

2482

quickly infants process a stimulus. Also, dishabituation
might relate to infants’ interest in novelty, which might
reflect curiosity. These ideas are bolstered by findings that
infant habituation predicts later cognitive skills. For
example, Thomson, Faulkner, and Fagan (1991) found a
correlation between infants’ novelty preference and Bayley
Scales of Infant Development scores (BSID, a standardized
test of cognitive, language, and social skills) at 12 and 24
months of age. Also, a meta-analysis by McCall and
Carriger (1993) showed a consistent relation between
habituation in the first year and IQ from 1 to 8 years. Thus,
there is correlational evidence of a relation between infant
habituation speed and later cognitive performance.
If this correlation is the result of some broad factor such
as cognitive efficiency, we might expect individual infants
to show consistent habituation speed (relative to their
cohort) across time and task. However, few studies have
tested longitudinal stability of habituation. In one study of
infants at 3, 4, 7, and 9 months, the strongest long-term
stability was found in longest-look (i.e., peak) duration
(Colombo, Mitchell, O’Brien, & Hotowitz, 1987).
However, cross-age stability was modest. Also, Bornstein
and Suess (2000) found low stability of total looking time
over several months. Thus, it is unclear how stable
individual infant’s rate of habituation is.
A complication in addressing this question is that infants
might habituate differently to different stimuli (Arteberry
& Bornstein, 2002). For example, infants like to look at
high-contrast, colorful, moderately complex objects (e.g.,
baby toys) (Fantz, 1964). They also like to look at faces
(Johnson, Dziurawiec, Ellis, & Morton, 1991). However, it
is not clear whether infants like to examine pictures of
objects and faces to the same degree, or prefer one to the
other. If the latter is true, we do not know how uniform
these preferences might be across infants. For instance,
children with autism spectrum disorder spend less time
looking at faces than age-matched controls (Hutt &
Ounsted, 1966). Perhaps some children are relatively faster
to habituate to only one kind of stimulus (e.g., faces) but
not the other. A related question is, how stable are
individual differences in preferences? Does an infant who
strongly prefers faces show a long-lived face-preference in
looking time?

The answers to these questions will affect how we
interpret infant habituation. If habituation is an index of
individual differences in cognitive speed, we should find
consistent performance from month to month. We might
also find consistency in dishabituation (akin to curiosity or
attraction to novelty). However, there is no guarantee of
stability across different classes of stimuli. For example,
perhaps infants show stable processing time (or interest)
for faces, but no month-to-month consistency in looking
times to objects. Thus, one of our goals was to address how
infants’ stable or changeable interests or preferences
impact their information-processing speed.

Method

support sat in a Bumbo® placed on the caregivers lap.
Caregivers wore shaded glasses and earphones playing
music so that they could not see the pictures or hear
infants’ vocal reaction. A Cannon GL camera placed
directly in front of infants was used to capture a zoomed-in
frontal view of infants’ faces. (See Figure 3.)

Figure 1: Example of habituation and novel face stimuli
(from Martinez & Benavente, 1998)

Participants
Forty healthy infants (18 girls, 22 boys) were recruited
between three to four months of age to participate
longitudinally at six months (mean age = 188 days), seven
months (mean age = 219 days), eight months (mean age =
249 days), and nine months (mean age = 278 days). Each
monthly visit was scheduled within a 10-day window
based on the child’s birthday. Infants were recruited
through announcements and flyers at local hospitals, and
visits and flyers at mother-infant recreational groups and
infant play groups in San Diego, CA. Infants and parents
were of middle-class socioeconomic level; 88% were white
and 12% were of African American, Asian American or
Hispanic descent. Parents’ mean age was 32.4 years and
mean education was 16.6 years. Recruitment and testing
procedures were approved by the UCSD Human Research
Participants Protection committee.

Figure 2: Example of habituation and novel object stimuli

Stimulus and Apparatus
Pictures of 8 faces and 8 objects were used as
habituation and dishabituation stimuli. Faces were taken
from the Computer Vision Center’s AR Face Database
(Martinez & Benavente, 1998). We selected faces of young
women of apparent Euro-American ethnicity, with mildly
pleasant expressions but not full smiles. Lighting, angle,
image size, and image resolution are all controlled in the
database. All faces are photographed in front of a light
background and are stripped of salient non-facial objects
like large jewelry or eyeglasses. (See Figure 1.)
Object stimuli were pictures of unfamiliar geometric
objects. All objects were colorful and had similar levels of
detail. (See Figure 2.) A group of parents had rated a large
set of candidate object pictures for familiarity and
attractiveness to infants. Low-familiarity but attractive
objects were chosen based on these results. All objects
were photographed on a white background.
Different face and object stimuli were presented at each
testing session. The stimuli were projected onto a white
screen, and measured 30.5cm2. The room lights were kept
low while the infant and parent were seated and prepared
for testing; the light was gradually dimmed to neardarkness for the test session. Infants requiring postural

2483

Figure 3: Infant participant orienting attentively to stimulus
image. Even though infant has shifted away from the center of the
camera field and twisted her body, the stimulus image is clearly
reflected (as a white box) in the center of her cornea.

Design and Procedure
During each visit infants performed two habituation
tasks. At 6 and 8 months object-habituation was the first
task and face-habituation was the second task (see Figure 1
and 2). At 7 and 9 months face-habituation was the first
task and object-habituation was the second task.
Parents were seated 91 cm from the projector screen and
instructed to secure the infant on their lap. The
experimenter then placed the earphones and glasses on the
parent and exited. Another experimenter (E2) in an
adjacent room then darkened the room and began the task.
Training and Coding. E2 watched the infant’s face from a
monitor in the control room, and recorded the infants’
fixations and look aways. E2 was trained extensively to
record infant looking by watching previously taped
habituation sessions, until a high accuracy criterion was

Measures
Several habituation measures were calculated for both
tasks (i.e., object; face): looking durations on each trial,
and total looking time until habituation; number of trials to
habituate (i.e., slope); and peak looking duration. Novelty
response was calculated as looking time to the
dishabituation stimulus, compared to the mean of the two
shortest looking times to the habituation stimulus.

Results
Stimulus Type Effects
Infants were more interested in faces than in objects.
Although this difference was mediated by an interaction
with order (see below), the face preference was reflected in
total looking time (Figure 4). To show this we examined
total looking time in a 4 (Age) X 2 (Stimulus) MANOVA.
The multivariate age effect was not significant, F(3, 12) =
1.24, p = .337. However, the effect of Stimulus was,

2484

80
TOTAL DURATION (s)

Task and Trials For each habituation task, infants were
presented with one stimulus for a maximum of 12 trials.
Custom software (InfAttend) tracked the looking time on
each trial while E2 depressed the button, and ended when
the button had been released (i.e., look-away periods) for 1
s. The program then imposed a 1 sec ISI and advanced to
the next presentation. The presentation automatically
ended if the infant looked for 20 sec. Habituation was
monitored automatically: when looking duration of the last
two trials averaged less than 50% of the mean of the two
peak (i.e., longest) trials, the next trial presented the novel
(dishabituation) stimulus.
After the first task was completed, the infant and parent
took a 1-3 min break to have a snack or drink, or diaper
change, so they would be comfortable for the second task.
When infants participated at 6 months they had already
been to the lab twice to participate in other cognitive tests,
including habituation. Thus, in every session infants were
already familiar with laboratory settings and personnel,
procedures in the testing room, and even habituation tests.
Thus, task or setting familiarity cannot explain age
differences. Also, infants saw different stimuli in each
session, so stimulus novelty was constant across sessions.

F(1,14) = 6.60, p = .022 (η2 = .32), as was the Age X
Stimulus interaction, F(3,12) = 4.45, p = .025 (η2 = .53).
Within-subjects contrasts reveal a cubic age X stimulus
effect, F(1,14) = 12.00, p = .004 (η2 = .46), related to the
order-related interaction described below.

70

R

60

2

= 0.04

50
40
30

R

`

20

2

= 0.44

FACES
OBJECTS

10
0
6

7

8

9

MONTH

Figure 4: Infants’ looking time to faces and objects at each
month. Note that presentation order reversed monthly; this
explains the oscillation across months of looking times to objects.
Bars = SE. Best-fitting linear regression lines are shown for each
stimulus, with R2 indicating the age effect for each stimulus type.
Note the significant age-related trend of declining attention to
objects.

NUMBER OF TRIALS

attained. E2 watched for white squares reflected on infants’
corneas; these are reflections of the stimulus that are
centered on the cornea when the infant looks at the stimuli.
E2 depressed a button whenever an infant was looking, and
released the button when the infant looked away or most of
the stimulus square was outside of the pupil.
To calculate reliability, 15% randomly chosen sessions
were coded frame-by-frame off-line. A different coder
found the first and last frames for the fixation in each trial.
Correlations between online and offline coding were r =
.998 (p < .01) for peak looking times, and r = .995 (p <
.01) for total looking time to the habituation stimulus.

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

R

2

= 0.06

R

2

= 0.18

FACES
OBJECTS
6

7

8

9

MONTH

Figure 5: Trials to habituate to faces and objects, by age. Bars
= SE. Best-fitting linear regression lines are shown with R2
indicating the age effect for each stimulus type.

The same pattern of effects was apparent in the number
of trials to habituation. A 4 X 2 MANOVA found a nonsignificant age effect, F(3, 12) = < 1, but a significant
Stimulus effect, F(1,14) = 12.6, p = .003 (η2 = .47), and
Age X Stimulus interaction, F(3,12) = 10.67, p = .001 (η2 =
.73). Again, within-subjects contrasts reveal a cubic Age X
Stimulus effect, F(1,14) = 29.4, p < .001 (η2 = .68).
For both the face habituation and object habituation task,
there are no significant total looking time differences
between the months that had the same order of presentation
(i.e. 6 and 8; 7 and 9 months). Similarly, for both face and

object habituation, there are no significant number-of-trials
differences between months with the same stimulus order.

Table 4: Mean total number of trials to habituate at 7 and 9
months (SD in parentheses).

7 months

9 months

Task 1: Faces

7.72
(2.77)

7.31
(2.47)

Task 2: Objects

4.60
(1.61)

4. 36
(1.56)

Task Order Effects
Order effects (i.e., which test was first or second) were
found in total looking time to objects. At 6 and 8 months,
when objects were first, infants looked longer at the object
than they did at 7 and 9 months (Tables 1 and 2) when
objects were second. Follow-up t-tests showed that total
looking times for objects significantly differed between 6
and 7, 6 and 9, 7 and 8, 8 and 9 months (all with a value of
p < .005). Total looking times to faces also was lower
when the face task was second; however, the difference
was not significant.
Table 1: Mean total looking time to habituation stimulus at 6 and
8 months (SD in parentheses).

6 months

8 months

Task 1: Objects

61.62 s
(50.58)

55.06 s
(28.35)

Task 2: Faces

52.93 s
(36.44)

56.81 s
(41.48)

The second- versus first-task differences shows that
overall interest in visual examination of stimuli declined
across time in the experimental context. This can be
interpreted as a “habituation to habituation” effect (see
Sirois & Mareschal, 2002). However, the effect is not
uniform: it is modulated by infants’ face-preference.
Infants’ interest is maintained or renewed if after
habituating to an object, they are shown a face. In contrast,
infants’ interest significantly decreases when an object is
presented after the face habituation task. We do not know
what stimulus properties or biases produced this difference
in habituation-of-habituation, but it highlights the
importance of examining stimulus-by-task interactions in
infant habituation.

Individual Stability: Looking Time
Table 2: Mean total looking time to habituation stimulus at 7 and
9 months (SD in parentheses).

7 months

9 months

Task 1: Faces

68.99 s
(38.17)

60.44 s
(35.61)

Task 2: Objects

35.13 s
(18.86)

27.36 s
(17.83)

This task order effect was also found for both objects
and faces in number of trials to habituate. For each
stimulus type, it took more trials to habituate if that
stimulus was used in the first task than in the second
(Tables 3 and 4). Follow-up t-tests showed that number of
trials to habituate to objects differed between 6 and 7, 6
and 9, 7 and 8, and 8 and 9 months (all ps < .05).
Table 3: Mean total number of trials to habituate at 6 and 8
months (SD in parentheses).

6 months

8 months

Task 1: Objects

6.97
(2.97)

7.30
(2.81)

Task 2: Faces

6.04
(2.22)

5.93
(2.62)

Significant individual stability for total looking time to
habituation faces was found between 6 and 8 months (r =
.56, p = .002), 7 and 8 months (r = .43, p = .020), 7 and 9
months (r = .49, p = .004), and 8 and 9 months (r = .43, p =
.020). Stability for looking time to objects was not
significant between any pair of months.
There were no significant correlations between sessions
in the number of trials to habituate to faces or objects.
Individual consistency across the object and face task
within a month was found at 6 months for total looking
time to habituate (r = .53, p <= .002). No significant
across-task correlation was found in later months.

Individual Stability: Dishabituation
Stability of dishabituation, or recovery of looking-time
to a novel stimulus, was tested. At 6 months, total looking
at the habituation face moderately predicted a greater
novelty response to the new face (r = .39, p = .024). The
same effect was found at 8 months (r = .52, p = .002) and
at 9 months (r = .41, p = .015). For objects, the same effect
was present at 6 months (r = .44, p = .009), at 7 months (r
= .43, p = .017), and at 8 months (r = .36, p = .033).

Gender Differences: Stimulus Preference
Connellan, Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Batki, and
Ahluwalia (2000) argue that male newborns prefer objects
whereas female newborns showed preference for faces
(mean age = 36. 7 hrs). Baron-Cohen (2002) claims that
there are deep-seated gender differences in social inference
and intelligence. However, we did not find gender
differences in interest to faces and objects at any age.

2485

Connellan et al. (2000) suggest that the gender effect for
stimuli preference present in 1-day-old infants could be
due to a biological nature since none have yet had exposure
to stimuli. However, infants learn prenatally as well as in
their first minutes and hours (Butko, Fasel & Movellan,
2006). Infants between 6 and 9 months of age have had
much more exposure to social and non-social stimuli,
which might be expected to amplify any nascent genderbased preferences suggested by Connellan et al. (2000).
However, no such difference was found.

Discussion
These findings suggest that infant habituation to faces is
moderately stable between 6 and 9 months of age, at least
with respect to total looking time. However, there was no
stability across months in looking-time to objects. Also,
there was no stability in the slope of habituation (i.e.,
number of trials to habituate) for either faces or objects.
These results complement Colombo et al.’s (1987)
findings of moderate stability in visual habituation from 3
to 9 months. They found stability in duration of looking to
faces, but not in trials-to-habituate or in dishabituation.
Consistent with Colombo et al.’s findings, we found
stability in looking time to faces, but not in trials-tohabituate or in dishabituation. Our results establish that
those effects are somewhat specific to faces. However, we
found moderate stability between habituation time and
dishabituation at some months, for faces and objects. The
reason for this is unclear; perhaps general attention or
arousal states contribute to consistent patterns of visual
examination from habituation to dishabituation trials.
Some studies of habituation use peak (i.e., longest single
trial) looking time as a measure of processing efficiency or
of interest. We focused on total looking time on the
assumption that it would carry less trial-by-trial error
variance. However, we did examine peak fixation times
(not reported here). This revealed very limited stability
across months.
One implication is that longitudinal prediction of infant
cognitive efficiency is stimulus-dependent. Researchers
have not known how different stimuli in habituation tests
predict individual differences in infants’ cognitive speed.
Our data show that stability is dependent on the type of
stimulus tested, as well as the type of response measured
and the age of the infant. It is unclear why stability is
greater for faces than for objects. It might be that interest in
faces is related to dimensions of temperament that relate to
sociability; these dimensions show some stability in infants
(Garcia-Coll et al., 1992). Conversely, interest in objects—
particularly pictorial representations of objects, which do
not allow typical multimodal exploration—might be highly
subject to episodic and stimulus-specific preferences. It
was not true, contrary to claims by Baron-Cohen (2002)
and colleagues, that gender predicted stimulus-interest.
It should be noted that “stimulus” here, and in most
studies, refers to pictorial representations, which are
unnatural in many ways. The use of live models and real

2486

objects might considerably alter these patterns, and this
would be an intriguing direction for future research.
Notably, in ongoing research we are testing whether the
face-habituation trends generalize from static faces to
dynamic faces (i.e., videos of rotating faces).
Our findings do not support the claim that infants’
interest in faces declines, and interest in objects increases,
after about 6 or 7 months (Adamson & Bakeman, 1991).
We found no decrease in face interest, but a mild decline in
object interest from 6 to 9 months. Although the claim that
interest in faces declines during this period is based on
very different types of data, our results suggest that there is
not a general reversal of interest, but perhaps only a taskspecific one. Currently there are no data or theories to
explain this. One possibility is that as infants’ response
capabilities in dynamic environments expand, their relative
interests in faces and objects start to differentiate. Their
interest might become primed by the response “channels”
that become viable in a given situation. Notably, during
this age range infants gain response capabilities for object
manipulation and for social interaction. These capabilities
can be enacted only when responding to real, near-at-hand
objects, on the one hand, and live, interactive people, on
the other. Thus, we would expect infants’ interests to be
governed by situations that permit these expanding
response channels. By contrast, in a narrow response
channel like looking time, with stimuli that are static and
non-interactive, we might detect only muted effects of
changing interests in people and objects. Thus, infants’
expanding action repertoire might influence their interest
in people and objects.
Infants attend to objects and faces for approximately
equal durations when presented first. However, this is not
true when they are presented second. The comparable firsttask interest to faces and objects could be due to the
novelty of the task. It is known that habituation itself
declines with repeated testing (Thompson & Spencer,
1966); this is known as “habituation of habituation.”
However, these data suggest that infants from 6 to 9
months show more habituation of habituation when a more
interesting stimulus, a face, is followed by a less (or lessconsistently) interesting stimulus, an object.
For this reason, we cannot make broad generalizations
about infants' relative interest in faces versus objects. The
differences depend on the sequential context of exposure,
as well as the infant’s age. Also, infants' familiarity with
faces and objects cannot be controlled in any obvious way.
We used novel exemplars of faces and objects, but it is
unlikely that unfamiliar objects are novel to infants in the
same way as unfamiliar faces. Infants have much
experience with face processing, and are likely able to
make fairly fine discriminations. They also have fastgrowing experience with objects, but the nature of their
experience is quite different. We can, nonetheless, compare
the same infant on the same stimulus types across months,
and see if they show parallel stability across stimulus
types. The current data show that they do not

The results show that it is not possible to use a single—
or even several—visual habituation tasks to draw valid
inferences about individual infants’ visual informationprocessing traits. Stable traits, such as they are, appear to
be conditional and subtle.

Acknowledgments
This project was funded by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (HSD SES-0527756) to G. Deák. We
thank the families who participated, and Ana Ramundo,
Jenny Nowinski, and Colleen Sheh for assistance in
collecting and coding data.

References
Adamson, L., & Bakeman, R. (1991). The development of
shared attention during infancy. Annals of Child
Development, 8, 1-41.
Arterberry, M.E., & Bornstein, M.H. (2002). Variability
and its sources in infant categorization. Infant Behavior
and Development, 25(4), 515-528.
Baron-Cohen, S. (2002). The extreme male brain theory of
autism. Trends in Cognitive Science, 6, 248-254.
Bornstein, M.H., & Benasich, A.A. (1986). Infant
habituation: Assessments of individual differences and
short-term reliability at five months. Child Development,
57(1), 87-99.
Bornstein, M.H., Pêcheux, M., & Lécuyer, R. (1988).
Visual habituation in human infants: development and
rearing circumstances. Psychological Research, 50(2),
130-133.
Bornstein, M.H., & Suess, P.E. (2000). Physiological selfregulation and information processing in infancy:
Cardiac vagal tone and habituation Child Development,
71, 273-287.
Butko, N., Fasel, I., & Movellan, J. (2006). Learning about
humans during the first 6 minutes of life. Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Development and
Learning, Bloomington, Indiana.
McCall, R.B., & Carriger, M.S. (1993). A meta-analysis of
infant habituation and recognition memory performance
as predictors of later IQ. Child Development, 64, 57-79.
Colombo, J., and others. (1987). The stability of visual
habituation during the first year of life. Child
Development, 58(2), 474-87.
Colombo, J., Shaddy, D.J., Richman, W.A., Maikranz, J.
M., & Blaga, O.M. (2004). The developmental course of
habituation in infancy and preschool outcomes. Infancy,
5(1).
Connellan, J., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Batki,
A., & Ahluwalia, J. (2000). Sex differences in human
neonatal social perception. Infant Behavior and
Development, 23(1), 113-118.
Fagan, J.F. (1970). Memory in the infant. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 9, 217-226.
Fagan, J.F. (1972). Infants’ recognition memory for faces.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 14, 453–476.

2487

Fagan, J.F. (1973). Infants’ delayed recognition memory
and forgetting. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 16, 424–450.
Fantz, R.L. (1964). Visual experience in infants: Decreased
attention to familiar patterns relative to novel ones.
Science, 146, 668–670.
Feldman, J.F. (1997). Memory and speed: their role in the
relation of infant information processing to later IQ.
Child Development, 68(4), 630-41.
Feldman, R., & Mayes, L.C. (1999). The cyclic
organization of attention during habituation is related to
infants' information processing. Infant Behavior and
Development, 22(1), 37-49.
Garcia Coll, C.T., Halpern, L.F., Vohr, B.R., Seifer, R., &
Oh, W. (1992). Stability and correlates of change of
early temperament in preterm and full-term infants.
Infant Behavior And Development 15, 137-153.
Hutt, C., & Ounsted, C. (1966). The biological significance
of gaze aversion with particular reference to the
syndrome of infantile autism. Behavioral Science, 11 (5),
346–356.
Johnson, M.H., Dziurawiec, S., Ellis, H.D., Morton, J.
(1991). Newborns preferential tracking of facelike
stimuli and its subsequent decline. Cognition, 40, 1 - 21.
Martinez, A.M. & Benavente. R. (1998, June). The AR
Face Database. CVC Technical Report #24.
Robertson, S.S., Bacher, L.F., & Huntington, N.L. (2001).
The integration of body movement and attention in
young infants. Psychological Science, 12(6), 523–526.
Roder, B., Bushnell, E., & Sasseville, A. (2000). Infants’
preferences for familiarity and novelty during the course
of visual processing. Infancy, (4), 491–507.
Rose, S. A., & Feldman, J. F. (1997). Memory and speed:
their role in the relation of infant information processing
to later IQ. Child Development, 68(4), 630-41.
Salthouse, T.A. (1996). The processing speed theory of
adult age differences in cognition. Psychological
Review, 103, 403-428.
Sirois, S., & Mareschal, D. (2002). Models of habituation
in infancy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6 (7), 293–298.
Tamis-LeMonda, C.S., & Bornstein, M.H. (1989).
Habituation and maternal encouragement of attention in
infancy as predictors of toddler language, play, and
representational competence. Child Development, 738-751.
Thompson, L.A., Fagan, J.F., & Fulker, D.W. (1991).
Longitudinal Prediction of Specific Cognitive Abilities
from Infant Novelty Preference. Child Development,
62(3), 530-538.
Thompson, R.F. & Spencer, W.A. (1966). Habituation: a
model phenomenon for the study of neuronal substrate of
behavior. Psychological Review, 73, 16–43.

