UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
INFLUENCE OF GRAMMATICAL GENDER ON DEDUCTIVE REASONING ABOUT SEX-SPECIFIC
PROPERTIES OF ANIMALS

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7070v29b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Imai, Mutsumi
Schalk, Lennart
Saalbach, Henrik
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

INFLUENCE OF GRAMMATICAL GENDER ON DEDUCTIVE REASONING
ABOUT SEX-SPECIFIC PROPERTIES OF ANIMALS
Mutsumi Imai (imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies, Keio University at Shonan-Fujisawa, Japan

Lennart Schalk (schalk@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Henrik Saalbach (saalbach@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Hiroyuki Okada (h.okada@eng.tamagawa.ac.jp)
Department of Engineering, Tamagawa University, Japan
Abstract
Grammatical gender is independent of biological sex for the
majority of animal names (e.g., a male giraffe is
grammatically treated as feminine). However, there is
apparent semantic motivation for grammatical gender classes,
especially in mapping human terms to gender classes. This
research investigated whether this apparent motivation in
mapping between grammar and biological sex affects
deductive inference in German speakers. We identified two
contexts in which speakers unconsciously over-generalize the
grammar-semantics mapping to make inappropriate deductive
inferences about sex-specific biological properties. They
tended to erroneously accept deductions when the sex in the
premise and the grammatical gender of the target animal
agreed. The sex-gender agreement affected the inference
even when the sex of the target was explicitly indicated (e.g.,
die[FEM] männliche (male) Giraffe). Experiment 2 further
suggested that these effects occur only when the gendermarking article accompanied the noun. Implications of the
results for lintuistic relativity is discussed.
Keywords: Add your choice of indexing terms or keywords;
kindly use a semi-colon; between each term.

Introduction
Many languages of the world have a system of
grammatical gender, where nouns are assigned to one of the
limited number of gender classes (Corbett & Fraser, 2000).
Unlike languages that mark gender only semantically (e.g.,
English), languages with grammatical gender assign gender
to all nouns regardless of whether or not referents have a
biological sex. The link between gender assignment and
conceptual properties of non-human referents has widely
been said to be arbitrary (Aikhenvald, 2000; Fox, 1990), as
grammatical gender is not relevant to biological sex for a
majority of words. For example, in German, the word
giraffe is grammatically feminine and elephant is masculine,
but it is not the case that all giraffes are female or that all
elephants are male. Nonetheless, the feminine article die
([FEM]) must be applied when one refers to a grammatically
feminine noun and the feminine pronoun sie must be used as
an anaphoric reference, whether the referent is biologically
female or male (e.g., die männliche (male) Giraffe). Here,

an interesting question is to what extent speakers are able to
separate the biological sex of an animal from its
grammatical gender. From the perspective of a speaker of
language without grammatical gender, it appears confusing
that one has to use the feminine article and the female
pronoun even when the giraffe is actually male. Of course,
speakers of a language with the grammatical gender system
must know that grammatical gender does not directly reflect
biological sex. However, are the speakers completely
immune to the influence of grammatical gender when they
draw inferences about the animal’s sex-specific biological
properties? It is possible that the few cases of semantic
correspondence between grammatical gender and biological
sex may have resulted in an overgeneralization during the
process of language acquisition. In German, for example,
salient female terms such as woman, lady, mother are
grammatically feminine, while salient male terms such as
man, boy, father, are grammatically masculine (Natural Sex
Principle, cf. Zubin & Koepcke, 1986).
Thus, speakers may falsely generalize this exceptional
mapping between gender class and biological sex to words
for animated entities in general. This assumption is
consistent with Vigliocco and colleagues’ (Vigliocco,
Vinson, Paganelli, & Dworzynski, 2005) sex-and-genderhypothesis, which proposes that a conceptual influence of
grammatical gender originates in speakers’ first noticing the
correspondence between grammatical classes and
corresponding conceptual classes. In other words,
acknowledging the link between biological sex and the
grammatical gender class in the case of some salient humanspecific terms leads speakers to develop a general
anticipation that even non-human animals from the same
grammatical gender class are more similar to one another
than animals from different grammatical gender classes.
Most of the previous research has asked whether and to
what extent grammatical gender influences speakers’
concepts of entities in terms of typically feminine/masculine
attributes assigned to those entities. Konishi (1993) looked
at how Spanish and German speakers construe femininity or
masculinity of non-animal objects by having them give
gender-related ratings of various nouns on a potency scale

1160

(e.g., weak vs. strong; tender vs. vigorous): German
speakers rated moon (grammatically masculine in German
and feminine in Spanish) to be higher on the scale of
masculinity than sun (masculine in Spanish and feminine in
German), while Spanish speakers showed the reverse
pattern. Sera and colleagues (Sera, Berge, & del Castillo
Pintado, 1994; Sera, Elieff, Forbes, Burch, Rodriguez, &
Dubois, 2002) asked Spanish and French speakers to assign
either a female or a male voice to artifact objects and
reported that the judgments tended to agree with the
grammatical gender of the objects (see also Boroditsky,
Schmidt, & Phillips, 2003; Flaherty, 2001). However, to
our knowledge, the question of whether speakers of a
language with grammatical gender are at all influenced by
grammatical gender when they make inferences about
biological sex-specific properties of animals has not been
addressed in the literature.
Importantly, Vigliocco et al. (2005) suggested that the
relation between grammatical gender and speakers’
concepts is weaker for languages with more than two gender
classes, such as German.
Using an odd-one-out
categorization task, they in fact found an effect of
grammatical gender on Italian speakers’ construal of
similarity among animals, but not on German speakers’.
However, unlike judgments of abstract similarity among
objects, inference about biological sex-specific properties is
more directly linked to grammatical gender categories, and
hence we might expect the influence of grammatical gender
in German speakers in this case.
It is hard to imagine that German speakers are not aware
of the motivated link between grammatical gender and
biological sex, as human males are clearly mapped to the
masculine gender and human females are mapped to the
feminine gender. Yet, when thinking about animals at the
level of generic species (dog, cat, giraffe, etc.), speakers
have to separate grammatical gender and biological sex. Of
course, adults speaking a language with grammatical gender
must consciously understand that grammatical gender of
basic-level animal names is independent of animals’
biological sex. However, it may still be possible that their
inference is still affected by the overgeneralization of the
syntax-semantics mappings: For example, they may make a
false deductive conclusion that grammatically feminine (or
masculine) animals in general have a female (or male)specific biological property.
Deductive reasoning plays a core role in human inference
and learning, along with inductive reasoning (cf. Murphy,
2002). If grammatical gender affects deductive reasoning
about biological properties even though people consciously
understand that grammatical gender is independent of
biological sex of animals, this will be taken as support for
linguistic relativity.
Provided that such an effect is seen, however, it is
important to be able to distinguish two possible mechanisms
behind it. The effect may arise within the realm of syntactic
processing but not at the conceptual representation of
animal kinds. In other words, the effect may be seen only

when a speaker processes the gender-marking article or
pronoun. The alternative possibility is that the overgeneralized syntax-semantic mapping penetrates into the
conceptual level of generic-level animal kinds. If this is the
case, the effect should be seen even when generic-level
animal names are presented without the gender-marking
article.

The present study
We tested German and Japanese speakers on deductive
inferences about sex-specific animal properties.
The
Japanese speakers’ performance served as a baseline
because Japanese is a language without grammatical gender.
We designed two experiments in such a way that we could
identify at what level of processing the relation between
grammatical gender and deductive reasoning is found, if it is
found at all. In the first experiment, target words for
deduction were presented in the singular form with their
associated articles marking the gender class of each word.
(In German, article + noun phrase can refer to a generic
meaning.) In the second experiment, the target words were
presented in plural form without any marking of gender
class. Participants were asked to indicate whether the
deductive conclusion would hold true or not; they were
instructed to give a “No” response in cases in which the
conclusion was logically indeterminable, in addition to the
cases in which deduction would be clearly false.
Five conditions were set up within participants. The
Generic Animal Condition was designed to test whether
German speakers were more likely to draw a erroneous
deductive conclusion when the sex specified for the
biological property given in the premise and the
grammatical gender class of the target animal’s basic-level
name were consistent (e.g., female – feminine) than when
they were inconsistent (e.g., female – masculine). Here, the
deductive conclusion is logically indeterminable, as the
biological sex of the target animal is unknown, and thus,
“No” is the correct answer. Nevertheless, German speakers
may experience difficulties rejecting the deductive
conclusion when the grammatical gender of the target
animal agrees with the biological sex specified in the
premise. In contrast, it should be easy for Japanese speakers
to reject the deduction in this ambiguous case.
In order to test for possible baseline differences in
deductive reasoning across the two language groups, we
included the Generic-Animal Control Condition. Here,
participants were to judge the correctness of the deductive
conclusion about a property true for all animals regardless
of their sex, while the targets were exactly the same as in the
Generic-Animal condition.
The Sex-specified Animal Condition was set up to test
whether grammatical gender affects deductive inference in
German speakers even when the sex of the animal is
explicitly specified in the conclusion. Here, unlike the
Generic Animal condition, the target animal’s sex was
explicitly specified by the gender-specifying adjective and
the specified sex and the grammatical gender of the target

1161

animal was either consistent or inconsistent. Here, the
deductive inference should of course be made based on the
agreement between the sex in the premise and the target
animal’s sex indicated by the adjective. It is interesting to
see if consistency between grammatical gender and sex
affects German speakers’ judgments in this obvious case.
The Sex-specified Animal Control Condition was included
to rule out an alternative explanation for the potential
gender effect in the Sex-specified Animal Condition.
Provided that the expected effect was obtained, it may also
have arisen from the difference in the difficulty in simply
processing of the two types of (i.e., grammatical gender-sex
specifying adjective matching and mismatching) noun
phrases. To disambiguate the two possibilities, the
conclusions in this condition were the same as those in the
Sex-specified Animal Condition, but the property in the
premise was not sex-specific. Finding the gender effect in
German speakers in this control condition would indicate
that the effect arises at the level of local phrase processing
rather than during the deductive reasoning. In contrast, if
there is no gender effect in this control condition, but the
effect is found in the Sex-specified Animal condition, where
the property in the premise is also sex-specific, this suggests
that the grammatical gender affects deductive reasoning
about a sex-specific property, even when the target animal’s
sex is explicitly given.
Finally, the Artifact Condition was included to examine
whether German speakers’ deductive reasoning about nonanimate entities was affected by grammatical gender. The
target object was an artifact whose grammatical gender was
either consistent or inconsistent with the sex specified in the
premise. The conclusion was logically determinable and
should always be rejected. This condition allows us to see
how pervasive the influence of grammatical gender on
deductive inference about sex-specific biological properties:
If the motivated sex-gender mapping is applied even in the
realm of entities without sex, this would suggest that the
influence of grammatical gender is overarching in German
speakers.

Experiment 1
In this experiment, we tested whether there is a relation
between grammatical gender and speakers’ deductive
reasoning about a sex-specific biological property when the
grammatical gender of the target object was explicitly
invoked by the gender-marking article.

As described earlier, there were five within-subjects
conditions: Generic Animal, Generic Animal Control, Sexspecified Animal, Sex-specified Animal Control, and Artifact.
In each trail across the five conditions, the premise sentence
containing a blank property X was shown, and followed by
the target object. In the Generic Animal, Sex-specified
Animal, and Artifact conditions, the premise stated that the
property X was sex-specific. It said: “All and only male (or
female) animal had X inside.” In the two Control
conditions, the premise statement was sex-general: “All and
only animals had X inside.” Prior to the experiment, the
participants were told that X was an internal and important
property.
In the Generic Animal Condition, 36 generic level animal
names (half grammatically feminine, half masculine in
German) that were commonly known to speakers of both
languages, were used as targets. Each animal appeared once
in the sex-gender consistent trials and once in the
inconsistent trials, yielding a total of 72 trials in this
condition. As described earlier, the correct response was
“No” for all trials, as the deduction was not logically
determinable. The same 36 animal names were used in the
Generic Animal Control Condition, in which the property
given in the premise sentence was general to all animals.
Here, of course, the correct response was “Yes” for all trials.
In the Sex-specified Animal Condition, 18 animal names
(half grammatically feminine, half masculine) that were not
used in the Generic Animal Condition were presented twice,
once in a consistent and once in an inconsistent trial. Here,
the sex specified in the premise and the grammatical gender
of the target animal always matched, but the specified sex
and the grammatical gender of the target animal was either
consistent (“die[FEM] weibliche (female) Maus (mouse)” ) or
inconsistent (“die männliche (male) Mous”) for the “all and
only female animals have X inside” premise). The same
targets were used for the Sex-specified Animal Control
Condition, but here, the property in the premise was not sexspecific (e.g., “all and only animals has X inside”).
In the Artifact Condition, the premise concerned a sexspecific animal property, as in the other two main conditions,
but 28 artifact names (half grammatically feminine, half
masculine) served as targets. All artifact names appeared
once in a sex-gender consistent and once in an inconsistent
trial. The “No” response was correct for all trials.
Altogether, , there were 208 trials including 90 trials with
potential “Yes” responses and 118 trials with potential “No”
responses.

Method
Participants
Twenty-one native German-speaking undergraduates
from Zurich and 17 native Japanese-speaking
undergraduates from Tokyo, both from a wide variety of
majors, participated for payment.

Design and Materials

Procedure
In each trial, a fixation cross appeared on the screen for
one second. The premise statement was then shown for 1.5
seconds, followed by a blank screen for 0.5 seconds. For
German participants, the name of the target object
accompanied by the gender article was then presented until
the participant made a response. For Japanese participants,
the target object name was presented alone, without a
classifier, as this was judged to be the most natural way of

1162

presentation The participants were asked to indicate
whether the deductive conclusion would hold true for the
target by pressing a designated key for “Yes” or “No”.
After the response, the screen remained blank for 1.5
seconds and the next trial was then started. The presentation
order of the 208 trials of all conditions was completely
randomized within and across participants.

Results and Discussion
We report the results separately for each condition.
Generic Animal Condition Here, we only analyze the
error responses (i.e., Yes responses, see Figure 1). Response
times were not submitted to the analysis because of the high
error rates in German speakers. As expected, there was a
significant Language (German vs. Japanese) X Consistency
(sex-gender consistent vs. inconsistent) interaction effect,
F1(1,31)=9.1, F2=(1,90)=98.8, both p<.01). Paired t-tests
were performed on subject (t1) and item means (t2)
contrasting the performance in consistent and inconsistent
trials across the different conditions. German speakers were
more likely to erroneously accept a deductive conclusion
when the sex in the premise and the grammatical gender of
the target were consistent (53.4%) than when they were
inconsistent (29.9%), t1(16) = 3.133, d = .626, p = .006,
t2(35) = 13.447, d = 2.898, p < .000. No such difference was
found in Japanese participants (17.0% vs. 17.2%), t1(15) = .102, p = .920, t2(35) = -.166, p = .869. However, the
performance in German speakers in the Control condition
showed that they were in general no poorer in deductive
reasoning than Japanese speakers (German:92.5%;
Japanese:83.5%) , t1(31) = 1.821, p = .078; t2(70) = 4.597, d
= .969, p < .000 . These results suggest that the grammatical
gender effect seen in the Generic Animal condition was not
a reflection of generally poor deductive inference on the part
of German speakers.

Figure 2. Percentages of error responses in the
Sex-specified Animal Condition (with sex-specific
premises) and the Sex-specified Animal Control
Condition (with sex-general premises) in
Experiments 1 and 2.

Figure 3. Response times (in milliseconds) for
correct responses in the Sex-specified Animal
Condition (with sex-specific premises) in Experiment
1 and the Sex-specified Animal Control Condition
(with sex-general premises) in Experiments 1 and 2.

Figure 1. Percentages of error responses in the
Generic Animal Condition (with sex specific premises)
of Experiments 1 and 2 and in the Generic Animal
Control Condition (with sex-general premises) in
Experiment 1.

Sex-specified Animal Condition In this condition, both the
error rates and response times were submitted to analyses.
Again, a significant Language X Consistency interaction
effect on the error rates was found, F1(1,31) = 8.5, F2(1,34)
= 8.9, both ps<.01. Unlike the Generic Animal condition,
the correct/error deduction was logically determinable
according to the agreement or disagreement between the sex
in the premise and the specified sex of the target animal.
Here, the inconsistent trials, in which the sex specified by
the adjective and grammatical gender in the target were
inconsistent (e.g., die männliche Giraffe), were expected to
be more difficult than the consistent trials (die weibliche
Giraffe). Indeed, German speakers were more likely to draw
erroneous deductions in the inconsistent trials (16.1%) than
in the consistent trials (3.9%), t1(16) = 2.917, d = .878, p

1163

= .010, t2(17) = 2.735, d = .766, p = .014 (Figure 2). No
such difference was found in Japanese participants (11.8%
vs. 8.3 %), t1(15) = -1.274, p = .222, t2(17) = -1.514, p
= .148. A similar pattern was found for response times.
German speakers were slower in drawing deductive
inferences in the inconsistent case (868ms) than in the
consistent case (716ms), t1(16) = 3.442, d = .574, p = .003,
t2(17) = 4.986, d = 1.522, p < .000, while no such difference
was found in Japanese responses (706ms and 761ms), t1(15)
= 1.342, p = .199, t2(17) = 1.969, d = .559, p = .065 (Figure
3). In the Control condition, there was no Language X
Consistency effect on either accuracy, F1 (1,31 ) = 0.3,
F2(1,34 ) = 1, or response times, F1(1, 31 ) = 0.01 , F2(1,34 )
= 0.6.
Thus, even when the biological sex of an animal was
explicitly indicated, grammatical gender affected German
speakers’ inferences about sex-specific animal properties.
The fact that German speakers’ performance did not differ
from that of Japanese speakers in the Control condition
(where the premise was not sex-specific) indicates that the
sex-gender consistency effect here emerged in the process
of deductive reasoning rather than from mere disturbance of
the local level processing of the target phrase due to gendersex mismatch.

indicate that the gender effect arises at the level of
grammatical processing, but not at the level of the
representation of animals. Experiment 2 was conducted to
disambiguate these two possibilities.

Artifact Condition In the Artifact Condition, no
Language X Consistency effect was found, F1 (1,31)=1.2,
F2(1,26)=0.9, both ps>.1. In neither language group did
sex-gender consistent and inconsistent trials differ with
respect to the error rates (German: 3.8% vs. 0.4%; Japanese:
1.3% vs. 0.4%) nor response times (German: 729ms vs.
727ms; Japanese: 601ms vs. 623ms). Thus, the influence of
grammatical gender on sex-specific biological properties
found in the animal domain did not extend to the artifact
domain.
The results of Experiment 1 showed that German speakers
were not immune to the motivated (but logically orthogonal)
gender-sex mapping when they make deductive inferences
about sex-specific properties of animals.
When the
biological sex specified in the premise agreed with
grammatical gender of the target animal, they often made a
false deduction that a sex-specific biological property holds
for the target animal in general even though its biological
sex was unspecified.
German speakers experienced
difficulty in rejecting the deductive conclusion even when
the target animal’s sex was explicitly indicated otherwise by
a sex-specifying adjective, when the biological sex specified
for the property and grammatical gender of the target animal
agreed.
These results naturally lead to a question of whether the
same effects are obtained when the target animal name is
presented without the article.
If German speakers’
representation of animals per se is affected by grammatical
gender, the same effects should be observed without explicit
invocation of the article. Alternatively, the gender effects in
Experiment 1 may vanish when the animal name is
presented without the gender article. If so, this would

In stark contrast to Experiment 1, we found no significant
difference between the gender-sex consistent and
inconsistent trials in any of the conditions on the error rates
or response times (for t1 and t2: all ps > .1; see Figures 1-3).
When the performance of German speakers in this
experiment was compared to that of Japanese speakers in
Experiment 1, in no condition (including the Generic
Animal and Sex-Specified Animal conditions) was there
any Language X Consistency effect.
The results of Experiment 2 indicate that the grammatical
gender effects found in Experiment 1 arise only when the
speakers see the target animal name with the gendermarking article. This suggests that it was the gender article
that affected German speakers’ deductive reasoning about
sex-specific animal properties; the effect did not arise
because German speakers’ representation of animals per se
was changed by gender grammar.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Twenty-nine German-speaking undergraduates from
Zurich participated in this study. None of them had
participated in Experiment 1.
Design, Materials, and Procedure
The design, materials and procedure of Experiment 2
were identical to those in Experiment 1 with one exception:
All target words were presented in plural form without
articles marking grammatical gender. In the Generic Animal
Condition, for example, the target “die [FEM] Maus (mouse)”
was now presented as Mäuse (mice) and in the Sexspecified Animal Condition, “die männliche (male) Maus”
was now presented as “männliche Mäuse”.

Results

General Discussion
Grammatical gender in principle is independent of
biological sex, as grammatical gender is assigned to nonsexuated entities as well as to sexuated ones. This is even
true for a majority of (basic-level) animal names. At the
same time, there is apparent semantic motivation for
grammatical gender classes, especially in mapping human
terms to gender classes. This research investigated whether
this mapping between grammar and biological sex is overgeneralized in deductive inference--a core domain of human
reasoning. We identified two contexts in which German
speakers unconsciously over-generalize this grammarsemantics mapping to make erroneous deductive inferences.

1164

First, German speakers tended to erroneously accept
deductions when the sex specified in the premise and the
grammatical gender of the basic-level name of the target
animal agreed. Second, the sex-gender agreement affected
the inference even when the sex of the target animal was
explicitly indicated: German speakers experienced difficulty
in rejecting the deduction when, for example, asked to judge
whether a female-specific property would be true for
Experiment 2
“die[FEM] männliche Maus (male mouse)”.
further suggests that these effects occur only when the
gender-marking article was processed.
Thus, German
speakers seem to project biological sex onto gendermarking articles but not onto the conceptual representation
of animals per se. Furthermore, this mapping does not go so
far as to affect inferences when the targets are non-sexuated
entities.
Researchers investigating the relation between the
speakers’ conceptual representation of objects and gender
grammar have mostly approached the question in light of
whether masculine or feminine images were projected on
objects according to the grammatical gender of the name.
This research examined the relation between gender
grammar and cognitive processes more directly, asking how
speakers handle the semantic motivation of gender classes
on one hand and the fact that grammatical gender is
independent of biological sex in animal terms on the other
hand. The finding that German speakers could not help
projecting biological sex on gender-marking articles (when
they should not) can be taken as some evidence for
linguistic relativity (Gentner & Goldin-Meadow, 2003, for
an overview). On the other hand, our findings cannot be
interpreted to be support for a strong version of linguistic
relativity hypothesis, as the effect was not obtained without
explicit invocation of the grammatical gender. Some
researchers may argue that the gender effect here is only
support for thinking for speaking (Slobin, 1996) but not for
linguistic relativity per se, because the effect was obtained
in a task using language (see also Vigliocco et al., 2005).
Nevertheless, the influence of grammatical gender we found
in this research should not be seen as trivial. For speakers
of languages with grammatical gender, explicit gender
marking by articles or pronouns is the norm rather than the
exception in everyday discourse. If these speakers of
languages unconsciously link the grammatical gender of an
animal’s name to its biological sex (even though the two are
orthogonal), and if this link is strong enough to serve as a
basis for inferences about sex-specific properties of animals,
then we may conclude that grammatical gender has nontrivial cognitive consequences for these speakers, be it
characterized as a “true” linguistic relativity effect or not.
This research is important for the literature of language and
thought in that it specifies how (i.e., the mechanism) and in
what contexts gender grammar might affect cognitive
processes rather than simply providing evidence for
linguistic relativity (see also Imai & Saalbach, 2010)

Acknowledgement

This research was supported by Ministry of Education
grant-in-aid for Scientific Research awarded to Imai and by
DAAD Post-Doc Fellowship to Saalbach.

References
Aikhenvald, A. (2000). Classifiers: A typology of noun
categorization devices. New York: Oxford University Press.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L. A., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex,
syntax, and semantics. In D. Gentner, & S. Goldin-Meadow
(Eds.), Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of
Language and Thought (pp. 61-80). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Corbett, G. G., & Fraser, M. N. (2000). Gender
assignment: A typology and a model. In G. Senft (Ed.),
Systems of Nominal Classification (pp. 293–325).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flaherty, M. (2001). How a language gender system creeps
into perception. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology,
32(1), 18-31.
Fox, A. (1990). The Structure of German. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Language in
mind: Advances in the Study of Language and Thought (pp.
61-80). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Imai, M., & Saalbach, H. (2010). Categories in mind and
categories in language: Do classifier categories influence
conceptual structures? In B. Malt (Ed.), Words and the
World. New York: Oxford Press.
Konishi, T. (1993). The semantics of grammatical gender:
A cross-cultural study. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 22(5), 519-34.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sera, M. D., Elieff, C., Forbes, J., Burch, M. C.,
Rodriguez, W., & Dubois, D. P. (2002). When language
affects cognition and when does it not: An analysis of
grammatical gender and classification. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 131(3), 377-397.
Slobin, D. I. (1996). From “thought and language” to
“thinking for speaking”. In J. J. Gumperz, & S. C. Levinson
(Eds.), Rethinking Linguistic Relativity (pp. 70-96).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Indefrey, P., Levelt, W. J.
M., & Hellwig, F. (2004). Role of grammatical gender and
semantics in German word production. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30(2), 483-497.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Paganelli, F., & Dworzynski,
K. (2005). Grammatical gender effects on cognition:
Implication for language learning and language use. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 134(4), 501-520.
Zubin, D., & Köpcke, K.-M. (1986). Gender and folk
taxonomy: The indexical relation between grammatical
gender and lexical categorization. In C. Craig (Ed.), Noun
classes and categorization (pp. 139-180). Philadelphia:
Benjamins

1165

