Participants saw suffixed target words. These targets were
preceded with visual primes. In the two key conditions, the
prime words ended in a suffix with the same phonetic form as
the suffix in the target words. However, in one of these conditions, this suffix was fully identical to the target suffix, i. e.
shared both its phonetic form and its function. In the other
condition, the prime word contained a homophonous suffix
with a different function.
The basic prediction was that the homophonous morphemes should have similar effects as the identical morphemes in masked priming with short stimulus-onset asynchrony. In unmasked priming, i. e. with longer SOA, suffix with identical function should result in stronger priming
effects than the homophonous suffix that merely shares the
form but not the function of the target suffix. Experiment 1
tested the prediction for short SOA, Experiment 2 for longer
SOA. Each experiment involved two components, one with
nouns and one with verbs as target words. The noun component of involved two additional conditions, the baseline, and a
condition involving a prime suffix with different form but the
same function as the target. The verb component only used
primes in the two conditions with homophonous affixes.

Experiment 1
All target words in each component ended with potentially
ambiguous suffix. In the noun targets, this was one of the
Czech feminine nominative suffixes, -a. In the two key conditions, the primes also ended with -a. In the identical condition, the primes were feminine nominatives, in the homophone conditions, they were masculine accusatives/genitives.
With regard to these two conditions, the prediction was that
there would not be no difference between lexical decision
times on target nouns. With 50 ms latency, the primes should
be decomposed and suffixes identified by the time of target
presentation, but the function of the suffixes should not be accessed yet. In order to test whether decomposition occurred
at all, a condition with orthographically distinct nominative
suffix primes was introduced in the noun component (no such
controls were possible for the verbs). Reaction times in this
allomorph condition should be slower because the search for
the target suffix will not have started until the target is presented. The baseline condition served to establish the processing times for target target words with no primes.
The verb component focused narrowly on the comparison
of the identical and homophone suffixes. No differences in
the effect of these suffixes were predicted in Experiment 1.

Method
Stimuli The noun component contained 104 experimental
items in four conditions summarized in Table 1. Four versions of the protocol were created so that each target word
was presented in each condition to approximately the same
number of participants. The verb component of the experiment presented 26 target words in two conditions: primes
had either the same suffix, or a homophonous suffix. The
verb component did not contain the baseline condition, nor

Table 1: Sample stimuli from all conditions
Noun targets

Verb targets

Condition
baseline
identical
homophone
allomorph
identical
homophone

Prime
XXXX
LÍPA
SYNA
VŮLE
BERETE
KUŘETE

Target
váha
váha
váha
váha
žijete
žijete

the different-suffix condition. This was mainly because the
number of possible stimuli was much smaller. Two versions
of the verb component were created and presented to approximately equal number of participants, so that each target word
was presented in each condition to equal number of participants. All the experimental conditions were constructed so
that the prime and target words had approximately equal frequency, and that in each version of the protocol, the mean
frequency of the primes and targets was approximately equal.
The primes and targets always had the same number of letters.
Primes were presented in uppercase, targets in lowercase letters.
Besides the 140 experimental trials, 123 real word fillers
and 270 nonword fillers were presented. The presentation
was block-randomized so that trials from different conditions occurred with approximately equal probability during
the whole experiment.
Pariticipants Thirty-nine students participated in the experiment as a part of their course requirement. All were native
speakers of Czech.
Procedure The experiment was presented on a laptop computer using DMDX (Forster & Forster, 2003) as the presentation and response-collection software. Each trial started with
a fixation cross presented for 500 ms. Then, the prime word
was presented for 50 ms, followed by the subsequent presentation of the target word. The target word was shown until response was made or until 1500 ms from the onset. If
no response was made within 1500 ms, the no response was
recorded and the computer proceeded to the next trial.
Analysis The data were analyzed using linear mixed models with random effects for persons and items. This procedure
replaces the separate ANOVA analyses by subjects and items
(cf. Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). Post-hoc pairwise
comparisons used the Tukey method as implemented in the
multcomp package for R (R development core ceam, 2003).

Results
Results are summarized in Table 2. The initial analysis compared the reaction times in the experimental conditions to the
baseline using planned contrasts. Compared to the baseline,
reaction times were significantly longer in the nominative allomorph (-e) condition (t = 3.55, p < 0.001). In the identical (nominative -a) condition, the times were also slower and

1668

Table 2: Top: baseline reaction times and the effects in experimental conditions. Bottom: pairwise comparisons of
reaction times in experimental conditions. ***p < 0.001,
**p < 0.01, *p < 0.05
SOA
50 ms 150 ms
Baseline
664
667
Nom. -a (identical)
*10
*13
Acc. -a (homophone)
2
***20
Nom -e (allomorph)
**17
*12

Identical − homophone
Identical − allomorph
Homophone − allomorph

50 ms
8
-7
*15

Table 3: Top: baseline reaction times and the effects in experimental conditions, separately for short and long nouns. Bottom: pairwise comparisons of reaction times in experimental
conditions. **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05, † p < 0.10
SOA
50 ms
150 ms
Word length (letters)
4–6
7 4–6
7
Baseline
658 672 668
666
Nom. -a (identical)
*17
1
8
*19
Acc. -a (homophone)
6
-3 *17 **25
Nom -e (allomorph)
**19 *15 *18
4

150 ms
7
-1
-8

Identical − homophone
Identical − allomorph
Homophone − allomorph

the difference was significant (t = 2.01, p = 0.048). There
was no significant difference between the baseline and the
incongruent homophonous (accusative -a) suffix condition
(t = 0.46, p = 0.67). Post-hoc analysis using Tukey contrasts revealed a significant difference between the accusative
homophonous condition and the nominative allomorph condition (p = 0.01). There was no significant difference between the congruent condition and the incongruent or allomorph condition.
The prediction for the experiment was that there should be
no difference between the congruent and incongruent condition. This is in line with the results. However, both these conditions should be faster than the allomorph condition. This is
only true about the incongruent condition. In order to examine this discrepancy, an analysis was performed that divided the items according to their length. It may be the case
that the shorter prime words were processed to a larger extent
that the longer primes. If there are any differences between
shorter and longer words, the original prediction should be
valid for the longer words, that were presumably processed
to a lesser extent, In shorter words, differences between the
two key conditions may surface because the prime suffix has
been processed enough so that its function is being accessed.
Two analyses were performed separately for two groups.
One group consisted of stimuli with 4-, 5- and 6-letter words
(57 trials), the other group of stimuli with 7-letter words
(47 trials). Results are summarized in Table 3. In longer
words, the pattern of results seemed to fit the expectations:
there was only a small difference between the identical and
homophonous condition, but the allomorph condition appeared slower and was significantly slower than the baseline
(t = 2.17,p = 0.03). However, the pairwise comparisons revealed only a marginally significant difference between the
homophonous and allomorph condition (p = 0.05). There
was no significant pairwise difference between the identical
condition and the allomorph condition. In the group of shorter
words, responses in the identical and the allomorph condition
were slower than the baseline (t = 2.58,p = 0.01 for identi-

50 ms
11
4
-2
-14
-13 †-18

150 ms
-9
-6
-10
15
-1 *21

cal, t = 2.94,p < 0.01 for allomorph). In post-hoc analysis,
there were no significant differences between conditions.
In trials with verb targets, there were only two conditions.
Reaction times were 14 ms slower in the homophonous condition than in the identical condition. This difference approached statistical significance (t = 1.71,p = 0.08). Because the observed difference conflicted with the prediction,
the analysis was repeated for shorter and longer words, with
the expectation that the results for shorter words would fit the
original prediction. In the 24 trials with 7- and 8-letter-long
words, the responses were 8 ms slower in the homophonous
condition, a nonsignificant difference (t = 0.77,p = 0.44).
In the 12 6-letter trials, there was a significant 28 ms effect
(t = 2.06,p = 0.04) with faster reactions in the identical condition.

Discussion
The predictions for Experiment 1 were only partially confirmed. No significant difference between the priming effects
of homophonous suffixes was found, which was in line with
the predictions. However, the reaction times in the identical
condition were significantly slower than the baseline, while
those in the homophone condition were very close to the baseline. The two conditions with the -a suffix in the primes
may thus have differing priming effects, which was not expected. The allomorph condition resulted in the slowest reaction times, being significantly slower than both the baseline
and the homophone condition.
The differences between the identical and allomorph condition might be due to differences in the progress of processing in prime words of different lengths. The subsequent analysis supported this view to a certain extent. The difference
between the effects of identical and homophone primes was
weaker in long words, which were presumably processed to a
lesser extent. However, even here, the two critical conditions
did not pattern in a completely identical manner and only the
homophone condition showed a marginally significant advan-

1669

Table 4: Top: overall reaction times and the condition effects
in verbs. Bottom: reaction times and effects form Experiment
1, separately for long and short words. **p < 0.01, *p <
0.05, † p < 0.10
50 ms 150 ms
Verb 2pl. -ete
735
707
Genitive noun -ete
†14
**21

Word length (letters)
Verb 2pl. -ete
Genitive noun -ete

50 ms
6 7, 8
705 743
*28
8

Method
Design, procedure, participants Experiment 2 used the
same design, stimuli and procedure as Experiment 1. The
only difference was in the stimulus onset asynchrony. The
primes were presented for 150 ms. Responses were collected
from 38 students who volunteered or participated in exchange
for course credit. None of the students participated in Experiment 1.

Results

tage over the allomorph condition. In longer words, there
were no significant pairwise differences between the conditions, but the identical and allomorph conditions were significantly slower than the baseline, while the homophone condition was not.
The analysis of the verb component showed a marginally
significant effect of condition, with homophonous targets
showing a tendency to slower responses. The subsequent
analyses for longer and shorter words suggested that the
marginal effect could be attributed to short words, which
showed significantly longer reactions in the homophone condition. Apparently, 50 ms is enough time for the word processing system to start accessing the function of a suffix at
least in shorter words.
Some of the findings are surprising, especially the relative
effects of the identical and homophone condition in nouns
and verbs. The pattern in verbs was in line with intuition: if
there is any difference between conditions, the homophone
condition should be slower, since the suffix on the homophone primes only shares its form, but not its function with
the target suffix. In shorter verbs, there was indeed a significant difference in this direction. However, the pattern in
nouns appears to be opposite. There was a tendency in the
identical condition towards slower reaction times than in the
homophone condition. This was especially apparent in the
group of shorter nouns, where the identical condition, but not
the homophone condition, was significantly slower than the
baseline. Possible reasons for this pattern are addressed in
the general discussion below.

The results are summarized in Tables 2, 3, and 4, along with
the results from Experiment 1. In the noun component, the
reaction times in all three experimental conditions were significantly slower than in the baseline condition (identical:
t = 2.57, p = 0.01; homophone: t = 3.93, p < 0.001; allomorph: t = 2.23, p = 0.03). Pairwise post-hoc analysis revealed no significant differences between the individual levels. The direction of the differences was in line with the expectations, with the longest reaction times in the homophone
condition, and the allomorph and identical condition eliciting
similar responses. However, none of the pairwise differences
between the experimental conditions were significant.
In order to examine the results more closely, the stimulus
set was again split, and the groups of short and long words
were analyzed. In the shorter words, there was a significant
difference between the baseline and the homophone condition (t = 2.41, p = 0.02), as well as the allomorph condition
(t = 2.67, p = 0.01). This would suggest an advantage for
the stimuli primed with the identical suffix. However, posthoc pairwise comparisons have not revealed any significant
difference between the experimental conditions. Therefore,
even though there seems to be an advantage for the identical
condition, the prediction is not supported.
In the group of long words, the pattern of results is different. Compared to the baseline, the reaction times were significantly slower in the identical condition (t = 2.42, p = 0.02)
and in the homophone condition (t = 3.14, p < 0.01). Pairwise comparisons revealed a significant difference between
the allomorph and homophone condition, with homophone
condition significantly slower than the allomorph condition
(z = 2.62, p = 0.04).
In the verb targets, the reaction times in the homophone
condition were significantly slower than in the identical condition (t = 2.88, p < 0.01). The results from the verb component are in line with the predictions.

Discussion

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 presented the same stimuli with longer SOA.
Under these conditions, it was expected that the homophonous condition will elicit slower reaction times than
the identical condition. If the function of the suffix is accessed within the chosen SOA (150 ms), the effect of the identical and allomorph suffix should be identical, or at least their
difference should be smaller than in the homophonous condition.

In Experiment 2, the predictions were again confirmed only
partially. In the verb component, the homophone condition
was slower than the identical condition, which is in line with
the expectations. However, the expected differences in the
more complex, noun component of the study have not materialized completely. Overall, there was a nonsignificant tendency for the reaction times to be longer in the homophone
condition (20 ms effect against baseline) than in the identical
or allomorph condition (13 and 12 ms effect, respectively).

1670

This would be in line with the expectations. However, separate analyses for shorter and longer words complicated the
picture. In the group of shorter words, more thorough processing of the primes is expected. The results should be in
line with the predicted pattern. However, the homophone
condition, predicted to be the slowest, has practically identical effects as the allomorph condition. These two conditions are significantly slower than the baseline. While this is
not in line with the prediction, it is understandable under the
assumption that the effects of orthography and function are
about equally strong at 150 ms SOA. In the homophone condition, the response is inhibited by the difference in the morpheme function (accusative instead of a nominative marker).
In the allomorph condition, the function is the same, but processing is inhibited by the difference in orthography. In any
case, there was no significant pairwise difference between the
identical condition and the two slower conditions, so the effects should be understood as a mere tendency.
In longer nouns, the pattern of results was more intriguing. Responses in the identical and homophone conditions
were significantly slower than the baseline. Pairwise comparisons showed a significant advantage of the allomorph condition over the homophone condition. This appears to suggest
that in these words, the function of the suffix is more influential than its orthographic form, since the condition with the
different-function suffix is significantly slowed down. However, in such a case, the identical condition should be even
faster than the allomorph condition. Another surprising aspect of the results is the fast response in the allomorph condition. The longer words are presumably processed to a lesser
extent than the shorter words discussed above. Yet, the inhibiting effect of orthography against the baseline is present
in the shorter, more completely processed words, and not
in the longer words. This goes against the assumption that
the orthographic form is accessed first and the function later.
Moreover, it goes against other aspects of the present data.
The allomorph condition was slower than the baseline both in
Experiment 1, where the primes were presumably processed
to a lesser extent, as well as in the short words in Experiment
2, where the processing of the primes progressed more than
in the long words.

that after 150 ms from the prime onset, the processing of the
suffix moved beyond the level orthography, and words ending with homophonous suffixes inhibited the processing of
target words. In Experiment 1, no such difference was predicted. It was expected that mere orthographic overlap between the prime and target suffix would initially affect the targets equally strongly as the repeated presentation of an identical suffix in the prime and target. However, it appears that in
short words, the ending is recognized even within the 50 ms
window, resulting in a morphological priming effect exceeding the effects of orthography.

General discussion

One possible explanation is that morphological decomposition does not occur in frequent nominative forms. In this
view, the processing system attempts morphological decomposition unless it can recognize the whole word form as a
whole. If decomposition is attempted, the function morpheme
is initially identified regardless of its function. If it is not attempted, there is nothing that would exert priming effect on
the targets. If this view is correct, the accusative homophone
primes in this experiment were decomposed. The -a suffix
was initially not identified as accusative but activated all possible meanings, including nominative. For this reason, it facilitated the processing of the nominative target words. The
nominative primes were not decomposed and thus could not
exert the priming effects. This would explain the tendency

The experiments examined the effects of morphological priming on word recognition. While the phenomenon has been
well established with derivational morphemes, little research
is available for inflectional morphemes. The results show that
inflectional affixes can exert priming effects similar to those
reported by Duñabeitia et al. (2008) and others for derivational affixes. However, the evidence is unequivocal only for
the 2nd person plural verb suffixes at 150 ms SOA. For nominal suffixes, the result show a more complex pattern.
In verb targets in Experiment 2, the presentation of a noun
prime with homophonous suffix inhibited word recognition
compared to verb primes with identical suffix. This means

The results from nouns require more detailed discussion.
There was no significant difference between the two key conditions (identical and homophone) in Experiment 1, which
was predicted. However, it was predicted that these two conditions would result in significantly faster responses than in
the allomorph condition. This was true only for the homophone trials. Trials with identical suffix primes had longer
reaction times than the homophone trials, and were not significantly different from the allomorph trials. This should not
occur if the initial decomposition is blind to the function of
the prime ending Moreover, the difference between the homophone and identical trials, though nonsignificant, goes in
the unexpected direction and contradicts the findings from the
verb component.
It is useful to summarize the results from the two key conditions based on the presumed amount of processing performed on the primes. On longer words with shorter SOA,
i. e. after the least amount of processing, none of these conditions is faster than the baseline. In shorter words and short
SOA, the identical condition is slower than the baseline. In
longer words with 150 ms SOA, both identical and homophone conditions are slower than the baseline. Finally, with
longer SOA and shorter words, only the homophone condition is slower than the baseline. This result is in line with the
prediction that in the later stages of processing, the functional
aspect of the affixes will play stronger role than their orthographic form. However, it is not clear why the primes with
identical and homophone suffixes result in slower processing
of long words in Experiment 2, and why identical suffixes
inhibit processing of short word targets in Experiment 1.

1671

towards slower responses in the identical condition in Experiment 1, as well as the absence of the difference between identical and homophone primes in longer words in Experiment
2. In these longer words with 150 ms SOA, the homophone
prefix presumably started to develop an inhibitory effect due
to the functional difference between primes and targets. At
the same time, the lack of priming due to the lack of nominative prime decomposition still inhibited processing after the
identical primes.
This view may seem paradoxical. If nominatives are not
decomposed, why should the decomposed -a affix from the
accusative primes temporarily activate the nominative interpretation? The possibility must exist that a low-frequency
word or a novel word will be analyzed as nominative. For
this reason, separating the -a suffix activates the nominative
interpretation, even though nominatives are not regularly decomposed. Another question that arises is why nominative
targets should be facilitated if they are not decomposed. But
it is not necessary to assume that facilitation of target processing operates on the suffix. The activation of nominative
-a suffix on the prime may activate the whole corresponding declensional class of nouns (paradigm “žena”). There is
independent evidence that declensional class of nouns is represented in an abstract manner (Bordag & Pechmann, 2009).
This way, the target nouns could be primed even if not morphologically decomposed.
The reason why nominatives would not be decomposed
lies in the fact that they function as the base and default
form. Nominatives are considered the citation form of
nouns, and they are the most frequent case form (Jelı́nek,
Bečka, & Těšitelová, 1961). It has been proposed that only
low-frequency words undergo morphological decomposition
(Baayen, Dijkstra, & Schreuder, 1997; Baayen & Schreuder,
1999). Even though there is evidence that all suffixes, including pseudo-suffixes, are decomposed, the decomposition of
nominatives may be slower than direct retrieval. In that case,
nominatives would not be decomposed.
This proposed explanation might explain many aspects of
the results reported here. Some aspects remain unexplained,
especially the fast responses in the allomorph condition on
long words in Experiment 2. In any case, the processes of
morphological decomposition of inflectional suffixes deserve
closer scrutiny. In particular, further research needs to test
whether nominative words undergo morphological decomposition.
To summarize, findings from Experiment 1 suggest that
the purely orthographic, function-blind stage of morphological decomposition may be over in less than 50 ms, at least
in shorter words. At the same time, results from the noun
targets in both experiments suggest the possibility that nominative forms do not undergo morphological decomposition.

Acknowledgments
The study was partially supported by the Czech Science
Foundation award No. P407/10/2047 Comprehension of
grammar and lexicon in toddlers.

References
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390–412.
Baayen, R. H., Dijkstra, T., & Schreuder, R. (1997). Singulars
and plurals in dutch: Evidence for a parallel dual-route
model. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 94–117.
Baayen, R. H., & Schreuder, R. (1999). War and peace:
morphemes and full forms in a noninteractive activation parallel dual-route model. Brain and Language,
68, 27–32.
Bordag, D., & Pechmann, T. (2009). Externality, internality, and (in)dispensability of grammatical features in
speech production: evidence from Czech declension
and conjugation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 35, 446–465.
Chateau, D., Knudsen, E. V., & Jared, D. (2002). Masked
priming of prefixes and the influence of spellingmeaning consistency. Brain and Language, 81(1-3),
587–600.
Duñabeitia, J. A., Perea, M., & Carreiras, M. (2008). Does
darkness lead to happiness? Masked suffix priming effects. Language and Cognitive Processes, 23, 1002–
1020.
Forster, K. L., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behaviral Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 35,
116–124.
Giraudo, H., & Graigner, J. (2003). On the role of derivational affixes in recognizing complex words: Evidence
from masked priming. In R. H. Baayen & R. Schreuder
(Eds.), Morphological structure in language processing (pp. 209–232). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Jelı́nek, J., Bečka, J. V., & Těšitelová, M. (1961). Frekvence
slov, slovnı́ch druhů a tvarů v českém jazyce. Praha,
Czech Republic: SPN.
Longtin, C.-M., Segui, J., & Halle, P. A. (2003). Morphological priming without morphological relationship. Language and Cognitive Processes, 18, 313-334.
Marslen-Wilson, W., Ford, M., Older, L., & Zhou, X. (1996).
The combinatorial lexicon: priming derivational affixes. In G. Cotrell (Ed.), Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
223–227). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Marslen-Wilson, W., Tyler, L. K., Waksler, R., & Older, L.
(1994). Morphology and meaning in the English mental lexicon. Psychological Review, 101, 3-33.
R development core ceam. (2003). R (programmable environment for statistical computing). Vienna. (Available
from: http://www.r-project.org)
Rastle, K., Davis, M. H., & New, B. (2004). The broth in my
brother’s brothel: morpho-orthographic segmentation
in visual word recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 1090–1098.

1672

