UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Initial Evidence of the Effects of Linguistic Framing on Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2951g336

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Engle, Randi A.
Mendelson, Adam
Nguyen, Phi D.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Initial Evidence of the Effects of Linguistic Framing on Transfer
Randi A. Engle (RAEngle@Berkeley.Edu)
Adam Mendelson (AMendelson@Berkeley.Edu)
Phi D. Nguyen (PDNguyen@Berkeley.Edu)
Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley
4646 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract

social realities (e.g, Duranti & Goodwin, 1992; van Dijk,
2008) that may encourage or discourage transfer (Engle,
2006; Laboratory for Comparative Human Cognition
[LCHC], 1983; Greeno, Smith & Moore, 1993; Hammer et
al., 2005). As Pea (1987, p. 647) explained, “contexts [that
matter for transfer] are not defined in terms of physical
features of settings, but in terms of the meanings of these
settings constructed by the people present.”
We use the term framing to refer to the linguistic
processes of establishing these social realities (e.g., Tannen
1993). For explaining transfer, the framing of boundaries of
learning and transfer contexts is particularly important as it
affects which contexts students view as being relevant sites
for using what they have learned. For example, when a
teacher introduces a lesson as providing students entry into
knowledgeable roles within communities they plan to
participate in throughout their lives, the social boundary of
the lesson expands to encompass additional contexts for
which each student’s understanding of the lesson will be
relevant. In contrast, the teacher could have introduced the
same lesson as only relevant to the next day’s quiz, thus
framing it as divorced from other contexts-of-use.
Here we investigate the hypothesis that transfer is more
likely when learning and transfer contexts are framed
expansively as opportunities for students to actively
contribute to larger conversations that extend across times,
places, people, and activities (Engle, 2006). The boundaries
of expansive contexts are framed as wide-ranging and
permeable to increase the contexts that can become linked
with them (Floriani, 1994; Gee & Green, 1998).
Additionally, learners become positioned as authors who
share their knowledge more generally. Thus, learners learn
under the assumption that they will be expected to transfer
what they learn to other contexts (LCHC, 1983; Pea, 1987).
In potential transfer contexts they act under the assumption
that they are accountable for using what they know from
other times, places, and people (Greeno et al., 1993; Pea,
1987).

This paper investigates the idea that it is not just the content
of what students learn that influences transfer, but also how
learning and transfer contexts are linguistically framed. In a
one-on-one tutoring experiment we manipulated framing
while controlling for several known transfer mechanisms. We
contrasted an expansive framing in which students are
positioned as contributing to larger conversations that extend
across time, places, people, and topics, with its opposite. We
then measured the degree to which high school biology
students transferred knowledge from a learning session about
the cardiovascular system to a transfer-of-learning session
about the respiratory system. We found that students in the
expansive condition were more likely to transfer: (a) facts, (b)
a conceptual principle, and (c) a learning strategy from one
system to another.
Keywords: Transfer-of-learning; Linguistic framing; Social
interactions and learning; Human tutoring; Self-explaining

Introduction
Transfer-of-learning, or the application of something
learned in one context to another context, is one of the most
important but difficult issues in cognitive science and
education (e.g. Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Lave, 1988; Lobato,
2006). As Barnett and Ceci (2002) explain, “there is little
agreement in the scholarly community about the nature of
transfer, the extent to which it occurs, and the nature of its
underlying mechanisms.” This paper focuses on an
instructional mechanism that has rarely been investigated
systematically: the linguistic framing of learning contexts
(Engle, 2006). In this paper, we report the first experimental
study of this mechanism in an educational context: a
tutoring experiment testing whether framing affects transfer.

Framing Contexts as a Mechanism for Transfer
Most research on transfer mechanisms does not focus on
contexts or their framing, but on the nature of the content
students transfer. For example, the importance of comparing
multiple examples to form generalizations is often
emphasized (e.g. Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Gentner,
Lowenstein & Thompson, 2003). When context is
addressed, the focus is on similarities between objective
features of learning and transfer contexts, like their physical
locations and who is present (e.g. Catrambone & Holyoak,
1989; Spencer & Weisberg, 1986).
Our approach to the relationship between context and
transfer investigates the idea that otherwise objectively
similar contexts can be linguistically framed as different

Existing Evidence About Framing and Transfer
Few studies have empirically investigated potential
connections between framing and transfer. Hammer et al.
(2005) showed that when two transfer contexts were reframed as being about active sense-making rather than the
replication of knowledge, students transferred-in their prior
knowledge in ways that helped them understand physics
concepts. Engle (2006) showed how a classroom case of

477

successful transfer that occurred despite weak content-based
supports could be explained by a teacher’s expansive
framing of time, participants, and roles. Finally, Hart and
Albarracin (2009) found that people were more likely to
repeat an action they had just engaged in—the most basic
form of transfer that there is—if they were prompted to
describe it using a progressive verb tense that frames it as a
continuing activity (“I was doing…”) versus a perfective
tense that frames it as a completed action (e.g., “I did…”).

respiratory system would be assessed on day 2. For facts,
students learned the sequence of body parts through which
blood flows—a sequence that overlaps with where oxygen
travels within the respiratory system. This material is
necessary for forming correct mental models of each system
(Chi et al., 1994; Liu & Hmelo-Silver, 2009). For principles,
students learned that pressure differentials determine the
direction of blood flow in the cardiovascular system, which
applies to gas movement in the respiratory system and fluid
flow more generally. They also learned that a large
collective surface area increases diffusion across capillaries,
which applies to increasing the rates of diffusion across
alveoli in the respiratory system as well as chemical
reactions, heat transfer, and many other processes.

A Tutoring Experiment to Investigate the
Effects of Framing on Transfer
We conducted a tutoring experiment using a 2x2 design
with framing condition (expansive vs. its opposite,
bounded) as a randomized variable and student population
(first year General Biology vs. Advanced Placement [AP]
Biology) as a fixed variable included to assess the generality
of effects across populations. To reduce pre-intervention
differences between conditions, matched pairs of students
from the same classes who performed similarly on a
screening test were randomly assigned to each framing
condition (Shadish, Cook & Campbell 2002). Each student
participated individually in a 3-4 hour learning session
about the cardiovascular system on one day followed by a 12 hour transfer-of-learning session about the respiratory
system the next day. Each session’s order was: instructions,
pre-test, tutoring, survey, and post-test. In all conditions we
aimed to strongly support learning while moderately
supporting transfer via known instructional mechanisms.

Tutoring Methods The foundation of day 1’s tutoring was
having each student self-explain the same text and diagrams
about the cardiovascular system (Chi et al., 1994, 2001).
This method, which promotes learning and transfer (e.g. Chi
et al., 1994; Rittle-Johnson, 2006), also allowed us to reduce
and control for the tutor’s role as provider of content.
Drawing on methods established in prior research (Chi et
al., 1994; McNamara, 2004), we first trained students to
self-explain using an unrelated science text, and then asked
them to read each sentence from the cardiovascular system
text out loud and self-explain it. Although most students
self-explained without difficulty, if the tutor observed a
student only paraphrasing (cf. Hausmann & vanLehn,
2007), she prompted for a more elaborate explanation.
Self-explaining was supplemented by having students:
1. Identify key body parts from the text on diagrams.
2. Answer questions about structures, behaviors,
functions, and their relationships (Goel et al., 1996).
3. Draw diagrams to represent their evolving models of
the cardiovascular system (Ainsworth & Loizou, 2003).
4. Interact with a gestural or physical model for each
target principle.
Tutoring about the respiratory system on day 2 was less
guided. Students were first asked to anticipate what they
would need to learn about the respiratory system. They were
then given as long as they wished to “think aloud” while
reviewing a text (adapted from Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer,
2004), hypermedia system (identical to Liu & HmeloSilver’s 2009), and diagrams. They were also provided with
pen and paper, but not required to use it, which provided an
opportunity for them to transfer the learning strategy of
drawing diagrams from day 1. Each student was also asked
to: (a) explain a lung model representing pressure
differentials, and (b) explain why there are so many alveoli
in the lungs, which relates to the surface area principle.

Participants and Their Originating Biology Classes
24 biology students from the same Northern California high
school participated in the experiment, 14 from General
Biology and 10 from AP Biology, with half of each
population assigned to each condition. Instruction in both
biology courses was generally consistent with a bounded
framing. Students took notes from lectures, the textbook,
and educational movies, and teachers evaluated their ability
to correctly recall individual facts from these sources. The
AP course may have been framed somewhat expansively by
its implicit linking to the end-of-year AP exam and college.

Similarities in Procedures Across All Participants
We controlled for objective features of the contexts in which
tutoring occurred as well as elements of instruction
commonly known to affect learning and transfer.
Objective Features of Context On day 1, the tutor was the
first author and the videographer was a research assistant.
On day 2, the tutor and videographer were different research
assistants. Both days of the study occurred in the same
laboratory room, but the student, tutor, and videographer
were located in different places on each day.

Known Instructional Supports for Transfer Use of
known transfer mechanisms was controlled for all students
in ways designed to avoid floor and ceiling effects. All
students received the same: (a) overlapping surface
linguistic cues between learning and transfer contexts
(Catrambone, 1998), (b) examples of each principle (e.g.
Gick & Holyoak, 1983), (c) comparisons between those

Target Content to Transfer The learning goal for the first
day was to have all students master the same facts and
principles about the cardiovascular system. Transfer to the

478

examples (e.g. Gentner et al., 2003), and (d) level of
abstraction of statements of each principle (e.g. Reeves &
Weisberg, 1994). No students were given any direct hints
(e.g. Anolli et al., 2001; Gick & Holyoak, 1983), nor was
the respiratory system mentioned prior to day 2.

of day 1’s tutoring session, a written pre/post test (adapted
from Chi et al., 1994) measured students’ knowledge of the
target facts and principles about the cardiovascular system
that could be applied to the respiratory system.
Respiratory System Pre/Post Test To measure transfer we
devised analogous written assessment questions about the
respiratory system. The fact question and the first question
about each principle comprised the three-item screening test
used to select students to participate in the study.

Operationalization of the Framing Manipulation
We manipulated the framing of five key aspects of contexts:
who, when, where, what, and how (Engle, 2006). Here we
provide illustrations of each framing in classrooms and then
in the experiment, with each sentence presenting the more
bounded framings first and the more expansive ones second.

Analytical Methods
We coded assessments at all five time points—screening,
pre-cardiovascular, post-cardiovascular, pre-respiratory, and
post-respiratory. Coding was done blind to condition and
not by the first author.
We assessed transfer of facts and principles using three
different but partially overlapping measures in order to
measure converging evidence of transfer effects. Transferof-knowing is when a student knows something about one
topic that they apply later to a related topic. It was measured
by calculating the proportion of material included in either
of the cardiovascular tests that re-appeared in the respiratory
system pre-test. Transfer-of-learning is when a student
learns something about one topic that they apply later to a
related topic. It was measured by calculating the proportion
of material that appeared in the cardiovascular system posttest but not in its pre-test that then re-appeared in the
respiratory system pre-test. Finally, transfer-after-exposure
is when a student increases the extent to which they use a
set of ideas with one topic after being exposed to those same
ideas with a related topic. It was measured by calculating
the proportion of material not known in the respiratory
screening test that was included in the same parts of the
respiratory pre-test.
We measured transfer of the learning strategy of diagram
drawing by simply recording which students spontaneously
chose to draw diagrams during day 2’s tutoring.

Who Is Involved? Lessons can be framed as just involving
the teacher and each student, or as being relevant to a much
larger community in the classroom and beyond. In our
experiment, we framed the student as interacting separately
with each tutor versus collectively with the whole research
team and anyone else students mentioned.
When Is It Happening? The temporal horizon of a lesson
can be framed as an isolated event that has been completed
or as part of an ongoing activity that will be continuing. In
our experiment, we framed each day as separate studies that
consisted of separate completed sub-events versus as one
ongoing study that extended across the two days and beyond
to other times students mentioned as being relevant to them.
Where Is It Happening? Lessons can be framed as only
being relevant to the particular classroom or as also being
relevant to other settings like the rest of the school, the local
community, a workplace, etc. We framed tutoring as being
contained to the room versus being relevant throughout the
university and anywhere else students mentioned.
What Is the Scope of the Activity? Two lessons can be
framed as being relevant to separate classes, topics, or
curriculum units; or as being part of the same larger subject
area, unit or topic. In our experiment, we framed each day
as a separate tutoring session about a different topic versus
part of a pair of tutoring sessions about a larger topic.

Results
Students Perceived Differences in Framing
Day 1’s survey indicated that students generally perceived
the intended differences in framing. Students in the
expansive condition perceived greater use of expansive
framing than those in the bounded condition (F(1,19)= 10.6,
p < .01), a large effect (Cohen’s d = 1.4). There was no
interaction effect or main effect of population. Follow-up
analyses found that students were most aware of the framing
of intellectual positioning and temporal horizon.

How Are Learners Positioned Intellectually? In lessons,
learners can be framed as disconnected recipients reporting
about the ideas of others or as authors and respondents who
take ownership of their own ideas. In our experiment, we
framed the learner as a spokesperson for the text versus as
the author of his or her own ideas about the body.

Instruments
Post-tutoring Survey To measure whether students
detected the intended framing and their general level of
motivation during tutoring, the videographer asked each
student to complete a survey during a break after tutoring.
The tutor was out of the room during its administration.

No Differences in Other Factors Affecting Transfer
There were no significant differences between conditions in
common factors affecting learning and transfer. Prior
knowledge, as measured by the screening test, was similar
across groups. There also were no differences in time spent
learning or in responses to the motivation question (“how

Cardiovascular System Pre/Post Test At the start and end

479

much did you care about learning the cardiovascular
system?”). Perhaps most importantly, there were no
differences by condition in how much students learned the
facts and principles whose transfer serves as the main
outcome of this study.

(F(1,20) = 5.42 p = .03), with no interaction effect or main
effect of population (see Fig. 2). Students in the expansive
condition transferred much (M = 78%) of what they knew
while those in the bounded condition transferred only about
half (M = 55%). For transfer-of-learning, there was a trend
for students in the expansive condition to transfer more than
the bounded condition (74% vs. 46%; F(1,21)=3.04, p=.098;
see Fig. 2). Upon further examination of the data, however,
we suspect this trend was driven by the General Biology
students. There were no differences between groups in
transfer-after-exposure. Thus, we found a statistically
reliable effect of framing for one of the three measures of
transfer for the differential pressure principle.

Differences by Condition in the Transfer of Facts
To assess the transfer of facts, we examined responses to a
question on each corresponding test that required listing the
body parts that oxygenated blood (cardiovascular system) or
oxygen (respiratory system) passes through between the
lungs and the body’s cells. Because these two paths involve
the same 10 body parts we assessed transfer by counting
how many were listed in each test and comparing them.
For transfer-of-knowing, there was a large main effect of
condition (see Fig. 1, error bars are SEM), with students in
the expansive condition transferring 42% of facts they knew
while those in the bounded condition only transferred 21%
of them (d = .89; F(1,20) = 4.37, p = .04). There were no
population nor interaction effects. For transfer-afterexposure, there was also a large main effect of condition (d
= .94), with students in the expansive condition listing 20%
more facts than they had during the screening test while
students in the bounded condition listed only 3% more facts
(F(1,19)=4.82, p = .04; Fig. 1). Again, there were no other
effects. For transfer-of-learning, there was a trend of more
transfer for expansive (36%) versus bounded (13%)
conditions (F(1,20)=3.27, p = .09; Fig. 1), with no other
effects found.

Figure 2: Generally greater transfer of the differential
pressure principle in the expansive condition.
In contrast, for the surface area principle there were no main
or interaction effects on transfer when measured in each of
the three ways. Although the observed means did favor the
expansive condition with the transfer-of-knowing measure,
there is no reliable evidence that framing affected students’
propensity to transfer what they knew or learned about the
surface area principle.

Differences by Condition in the Transfer of the
Learning Strategy of Drawing Diagrams

Figure 1: Greater transfer of facts in expansive condition.

Partial Evidence for Differences by Condition in
the Transfer of Principles
To measure degree of transfer for principles, we divided
each principle into a set of propositions that could be
included in student responses to analogous questions at each
testing occasion. There were 12 codeable propositions
relevant to the differential pressure principle and 11
codeable propositions relevant to the surface area principle
(91% agreement; Kappa = .82).
For the differential pressure principle, there was a large
main effect (d = .95) of condition on transfer-of-knowing

Figure 3: Greater transfer of the strategy of drawing
diagrams in the expansive condition.

480

On the basis of a 2x2x2 loglinear analysis, students in the
expansive condition were much more likely to draw
diagrams than those in the bounded condition (G2(2) = 8.28,
p = .02). Only 1 of the 12 students in the bounded condition
drew diagrams while 7 of the 12 students in the expansive
condition did so (see Fig. 3). There was a trend of this
effect being greater for General Biology than AP Biology
students (G2(4) = 8.52, p = .07).

cross content-based support with framing while controlling
for principles.
More generally it is possible that the framing of learning
contexts in an expansive manner makes it more likely that
students assume they will need to transfer what they have
learned, which may prompt them to make better use of those
content-based supports for transfer that are available to them
(Engle, 2006). For instance, students learning with an
expansive framing may be more likely to bring in multiple
examples from a wide range of contexts. In anticipation of
applying what they are learning, they may also be more
likely to make systematic comparisons between multiple
examples to form abstract generalizations. Although
tracking which examples, comparisons, and generalizations
students made was beyond the scope of this study, it would
be a compelling focus of future investigation. Future
investigations also should more systematically probe
whether motivational variables like utility, relevance, and
importance mediate these effects (Pugh & Bergin, 2006).
What is potentially so powerful about expansive framing
is that it is much less targeted and content-specific than
previously studied instructional supports for transfer.
Because of this, it may be easier for teachers to implement
expansive framing than instructional supports for transfer
that rely on sophisticated content knowledge. In addition, as
students come to regularly orient to learning activities in an
expansive fashion, one would expect them to make greater
use of prior knowledge more generally as they become
increasingly accountable for sharing what they know across
connected contexts.
At the same time, we do not claim that expansive framing
is the be-all and end-all for instruction. Our informal
observations of the tutoring sessions and broader theoretical
considerations suggest that there may be costs as well as
benefits of expansive framing for both learning and transfer.
For example, we observed a few students in the expansive
framing condition that brought in so much prior knowledge
while self-explaining that they became overwhelmed or had
difficulty focusing on what the text could contribute to their
understanding. Thus, it may make sense for the starts and
ends of lessons and curriculum units to be framed more
expansively, but to use a less expansive framing when
students need to focus on learning particular new material.
Also, expansive framing should ideally be paired with
activities in which students critically evaluate the
knowledge they transfer in for its relevance and validity.
In closing, this study provides converging evidence that
framing is an important instructional mechanism to consider
when trying to enhance transfer, one that can potentially
affect the transfer of many different kinds of knowledge.

Discussion
We found compelling initial evidence that framing may in
fact influence transfer. Students in the expansive condition
were more likely than those in the bounded condition to
transfer: (a) the learning strategy of drawing diagrams; (b)
facts they knew or (c) had been exposed to; and (d) what
they knew about the differential pressure principle. In
addition, (e) General Biology students in the expansive
condition were more likely to transfer what they learned
about the differential pressure principle.
The fact that several large effects of framing on transfer
were found within a small-scale experiment suggests that it
is likely that framing does play an important role in transfer.
Also framing does not appear overly specialized in terms of
what kinds of transfer it can influence. In this study it
affected the transfer of facts, principles, and strategies while
in prior research it influenced the transfer of actions,
experiences and explanatory schemes (Engle, 2006;
Hammer et al., 2005; Hart & Albarracin, 2009).
In future research it will be important to investigate
whether it is the framing of one particular aspect of contexts
that is responsible for the effects or whether all are
necessary. For example, is the manipulation of intellectual
positioning as authors versus spokespersons the most
important, or is it the way in which time and other aspects
of settings are framed as being linked with each other? If
more than one aspect of expansive framing matters, does
each one make its own independent contributions or is the
whole greater than the sum of its parts? To address these
questions, future experiments can manipulate each aspect of
framing alone and in coordination. This will simultaneously
advance understanding of how exactly framing works,
provide replication of the effects reported here, and guide
educators about which aspects of framing to focus on.
Although transfer of the differential pressure principle
was found, no differences were detected across conditions in
any kind of transfer of the surface area principle. This
contrast opens up issues about how framing may interact
with other mechanisms for supporting transfer. This could
suggest that framing’s effects on transfer may be found only
when there is at least some minimal level of content-based
support for transfer. In this study, we provided more
examples and comparisons for the differential pressure
principle than the surface area principle. However, this
outcome could also be due to the fact that the surface area
principle is arguably more complex. To distinguish between
these possible interpretations, follow-up experiments could

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a UC Berkeley junior
faculty grant, a Hellman Family Faculty Fund grant, and
National Science Foundation (NSF) Grant #0844910 to
Randi A. Engle. We thank Seda Bourikian, Pegah Ghaneian,
Pauline Huang, Diane Lam, Jonathan Lesser, Xenia Meyer,

481

Sarah Nix, Melissa Pandika, Sharla Roberts, Sadaf
Sareshwala, Alexandra Tee, and Pamela Yee for assistance.
We also thank our reviewers for their invaluable input.

instruction. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F.
(2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Mestre
(Ed.), Transfer of learning: Research and perspectives.
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Hart, W. & Albarracin, D. (2009). What was doing vs. what
I did: Verb aspect influences memory and future actions.
Psychological Science, 20(2), 238-244.
Hausmann, R. G. M. & vanLehn, K. (2007). Explaining
self-explaining: A contrast between content versus
generation. In R. Luckin, K. R. Koedinger & J. E. Greer
(Eds.), Artificial intelligence in education: Building
technology rich learning contexts that work. Amsterdam:
IOS Press.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing
expert and novice understanding of a complex system
from the perspective of structures, behaviors, and
functions. Cognitive Science, 28, 127-138.
Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition (1983).
Culture and cognitive development. In P. H. Mussen
(Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. History,
theory and methods. New York: Wiley.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics,
and culture in everyday life. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Lobato, J. (2006). Alternative perspectives on the transfer of
learning: History, issues, and challenges for future
research. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 431449.
Lui, L. & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2009). Promoting complex
systems learning through the use of conceptual
representations in hypermedia. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 46(9), 1023-1040.
McNamara, D. (2004). SERT: Self-explanation reading
training. Discourse Processes, 38(1), 1-30.
Pea, R. D. (1987). Socializing the knowledge transfer
problem. International Journal of Educational Research,
11, 639–663.
Pugh, K.J. & Bergin, D.A. (2006). Motivational influences
on transfer. Educational Psychologist, 41(3), 147-160
Reeves, L.M. & Weisberg, R.W. (1994). The role of content
and abstract information in analogical transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 115(3), 381-400.
Rittle-Johnson, B. (2006). Promoting transfer: Effects of
self-explanation
and
direct
instruction.
Child
Development, 77(1), 1-15.
Shadish, W., Cook, T. & Campbell, D. (2002).
Experimental and quasi-experimental design for
generalized causal inference. New York: HoughtonMifflin.
Spencer, R. M. & Weisberg, R. W. (1986). Contextdependent effects on analogical transfer. Memory and
Cognition, 14, 442-449.
Tannen, D. (Ed.) (1993). Framing in discourse. New York:
Oxford University Press.
van Dijk, T. A. (2008). Discourse and context: A
sociocognitive approach. New York: Cambridge U.P.

References
Ainsworth, S. & Loizou, A. Th. (2003). The effects of selfexplaining when learning with text or diagrams.
Cognitive Science, 27, 669-681.
Anolli, A., Antonietti, A., Crisafulli, L. & Cantoia, M.
(2001). Accessing source information in analogical
problem-solving. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54A(1), 237-261.
Barnett, S. M. & Ceci, S. J. (2002). When and where do we
apply what we learn? A taxonomy for far transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 128(4), 612-637.
Catrambone, R. (1998). The subgoal learning model:
Creating better examples so that students can solve novel
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
127(4), 355-376.
Catrambone, R. & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15(6), 1147-1156.
Chi, M. T. H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M-H. & LaVancher, C.
(1994).
Eliciting
self-explanations
improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., &
Hausmann, R. G. (2001). Learning from human tutoring.
Cognitive Science, 25, 471-533.
Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster
generative learning: A situative account of transfer in a
community of learners classroom. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 15(4), 451-498.
Floriani, A. (1994). Negotiating what counts: Roles and
relationships, texts and contexts, content and meaning,
Linguistics and Education, 5, 241-274.
Gee, J. P. & Green, J. L (1998). Discourse analysis,
learning, and social practice: A methodological study,
Review of Research in Education, 23, 119-69.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J. & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 393408.
Gick, M.L. & Holyoak, K. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1–38.
Goel, A. K., Gomez de Silva Garza, A., Grué, N., Murdock,
J. W., Recker, M. M., & Govinderaj, T. (1996). Towards
designing learning environments I: Exploring how
devices work. In C. Fraisson, G. Gauthier, & A. Lesgold
(Eds.), Intelligent tutoring systems: Lecture notes in
computer science. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Duranti, A. & Goodwin, C. (Eds.) (1992). Rethinking
context:
Language as
interactive
phenomenon
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Greeno, J. G., Smith, D. R., & Moore, J. L. (1993). Transfer
of situated learning. In D. K. Detterman & R. J. Sternberg
(Eds.), Transfer on trial: Intelligence, cognition, and

482

