UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactive Effects of Diagrammatic Format and Teleological Beliefs on Tree Thinking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/74g030v7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Phillips, Brenda
Novick, Laura
Catley, Kefyn
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactive Effects of Diagrammatic Format and Teleological Beliefs
on Tree Thinking
Brenda C. Phillips (b.c.phillips@vanderbilt.edu)
Dept. of Psychology & Human Development, Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Laura R. Novick (Laura.Novick@vanderbilt.edu)
Dept. of Psychology & Human Development, Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Kefyn M. Catley (kcatley@wcu.edu)
Dept. of Biology, Western Carolina University
Cullowhee, NC 28723 USA

Daniel J. Funk (daniel.j.funk@vanderbilt.edu)
Dept. of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235 USA
Abstract
A common misconception regarding evolutionary history is
that the tree of life depicts the progression of species over
time from least complex to most complex, ending with our
own species at the pinnacle of evolution. The current study
examined the diagrammatic factors that may impact the effect
this misunderstanding has on students’ ability to correctly
interpret evolutionary trees. Students with weaker and
stronger backgrounds in biology were presented with two
cladograms, each featuring a different focal taxon (human or
honeybee). The evolutionary relationships among the taxa
were presented in four diagrammatic formats. Students
reasoned in qualitatively different ways when asked about the
human species as opposed to the honeybee, with specific
diagrammatic formats facilitating anthropomorphic views,
particularly among weaker background students.
Keywords: spatial cognition, teleological explanations,
evolutionary
diagrams,
evolutionary
misconceptions,
cladograms, macroevolution

Introduction
There is a wealth of evidence that indicates students have
great difficulty acquiring evolutionary concepts, particularly
concepts regarding macroevolution and the origin of
species. These studies have demonstrated that
misconceptions are prevalent even among students with
substantial training in the biological sciences (Ferrari & Chi,
1998; Greene, 1990; Samarapungavan & Weirs, 1997). A
pertinent question is whether the tools that scientists use to
study macroevolution are cognitively accessible and
transparent to students of varying abilities, and whether
there are perceptual or diagrammatic factors that potentially
impede students’ understanding of these tools in the absence
of explicit instruction.
Tree thinking is a tool that professional biologists use to
describe and classify species according to patterns of most
recent common ancestry and to make inferences in the

absence of data (e.g., Angielczyk, 2009). Evolutionary trees,
or cladograms, are based on hypotheses regarding the
distribution of derived characters among a set of taxa; they
provide biologists with a conceptual framework for
understanding the historical processes that promote and
maintain the biodiversity of our planet. Although intensive
instruction on macroevolution and tree thinking is largely
absent from high school and college biology classes (Catley,
2006), a recent analysis of textbooks indicates that biology
students at both levels are exposed to cladograms (Catley &
Novick, 2008). This poses a potential problem if students
reason incorrectly about the evolutionary relationships
depicted in those diagrams.
Researchers have only recently begun to examine what
information students are able to extract from these diagrams,
both in the absence of explicit instruction as well as after
instruction. This research has focused on assessing treethinking skills when cladograms are drawn in the familiar
hierarchical tree format or in an alternative ladder format
(Catley, Novick, & Funk, accepted; Meir, Perry, Herron, &
Kingsolver, 2007; Novick & Catley, 2010; Sandvik, 2008).
The results indicate that students, regardless of instruction,
find the tree format much easier to understand.
The current study builds upon this prior research by
examining how the particular taxa depicted in the
cladograms, and especially students’ knowledge and/or
beliefs about those taxa, affects tree thinking (i.e.,
cladogram interpretation). We used the simpler-tounderstand tree format and manipulated how the cladograms
were oriented and how the taxa were arranged (keeping the
underlying structure—evolutionary relationships—constant
across cladogram versions). In particular, this study explores
the misconception that the tree of life depicts the
progression of the evolution of taxa over time from least
complex to most complex. If students reason incorrectly
about the evolutionary relationships among taxa, they may

2656

state that the most cognitively complex taxon (i.e., the
human) is the most highly evolved. Feeding into this
misconception is the widely held belief that humans are not
subject to the same evolutionary pressures as other
organisms because we were created intentionally by an
outside agent (Evans, 2001; Greene, 1990) or created
intentionally to fulfill a purpose (Kelemen, 1999; Kelemen
& Rosset, 2008).
These considerations raise several questions: In the
absence of explicit instruction, are students likely to
perceive the evolution of specific taxa, such as the human,
in teleological, or goal-directed, terms? Do students’
responses differ depending on their biology background?
Additionally, are students more likely to provide
teleological responses when the focal taxon is located at the
end of the cladogram versus when it is located in the center
position? How does the vertical or horizontal orientation of
the cladogram influence students’ judgments?

Study Overview
The data presented here are part of a larger study that was
designed to assess college students’ reasoning about
evolutionary history among several different subsets of taxa
from the tree of life. The questions assessed, in several
different ways, students’ understanding of the evolutionary
relationships among hierarchically nested sets of taxa. We
limit our presentation here to one question that examined
whether students’ misinterpreted the information depicted in
the cladograms by stating that the focal taxon was the most
highly evolved. This question was asked about two
cladograms, which differed in the focal taxon highlighted
for subjects (human or honeybee).
The cladograms were drawn in four different ways: The
cladogram itself was oriented either horizontally or
vertically, and the focal taxon was situated either at one end
of the cladogram (top or right) or in the center position
among the set of nine taxa. Given students’ teleological
beliefs and misconception that humans are evolutionarily
special, we predicted that students would be more likely to
state that the focal taxon was the most highly evolved taxon
when it was the human rather than the honeybee (see
Figures 1 and 2). We also predicted that students would be
more likely to make this claim when the focal taxon
occupied the end (top or far right) rather than the middle
position because a teleological construal would lead one to
expect the most complex taxon to be at the end. Finally,
because Franklin and Tversky (1990) have found that the
vertical dimension is the most salient of the three spatial
dimensions, we predicted that responses indicating that the
human is the most highly evolved taxon would be most
prevalent for the vertical orientation when human was
situated at the top.
The main study included a sample of college students
with weaker and stronger backgrounds in biology. In a
follow-up study, a subset of the stronger background
students received two days of instruction on phylogenetics

(i.e., understanding evolutionary trees). They were tested
before and after instruction.

Method
Subjects
The subjects in the main study were 112 Vanderbilt
University undergraduates. Most students (34 females, 33
males, 2 unknown sex) were recruited from a paid subject
pool in the psychology department. The remaining students
(23 females, 20 males) were currently enrolled in the
evolution class at Vanderbilt (taught by the fourth author).
We divided the subjects into two groups based on their
background in biology: Students who had completed at
least the two-semester introductory biology sequence for
biology majors and pre-med students were assigned to the
stronger background group; the remaining subjects were
assigned to the weaker background group. The 52 stronger
background students (28 females, 24 males) completed an
average of 3.09 semesters of biology classes that were
chosen from a list of classes presented on a background
questionnaire. The 60 weaker background students (29
females, 29 males, 2 unknown sex) had completed an
average of only 0.40 semesters of such coursework. This is
nearly an 8:1 difference in coursework between the groups.

Materials and Procedure
All students received a 4-page booklet that included one
cladogram and two to three questions about the information
in that cladogram on each page. The presentation order of
the cladograms was counterbalanced. Students completed
this booklet, as well as several other booklets, in one session
that took approximately 50-75 min.
Each cladogram included nine taxa. One taxon was the
focal taxon, so named because the first question for each
cladogram asked students what the diagram shows about the
evolution of that taxon. (Subjects provided a written
response to that question.) We limit our discussion here to
the third question that was asked about the two cladograms
for which human and honeybee were the focal taxa. This
question asked students which taxon/taxa was/were the most
highly evolved. (The second question asked students to
evaluate the relative evolutionary distance between pairs of
taxa. This question did not reference the focal taxon and did
not bear on the present results).

Design
We examined three factors in the present study. One factor
was weaker versus stronger biology background. We were
interested in whether a year-long introductory class (and
perhaps subsequent biology coursework) would countervail
stronger background students of a teleological perspective
on evolution.
The remaining two factors pertained to the visual
presentation of the cladograms. The first of these factors
was the orientation of the cladogram, which was

2657

manipulated between subjects. The terminal branches were
either located at the right side of the cladogram (vertical
orientation, Figure 1) or at the top of the cladogram
(horizontal orientation, Figure 2). The second factor was the
rotation of the branches of the cladogram. The branches
were rotated, without altering the depicted relationships
(i.e., the underlying topology), so that the focal taxon was
located either at the end (far right or top, depending on the
orientation; see Figure 1) or at the center position (see
Figure 2). In Rotation Set 1, human was located at the end
position whereas the honeybee was in the middle. In
Rotation Set 2, the human was in the middle and honeybee
was at the end. Rotation set was manipulated between
subjects. We fully counterbalanced the orientation and
rotation of the cladograms (see Figures 1 and 2 for two of
the four possible combinations).
Figure 2: Honeybee cladogram—horizontal orientation,
focal taxon in the middle.

Results
Are Humans Most Highly Evolved?

Figure 1: Human cladogram—vertical orientation, focal
taxon at the end.

Follow-Up Study
We also examined whether students’ evolutionary concepts
were amenable to instruction by providing a subset of the
students in the stronger biology background group (N = 42)
with two days of instruction in phylogenetics (i.e.,
understanding cladograms). These students were recruited
from their evolutionary biology course and completed the
cladogram booklets at mid-semester (Time 1) and again 4.55 weeks later (Time 2). Students received the same booklet
at both times.

Students received a score of 1 if they indicated that the focal
taxon (i.e., human or honeybee) was the most highly
evolved species or a score of 0 for any other response.
Overall, only 6% of students (all stronger background)
responded correctly that the human cladogram did not
reveal that any taxon was more highly evolved than any
other taxon. In comparison, 5% of students (all stronger
background) provided a correct response to this question
regarding the honeybee.
As discussed earlier, we expected more responses that the
focal taxon was most highly evolved when that taxon was
the human as opposed to the honeybee. The results support
this prediction, with 35% of students providing this response
for the human cladogram, compared with only 2%
(2 students, both from weaker backgrounds) for the
honeybee cladogram, (χ2=42.32, p <.001). Because students
essentially never said that the honeybee was the most highly
evolved taxon, we restricted our analysis of the effects of
the diagrammatic factors on these responses to the human
cladogram.
We conducted a 2 (biology background; between) x 2
(orientation; between) x 2 (rotation set = human at the end
vs. in the middle; between) analysis of variance (ANOVA)
on the responses that the human was the most highly
evolved taxon. The main effect of biology background, F(1,
104) = 17.20, p < .001, MSE = 0.17, partial η2 = .14,
indicated that weaker background students were more likely
to make this incorrect claim than were stronger background
students (M = 0.50 vs. M = 0.19, respectively). The main
effect of focal taxon location (rotation set), F(1, 104) =
20.17, p < .001, partial η2 = .16, indicated that a higher
proportion of students made this claim when the human was

2658

positioned at the end of the array than at the center
(M = 0.52 vs. M = 0.20, respectively).
There was also a biology background x orientation
interaction, F(1, 104) = 6.55, p < .05, partial η2 =.06 This
interaction was subsumed by a three-way interaction
between biology background, focal taxon location, and
orientation, F(1, 104) = 4.02, p < .05, partial η2 = .04 (see
Figure 3). When the human was located in the middle of the
cladogram, weaker background students said humans are
most highly evolved 35% of the time, compared with 0% of
the time for stronger background students. Cladogram
orientation had little effect. When the human was located at
the end, however, both groups of students said that the
human was most highly evolved, with such responses being
especially prevalent for weaker background students who
received the vertical orientation. Indeed, 92% of these
students said that humans were most highly evolved,
compared with only 40% for the other three groups
combined.

human was the most highly evolved taxon when it was
presented at the end (top or right) of the cladogram. Under
these conditions, students were less likely to state that the
human was the most highly evolved taxon after instruction
(M = 0.10) than before (M = 0.33). Students never
responded that the human was the most highly evolved
taxon when it was presented in the middle position.

Students’ Justifications

Figure 3: Proportion of students who claimed the human
was the most highly evolved taxon as a function of
biology background, focal taxon location, and
cladogram orientation.
To examine the effects of instruction on students’
phylogenetic conceptions, we conducted a 2 (orientation;
between) x 2 (rotation set = human at the end vs. in the
middle; between) x 2 (test: Time 1 vs. Time 2; within)
mixed ANOVA on the responses that the human is the most
highly evolved taxon. These students comprised a subset of
the stronger background students from the main study. The
analysis revealed a main effect of time of test, F(1, 38) =
6.18, p < .05, MSE = 0.05, partial η2 =.14. Students were
less likely to claim that the human is the most highly
evolved taxon after having received two days of instruction
on phylogenetics (M = 0.17 vs. M = 0.05, respectively, for
before vs. after instruction). There was also a time of test x
focal taxon location interaction, F(1, 38) = 6.18, p <.05,
MSE = 0.05, partial η2 =.14. Students only claimed that the

After indicating which taxon was most highly evolved,
students were asked to provide an explanation for their
response. We are in the process of devising a coding scheme
to examine these qualitative data. In the following
paragraphs, we provide a subset of the responses students
wrote for the explanation question for illustrative purposes.
Consistent with our hypotheses, students who indicated
that the human was the most evolved taxon frequently stated
that a) the cladogram presented the progression of evolution
across species and time, and b) presented an array of
organisms, from least complex to most complex. For
example, students provided statements such as, “The general
assumption is that with every further deviation from the
evolutionary chain, organisms develop more complete
biological systems (esp. nervous systems)”, “We have
complex language & highly developed social systems”, or
“we are the only sentient beings on earth.” Students also
made comparative statements such as “I'm arogant [sic]
enough to believe [that] I'm more evolved than livestock” or
“they are the last animal in the chart. I am, as a person, more
evolved than a pig.”
Students also provided evidence that they were reasoning
about phylogenetic concepts, albeit incorrectly: “humans
have diverged from the most basic common ancestor the
most times out of all the animals shown”, “humans are at
the top of the diagram and they display the most specified
method of evolution in the diagram”, or “humans are the
organism which most recently evolved.” Interestingly,
sometimes students provided conflictive statements such as,
“from the chart I would say pig & camel, but I'm biased to
say human” or “humans have to be the most highly evolved
(regardless of the structure of the diagram).” Additional
analyses will examine whether stronger and weaker
background students provided different types of
justifications for incorrect responses.
The aforementioned statements were qualitatively
different from those that students provided for correct
responses. For example, students who indicated that no
taxon was more highly evolved than any other taxa made
statements such as, “the diagram only shows the
evolutionary relationships not how much each species has
changed over time” or “these trees just show genetic
similarity and hypothetical common ancestors. All the
organisms have radiated into different niches, from the
labeled hypothetical common ancestor.” As stated
previously, only a very small minority of students with
stronger backgrounds in biology provided correct responses.

2659

Discussion
The current study provides critical information regarding the
use of cladograms for educational purposes. In the absence
of instruction, both students with weaker and stronger
backgrounds in biology misinterpreted the information
depicted in cladograms when asked to evaluate which taxon
was the most highly evolved. An important finding is that
the cladograms had different effects on students’ reasoning
depending on the format in which they were presented and
the biology background of the students.
As expected, students provided more teleological
responses and explanations for the human cladogram than
the honeybee cladogram. In fact, students essentially never
stated that the honeybee was the most highly evolved taxon
despite the fact that the two taxa occupied identical
locations in their respective cladograms. Students provided
justifications that indicated that they perceived the human as
the most complex organism in the array, and therefore the
most highly evolved.
Previous research has found that college students endorse
scientifically unwarranted explanations for the occurrence
of natural phenomena (e.g., “Finches diversified in order to
survive”), especially when placed under a high cognitive
load (Kelemen & Rosset, 2009). These studies indicate that
adults, like children (see Carey, 1985; Keil, 1994; Kelemen,
1999), ascribe to teleological explanations for the existence
of biological natural kinds and prefer these explanations to
physical-causal explanations. These beliefs are suppressed
under certain conditions, such as when students are provided
with alternative explanations and are provided with ample
time to think about the phenomena in question. However,
under cognitively demanding circumstances, these
unwarranted scientifically beliefs prevail.
Our results are consistent with these earlier studies and
provide new information concerning the perceptual or
diagrammatic factors that either promote or lessen students’
appeal to teleological interpretations of evolutionary
diagrams. We reasoned that students who conceived of
evolutionary processes as goal-directed would expect the
most complex taxon to occupy an end position. As
predicted, students were more likely to state that the human
was the most evolved taxon when it occupied the end
position rather than the center position. Students with
stronger backgrounds in biology only said that the human is
the most highly evolved taxon when it was depicted at the
end of the set of taxa. Instruction in phylogenetics reduced
such responding to only 10% of students.
Teleological responses were most prevalent for weaker
background students when interpreting the vertically
oriented cladogram with the human located in the top
position. One possible interpretation of these results is that
students used spatial location to evaluate evolutionary
relatedness; that is, they inferred the taxon at the highest
vertical point was the most complex. These results are
consistent with the embodied cognition perspective that
states that individuals orient themselves vertically in

reference to elements of the environment, such as the sky
and ground (Franklin and Tversky, 1990).
Given that high school and college students in the United
States are currently exposed to cladograms in their biology
textbooks, and perhaps from their instructors in class as
well, our results indicate that it is essential that textbook
illustrators and instructors consider the perceptual or
diagrammatic factors that impact students’ understanding of
evolutionary processes. In particular, our results indicate
that the horizontal cladogram format is preferable to the
vertical format. Moreover, because cladogram branches can
be rotated without changing the underlying structure (i.e.,
the evolutionary relationships depicted; just as the turning
branches of a mobile in the wind do not change the structure
of the mobile), when cladograms include taxa that may play
into students’ teleological misconception of evolution, it is
critically important to present those taxa in a horizontal
order that suppresses activation of this misconception. For
example, more complex taxa should be located in the
middle rather than the end, and there should be little or no
correlation between the linear ordering of the taxa across the
terminal branches of the cladogram and students’
conceptions of complexity.

References
Angielczyk, K. D. (2009). Dimetrodon is not a dinosaur:
Using tree thinking to understand the ancient relatives of
mammals and their evolution. Evolution: Education and
Outreach, 2, 257-271.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Catley, K. M. (2006). Darwin’s missing link: A new
paradigm for evolution education. Science Education, 90,
767-783.
Catley, K. M., & Novick, L. (2008). Seeing the wood for
the trees: An analyseis of evolutionary diagrams in
biology textbooks. BioScience, 58, 976-987.
Catley, K. M., Novick, L. R., & Funk, D. J. (accepted
pending revision). The Promise and Challenges of
Introducing Tree Thinking into Evolution Education. In
K. Rosengren, E. M. Evans, S. Brem, & G. Sinatra (Eds.),
Evolution Challenges: Integrating Research and Practice
in Teaching and Learning about Evolution.
Evans, M. (2001). Cognitive and contextual factors in the
emergence of diverse belief systems: Creation versus
evolution. Cognitive Psychology, 42, 217-266.
Ferrari, M., & Chi, M. (1998). The nature of naïve
explanations of natural selection. International Journal of
Science Education, 20, 1231-1256.
Franklin, N., & Tversky, B. (1990). Searching imagined
environments. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 119, 63-76.
Greene, E.D. (1990). The logic of university students’
misunderstanding of natural selection. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 27, 865-885.
Keil, F.C. (1994). The birth and nurturance of concepts by
domains: The origins of concepts of living things. In L.A.

2660

Hirschfeld & S.A. Gelman (Eds), Mapping the Mind:
Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kelemen, D. (1999). Function, goals, and intention:
Children’s teleological reasoning about objects. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 3(12), 416-468.
Kelemen, D., & Rosset, E. (2009). The human function
compunction: Teleological explanation in adults.
Cognition, 111, 138-143.
Meir, E., Perry, J., Herron, J. C., & Kingsolver, J. (2007,
September). College students’ misconceptions about
evolutionary trees. The American Biology Teacher Online,
69 (7).
Novick, L. R., & Catley, K. M. (2010). Understanding the
Tree of Life: Exploring Tree-Thinking Skills in College
Students. Manuscript under revision for an invited
resubmission.
Samarapungavan, A., & Weirs, R.W. (1997). Children’s
thoughts on the origins of species: A study of explanatory
coherence. Cognitive Science, 21, 147-177.
Sandvik, H. (2008). Tree thinking cannot taken for granted:
challenges for teaching phylogenetics. Theory in
Biosciences,
127,
45–51.
Retrieved
from:
http://www.springerlink.com/content/eu62420p381402xr/
March 19, 2008.

2661

