UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is categorical perception really verbally mediated perception?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6cp6j72g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hendrickson, Andrew
Kachergis, George
Gureckis, Todd
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is categorical perception really verbally mediated perception?
Andrew T. Hendrickson, George Kachergis ({athendri, gkacherg}@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 East Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Todd M. Gureckis (todd.gureckis@nyu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 6 Washington Place
New York, NY 10003 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 East Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Recent research has argued that categorization is strongly tied
to language processing. For example, language (in the form
of verbal category labels) has been shown to influence
perceptual discriminations of color (Winawer et al., 2007).
However, does this imply that categorical perception is
essentially verbally mediated perception? The present study
extends recent findings in our lab showing that categorical
perception can occur even in the absence of overt labels. In
particular, we evaluate the degree to which certain
interference tasks (verbal, spatial) reduce the effect of learned
categorical perception for complex visual stimuli (faces).
Contrary to previous findings, our results show that a verbal
interference task does not disrupt learned categorical
perception effects for faces. Our results are interpreted in
light of the ongoing debate about the role of language in
categorization. In particular, we suggest that at least a sub-set
of categorical perception effects may be effectively
“language-free”.
Keywords: Perceptual Learning,
Categorization, Concept Learning, Language.

Introduction
It is now well-known that the categories we know often
influence the things that we perceive. For example, the
phoneme categories in the native language of a listener
dramatically influence their ability to perceive physical
differences between two speech sounds. In particular,
differences that span phonemic category boundaries are
much more accurately discriminated than differences that
fall within the same phonemic category (Liberman, Harris,
Hoffman, & Griffith, 1957).
This effect, known as
Categorical Perception (CP), has been shown for many
types of perceptual stimuli, and is known to be influenced
by both innate and learned factors (e.g., Harnad, 1987;
Goldstone, 1994; see Goldstone & Hendrickson, 2009 for a
review).
Given the fact that CP effects are so ubiquitous, it is
perhaps surprising that so little is known about how they
arise. Theoretical analyses suggest that the very act of
associating category labels with items can warp the
representations of those items in the service of
categorization. For example, Harnad, Hanson, & Lubin
(1995) showed through neural network simulations that
adding such a label, even without changing the

representation space, changed the similarity of item
representations in that space in a way consistent with CP
effects. However, such simulations simply show how CP
might arise without explaining the exact psychological
factors that may contribute to it in humans.
On the other hand, recent work by Winawer et al. (2007)
has argued that the change in representation that produces
such a CP effect may be due to the inclusion of a “languagespecific” component to the representation of an item in
memory. In their study, Winawer and colleagues found that
Russian speakers, who have unique words in their language
for ‘light blue’ and ‘dark blue,’ show a standard CP effect: a
higher accuracy for perceptual discriminations of blues that
span the light-dark category boundary relative to blues
within one category. English speakers, who only use one
basic word for blue, did not show a similar CP effect for the
same stimuli. Interestingly, the CP between-category
advantage was eliminated for the Russian speakers when
they were given a verbal interference task (repeating a string
of digits) while performing the perceptual discriminations,
though the CP effect was preserved if the interference task
involved a spatial task (remembering a pattern) instead of a
verbal task. From this, Winawer, et al. argue that linguistic
processing not only influences the category learning
processes, but has an online influence during perceptual
discrimination as well (see also Lupyan, 2008).
Somewhat consistent with this viewpoint, learned CP
effects are most often found in supervised learning tasks,
where feedback about an item’s correct category label
drives learning to reduce classification error of category
labels (Harnad, 1987; Goldstone & Hendrickson, 2009).
However, Gureckis and Goldstone (2008) presented an
interesting finding which would appear to challenge this
view. In their study, a set of morph faces was created with
varied along two arbitrary dimensions (Figure 1). Four
“clusters” of items were created in the space by withholding
a subset of the items from the training phase (the grey
stimuli in Figure 1). Two of the clusters were assigned to
category “A” and the other two clusters were assigned to
category “B” by applying either a vertical or horizontal
category boundary. Both before and after category learning
participant’s ability to make pair-wise discriminations

1216

An Experiment
Method
Participants 172 students at Indiana University participated
in partial fulfillment of a course requirement and were
assigned into one of two conditions based on which
dimension (1 or 2 in Figure 1) was relevant for

!"#$%&"'%()

!"#$%&"'%(*

between items was measured. The results showed that
discrimination of items within each small cluster was
reduced following learning. In addition, discrimination of
items across the category boundary was improved (a pattern
consistent with the standard CP effect). They also found
that discrimination performance was improved between
clusters that belonged to the same category. These CP
effects were largest in blocks in which performance on the
categorization judgment task was highest, suggesting that
learning drove both improvements in categorization
performance as well as the changes in perceptual
discrimination.
The improvement in perceptual discrimination within a
category (and along the category-irrelevant dimension)
would not be predicted if CP was only the result of verbal
labeling processes since all of these items share the same
label. Instead, it appears to suggest that a non-verbal
learning mechanism is engaged during category learning
that is sensitive to the internal structure of the categories
(e.g., Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004). In this study we
explore the hypothesis that the effect of this non-verbal
learning is not impacted by verbal interference.
In our experiment, we taught participants to categorize the
same set of morphed faces that have been previously shown
to induce categorical perception effects in Goldstone (1994)
and Gureckis & Goldstone (2008). Following the learning
phase we had participants make perceptual discriminations
between pairs of faces that span both the category and
cluster boundaries while performing a set of spatial or
verbal interference tasks. Similar to the approach adopted
by Winawer, et al, our goal was to assess the impact that
verbal interference has on CP of these stimuli relative to a
spatial interference task. In light of these previous findings,
we predict that verbal interference will disrupt the standard
CP effect of improved discrimination across the categoryrelevant boundary by preventing online linguistic processing
while a spatial interference task does not. In contrast, we
predict that verbal interference would have little impact on
the improved discrimination of items that belongs to
different clusters within the same category (since such
effects are unlikely to be driven by differences in verbal
labeling). In line with previous work, we further predict
that these effects will be most pronounced for perceptual
discrimination judgments in blocks where categorization
performance is most accurate. Our results replicate the
effects of previous studies, but we found that the
interference tasks had overall little effect on learned CP for
our face stimuli.

Figure 1: Stimuli varied along two arbitrary dimensions
(1 and 2) forming a 10-by-10 grid of blended faces. The
light grey stimuli were not included in category learning,
introducing a source of within-category structure (two
clusters of faces within each category). The vertical line
between columns E and F shows an example category
boundary used during category learning (the other category
boundary was a horizontal line between rows 5 and 6).
categorization (87 had dimension 2, and 85 had dimension
1). 61 participants were excluded who did not perform
significantly above chance on either categorization or
discrimination trials with no interference task (the threshold
used for both tasks was 0.52, the upper threshold of a 95%
confidence interval based on a binomial distribution
centered at 0.5).
Materials
The stimuli were morphs of bald male faces selected from
Kayser (1997) using the blending technique outlined in
Steyvers (1999). A stimulus space was constructed that
varied along two arbitrary dimensions, each one formed by
morphing between two anchor faces to create 10 faces per
dimension that formed a continuum from one anchor face to
the other (see Dimensions 1 and 2 in Figure 1). The two
specific dimensions used in this study were selected because
they were roughly equally salient and roughly orthogonal
when subjected to a MDS analysis in preliminary work
(Gureckis & Goldstone, 2008). A 10 by 10 matrix of
stimuli faces were created by combining each face along
dimension 1 with each face along dimension 2 to create a
blended face that is the average of the two faces. Not all
100 faces in the 10 by 10 matrix were presented during
categorization trials. In particular, a subset of faces was
never presented (the light grey faces in Figure 1), creating
two ”clusters” of faces within each category.

1217

Procedure
Categorization Task On each categorization trial, a single
face was presented for 500 ms in the center of the display
for study followed by a blank screen for 300 ms.
Instructions were then presented directing participants to
indicate if the correct category label for the item was ‘P’ or
‘Q.’ After a participant responded, the stimulus was again
presented for 2000 ms along with feedback indicating
whether the response was correct and the correct category of
the stimulus.
Discrimination Task On each trial, a target stimulus was
presented for 500 ms in the center of the display for study
followed by a blank screen for 300 ms. For discrimination
trials, immediately after the blank screen two stimuli were
simultaneously presented: one stimulus that exactly matched
the target stimulus and a foil stimulus. Participants were
instructed to indicate by pressing one of two keys which
stimulus matched the target. No feedback was provided
after discrimination trials.
Sixteen stimuli were used as targets and foils in the
discrimination task: the four corners of each of the four
clusters shown in Figure 1 (e.g. stimuli A7, A10, D7 and
D10 of the lower left-hand cluster). Each foil stimulus was
two values away from the target stimulus on one of the two
dimensions or two values away from the target stimulus on
both dimensions (e.g. for stimulus A1 the set of foils was
D1, A4, and D4; for stimulus D4 the set of foils was: A4
and G4 along Dimension 1, D1 and D7 along Dimension 2,
as well as A1, G1, G7, and A7 along both dimensions).
Interference Tasks The verbal and spatial interference
tasks involved participants memorizing a verbal string or a
spatial pattern and recalling that information after a miniblock of categorization and discrimination trials. Verbal
interference mini-blocks were preceded by the presentation
of a string of 6 digits for 8 s followed by an interval of 3 s.
Participants were instructed that they should memorize this
string and would be tested on it later. At the end of the
mini-block, memory for the studied string was probed by
presenting the original string along with a foil stimulus
(which had two randomly selected digits swapped).
Participants simply indicated which string they recognized
as the studied item by pressing one of two keys.
Spatial interference mini-blocks were preceded by the
presentation of a 6 by 6 grid composed of half white squares
and half black squares for 8 s followed by an interval of 3 s
before the mini-block began. Participants were instructed to
memorize this pattern and that they would be tested on it.
At the end of the mini-block, recall of the pattern was tested
by presenting the original pattern and a foil pattern that had
the black-white state of one randomly selected square
different than the original pattern.
A pilot study was done to control for the relative
difficulty of the spatial and verbal interference tasks. The
number of squares in the spatial interference task (36) and
the length of the number of digits in the verbal interference
task (8) were selected such that participants performed
equally well at the discrimination task for the two

interference tasks (0.72 vs. 0.73, spatial vs. verbal
interference, t(21) < 1, p = 0.58). Participants in the pilot
study were not exposed to any categorization trials.
The complexity of the verbal and spatial tasks differed
from those used by Winawer et al. (2007). They used a
verbal string of length 8 and a 4 by 4 grid for their spatial
pattern.
Using a pretest they found no significant
differences in accuracy on the interference judgment for
those two tasks. In our pilot study, we found a significant
difference on discrimination performance (with no
categorization training) between their two conditions (0.76
vs. 0.71, spatial vs. verbal, t(21) = 2.26, p = 0.03).
Phase 1: Mixed Categorization and Discrimination Phase
one consisted of two blocks of 120 categorization learning
and discrimination trials presented without interference
tasks. This allowed participants to begin learning the correct
categories before introducing interference tasks. Trials were
randomly mixed such that for each mini-block of 15
consecutive trials, 8 trials were categorization and 7 were
discrimination, randomly ordered and intermixed. Note that
participants did not know the type of judgment they would
have to make (categorization or discrimination) until after
the stimulus disappeared. This manipulation increases the
relevance of processing category-level information during
discrimination. The first block of phase one discrimination
trials was used as a baseline measurement of performance
before learning.
Phase 2: Interference Tasks with Mixed Categorization
and Discrimination Phase two consisted of 21 mini-blocks
composed of eight categorization and eight discrimination
trials presented in a random order. Of the 21 blocks, seven
had a verbal interference task, seven had a spatial
interference task, and seven had no interference task. The
order of mini-blocks was randomized across participants.

Results
For all analyses presented below, responses faster than 150
ms (less than 2% of all responses) were excluded from
analysis. Including these fast trials in the analyses does not
change the significance of the results.
Interference Task Performance In phase two participants
demonstrated above chance performance on the spatial
interference task (M = 0.89, SD = 0.08, t(110) = 31.5, p <
0.001) and the verbal interference task (M = 0.95, SD =
0.13, t(110) = 59.4, p < 0.001). A paired-sample t-test
found a significant difference in performance between
accuracy on the two test types (t(110) = 4.51, p < 0.001).
Participants were more accurate on the verbal interference
task.
Categorization Performance In phase two participants
demonstrated above chance categorization performance in
the no interference condition (M = 0.83, SD = 0.12, t(110) =
28.3, p < 0.001), the verbal interference condition (M=0.82,
SD = 0.12, t(110) = 28.9, p < 0.001), and the spatial
interference condition (M = 0.82, SD = 0.12, t(110) = 28.2,
p < 0.001). There was not a significant difference in

1218

categorization performance across interference conditions
(F(2,220) = 0.1, Mse = 0.0003, p = 0.9).
Discrimination Performance Discrimination trials were
classified based on the relationship of the target and foil
face stimuli and the category boundary. Trials were
classified as within-cluster if both faces were contained in
the same group, and therefore within the same category as
well. If the faces were in different clusters but still in the
same category, those trials were classified as withincategory. All remaining trials contained faces that were in
different categories and were classified as betweencategory.
Discrimination performance during phase two, containing
interference tasks (blocks 3 and 4), was assessed as a change
in performance relative to a baseline performance on
discrimination trials. The average for each participant of all
discrimination trials in the first block (all possible 56
discrimination pairs) of phase one was used as this baseline
measure. Removing baseline performance minimizes the
variance due to any initial differences in discrimination
ability across individuals. In all the following analyses this
change in discrimination performance was used as the
dependent measure.
Discrimination Performance across all Interference
Tasks A repeated-measures ANOVA with discrimination
type (3 levels) as a within-subject variable found a
significant main effect of discrimination type on change in
discrimination performance (F(2, 220) = 14.83, Mse = 0.06,
p < 0.001). Planned comparisons between discrimination
types found significant differences between betweencategory and within-category conditions (t(110) = 2.63, p =
0.010), between within-category and within-cluster
conditions (t(110) = 2.61, p = 0.010), and between betweencategory and within-cluster conditions (t(110) = 5.98, p <
0.001).

Figure 2 shows these results support the predicted pattern
of results and replicate the general pattern of results reported
in Gureckis and Goldstone (2008). The learned CP effect
was found: perceptual discriminations that span category
boundaries showing the largest increase. Participants also
learned the internal structure of categories, reflected in the
significant difference between within-category and withincluster perceptual discriminations, where discriminations
that span within-category clusters had a larger increase. The
main difference from Gureckis and Goldstone (2008) was
that an increase in perceptual discrimination was found for
all discrimination types (Gureckis and Goldstone (2008)
found a non-significant decrease in the within-cluster
condition).
Discrimination Performance within Interference Tasks
A repeated-measures ANOVA with interference condition
(3 levels: none, verbal, and spatial) and discrimination task
(3 levels: as above) was performed with change in
discrimination performance as the dependent measure. A
main effect of discrimination type was found (F(2,220) =
14.78, Mse = 0.19, p < 0.001). Surprisingly, there was no
main effect of interference task (F(2,220) = 0.29, Mse =
0.003, p = 0.75), nor a significant interaction between
discrimination type and interference condition (F(4,440) =
0.77, Mse = 0.008, p = 0.55). Figure 3 shows this result.

Figure 3: The effect of discrimination type and
interference condition on change in discrimination
performance relative to baseline (block 1). Participants
show a consistent pattern in which Between-category
improvement is greater than Within-category improvement,
which is greater than Within-cluster improvement. There is
no effect of interference condition or an interaction with
discrimination type. All error bars are standard errors.

Figure 2: The change in discrimination performance
relative to baseline averaged across interference condition.
Participants show an increase in discrimination performance
for all discrimination types relative to baseline (block 1), but
a larger increase for judgments that cross category or cluster
boundaries than are within-cluster. All error bars are
standard errors.

1219

Within each interference condition the same pattern of
results hold as across all conditions. Between-category
discriminations increase more relative to baseline than
within-category, which increases more than within-cluster.
The difference in improvement between between-category
and within-category is marginally significant for the no
interference (t(110) = 1.80, p = 0.075) and the spatial
interference conditions (t(110) = 1.79, p = 0.077), and not
significant for the verbal interference condition (t(110) =
1.34, p = 0.18). The difference between within-category
and within-cluster improvement is significant in the verbal
interference condition (t(110) = 2.50, p = 0.01), marginally
significant for the no interference condition (t(110) = 1.81, p
= 0.073), and not significant in the spatial interference
condition (t(110) < 1, p = 0.75). The difference in
improvement between between-category and within-cluster
is significant for all interference conditions (none (t(110) =
3.75, p < 0.001), spatial (t(110) = 4.47, p < 0.001), and
verbal (t(110) = 4.47, p < 0.001).
Discrimination Performance grouped by Categorization
Performance Following Gureckis and Goldstone (2008), an
analysis was performed on the effect of discrimination task
on discrimination performance within mini-blocks as a
function of the accuracy of categorization trials within that
mini-block. For each participant, mini-blocks selected from
trials in phase two were grouped based on categorization
accuracy within the mini-block into high categorization (75100%, 322 mini-blocks among 107 subjects), medium
categorization (50-75%, 312 mini-blocks among 79
subjects), and low categorization (0-50%, 124 mini-blocks
among 22 subjects). Figure 4 shows these results.

Figure 5: The effects of discrimination type and
interference condition on change in discrimination
performance relative to baseline for mini-blocks in which
categorization accuracy was above 75%. Participants show a
consistent pattern in which Between-category improvement
is greater than Within-category improvement, which is
greater than Within-cluster improvement. There is no effect
of interference condition or an interaction with
discrimination type. All error bars are standard errors.
The pattern of results in the high categorization accuracy
set follows those of Gureckis and Goldstone (2008). The
pattern among low categorization performance mini-blocks
may be an artifact of having few participants at that level.
Looking specifically in the high categorization
performance group (figure 5) where CP effects were
predicted to be strongest and thus easiest to see an influence
of interference condition, a repeated-measures ANOVA was
performed with interference condition (3 levels) and
discrimination type (3 levels) as within-subject factors.
There was a significant main effect of discrimination type
(F(2, 214) = 8.56, Mse = 0.19, p < 0.001) but not of
interference condition (F(2,214) = 0.4, Mse = 0.009, p =
0.66) and no significant interaction between the two factors
(F(4,424) = 0.68, Mse = 0.02, p = 0.60).
The high-categorization mini-block results echo our
previous results (Figure 3) showing a strong effect of
discrimination type but no influence or interaction with
interference condition.

Discussion
Figure 4: All bars are standard error bars but not all
conditions had the same number of participants.
Participants who did not have any low categorization
accuracy mini-blocks did not contribute to the number of
participants in the low categorization conditions. The small
number of observations in the within-category low accuracy
condition may have contributed to what appears to be a
spuriously high increase in that condition.

Consistent with Gureckis and Goldstone (2008), we found
strong evidence for learned categorical perception across the
category boundary as well as learned sensitivity to the
structure of information within the categories. This learning
effect was strongest when averaged across all interference
conditions, but the same pattern was exhibited in each
interference condition: between-category discriminations
improved the most, followed by within-category
discriminations,
and
within-cluster
discriminations

1220

improved the least. This pattern was found within each
interference condition with varying degrees of reliability.
As predicted, it was also consistently found in mini-blocks
that had high accuracy on categorization trials, more so than
in blocks with low categorization accuracy.
Surprisingly, we did not find any indication that the
interference tasks modulated the effects of increased
discrimination. No main effect of interference condition
was found in any discrimination types, across either
category boundaries or within-category structures. This
pattern was also found in mini-blocks with high
categorization accuracy and in all discrimination types. The
lack of interaction between interference condition and
discrimination type is less startling than the lack of main
effect of interference condition on overall discrimination
performance because the difficulty of the spatial and verbal
interference tasks was selected based on pilot data to have a
relatively equal effect on perceptual discrimination tasks.
The lack of main effect of interference condition is
consistent with the results of Russian speakers in the
Winawer et al. (2007) study (who only found an interaction
between interference condition and the CP effect), though
their interference tasks were pretested to equate for accuracy
on the interference task itself. Winawer et al. also did not
find an interaction between categorical perception and
interference condition among the English speakers who did
not show a main effect of categorical perception. This is not
consistent with learners in our task who did show
categorical perception, as well as sensitivity to intercategory structure, but did not show an interaction with
interference condition.
This current work suggests that firmly entrenched verbal
labels, such as color names (Winawer et al., 2007) or basic
shapes (Lupyan, 2009), may be necessary to see verbal
interference effects in perceptual discrimination. The
incidentally learned information about the structure of
categories that underlies the results found in Gureckis and
Goldstone (2008) and replicated here may not have verbal
labels attached that are influenced by an interference task.
Instead, the preservation of this pattern across interference
conditions is consistent with the non-verbally mediated
account of CP that directs the focus of learning toward
learning to weight perceptual dimensions rather than rely on
verbal labels for categories. Clearly, the lack of effect of
interference task does not justify strong claims about the
nature of learned CP effects. However it does suggest that
for non-automated categories verbal labels might not tell the
whole story about what learning drives CP. Further work is
needed to bridge the gap between our understanding of
entrenched categories that do show verbal interference
effects and newly-learned categories that might not, and
how representations may change to incorporate more
information about verbal labels.

References
Goldstone, R. (1994). Influence of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123(2), 178-200.
Goldstone, R. L., & Hendrickson, A. T. (2009). Categorical
Perception. Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science,
1, 69-78.
Gureckis, T. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2008). The effect of
internal structure of categories on perception.
Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 1876-1881). Washington,
D.C.: Cognitive Science Society.
Harnad, S. (Ed.). (1987). Categorical perception: The
groundwork of cognition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Harnad, S., Hanson, S., & Lubin, J. (1995). Learned
categorical perception in neural nets: Implications for
symbol grounding. In V. Honavar & L. Uhr (Eds.),
Symbol processors and connectionist network models in
artificial intelligence and cognitive modeling: Steps
toward principled integration (p. 191-206). Boston:
Academic Press.
Kayser, A. (1997). Heads. New York: Abbeville Press.
Liberman, A. M., Harris, K. S., Hoffman, H. S., & Griffith,
B. C. (1957). The discrimination of speech sounds within
and across phoneme boundaries. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54, 358-368.
Logan, J., Lively, S., & Pisoni, D. (1991). Training Japanese
listeners to identify English /r/ and /l/: A first report.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 89, 874886.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A Network Model of Category Learning.
Psychological Review, 111(2), 309-332.
Lupyan, G. (2008). The conceptual grouping effect:
Categories matter (and named categories matter more).
Cognition, 108, 566-577.
Lupyan, G. (2009). Extracommunicative functions of
language:
Verbal
interference
causes
selective
categorization impairments. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 16, 711-718.
Steyvers, M. (1999). Morphing techniques for generating
and manipulating face images. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 31, 359-369.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M. C., Wu, L., Wade, A.
R., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal effects
of language on color discrimination. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104, 7780-7785.

1221

