UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Large differences in the distribution of instances of common object-based categories in
early childhood
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/66t4x86q
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Pereira, Alfredo F.
James, Karin H.
Jones, Susan S.
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
  eScholarship.org                                   Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

           Large differences in the distribution of instances of common
                         object-based categories in early childhood
                                                Alfredo F. Pereira
                                            Indiana University Bloomington
                                                 Karin H. James
                                            Indiana University Bloomington
                                                 Susan S. SJones
                                            Indiana University Bloomington
                                                  Linda B. Smith
                                            Indiana University Bloomington
Abstract: Few studies have documented the examples of common early-learned object-based categories children
actually encounter. This study asked parents (N = 10) to record, using a digital camera, the concrete instances their
children saw (M = 16 mo). For five days, if an object was labeled with one of the nouns inside a pre-determined
list of eight nouns, parents were to take a photo–our final dataset consisted of 700 photos. We coded the contents of
each photo as: 3D real object, 3D realistic toy, 3D simple shape toy, 2D realistic object, and 2D simple shape.
   Our results show large differences between categories in terms of type of exemplars: mostly composed of 3D real
objects, with a mixture of 3D and 2D variability, or only experienced as 2D images.
   These results are relevant to theories of visual object categorization–e.g. in understanding viewpoint invariance,
or perception of abstract structural shape.
                                                          651

