UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning to Explore the World through its Statistics: Infants’ Visual Search in the A-not-B
task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2ms713wm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Popick, Hanna
Ramscar, Michael
Kirkham, Natasha

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning to Explore the World through its Statistics:
Infants’ Visual Search in the A-not-B task
Hanna Popick (hmuenke@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
450 Serra Mall, Jordan Hall
Stanford, CA 94305, USA

Michael Ramscar (ramscar@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
450 Serra Mall, Jordan Hall
Stanford, CA 94305, USA

Natasha Kirkham (Natasha.Kirkham@gmail.com)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London
London, Malet Street, WC1E7HX, England

Abstract
In searching for hidden objects, infants younger than 12
months frequently commit “A-not-B errors,” in which they
successfully search for an object in one location (A) and then
fail to search for it when it is conspicuously hidden in a new
location (B). Why do they fail to make the switch and
perseverate at the first location? Although these errors have
often been attributed to cognitive and conceptual limitations,
we suggest that the answer is far more basic: in order to
search successfully, children must first learn to do so. In what
follows, we present an error-driven learning account of “Anot-B” search which suggests that failing to make the switch
is an essential part of learning the appropriate searching cues
and contextual search strategies. We elaborate the findings of
an eye-tracking experiment with 9 month-olds that
behaviorally confirms the predictions of our learning model.
Keywords: error-driven learning; search; A-not-B; feedback

It is Monday morning. You haven’t seen your car keys
since Friday evening. Where do you look for them? In an
ideal world, you will go straight to where you last saw
them. As an adult, you will have learned from previous
experience that keys are not (usually) assigned random
locations, and that what best predicts a key’s location is the
conjunction of a given spot and that spot being the most
recent place the keys were seen. In a less than ideal world,
however, you may not remember where you last saw the
keys; other memories might compete with your specific
memories from Friday. Indeed, when you aren’t precisely
sure where you last saw the keys, you may check the hook
where you usually keep them first, because you know that
searching at a location where they keys are seen frequently
can (on other days) be a successful search strategy.
This story illustrates the task a child faces in learning to
find things in the world. A child must learn that some things
are most likely found at the location they were last seen,

while other things are most likely found they are most often
seen (while it makes sense to look for keys in the last place
you saw them, if you haven’t seen your cat for a while, you
would be best off looking in the most frequent place the cat
is found), and that a successful search will involve weighing
these considerations against what the child remembers about
the last and most frequent locations of an object. From this
perspective, “perseverative errors,” in which a child
searches for an object in a most frequent location rather than
a most recent, can be seen as a misapplication of what in
other circumstances might be a logical strategy.
Piaget (1954) first described what are often called “A-notB errors” in infants, namely that 8- to 12-month infants will
generally search successfully for an object in an initial
location (A) and then fail to search for it when it is
conspicuously hidden in a new location (B) instead,
continuing to search at location A. Subsequent studies have
confirmed that in actively searching for hidden objects,
infants robustly commit this prototypical A-not-B error,
ignoring the last location of an object when they reach for it
(see Marcovitch & Zelazo, 1999 for a meta-analyses). In
seeking explanations for this reaching behavior, accounts
have tended to assume that infants’ errors stem from
problems associated with implementing a correct search,
such as limited working memory and inhibitory control, or
from weak memory traces for the object and hiding location
(e.g. Baillargeon, Graber, Devos, & Black, 1990; Diamond,
1988; Diamond, Cruttenden, & Neiderman, 1994;
Munakata, 1997; Thelen, Schöner, Scheier, & Smith, 2001).
In what follows, we take a slightly different approach to
thinking about the prevalence of the perseverative searching
behavior. Rather than assuming that a child “knows” how to
search, all other things (object concepts, memory, etc.)
being equal, we consider what might be expected when
children are learning how to search. As noted above, in

1863

learning to find objects, children have to figure out which
strategy is appropriate in a particular context.
We consider the question of how children learn to
discriminate between possible object retrieval strategies in a
given context within the framework provided by formal
learning theories (e.g. Rescorla & Wagner, 1972), which
view learning as a process of acquiring information about
the relationships between salient events (outcomes) in the
environment, and the cues that allow those outcomes to be
predicted. From this perspective, children’s learning to
search is a process of trial and error, each iteration of which
strengthens or weakens cues depending on how well they
predict an outcome (termed error-driven learning). While
from an adult perspective, children’s “perseverative” search
may be erroneous, we suggest that from an infant
perspective, their behavior is rational in following the often
accurate cue of where something has been found most
frequently. In the approach of learning theories, A-not-B
“errors” are an inevitable, and logical, step along the path to
adult search expertise, as infants go through the process of
learning which situational cues best predict an outcome.

Mastering Search
In considering perseveration as part of a logical learning
strategy, it is interesting to note that it is also evident when
infants learn other (novel) relationships between cues and
outcomes, and not just in hiding events. Aguiar &
Baillargeon (2000), showed that 7-month-old infants
perseverated in pulling a towel that had previously had a toy
on it, even when the toy was now visibly on a different
towel, and Smith, Thelen, Titzer, & McLin (1999) found
that directing infants’ attention to lids in an A-not-B pattern
drew reaching behavior similar to when objects were
hidden. These examples suggest that the perseverative
response has more to do with the process of learning where
to direct an action than particular properties of the objects or
hiding events themselves. Munakata (1997) found that
perseveration was reduced if the experimenter waved lids at
A, but then hid a toy at B, suggesting that infants learn
about particular outcomes at particular locations, such that if
a different outcome is observed at a new location, it is less
influenced by prior evidence.
Thus, it appears that A-not-B errors are not only due to
prior motor habit (given that infants can switch when a new
object is hidden at the new location), or by infants having
trouble conceptualizing objects or not being interested in
them (given that they search successfully at the first
location). Infants appear to “understand” the task, so why do
they fail to search correctly after a switch in location?
As we noted above, successfully searching for an object
involves weighing a number of cues to its likely location: its
last location, its usual location, the independent mobility of
the object, etc. If a child doesn’t know how to weigh those
items correctly in search, then in the early stages of learning
within a particular context, cues learned when an object is

hidden at location A and then reappears at A may suggest to
the infant that location A is the most likely location a hidden
object will reappear from. When the object is first hidden at
location B, the infant will have no experience of objects
reappearing at B, and given that the situational cues
provided by an object being at A and an object hidden at B
overlap, the infant’s best guess ought to be that the object
will reappear at A. Given only this information, a child thus
ought to continue to search at location A when the object
has first been hidden at location B.
Over time, if we assume that the child in the A-not-B
task is capable of learning (e.g., Rescorla & Wagner, 1972),
the error resulting from incorrect searches at location A
during trials when the object is hidden and retrieved from
location B will weaken the cues that continue to predict that
an object will be at location A. At the same time, cues
supporting the prediction that location B is the correct
location will strengthen. Eventually, the cues predicting
that the object will reappear at location B will have more
support than those predicting that it will reappear at A, and
the infant will slowly come expect the object at B.
Moreover, since the cues supporting the general “search
at the most frequent location” response will generate error
over time as hiding locations are switched, while
conjunctive cues that support searching at the specific place
an object was last seen will continue to be accurate, this
process will gradually result in conjunctive cues (that favor
the most recent location) over cues favoring search at the
most frequent location. Thus, the infant will gradually learn
to weigh search strategies within a context from the
evidence of their success and failure, and will then come to
resemble the adult strategies described above.
Further, although we have talked so far about children
‘learning to search,’ the evidence is that children do not
initially appear to learn abstract, generalized “search.”
While 9-month-old infants succeed in Aguiar &
Baillargeon's (2000) towel pulling task, they still fail the
standard A-not-B task (Piaget, 1954), even though the tasks
are structurally similar. Rather than learning abstract
“search,” it appears that children may instead learn search
and retrieval strategies within particular contexts.
To formally illustrate how children might learn the
appropriate search strategy in the A-not-B task, we
simulated this process using the Rescorla-Wagner (1972)
learning model. In the model the change in associative
strength between a cue Ci and a relevant environmental
event Ej given a learning trial n is defined to be:
!Vijn =! i " j (#j – Vtotal)
This rule specifies how the associative strength (V) between
individual cues (Ci) and an event (Ej) changes as a result of
discrete exposure trials, where n indexes the current trial
(Vtotal is the sum of the associative strengths between all CSs
present on the current trial and USj). The individual saliency
of cues can be denoted by a parameter "i (where Ci 0 ! "i !
1), the rate at which cues are learned with respect to an

1864

event is determined by a learning rate parameter #j (where 0
! #j ! 1), and the maximum amount of associative strength
that an event Ej can support is denoted by value $j, such that
the amount learned by the set of cues on a given trial is the
value of #j – Vtotal, modulated by # and ".
In simulating children learning about the two locations (A
and B) of the A-not-B task, we assume that on each trial
infants will search at the location that they most strongly
associate with the object’s reappearance, and that the
outcome of each search, either finding the object or not, will
be incorporated into task learning and affect later search
behavior. To reflect the fact that infants will most likely
spend longer looking towards the location at which they
expect objects to reappear (keeping in mind that this may
not match the location in which the object was hidden), the
saliency of the unattended location was set lower than that
rate for the attended location.1 This allowed the model to
reflect the likelihood that infants would learn less quickly
about location B when they were still primarily attending to
A. This meant that, as a consequence of their attending to A,
infants were initially slow to learn about hiding events at B.
To initially examine the learning problem facing an
infant, we simulated the learning of cues that represented
each location, and the strength of association between those
cues and the object. Figure 1 shows these associative
strengths changing across the trials (first at location A, then
at location B) of a typical A-not-B task. Initially the
association for the object at location A increases as objects
are being hidden there. The association with location A then
decreases slowly when hiding events begin at location B,
because the error associated with unsuccessful search at
location A reduces the value of cues predicting location A.
For cues associated with location only, the model predicts
that if hiding were to be later switched back to location A,
learning to search at A would again proceed slowly, given
that B is now strongly associated with the object’s location.
However, unlike this model, which predicts that an infant
will simply search at the location most associated with an
object, children do eventually succeed on the A-not-B task,
switching back and forth with ease, suggesting they need to
learn about the conjunction between a location and the most
recent hiding event. To reflect this, we added conjunctive
cues to the model. The changing associative strength of the
conjunctive cues, along with those of the simple location
cues discussed previously, is shown in Figure 1. During the
initial hiding events at A, there is nothing to distinguish
between the simple and conjunctive cues, because each
predicts the correct outcome at location A. However, after
the switch in locations, the associative strengths of the

1

"i=0.05 for attended stimuli and 0.075 for unattended stimuli; the
other parameter values for the simulations reported were: $ =
100% when the keys are visible at a given location or 0% when
they are not visible at a given location and #j=0.5.

simple cues are weakened because they fail to predict the
object location as well as the conjunctive cues.

Figure 1: A Rescorla-Wagner model of cue competition
between two cues representing location only, and two
conjunctive cues representing last known location. The
model shows associations with the hidden object across two
trials at A, then four trials at B, then hiding events
alternating between the two locations.

Learning and Visual search: Experiment 1
We suggested above that A-not-B errors are the result of a
particular kind of search in a particular context, and that the
relationships (and similarities) between the particular cues
observed and the particular outcomes expected from those
cues is a very important component in shaping children’s
early search behaviors. To examine our account of learning
to search, we conducted a study of the visual search
behavior of infants in an A-not-B paradigm using eyetracking. Though the standard A-not-B task generally
involves infants reaching for hidden physical objects, if our
hypothesis about the need for infants to learn appropriate
search strategies is correct, we would expect the same
pattern of behavior to be apparent across modalities (see
also Diamond, 1990; Hofstadter & Reznick, 1996; Bell &
Adams, 1999). In addition, by measuring eye gaze across
the duration of a specified search period in which both
hiding locations were visible but neither was cued, we
sought to acquire a continuous measure of children’s
attention to—and association between—each of the two
regions and the objects shown to have been hidden there.

Methods
Participants 32 9-month-old infants successfully completed
our testing procedure (range 8 months 17 days to 9 months
17 days, median 9 months 7 days; 16 males). An additional
13 infants failed to complete the experiment due to
fussiness.
Participants were recruited from a volunteer

1865

pool, which reflects the properties of the community
surrounding Stanford University.
Stimuli Stimuli were movies of colorful keys, accompanied
by music. The keys were familiarized in center screen, and
were then shown moving across the screen and disappearing
into a bucket on one side of the screen. An identical bucket
was present on the other side of the screen.
Following the disappearance of the keys, a pinwheel
distracter appeared in the center of the screen for three
seconds, then disappeared. For the following four seconds
only the buckets were visible, while the music that
accompanied the keys was played to encourage searching.
After the four-second search period, the keys reappeared
from the same bucket into which they had disappeared,
before moving back towards center screen. The pinwheel
animation then reappeared in center screen and remained
until infants’ attended to it, at which point the next trial
began.
Procedure and design Participants sat on a caregiver’s lap
during testing, facing a 152cm projection screen, which was
approximately 180cm from them. An Applied Science
Laboratories (ASL) Model 504 corneal reflection eye
tracking system collected eye movement data as infants
were shown the stimulus displays. A computer script
translated the gaze coordinates recorded by the system into
gaze durations to regions of interest (ROI) defined around
each of the hiding wells during the 4-second search period
after each hiding event.
Infants were shown the key-hiding sequence six times: the
keys were hidden twice in the bucket on one side of the
screen, and then four times in the bucket on the other side of
the screen, mimicking the sequence of a typical A-not-B
task. Side of initial presentation was counterbalanced across
participants.
Results and Discussion Looking-time data are presented as
a difference in milliseconds between the amount of looking
to the two ROIs, with positive values reflecting greater
looking (bias) towards the A-side, and negative values
reflecting greater looking (bias) towards the B side,
calculated for each participant on each trial.
For data-analysis, the six trials were grouped into three
pairs; the first two trials, in which the keys were shown
hidden in location A, are labeled ‘A trials’; the two
subsequent trials, immediately following the switch to the
new hiding location B are labeled ‘early B trials’; and the
last two trials in location B are labeled ‘later B trials.’
Because not all of the infant participants provided clean data
from all six trials, pairing the trial data in this way allowed
some missing cells to be filled in. Data was averaged for
both trials if available, but if only one trial of the pair had
clean data, then this trial was used.

Although the display shown to the infants was intended to
mimic the manual A-not-B search task in presentation, the
presentation could not be infant-controlled in the same way
that manual studies can. In a manual search task, the toys
can continue to be hidden at location A until the infant has
reached a success criterion for searching at that location,
ensuring that the infant has been attending to, and learning
about, the hiding events; however, in the current visual
search task, we were unable to employ such a criterion
accurately in real time.
Therefore, the presentation of
hiding events continued without any performance-based
contingency. Because our visual search task did not require
success at location A prior to the switch in hiding to
location B, we expected that there might be individual
differences among the participants in extent of learning
about location A, and that this difference might affect later
search behavior. Consistent with the design of our model,
we would not expect children to learn about hiding events
that occurred at a location to which they were not attending.
We considered two possible measures of how much
children learned about hiding events at location A. One that
is predicted by the model is that infants who attend more to
the actual hiding event, as the keys move towards the
location in which is will be hidden, learn more about it.
However, infants are capable of deploying covert attention,
such that gaze does not necessarily imply attention (e.g.
Johnson, M.H., Posner, M. & Rothbart, M.K., 1994).
Therefore, we decided to use infants’ looking behavior
during the search period of hiding events at location A as
evidence for how much they learned about those events.
Following a hiding event at location A, an infant who looks
a lot at the ROI for location A, and little at the ROI at
location B, demonstrates a greater expectation for the object
to be at (and reappear from) location A – the infant has
learned something about what to expect about hiding events
in the context! As might be expected, there is a correlation
in the trials at location A between how much infants attend
to the object as it moves towards a hiding location, and how
much they look at location A during the search period
(r=.456, p=.005), but in terms of making predictions about
later search expectations, the actual extent of learning
demonstrated during trials at location A seems more directly
relevant as a measure, which is why we have chosen to
focus on that.
Analysis confirmed that infants in the study varied in how
much they looked towards location A during the search
period of A trials, with 17 infants who (accurately) looked
more at location A and another group of 15 infants who
looked more at location B during that search period. An
ANOVA comparing the searching patterns across the study
between these two groups of infants (who searched
differently during A trials) revealed the anticipated
difference in the patterns of infants’ looking across the
study, F(2,90)=34.597, p<.001. Accordingly, the children
were separated for remaining analyses: an ‘attenders’ group

1866

of children who looked more to A during the initial search
trials, and a ‘non-attenders’ group who looked more to B
during the initial search trials even though the keys were
hidden at location A.
A further omnibus ANOVA, including attending status as
a variable, revealed an overall ‘side’ x ‘time’ interaction,
F(1,92)=2.622, p=.022, and a ‘side’ x ‘attending status’
interaction, F(1,92)=5.435, p<.001 (Figure 2). These results
revealed an overall change in where the infants were
looking during the search period across trials, and that this
change was driven by the attenders, who searched first at
location A and then changed their locus of search over time,
as more hiding events occurred at location B.
Unsurprisingly, the non-attenders did not change their
searching behavior throughout the study.

attenders elucidate this learning, with a regression showing
that the extent of the searching bias A events “predicted” the
extent of bias on early B-trials, p=.018, a relationship that
was not significant for non-attenders.
The non-attenders, who did not learn about location A or
the hiding events that occurred there, were not expected to
behave in the same way as the attenders. While these nonattenders showed a main effect of side, F(1,42)=10.979,
p=.002, this resulted from more overall looking to location
B, t(1,43)=7.282, p<.001.
More distinctly from the
attenders, the non-attending infants did not change their
looking bias over the course of the trials in different
locations, F(1,42)=.378, ns. Since the non-attenders failed to
notice the hiding events at A, there was no reason that they
should later begin to search there. The fact that the nonattenders do not change their bias over time suggests that
changes in search do not result simply from regression to
the mean (a possible concern, because groups were split
based on early search behavior), but reflect different
patterns of learning over time in the two groups.

General Discussion

Figure 2: A plot of the difference in looking time to
locations A and B across the visual search A-not-B task,
(with the first two trials at location A and the remaining at
location B) for each of the two groups (those who searched
more at location A during the first two trials, attenders, and
those who did not, non-attenders.
An analysis of the visual search of the attenders revealed
a change in looking bias across the trials, with decreasing
looking to location A, F(1,49)=14.057, p<.001. Despite this
trend however, there was still a main effect of side in the
study, F(1,49)=29.468, p<.001, with significantly more
looking to A (M=2038 ms) than B (M=1192 ms),
t(1,50)=4.611, p<.001, even there are twice as many hiding
events at B than at A over the course of the experiment. This
overall greater searching at location A within the attending
group is noteworthy because it demonstrates the same
perseverative trend seen in the typical A-not-B task with
manual search. Along with the overall perseverative trend,
however, the data are also consistent with the learning
model presented. Specifically, children’s searching at the
formerly correct location gradually lessens as the cues that
predict that location are weakened following hiding events
in a new location, and the rate of learning to search the
alternative location is also slowed until attention shifts away
from the initial location. Individual differences among the

Children who initially learned about an object hidden at one
location continued to search visually at that location even
after the object was hidden elsewhere, but then showed a
gradual shift in their search behavior away from the initial
location and towards the new location. This pattern of data
is consistent with the idea that learning is a function of
experience and the expectations that experience produces
(Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; Ramscar, Yarlett, Dye, Denny,
Thorpe, in press; Ramscar & Dye, 2009) and suggests that
when infants initially learn that objects will appear from A,
they will “perseverate” in that response before gradually
learning to predict the objects’ appearance at B. The
correlation between the attenders’ bias during A trials and
the early B trials, but not the later B trials, also supports the
idea that the initial bias towards A must be unlearned, and
that this will happen only as more hiding / appearance
events are shown at location B (see also Diedrich, Thelen,
Smith, & Corbetta, 2000). This gradual change in looking
preference over time supports our hypothesis that search is
something children have to learn, and that success or failure
at different kinds of search is, to a degree, a matter of
contextual experience.
Our results further suggest that infants given the same
exposure to a particular hiding location may actually learn
differently about it, in part because of the degree to which
they attend to training. This variability in attending might
not be evident in a reaching paradigm. For example, the
results of a recent A-not-B study by Topal, Gergely,
Miklosi, Erohegyi & Csibra (2008) are consistent with the
idea that the degree to which children attend to hiding
events at location A will impact the degree to which they
perseverate in search to that location rather than a new
hiding location. In their study, Topal et al. found that infants

1867

who were directed to hiding events with the highest level of
engagement (both words and gestures) later showed the
greatest perseveration to location A, while a group who saw
only gestures was more likely to switch successfully to
searching at location B. Although the groups had similar
rates of searching at location A, that does not necessarily
imply equal attention to or learning about hiding events in
that location, because any attention drawn to location A
should make a reach there more likely than to another
location, given the forced-choice single measure outcome. A
more continuous measure of attending or learning during
trials at location A, such as eye tracking, could have
confirmed whether this later difference in perseveration was
because attention was actually increased to location A when
the experimenter verbally engaged the infants, thereby
increasing their learning about that location, and therefore
increasing the time it took them to unlearn their response to
location A, therefore leading to the observed greater
perseveration to location A after the change in hiding
location.
While there is much to explain with regards to the
development of children’s ability to search—and not least
how the learning of conjunctive cues over extended trials
might impact performance on the A-not-B task—we believe
that there is insight to be gained from seeing infants’
behavior in the A-not-B task in terms of learning to search,
and the patterns of behavior that accompany such learning,
rather than as a failure to search correctly. Not only does
this approach offer an answer to the often puzzling search
behavior of children, but we believe that the combination of
eye-tracking and computational modeling methods used in
the current study provide a useful formal framework for
addressing these questions.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant Nos. 0547775 and 0624345
to Michael Ramscar. We are grateful to Melody Dye for
insightful comments and discussions. We also thank the
participants, and Research Assistants.

References
Aguiar, A., & Baillargeon, R. (2000). Perseveration and
problem solving in infancy. In H. Reese (Ed.), Advances
in child development and behavior (Vol. 27, pp. 135-180).
New York: Academic Press.
Baillargeon, R., Graber, M., Devos, J., & Black, J. (1990).
Why do young infants fail to search for hidden objects?
Cognition, 36(3), 255-284.
Bell, M. A., & Adams, S. E. (1999). Comparable
performance on looking and reaching versions of the Anot-B task at 8 months of age. Infant Behavior and
Development, 22(2), 221–235.

Diamond, A. (1988). Abilities and neural mechanisms
Underlying AB Performance. Child Development, 59(2),
523-527.
Diamond, A. (1990). The development and neural bases of
memory functions as indexed by the AB and delayed
response tasks in human infants and infant monkeys. In
A. Diamond (Ed.), The development and neural bases of
higher cognitive functions (pp. 267-309). New York: New
York Academy of Sciences Press.
Diamond, A., Cruttenden, L., & Neiderman, D. (1994). AB
with multiple wells: 1. Why are multiple wells sometimes
easier than two wells? 2. Memory or memory+ inhibition.
Developmental Psychology, 30(2), 192–205.
Diedrich, F. J., Thelen, E., Smith, L. B., & Corbetta, D.
(2000). Motor memory is a factor in infant perseverative
errors. Developmental Science, 3(4), 479-494.
Hofstadter, M., & Reznick, J. S. (1996). Response modality
affects human infant delayed-response Pperformance.
Child Development, 67(2), 646-658.
Johnson, M. H., Posner, M. I., Rothbart, M. K. (1994).
Facilitation of saccades toward a covertly attended
location in early infancy. Psychological Science, 5, 90-93.
Marcovitch, S., & Zelazo, P. D. (1999). The A-Not-B error:
Results from a logistic meta-analysis. Child Development,
70(6), 1297-1313.
Munakata, Y. (1997). Perseverative reaching in infancy:
The roles of hidden toys and motor history in the AB task.
Infant Behavior and Development, 20(3), 405–416.
Piaget, J. (1954). The Construction of Reality in the Child
(M. Cook, Trans.). New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Ramscar, M., & Dye, M. (2009) Expectation and negative
evidence in language learning: the curious absence of
mouses in adult speech. Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K. & Thorpe, K.
(in press). The Feature-Label-Order Effect in Symbolic
Learning. Cognitive Science.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A Theory of
Pavlovian Conditioning: Variations in the Effectiveness
of Reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black
& W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical Conditioning II:
Current Research and Theory (pp. 64-99). New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Smith, L. B., Thelen, E., Titzer, R., & McLin, D. (1999).
Knowing in the context of acting: the task dynamics of
the A-not-B error. Psychol Rev, 106(2), 235-260.
Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. B. (2001).
The dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant
perseverative reaching. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24(01), 1-34.
Topal, J., Gergely, G., Miklosi, A., Erohegyi, A., & Csibra,
G. (2008). Infants' perseverative search errors are induced
by pragmatic misinterpretation. Science, 321, 1831-1834.

1868

