UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning from Environmental Regularities is Grounded in Specific Objects not Abstract
Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7623p0fr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Emberson, Lauren
Rubinstein, Dani

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning from Environmental Regularities is Grounded in Specific Objects
not Abstract Categories
Lauren L. Emberson (lle7@cornell.edu)
Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology; Weill-Cornell Medical School
Box 140, 1300 York Ave., NY, NY 10065 USA

Dani Rubinstein (rubinsteind@mail.nih.gov)
MEG Core Facility, National Institute of Mental Health
Building 10 - Magnuson Clinical Center, B1D65B, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA
Abstract
This paper examines statistical learning in the presence of
predictive regularities at multiple levels of abstraction.
Participants were presented with streams of pictures where
picture order was predicted by both object identity and the
categories these objects belong to. In Experiment 1, we
establish that participants do learn based on the specific
objects and not solely at the abstract, categorical level. In
Experiment 2, we discount the possibility that participants
gain abstract knowledge in addition to more concrete, objectbased knowledge. Moreover, we consistently find equal
learning in those who viewed the atypical exemplars and
those who viewed the typical exemplars of the categories.
Overall, our results suggest that when learning from
environmental regularities, object-specific information takes
precedence over more abstract, category level information
when both are predictive.
Keywords: Statistical learning; environmental learning;
visual development; perceptual learning; object perception;
categorization.

Introduction
Throughout our lifetimes, it is clear that experience
shapes our mental model of the world. Focusing on
adulthood, adults learn to recognize new objects and
categories as well as new properties of familiar objects; they
learn new words and adapt to changing patterns in the
ambient language, all by adapting future behavior based on
experience. Despite the clear importance of learning from
information in the environment, the nature of the
mechanisms that support learning from real-world
experience is largely unknown. A central problem in this
literature is how learning mechanisms operate given the
richness of the information we get from the world. Are
learning mechanisms a priori constrained to learn particular
patterns? Can learning proceed along many types of
perceptual information and/or at different levels of
abstraction 1 simultaneously?
In this paper, we focus on a type of learning called
“statistical learning” where participants passively learn from

stimuli embedded with probabilistic information 2. Previous
research has supported the view that these experiential
learning mechanisms are unconstrained: statistical learning
has been demonstrated in multiple sensory modalities
(Conway & Christiansen, 2005), across a wide range of
perceptual input. For example, in the visual modality,
learning can occur from sequences of gestures (Baldwin,
Anderrson, Saffran, & Myers, 2007) as well as abstract
shapes (Fiser & Aslin, 2001). While the majority of these
studies have focused on learning probabilistic relations of
individual items or objects, there is evidence that learning
can occur at higher levels of informational abstraction
including over new categories of nonsense words (Saffran,
2002) and based on familiar semantic categories (Brady &
Oliva, 2008).
Overall, these studies support the view that environmental
learning is unconstrained. That is, if there is any reliability
probabilistic information in the environment, humans can
learn from it regardless of level of abstraction or perceptual
properties. If learning is entirely unconstrained, it is unclear
how learning mechanisms operate in complex environments
where information from multiple sources and at many levels
of abstraction abounds.
However, these behavioral demonstrations of an entirely
unconstrained learning mechanism arise from paradigms in
which information is only predictive at a single perceptual
and/or informational dimension. For example, while Brady
and Oliva (2008) demonstrate learning of categories of
scenes, participants were presented with a new scene from
the category during each successive presentation. In this
paradigm, individual scenes (e.g. beach1 and beach2) are not
predictive of picture order, only the category of pictures are
(e.g. a beach predict a kitchen but beach1 does not predict
kitchen1), thus it would be impossible for participants to
learn based on individual scenes. Thus, these results provide
an existence proof of an unconstrained learning mechanism
but they arise under specific, restricted conditions.
In actuality, environmental stimuli exhibit statistical
regularities at many levels of abstraction, simultaneously.
2

1

By “levels of abstraction” we are broadly referring to the
multiplicity of ways in which a cognitive system can represent a
given object or experience: e.g. your pet could be “Rex”, a beagle,
a dog, an animate being, a brown object etc.

In the current paradigm, a stream of pictures is embedded with
regularities that predict picture order—predictive regularities. If
participants learn from this probabilistic environmental
information, they should be able to distinguish picture orders that
they observed from scrambled or foil orders of pictures.

2518

For example, the predictive relationship between dogs and
leashes exists based on abstract categories as well as in the
actual objects or exemplars seen in the world (e.g. dogs
have their specific leashes). The learning paradigms
reviewed above do not reflect this important aspect of
information that we receive from the world: information is
often redundant across multiple levels of abstraction.
The current paper systematically investigates learning
where participants are exposed to environmental regularities
at multiple levels of abstraction. Do participants learn from
the multiple levels of predictive dependencies
simultaneously or are they biased to information at a certain
level of abstraction? To address this question, we devised a
novel statistical learning task where predictive regularities
are learnable and redundant at multiple levels of abstraction.
Specifically, participants were presented with sequences of
new exemplars from known categories. Both the categories
(e.g. dogs-fish, flowers-birds) and the individual exemplars
of these categories (e.g. dog1-fish1, dog2-fish2) were
predictive of picture order (see Figure 1). In two studies, we
examined whether participants learn simultaneously based
on both types of information or whether participants learn
preferentially based on categorical or object-based
regularities.
We believe that the current experimental design provides
ample opportunity for learning at the abstract, categorical
level. First, previous research has established that the
categories used in the current experiment are initially
processed at the basic-level (dog as opposed to the
subordinate level of beagle; Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson,
& Boyes-Braem, 1976) which is the level of categorical
regularities of the picture stream. Second, we employed the
same stimulus timing (short durations and long interstimulus-intervals) as employed by Brady and Oliva (2008)
which will likely tap into the fast, gist-based recognition of
the pictures. Finally, the stream has fewer pairs of categories
than objects (see Figure 1). Thus, category level learning is,
in some sense, easier than object-based learning.
Using the same methodology as Brady and Oliva (2008)
as described above, pilot testing confirmed that when
categorical regularities are predictive of picture order but
individual objects or exemplars are not participants can
learn based on categorical regularities: mean = 62.6%, t(13)
= 2.80, p < 0.05. These results confirm that if object-based
regularities are not present, category-level statistical
learning is possible using the current stimuli and categories.
Finally, in order to more closely examine how learning
proceeds at the categorical level of information, we
manipulated the typicality of the exemplars that participants
viewed: roughly half the participants were familiarized with
typical exemplars of the categories and the rest were
familiarized with atypical exemplars (see Appendix 1 for
the atypical exemplars). Research has consistently shown
that atypical exemplars are processed differently from
typical exemplars (Dale, Kehoe, & Spivey, 2007) and tend
to be more quickly processed below the basic-level
categories (e.g. penguin as opposed to bird; Jolicoeur,

Gluck, & Kosslyn, 1984). Thus, we expect the participants
familiarized with atypical exemplars to have weaker
learning at the category-level but equivalent learning at the
object or exemplar specific level. This typicality
manipulation provides another way to examine performance
for evidence of learning across different levels of
abstraction.

Experiment 1: Testing for
Object-Level Learning
The first experiment examines learning based on
regularities of individual objects where both objects and
object categories are predictive of picture order. Figure 1
illustrates a sample familiarization stream. We employed a
testing procedure that is well-established in the statistical
learning literature (e.g. Brady & Oliva, 2008; Fiser & Aslin,
2001): participants were asked to distinguish pairs of
pictures from familiarization (e.g. bird1-dog1) from a foil
pair created from the same pool of pictures but which
violates contingency pattern of the familiarization stream.
To isolate knowledge at the object-specific level, the foils
were designed to violate object-based regularities while
maintaining categorical regularities (e.g. bird1-dog2, see top
panel of Figure 2). Thus, participants require object-level
knowledge of the familiarization stream in order to
distinguish the foils from the pairs. Given this experimental
design, if participants are able to consistently distinguish
pairs from foils, this is evidence for learning based on the
objects and not the categories presented during
familiarization.

Figure 1: A sample familiarization stream. Pictures were
organized into pairs of categories (e.g. birds > dogs) as well
as specific objects within these categories (e.g. robin >
beagle). Thus, predictive regularities were redundant across
multiple levels of abstraction resulting in two pairs of
categories and eight pairs of objects or exemplars of these
categories.

2519

Methods

Results and Discussion

18 undergraduate students participated in Experiment 1
(age: mean = 20.7, std = 1.75; 2 left handed; 10F) and
randomly assigned to each condition: 10 participants viewed
the typical pictures, and 8 viewed the atypical pictures. All
participants were from Cornell University, participated in
exchange for course credit, and provided informed consent.

The current experiment was designed such that only
exemplar specific knowledge could distinguish pairs seen
during familiarization and foils. Performance was evaluated
against chance (50%) for evidence of learning. Overall,
participants demonstrate evidence of significant learning
(mean = 72.7%; std = 23.2; t(17) = 4.15, p < 0.0001)
indicating that participants acquired object-specific
knowledge. See the bottom panel of Figure 2 for a graphical
presentation of the results of this experiment.
12 participants reported evidence of explicit knowledge
via the post-test questionnaires. The majority of these
reports involved category level knowledge, some with
knowledge of specific pairings within these categories (e.g.
“particular flower with certain fish” and “maybe bird w/dog,
flower w/fish”). A very small number of reports were
exclusively at an object level (“white bird with white flower
combo” and “black lab, sunflower, etc”).
Data were submitted to an ANOVA examining the effects
of exemplar typicality (Atypical vs. Typical) and explicit
knowledge on test performance. Consistent with the
findings mentioned in the introduction, we hypothesized
that any contribution of categorical knowledge would be
modulated by the typicality of the exemplars. We report no
main effect of exemplar typicality (F(1,14 = 0.307; p > 0.5)
nor interaction of typicality and explicit knowledge. The
uniform performance across atypical and typical groups, as
indicated in Figure 2, suggests no contribution from
category-level knowledge in the current experiment.
We do, however, report a marginal effect of explicit
knowledge of sequence structure (F(1,14) = 3.96; p < 0.07).
We will address this issue more deeply in the results section
of Experiment 2. Given that the current experiment was
designed such that categorical knowledge could not be used
to distinguish foils from pairs, and most evidence for
explicit knowledge came as a report of predictive
dependencies involving category level knowledge, it is
unclear how explicit knowledge boosts performance. One
possibility is that participants who achieve a high level of
knowledge also achieve lexical access to the categories.
Possibly knowledge of many of the pairs of exemplars
induces category-level explicit knowledge.
In sum, participants were exposed to a sequence of
pictures containing predictive dependencies redundant at the
level of individual object and at a more abstract level of the
categories these objects belonged to. Test performance
indicates that participants gained object-specific knowledge.
In addition, results suggest that participants do not acquire
additional knowledge from more abstract, categorical
regularities. We hypothesized that if participants do acquire
categorical level knowledge, it would be modulated by
object typicality. Results indicate no difference in learning
between participants who received exposure to typical or
atypical exemplars. Failing to find any difference between
these groups suggests that participants learned from objectlevel regularities exclusively.

Familiarization A statistically-structured familiarization
sequence was presented, using PsyScope X B53 on a
MacMini computer with a 17in CRT monitor. Each picture
was displayed for 300ms with a 700ms inter-stimulus
interval (Brady & Oliva, 2008)
There were 4 categories of pictures: birds, dogs, fish, and
flowers. For each category 4 different exemplars were used
(dog1, dog2, etc.). The pictures were grouped into 8 pairs
such that both the categories and the specific exemplars
were predictive of picture order. For example, bird1-dog1
would always occur as a pair, as would bird2-dog2, bird3dog3, and bird4-dog4. Thus, the familiarization stream
contains multiple, redundant levels of predictive
information: both the exemplar level and the more abstract
category level of information are predictive. See Figure 1
for an illustration of the familiarization sequence. To
ameliorate any effect of specific pairings on learning,
different categories and object pairings were employed
across participants. Participants saw each pair 28 times
presented in random order without pairs repeating each
other and were simply instructed to look at the pictures.
Testing After familiarization, the participants performed a
test in which two pairs of pictures were presented
sequentially: 700ms between pictures in the same pair, and
1200ms separating the pairs. One pair was from the
familiarization (e.g. bird1-dog1), and one was a foil pair (e.g.
bird1-dog2; see Figure 2). The foils were designed to violate
the structure only at the exemplar level, and not the category
level. Thus, participants require exemplar level knowledge
of the familiarization stream in order to distinguish the foils
from the true pairs. This test determines whether
participants learn the familiarization sequence at the level of
exemplars or specific figures or at the level of abstract
categories. The participants were instructed to choose which
of the pairs seemed more familiar, based on the
familiarization task. No time constraint was imposed for
their responses. There were 64 test trials.
After the experiment, the participants completed a survey
in which they rated the pictures they had seen on a scale of
1-5 for interestingness and typicality. They were also asked
to repeat the instructions of each task, to ensure they
understood them correctly. Finally, they were asked whether
they noticed any patterns during the familiarization
sequence, to check for explicit knowledge of the sequence
structure.

2520

However, some participants do report explicit knowledge
of the sequences. The majority of these reports included and
sometimes were exclusive to abstract, object categories.
These results indicate some awareness of the abstract
properties of the stream. Moreover, we find that explicit
knowledge has a marginally significant effect on test
performance. It is unclear how explicit knowledge of this
kind could aid in performance given that the experiment was
designed to tap into object-specific knowledge only. Thus,
while Experiment 1 provides strong evidence for object
level learning, it does not entirely exclude the possibility
that participants acquire some more abstract knowledge. In
the second experiment, we more directly examine the
possibility that participant learn from both categorical and
object level predictive dependencies.

Experiment 2: Testing for Additional
Category-Level Knowledge
The current experiment addresses whether participants
learn from the predictive dependencies at multiple levels of
abstraction simultaneously (e.g. objects: bird1-dog1;
abstract, categories: birds-dogs). To this end, we modified
the foils used in Experiment 1 while keeping all other
aspects of the experiment the same (e.g. bird1-dog2). The
foils in Experiment 1 violated the statistical regularities at
the level of individual objects but preserved categorical
regularities. Thus, object-specific knowledge but not
category level knowledge would be essential in order to
distinguish the pair from the foil.
In Experiment 2, we changed the foils to violate both
object-level and category-level statistical regularities (e.g.
bird1-flower3). Therefore, category knowledge as well as
object-specific knowledge could be used at test. If it were
the case that participants learn from predictive dependencies
at both levels of informational abstraction, we hypothesize
that it would be easier to distinguish foils in the current
experiment, which violate both forms of statistical
regularities, compared to the foils used in Experiment 1,
where only object-level regularities were violated.
However, if participants do not acquire abstract knowledge
during familiarization, they will still be able to perform the
test in the same manner as Experiment 1. Thus, if
participants acquire abstract knowledge, we hypothesize a
significant increase in performance in Experiment 2 from
Experiment 1, and failure to observe a significant increase
in test performance would indicate that learning does not
occur at the abstract categorical level.
As in Experiment 1, participants viewed either typical or
atypical exemplars. If participants acquire categorical
knowledge during familiarization, this knowledge will
likely be modulated by the typicality of exemplars. In
Experiment 1, we did not observe any asymmetry of
performance between these groups; however, categorical
knowledge would interfere with test performance in this
case. In the current experiment, categorical knowledge
would be of benefit. Thus, we hypothesize that, if
participants have access to category level knowledge after
familiarization, participants who view typical exemplars
will have a greater boost in test performance than those who
view atypical exemplars.

Figure 2: Top Panel: The sole difference between
experiments was the composition of foils used at test. In
Experiment 1, foils were designed to assess learning at the
object or exemplar-specific level, while Experiment 2 foils
allow for knowledge at both levels of abstraction (object and
category) to influence test performance.
Bottom Panel: Results across Experiments 1 and 2
indicate no effect of exemplar typicality or foils on test
performance.

2521

Methods
Another 24 participants were recruited from the same
subject pool and randomly assigned to each condition (16F,
1 left handed, age: mean = 19.6, std = 1.28): 12 viewed the
typical pictures, and 12 viewed the atypical pictures. The
procedure in this experiment differed from Experiment 1 in
only one respect: the foil pairs during the test were
designed to violate the statistical structure of the
familiarization sequence at the exemplar and the category
level.

Results and Discussion
We report significant learning overall in Experiment 2
(mean = 67.7%, std = 21.2; t(23) = 4.10, p < 0.0001). The
data were submitted to a two-way ANOVA to evaluate the
effects of typicality of exemplars and explicit knowledge.
There is a main effect of explicit knowledge (F(1, 20) =
110.2; p < 0.001) and, as seen in Experiment 1, we report no
main effect of typicality (F(1, 20) = 0.537, p > 0.5) or
interaction between these factors. We hypothesized that if
categorical knowledge was acquired during exposure that it
would be modulated by the typicality of exemplars. The
consistent null effect of exemplar typicality indicates that
participants do not acquire abstract, category level
knowledge during exposure to environmental regularities at
multiple levels of abstraction.
We also hypothesized that if participants learned from
statistical regularities about objects as well as categories,
participants in Experiment 2 would performance better at
test than participants in Experiment 1. Results from both
experiments were analyzed in a 3-way ANOVA, to test for
effects of experiment, typicality, and explicit knowledge on
test performance. This analysis confirmed the pattern of
results seen in the bottom panel of Figure 2: there is no main
effect of Experiment (F(1,35) = 0.440, p > 0.5).
Additionally, we confirm that across both experiments there
is no main effect of typicality of exemplars (F(1,35) =
0.081, p > 0.5) and no interaction between these factors.
Thus, test performance is equivalent across experiments
indicating that participants likely did not acquire categorical
knowledge during exposure to the familiarization stream.
Consistent with results found in both experiments
separately, there is a main effect of explicit knowledge:
F(1,35) = 35.9, p < 0.001. Pooling participants from both
experiments, we find that participants with explicit
knowledge performed better than those without (mean
performance: 85.3% vs. 54.4%). However, both groups
performed significantly better than chance (with knowledge:
t(20) = 8.07, p < 0.001; without knowledge: t(20) = 2.21, p
< 0.02). Thus, regardless of explicit knowledge there is
evidence for learning in both groups.
To determine whether explicit knowledge is related to any
of our experimental manipulations (e.g. typicality of
exemplars), we examined whether number of participants
who demonstrate explicit knowledge is biased towards
either a particular experiment (Exp. 1 or 2) or typicality of
the objects seen. Of the 42 subjects in both experiments, 21
reported knowledge of the structure, while 21 reported no
such knowledge. Chi-square tests show that the proportion
of participants who had explicit knowledge of the sequence
structure was not significantly different between any of the
experimental factors: Experiment 1 vs. Experiment 2: c2(1,
N = 42) = 3.5, p > 0.05; typical vs. atypical: c2(1, N = 42) =
1.09, p > 0.25. These results indicate that explicit
knowledge, while a significant factor affecting performance,
is equally distributed across groups and thus should not
disproportionally bias overall performance.

Finally, all participants rated both typical and atypical
pictures on “interestingness” and typicality. T-tests
comparing ratings within categories revealed that
participants rate atypical and typical exemplars distinctly
and also rate the atypical exemplars as more interesting
(t(134) > 3.5; p < 0.001 within categories for both typicality
and “interestingness”). These results validate the assumption
that participants view atypical and typical exemplars
differently.
Along with Experiment 1, these results support the view
that participants learn from statistical regularities at the
lowest level of representational abstraction even when more
abstract statistical regularities are available to any learning
mechanism. Specifically, the results from Experiment 2 cast
doubt on the possibility that participants learn from
predictive regularities at both levels abstraction.

General Discussion
Humans are able to learn from experience where complex
regularities are present. We investigated behavior in a novel
learning task designed to investigate a key aspect of the
complexity of daily experience: participants viewed streams
of pictures with predictive dependencies at multiple levels
of abstraction. Specifically, both individual objects or
exemplars and the semantic categories that these objects
belonged to predicted picture order, thus both object and
categorical information could be used determine the
structure of the familiarization stream. We consistently find
evidence for learning at the lowest level of abstraction:
participants respond at test according the predictive
dependencies of specific objects or category exemplars and
do not show evidence of having learned at the more abstract
level of categories even when abstract knowledge could aid
test performance. Moreover, we find no modulation of
learning by exemplar typicality. These findings suggest that
while participants can learn from regularities of categories,
they do not learn from more abstract regularities when less
abstract, more grounded statistical information is present.
Interestingly, while we systematically find that
categorical knowledge has no influence on test performance,
some participants acquire explicit knowledge of the
categorical knowledge of the sequence. This result is
strikingly similar to Brady and Oliva (2008): in their Exp. 3,
after viewing streams with regularities present solely at the
categorical level, participants were able to perform
consistently in a test where pictures were replaced with
category labels. In Exp. 4, Brady & Oliva (2008) include
regularities at the scene specific or object level in addition
to categorical regularities and again find evidence for lexical
access. We argue that lexical access results in Exp. 3 and 4
of Brady & Oliva (2008) are similar to the demonstration of
abstract level explicit knowledge in the current experiment.
While demonstration of lexical access to categories is
interesting and important, we repeatedly show that abstract
knowledge does not have a clear effect in test performance,
raising questions about the nature and function of this
lexical knowledge. To date, there has been no demonstration

2522

of generalization, an important hallmark of abstract
categorical knowledge, when less abstract regularities are
present. This is an important avenue for future study to
clarify this lexical result. An alternative possibility is that
the lexical access is a byproduct of the participant strategy
of using mental labels for the familiar objects and scenes as
they are being presented. Previous statistical learning
studies have been careful to avoid recognizable visual
objects for this reason (Conway & Christiansen, 2005; Fiser
& Aslin, 2001).
Despite our findings that adults did not learn from
abstract, category level regularities when object-based
regularities were present, it is nevertheless clear that in a
natural environment we do acquire knowledge of higher
order regularities. Thus, our results may simply point to a
direction of how this learning occurs: learning starts in the
relation of specific objects when statistical regularities are
comparable at multiple levels of abstraction. One possibility
is that when once the least abstract regularities have been
mastered, learning can proceed along more abstract
dimensions. Nevertheless, this finding may have important
implications for more efficient teaching methods and could
inform computational modeling of learning and
development of human cognitive processes where the
abstraction of representation is often an assumption built
into the model.
Overall, this study aims to uncover how simple learning
mechanisms operate in complex, naturalistic environments.
We increased the complexity of the learning task, relative to
previous experiments, by having predictive dependencies at
multiple levels of abstraction. Results indicate that
participants learned based on the more concrete, less
abstract predictive dependencies. Results also suggest that
participants did not additionally learn the more abstract
relationships as this knowledge consistently did not
influence test performance. These results inform the ongoing debate as to whether domain-general learning
mechanisms are largely unconstrained, as previous
behavioral studies would have suggested. We believe that
these results show some level of constraint on learning
where more grounded, less abstract statistical relationships
are learned preferentially when categorical and object
specific knowledge is redundant.

Acknowledgments
Dr. Dima Amso, Dr. Rick Dale and Jordan DeLong for
helpful conversations, Claire Schmidt for data collection
and in particular, we thank Dr. Michael Spivey for his
support.

Appendix 1: All atypical exemplars used in the current
paper, organized by category
(from left: dog, flower, fish, bird).

References
Baldwin, D. Anderrson, A, Saffran, J. & Myers, M. (2007).
Segmenting dynamic human action via statistical
structure. Cognition, 106, 1382-1407.
Brady, T. F. & Oliva, A. (2008): Statistical learning using
real-world scenes: Extracting categorical regularities
without conscious intent, Psychological Science, 19, 678685.
Conway, C. & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). Modalityconstrained statistical learning of tactile, visual, and
auditory sequences, Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 31, 24-39.
Dale, R., Kehoe, C.E. & Spivey, M. J. (2007). Graded motor
responses in the time course of categorizing atypical
exemplars. Memory and Cognition, 35, 15-28.
Fiser, J. & Aslin, R. A. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12, 499-504.
Jolicoeur, P., Gluck, M. A., & Kosslyn, S. M. (1984).
Pictures and names: Making the connection, Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 243-275.
Marcus, G. F., Fernandes, K.J. & Johnson, S.P. (2007).
Infant rule learning facilitated by speech. Psychological
Science, 18, 387-391.
Saffran, J. R. (2002). Constraints on statistical language
learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 172-196.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C., Gray, W., Johnson, D., & BoyesBraem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.

2523

