UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning perceptual aspects of diagnosis in medicine via eye movement modeling
examples on patient video cases

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1xf1g3kr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Jarodzka, Halszka
Balslev, Thomas
Holmqvist, Kenneth
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Perceptual Aspects of Diagnosis in Medicine via Eye Movement
Modeling Examples on Patient Video Cases
Halszka Jarodzka∗, Thomas Balslev†, Kenneth Holmqvist‡,
Marcus Nyström‡, Katharina Scheiter∗, Peter Gerjets∗, & Berit Eika◦
∗Knowledge Media Research Center, Germany
†Viborg Hospital, Department of paediatrics, Denmark
‡Lund University, Sweden
◦Aarhus University, Centre of Medical Education, Denmark

Abstract
Complex tasks with a visually rich component, like diagnosing seizures based on patient video cases, not only require the
acquisition of conceptual but also of perceptual skills. Medical education has found that besides biomedical knowledge
(knowledge of scientific facts) clinical knowledge (actual experience with patients) is crucial. One important aspect of clinical knowledge that medical education has hardly focused on,
yet, are perceptual skills, like visually searching, detecting,
and interpreting relevant features. Research on instructional
design has shown that in a visually rich, but simple classification task perceptual skills could be conveyed by means of
showing the eye movements of a didactically behaving expert.
The current study applied this method to medical education in
a complex task. This was done by example video cases, which
were verbally explained by an expert. In addition the experimental groups saw a display of the expert’s eye movements
recorded, while he performed the task. Results show that blurring non-attended areas of the expert enhances diagnostic performance of epileptic seizures by medical students in contrast
to displaying attended areas as a circle and to a control group
without attention guidance. These findings show that attention guidance fosters learning of perceptual aspects of clinical
knowledge, if implemented in a spotlight manner.
Keywords: example-based learning; eye tracking; expertise;
attention; medical education

With progressing technical development, complex visualizations are increasingly in use for tasks, such as interpreting
weather maps (Canham & Hegarty, 2010), classifying fish
locomotion (Jarodzka, Scheiter, Gerjets, & Van Gog, 2010),
driving (Underwood, Chapman, Brocklehurst, Underwood,
& Crundall, 2003), or air traffic control (Helleberg & Wickens, 2003), to name just a few diverse examples. Dealing
with such tasks requires not only knowledge about facts in
this domain (i.e., conceptual knowledge), but also substantial visual search (i.e, perceptual skills). Sophisticated perceptual skills enable people in these professions to rapidly
perceive the relevant out of the irrelevant and interpret it correctly. A large body of research has already shown that experts exceed novices in those skills (e.g., Antes & Kristjanson, 1991; Canham & Hegarty, 2010; Charness, Reingold,
Pomplun, & Stampe, 2001; Jarodzka et al., 2010; Underwood
et al., 2003; Van Gog, Paas, & Van Merriënboer, 2005; Vogt
& Magnussen, 2007).

Perceptual Skills in Medical Education
The extensive presence of visually rich tasks and thus, the importance of sophisticated perceptual skills is especially true
for the medical domain. Many medical imaging techniques

developed only recent (like fMRI, CT, 3D displays). The
task to diagnose medical images can also be seen as a visually complex task. In particular, since research could already
show expertise differences on a perceptual level (e.g., Krupinski, 2005; Krupinski et al., 2006; Kundel, Nodine, Krupinski,
& Mello-Thoms, 2008; Lesgold et al., 1988; Nodine, Kundel,
Lauver, & Toto, 1996). However, not only diagnosing medical images is difficult from a perceptual perspective. Also
the diagnosis in real-life situations of diseases that manifest
in occasionally occurring behavioral patterns, like seizures, is
difficult on a perceptual level (Balslev et al., in preparation).
In the case of diagnosing seizures it is crucial to recognize the
important features, which distinguish the seizure from normal
behavior. Those features, however, might be short-term, subtle, time-sensitive, and not salient compared to other features.
Little children display many different movements. In rare
cases some of these movements may be symptoms of diseases. In particular for small children that cannot be questioned it is important to carefully observe their movements
for diagnosing certain diseases. The example we focus on
are epileptic seizures. Epileptic seizures can be distinguished
according to whether they involve one or both hemispheres
of the brain (“International Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders (ICD-10)”, 2006): if only one brain
hemisphere is involved they are classified as partial seizures
whereas if both hemispheres are involved they are classified
as general seizures (here: spasms). Both seizure types have
a normal behavior counterpart (i.e., differential diagnosis)
with which they can easily be confused: epileptic seizures
are easily confused with benign sleep myoclonus (BSM; Egger, Grossmann, & Auchterlonie, 2003), whereas spasms are
easily confused with infantile masturbation (IM; Hansen &
Balslev, 2009). A general seizure (spasm) is characterized
by bilateral movements that can be spasmic or jerky, the face
is affected, the infant briefly looses consciousness / awareness, and the movements are not stopped by touching the
child. BSM is also characterized by bilateral, jerky movements, however, the face is not involved, the child is asleep,
and the movements may rather worsen by touching the child.
A partial seizure is characterized by lateral movements that
can be spasmic or jerky, the face is affected, the infant looses
briefly consciousness / awareness, and the movements are not
stopped by touching the child. IM is also characterized by
lateral, rather tension movements, however, the face is not in-

1703

volved, the child is awake and conscious, and the movements
stop by touching the child.
In order to convey diagnostic skills, medical education focused in its beginnings on the role of biomedical knowledge
(Feltovich & Barrows, 1984; Kuipers & Kassirer, 1984; Lesgold et al., 1988). Biomedical knowledge is the knowledge
contributing to the understanding of the functioning and dysfunctioning of the human body and gained during textbook or
lecture study. It is composed of conceptual or factual knowledge. Thus, biomedical knowledge may be described as “inert knowledge”. Knowledge is inert, if it is learnt in a formal
setting and can be expressed by the student as facts without
the ability to apply it in a real world situation (Whitehead,
1929). The focus on conveying inert knowledge in education
has been extensively criticized by educational psychologists
(e.g., Pozzi, Noss, & Hoyles, 1998).
In line with those findings, current research on medical
education emphasizes that besides biomedical knowledge,
also clinical knowledge is important (Boshuizen & Schmidt,
1992; Patel, Evans, & Groen, 1989a, 1989b; Patel & Kaufman, 1995; Schmidt & Boshuizen, 1992, 1993). Clinical
knowledge is composed of manifestations, classifications,
and treatments of diseases and it is gained during clinical
praxis. One important aspect of clinical knowledge may be
seen as being of perceptual nature (Manning, Gale, & Krupinski, 2005). As described above, novices have severe deficiencies on this level. However, there is little research so far,
focusing on this aspect of clinical knowledge (Chen, Gale,
& Evans, 2009; Jarodzka, Gog, Dorr, Scheiter, & Gerjets, in
preparation; Litchfield, Ball, Donovan, Manning, & Crawford, 2008). Thus, the aim of the current study is to enhance
the perceptual part of information-processing as part of medical expertise.

Conveying Perceptual Skills by Modeling Examples
An approach that has recently been developed to foster perceptual skills are eye movement modeling examples
(Jarodzka et al., in preparation; Van Gog, Jarodzka, Scheiter,
Gerjets, & Paas, 2009). To develop such modeling examples an expert model is recorded while performing a task.
In addition, the model explains hers/his actions and hers/his
eye movements are recorded. In a second step, those recordings are replayed to a student as an educational video. Those
videos can be seen in the tradition of example-based learning and modeling. Example-based learning has been shown
to be a powerful instructional method in early skill acquisition. Examples demonstrate a problem solution to students,
either by providing them with a written, worked-out problem solution to study (i.e., worked examples; see, Atkinson,
Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000; Sweller, Van Merriënboer,
& Paas, 1998) or by allowing them to observe an expert performing the task live or on video (i.e., modeling examples;
Bandura, 1977; Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989). For cognitive tasks, modeling examples require the model to verbalize his/her cognitive actions while performing the task (e.g.,
Wouters, Paas, & Merriënboer, 2008).

For cognitive tasks that require the processing of complex
visual information, it is crucial that the student not only hears
the expert’s verbal explanations, but can also see the material the expert is looking at. However, this may not suffice.
As Bandura (1977) noted, to learn from modeling examples
students have to attend to the important features of the modeled behavior. The verbal explanations of the expert can only
guide the students’ attention to the important features of the
material when students know exactly what the expert is referring to. However, the chance that they simultaneously attend to the same features is very small, as was shown by the
eye tracking research described above. Thus, when learning
from modeling examples that involve complex visual material, novices might need attention guidance to those task aspects that the expert is attending to. Otherwise, especially on
dynamic tasks, they may miss important information relevant
for understanding and learning from the example.
Although several studies exist on attention guidance via
cueing instructional material (for a review: Koning, Tabbers,
Rikers, & Paas, 2009), the decision concerning which information will be highlighted and when often remains arbitrary.
In particular, since research has shown that experts cannot estimate the knowledge level of novices appropriately (Hinds,
1999). Thus, it is very unlikely that they would be able to estimate appropriately, where to place a cue for a novice. On the
other hand, research has shown that choosing a cue based on
eye movements of successful problem solvers, enhances the
probability for correctly solving an insight problem (Grant &
Spivey, 2003). The question remains, however, whether attention guidance based on eye movements, not only as a single cue but the entire perceptual process of the expert, cannot just influence insight problem performance on the task
at hand, but also enhance learning. Learning refers to the
resilient change in a person’s knowledge about a task that
enables him or her to independently perform that task after
practice (Simon, 1983).
In an earlier study, we could show that students’ attention
can be guided directly by the eye movements of an expert
and that this influences learning (Jarodzka et al., in preparation). We developed modeling examples for a classification
task in which an expert’s eye movements and verbal explanations were recorded while he was performing this task. Participants who studied examples in which the expert’s eye movements were displayed either as a dot on the fixated area or
by blurring non-fixated areas (spotlight display), closely followed the expert’s gazes during example study. The spotlight
display led to significant improvements in learning in terms
of visual search during the test, and the dot display led to enhanced classification performance on the test. These findings
showed that guiding students’ attention can go beyond guiding thought, to guiding learning.
Still, two open questions remain. First, since none of the
displays was optimal, the current study aimed at improving
both types of display. The dot display partially occluded relevant problem features. Thus, instead of a solid dot, the ex-

1704

pert’s gazes are displayed as a circle. For the spotlight display, we decided to use a less intrusive blurring so that a
holistic impression of the overall scene can be gained. This
was done by compressing the video on non-attended areas.
This procedure has shown to be well accepted by viewers
(Nyström & Holmqvist, 2007). Second, although the classification task in the study described above was visually rich,
the task in itself was simple. For this reason the benefit of
this instructional approach might not have fully unfolded, because the task itself was too easy. Thus, the current study uses
a medical diagnosis task based on video cases, which is not
only a visually rich task, but is also composed of a complex
underlying decision tree.

Research Question - Hypothesis
In line with prior research, we hypothesize that attentionguidance based on expert’s eye movements will foster learning of perceptual skills not only in a simple classification task,
but also in medical diagnosis. Since both ways of display
were improved, we assume learning to enhance in terms of a
better diagnostic performance.

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 60 medical students in their final year of
the University of Aarhus (age: M = 26.57 years, SD = 2.03;
41 female), who had no prior knowledge on the task and had
normal or corrected-to normal vision. They had been randomly assigned to one of three conditions (n = 20 each): (1)
control condition with no attentional guidance, (2) attentional
guidance by a circle on fixated areas based on the model’s
eye movements (circle display), (3) attentional guidance by
blurring non-attended areas and leaving fixated areas sharply
displayed (spotlight display).

Apparatus and Materials
Eye tracking equipment The expert model’s eye movements were recorded with a SMI High Speed eye tracking system with a temporal resolution of 240 Hz and the
iView X 2.2 software. These eye tracking data were edited
with BeGaze 2.3 software (www.smivision.com) and selfprogrammed MatLab algorithms. All video material was presented to the participants via Experiment Center 2.2. The
questionnaire in the testing was presented via e-prime 2.0
software.
Modeling examples The modeling examples for the control group consisted of four digital videos (.avi format), sized
720 × 576 pixels and presented in fullscreen on a 1280
× 1024 pixels resolution (corresponding to 17.07 × 13.65
inches). Each video depicted a single infant (between 4 hours
and 8 months old), whereby two infants deployed behavioral
patterns corresponding to a focal seizure and two infants deployed different types of normal behavior (benign sleep myoclonus, infantile masturbation). The original sound was removed from the videos, because parents and clinical staff

were talking, which would disturb the use of verbal explnations. The duration of the videos was between 71 and 103
seconds. All videos included a spoken description and diagnosis of the behavior by the expert model. The expert was
a physician of pediatric neurology, with extensive experience
in diagnosing epileptic seizures. Rather than using the expert’s natural performance of these tasks as an example we
decided to instruct the expert to behave didactically, that is, to
explain to novice students what the relevant aspects of the behavioral pattern shown in each video are. Each recording was
replayed to the expert so that he could self-evaluate the replay data based on a number of statements (e.g., for a novice
student, the disease is explained in enough detail, in comprehensible terms, et cetera; cf. Jucks, Schulte-Löbbert, &
Bromme, 2007), and if necessary, he could re-record it. This
was done, because a prior study had shown that experts use
knowledge-based shortcuts in verbal and eye tracking data
due to automated processes as well as using many technical
terms that a novice student would not understand (shortcuts
in this domain, cf. Balslev et al., in preparation).
In the circle display condition, participants received the
same examples as the control group but those additionally
included the expert’s eye movements. These were created
using the manufacturer rendered “fixation scanpath display
function”. The saccadic definition was set at a peak velocity
threshold of 40/s. The fixations were displayed as yellow circles with a line thickness of one pixel and a gaze trail for a
temporal window of 1 sec. In the spotlight display condition,
potentially distracting features in the unattended areas were
filtered out. That is, the focus of the expert’s attention (with
a radius of 32 pixels) was visible as usual, whereas the areas
surrounding it were blurred’ by off-line foveation via video
compression on non-attended areas (Nyström & Holmqvist,
2007). Figure 1 shows a screen shot from each of the three
conditions.
Tests Participants were shown six new realistic videos for
a mean duration of 31.00 seconds (SD = 18.35) of different
children displaying different types of behavior (3 × seizures
and 3 × normal behavior). The duration of the testing video
depended on the duration of the seizure / normal behavior.
Afterwards, their diagnositc performance was assessed by answering multiple-choice questions on those videos: (1) indicating from a list of body parts, which was moving, (2) indicating from a list the type of the movement, (3) indicating,
whether the face was involved and whether or not this was
important for the diagnosis, (4) indicating the level of consciousness of the child, (5) indicating, whether awaking the
child would change the movement, if child was asleep, and
(6) indicating, whether touching the child changes the movement.

Procedure
The recording ran in individual sessions of approximately 45
minutes each. At the beginning, participants filled in a questionnaire on their prior knowledge in this task and their de-

1705

Table 1: Screenshots from the three conditions used in the study.
Control

Dot display

mographic data. Then, they received a short introduction to
the topic, stating very general information on seizures and the
importance to distinguish them from normal behavior. Then,
the learning phase started. Participants were told that they
will subsequently receive videos of the to-be-learned disease,
where an expert explains the according movements and behavioral pattern. Depending on the condition, they were told
that they will additionally see where the expert’s attention
was attracted to on the video. Before watching the learning videos, participants received the age, gender, and a short
problem description of the patient.
In the testing phase the testing videos were replayed once.
Afterwards, each video disappeared, resulting in a blank
screen. Then, the participants had to answer the multiplechoice questions in an arbitrary order. This procedure was
repeated for six new patient video cases.

Data Analysis
Test performance The construction and scoring of the performance measure was derived from a task analysis and by
the help of domain experts. Accordingly, to diagnose a focal seizure, the following guidelines should be applied: (1)
correctly stating which part of the body is involved in the
movement, (2) correctly stating how this part moves, (3) correctly stating, whether the face was involved and whether or
not this is important for the diagnosis, (4) correctly indicating the child’s level of consciousness, (5) correctly indicating,
whether awaking the child would change the movement, if
child was asleep, and (6) correctly indicating, whether touching the child would change the movements. Hence, participants could receive a maximum of six points per video (1
point for each category).

Results
For all statistical tests reported here, a significance level of .05
is used. Means and standard deviations for each condition are
given in Table 2.

Spotlight display

Table 2: Means (and SD) for Testing Performance for Diagnosing Seizures and Differential Diagnoses.

Testing

Control
group

Circle
display
group

Spotlight
display
group

Seizure diagnosis

3.25
(0.47)

3.38
(0.41)

3.90
(0.62)

Differential
diagnosis

3.78
(0.59)

3.48
(0.81)

3.57
(0.69)

Seizure Diagnosis
An ANOVA showed significant differences between conditions in performance on the multiple choice test, F(1, 59) =
9.13, p < .01, η p 2 = .24. Bonferroni post-hoc tests indicated
that the spotlight display condition outperformed the circle
display condition (p < .01) and the control condition (p <
.01), while the control condition and the circle condition did
not differ significantly.

Differential Diagnosis
An ANOVA showed no significant differences between conditions, F < 1.

Discussion
This experiment showed that attention guidance based on
displaying expert’s eye movements in video-based modeling
examples fostered learning in terms of improved diagnostic skills. Participants in the spotlight display group outperformed the control and the circle display group in diagnosing
epileptic seizures. No differences were found in diagnosing
normal behavior.
These findings leave us with two questions: (1) Why did
both types of eye movement displays resulted in such differential effects and (2) why does this effect occur for diagnosing seizures, but not for diagnosing the differential diagnosis?

1706

Considering the first question, the fact that the circle display did not enhance learning is surprising. Although, one
study found a negative effect on learning by displaying the
model’s eye movements based on the manufacturers’ gaze
replay functions (Van Gog et al., 2009), three others found
a positive effect of a comparable visualization (Chen et al.,
2009; Litchfield et al., 2008; Jarodzka et al., in preparation).
However, only the latter three studies used visually rich learning tasks. Adding information to a display in terms of eye
movements, might only be a benefit for visually rich tasks. In
this study, a visually rich task was also used, but what differed
was the fact that the display was not a solid dot, as for the remaining three studies, but a fully translucent circle. Might it
be that the total translucence in terms of a circle reversed the
positive learning effect? This might be tested in future studies by investigating the students’ ability or willingness to follow the circle during learning. Another possibility is that the
circle display increased mental effort due to a noisy type of
display? Van Gog et al. (2009) found a higher mental effort in
their study for this display, which lead to detrimental effects
on learning. This should be investigated in future research by
assessing mental effort in the learning and the testing phase.
In contrast, the spotlight display, which was rather an unintrusive guidance, might have enabled the students to infer the
element behind the cue and thus, lead to a holistic impression
of the behavioral pattern.
The second question, about the different effects for seizure
and differential diagnosis, has two competing answers. First,
it might be that detecting the symptoms of a seizure, strongly
relies on interpreting the perceptual input. Whereas detecting
the symptoms of types of normal behavior requires more conceptual knowledge. This type of knowledge, however, was
not varied between the groups in the current study. Second, it
might be that the lack of an effect for the differential diagnosis
is due to the type of material used in this study. One type of
normal behavior (benign sleep myoclonus) was quite easy to
detect, because both children in training and in testing were
asleep. Neither of the others was asleep. Thus, this cases
might have been too easy. The other normal behavior (infantile masturbation) was trained with an older child, whereas
the testing occurred with younger children. Thus, thus testing
might have been too difficult. Both possible reasons should
be investigated in future research with more cases.
In sum, the current study provided an interesting, first approach to train perceptual skills in medical diagnosis. Still
many research questions remain. Not only the above mentioned issues should be further investigated, but also additional improvements of the training are conceivable. We
trained the students in this case only for a short time and only
within individual learning. Training students in longer sessions that allow them to re-view the cases and discuss them
with peers might further improve the training. On the other
hand, the training effects should be also investigated in a more
direct manner via detailed analyses of potential influences on
participants’ eye movements.

References
Antes, J. R., & Kristjanson, A. F. (1991). Discriminating
artists from nonartists b their eye-fixation patterns. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 73, 893-894.
Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.
(2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of Educational
Research, 70, 181-214.
Balslev, T., Jarodzka, H., Holmqvist, K., Grave, W. S. de,
Muijtjens, A., Eika, B., et al. (in preparation). How do
paediatricians do it? the influence of experience and training on attention and clinical reasoning.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Boshuizen, H., & Schmidt, H. (1992). On the role of biomedical knowledge in clinical reasoning by experts, intermediates, and novices. Cognitive Science, 16, 153-184.
Canham, M., & Hegarty, M. (2010). Effects of knowledge
and display design on comprehension of complex graphics.
Learning and Instruction, 20, 155-166.
Charness, N., Reingold, E. M., Pomplun, M., & Stampe, D.
(2001). The perceptual aspect of skilled performance in
chess: Evidence from eye movements. Memory and Cognition, 29, 1146-1152.
Chen, Y., Gale, A. G., & Evans, A. (2009). The feasibility of vision-supported computer-based training in digital
mammography. Breast Cancer Research, 11, 10.
Collins, A. F., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. (1989). Cognition and instruction: Issues and agendas. In L. Resnick
(Ed.), (chap. Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft
of reading, writing, and mathematics.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Egger, J., Grossmann, G., & Auchterlonie, I. A. (2003).
Benign sleep myoclonus in infancy mistaken for epilepsy.
British Medical Journal, 326, 975-976.
Feltovich, P. J., & Barrows, H. S. (1984). Issues of generality in medical problem solving. In H. G. Schmidt &
M. L. D. Volder (Eds.), Tutorials in problem-based learning. new directions in training for the health professions.
(p. 128-142). Assen/Maastricht: Van Gorcum.
Grant, E. R., & Spivey, M. J. (2003). Eye movements and
problem solving. guiding attention guides thought. Psychological Science, 14.
Hansen, J. K., & Balslev, T. (2009). Hand activities in infantile masturbation: A video analysis of 13 cases. European
Journal of Paediatric Neurology, 13, 508-510.
Helleberg, J. R., & Wickens, C. D. (2003). Effects of
data-link modality and display redundancy on pilot performance: An attentional perspective. The International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 13, 189-210.
Hinds, P. I. (1999). The curse of expertise: The effects of
expertise and debiasing methods on predictions of novice
performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 5, 205-221.
International classification of mental and behavioural disor-

1707

ders (icd-10) [Computer software manual]. (2006). Genf:
World Health Organisation (WHO).
Jarodzka, H., Gog, T. van, Dorr, M., Scheiter, K., & Gerjets,
P. (in preparation). Guiding attentions guides thought, but
what about learning? eye movements in modeling examples. NN.
Jarodzka, H., Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Van Gog, T. (2010).
In the eyes of the beholder: How experts and novices interpret dynamic stimuli. Journal of Learning and Instruction,
20, 146-154.
Jucks, R., Schulte-Löbbert, P., & Bromme, R. (2007).
Supporting experts’ written knowledge communication
through reflective prompts on the use of specialist concepts.
Journal of Psychology, 215, 237-247.
Koning, B. B. D., Tabbers, H. K., Rikers, R. M. J. P., & Paas,
F. (2009). Towards a framework for attention cueing in instructional animations: Guidelines for research and design.
Educational Psychology Review, 21, 113-140.
Krupinski, E. A. (2005). Visual search of mammographic images: Influence of lesion subtlety1. Academic Radiology,
12(8), 965 - 969.
Krupinski, E. A., Tillack, A. A., Richter, L., Henderson, J. T.,
Bhattacharyya, A. K., Scott, K. M., et al. (2006). Eyemovement study and human performance using telepathology virtual slides. implications for medical education and
differences with experience. Human Pathology, 37(12),
1543 - 1556.
Kuipers, B., & Kassirer, J. P. (1984). Causal reasoning in
medicine: Analysis of a protocol. Cognitive Science, 8,
363-385.
Kundel, H., Nodine, C., Krupinski, E., & Mello-Thoms, C.
(2008). Using gaze-tracking data and mixture distribution
analysis to support a holisitc model fort he detection of cancers on mammograms. Academic Radiology, 15, 881-886.
Lesgold, A., Rubinson, H., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R., Klopfer,
D., & Wang, Y. (1988). The nature of expertise. In
M. T. H. Chi, R. Glaser, & M. Farr (Eds.), (p. 311-342).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Litchfield, D., Ball, L. J., Donovan, T., Manning, D. J., &
Crawford, T. (2008). Learning from others: Effects of
viewing another person’s eye movements while searching
for chest nodules. In B. Sahiner & D. J. Manning (Eds.),
Proceedings of spie medical imaging 2008: Image perception, observer performance, and technology assessment
(Vol. 9). San Diego, CA, USA: SPIE.
Manning, D. J., Gale, A., & Krupinski, E. A. (2005). Perception research in medical imaging. The British Journal
of Radiology, 78, 683-685.
Nodine, C. F., Kundel, H. L., Lauver, S. C., & Toto, L. C.
(1996). Nature of expertise in searching mammograms for
breast masses. Academic Radiology, 3(12), 1000 - 1006.
Nyström, M., & Holmqvist, K. (2007). Deriving and evaluating eye-tracking controlled volumes of interest for variableresolution video compression. Journal of Electronic Imaging, 16(1).

Patel, V. L., Evans, D. A., & Groen, G. J. (1989a). Biomedical knowledge and medical reasoning. In D. A. Evans &
V. L. Patel (Eds.), Cognitive science in medicine: Biomedical modeling (p. 53-112). Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Patel, V. L., Evans, D. A., & Groen, G. J. (1989b). Reconciling basic science and clinical reasoning. Teaching and
Learning in Medicine, 1, 116-121.
Patel, V. L., & Kaufman, D. R. (1995). Clinical reasoning
and biomedical knowledge: Implications for teaching. In
J. Higss & M. Jones (Eds.), Clinical reasoning in the health
professions (p. 117-128). Oxford, UK: Butterworth Heinemann.
Pozzi, S., Noss, R., & Hoyles, C. (1998). Tool in practice,
mathematics in use. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
36, 105-122.
Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (1992). Encapsulation of biomedical knowledge. In D. A. Evans & V. L. Patel
(Eds.), Advanced models of cognition for medical training
and practice (p. 265-282). New York, NY: Springer Verlag.
Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (1993). On acquiring
expertise in medicine. Educational Psychology Review, 5,
205-221.
Simon, H. A. (1983). Why should machines learn? In
R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.),
Machine learning: An artificial intelligence approach
(p. 25-38). Palo Alto, CA: Tioga.
Sweller, J., Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design. Educational
Psychological Review, 10, 251-296.
Underwood, G., Chapman, P., Brocklehurst, N., Underwood,
J., & Crundall, D. (2003). Visual attention while driving:
Sequences of eye fixations made by experienced and novice
drivers. Ergonomics, 46.
Van Gog, T., Jarodzka, H., Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Paas,
F. (2009). Attention guidance during example study via the
model‘s eye movements. Computers in Human Behavior,
25, 785-791.
Van Gog, T., Paas, F., & Van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (2005).
Uncovering expertise-related differences in troubleshooting performance. combining eye movement and concurrent
verbal protocol data. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19,
205-221.
Vogt, S., & Magnussen, S. (2007). Expertise in pictorial
perception: Eye movement patterns and visual memory in
artists and laymen. Perception, 36, 91-100.
Whitehead, A. N. (1929). The aims of education. New York,
NY: MacMillan.
Wouters, P., Paas, F., & Merriënboer, J. J. G. V. (2008). How
to optimize learning from animated models: A review of
guidelines based on cognitive load. Review of Educational
Research, 78, 645-675.

1708

