UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Functional and Causal Abstractions of Classroom Aquaria

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/88s041jk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Goel, Ashok
Vattam, Swaroop
Rugaber, Spencer
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Functional and Causal Abstractions of Classroom Aquaria
Ashok K. Goel1, Swaroop S. Vattam1, Spencer Rugaber1, David Joyner1,
Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver2, Rebecca Jordan3, Sameer Honwad2, Steven Gray3, Suparna Sinha2
1

Design & Intelligence Laboratory, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA 30332.
2

Department of Educational Psychology, Graduate School of Education, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ
08901.
3

School of Environmental and Biological Sciences, Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Natural Resources,
and the Program in Science Learning, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901.

Abstract
Structure-Behavior-Function (SBF) models of complex
systems use functions as abstractions to organize knowledge of
structural components and causal processes in a system. We
describe an interactive learning environment called ACT
(Aquarium Construction Toolkit) for constructing simple SBF
models of classroom aquaria, and report on a case study on the
use of SBF thinking and the ACT tool in middle school science
classes. We present initial data indicating that SBF thinking
supported in part by the ACT tool leads to enhanced
understanding of functions and behaviors of aquaria.
Keywords: Science education, Middle school science,
Complex systems, Ecological systems, Functional models,
Interactive learning.

Motivation and Goals
Understanding of complex systems enables important tasks
such
as
monitoring,
measurement,
sensemaking,
troubleshooting, explanation, prediction, diagnosis, redesign
and design. Thus, understanding complex systems has been
recognized as a key idea in science education in national
science standards (National Research Council, 1996) as well
as local standards (e.g., New Jersey Department of
Education, 2006).
However, understanding complex systems is cognitively
hard not only because of the large number of components and
variables in a given system, but also because complex
systems are dynamical and contain feedback loops (Forrester
1968) and exhibit hierarchical structure but are only nearly
decomposable (Simon 1996); causal processes at one
abstraction level in a complex system emerge out of
interactions among components and processes at lower
levels; and while some components of a complex system may
be visible, many components, relations and processes
typically are invisible. Thus, understanding complex systems
challenges cognitive resources such as attention, memory and
perception. The juxtaposition of understanding complex
systems as an educational standard and the cognitive
difficulty of understanding complex systems in turn poses a
practical challenge for cognitive and learning sciences.

Theories of understanding complex systems in terms of
functional models use functions as abstractions for
organizing knowledge of structural components and causal
processes (e.g., Chandrasekaran 1994a, 1994b; Kitamura et
al. 2004; Rasmussen 1986). In Structure-Behavior-Function
(SBF) models, for example, Structure refers to components
of a complex system as well as connections among the
components; Behaviors pertain to causal processes in the
complex system; and Functions are abstractions of structural
components and causal behaviors (Goel et al, 1996;
Prabhakar & Goel, 1998; Goel, Rugaber & Vattam 2009).
Representations of structural components and causal
processes specify the functions they accomplish;
representations of functions in turn act as indices into the
components and processes that combine to accomplish them.
The SBF theory of understanding complex systems has led
to lesson plans and interactive tools for learning about
complex systems in science education. Our ongoing ACT
project, for example, is an interactive learning environment
that enables middle school children to construct and simulate
SBF models of classroom aquaria (Vattam et al. 2010). An
initial study indicates that teacher-led SBF thinking about
aquaria, supported in part by use of ACT by small teams of
students, led to significant improvement in understanding the
basic structure, behaviors and functions of aquaria. However,
we also found that in practice, middle school teachers and
students did not use ACT the way we had planned. Instead of
using ACT to construct and simulate full SBF models of
aquaria, middle school students in our studies used the tool
mainly to construct SBF graphical models of aquaria (Jordan
et al. 2009).
In this paper, we report on a new study that utilizes a new
version of the ACT interactive tool. The new version of ACT
(ACT3) directly builds on our observations of SBF thinking
practices in middle school science classrooms in the initial
studies as well as feedback from the middle school teachers
and students on the use of the previous version of ACT
(ACT2). Preliminary results from new studies of SBF
thinking about aquaria, stimulated, scaffolded and supported
in part by the new ACT tool, appear to replicate the findings
from the earlier studies with the new and more engaging tool.

2128

The SBF Theory of
Understanding of Complex Systems
Narayanan (2007) characterizes complex systems as
follows: complex systems exhibit hierarchical structures
composed of subsystems and components; subsystems and
components exhibit natural behaviors or engineered
functions; the subsystem/component behaviors causally
influence other subsystems/components; the propagation of
these causal influences creates chains of events in the
operation of the overall system and gives rise to its overall
behavior and function; and these chains of events extend in
temporal and spatial dimensions. The origin of both
Narayanan’s characterization and our SBF models lies in
Chandrasekaran’s (1994a) Functional Representation (FR)
scheme. Chandrasekaran (1994b) traces the development of
FR; Goel, Rubager, Vattam (2009) describe the evolution of
SBF from FR. Briefly, (1) the structure portion of an SBF
model of a complex system specifies the “what” of the
system, namely, the components of the system as well as the
connections among them. (2) Behaviors specify the “how” of
the complex system, namely, the causal processes occurring
in the system. A behavior typically comprises of multiple
states and transitions among them. The transitions are
annotated by causal explanations for them. (3) Functions
specify understanding of the “why” of the system. A function
is a teleological interpretation of the components and
processes in the system. (4) A component of a complex
system can itself comprise a system and thus have its own
SBF model. (5) The behavior of a system specifies the
composition of the functional abstractions of its subsystems
into the system functions.
Other researchers have described similar functional models
of complex systems, e.g., Rasmussen (1986) and Kitamura et
al. (2004). Although the various functional models differ in
many features, they typically share some key characteristics,
viz., explicit representation of function, use of functional
representations to organize knowledge of causal behaviors
and structural components, a hierarchical system-subsystem
organization of knowledge, a view of causal behavior as an
intermediate abstraction between structure and function, and
domain-independent vocabularies for representing structure,
behaviors and functions of complex systems. Erden et al.
(2008) provide a recent survey of functional models of
complex systems and their use in design.
Note that in the SBF theory of understanding complex
systems, functions are mental abstractions, and thus are not
intrinsic to the complex system. In case of designed systems,
a functional abstraction corresponds to an intended output or
observable behavior of a system, subsystem, or component.
However, since functions are abstractions, we have also used
the SBF theory to model natural systems including biological
systems such as the human heart and ecological systems such
as aquaria. Like designed systems, natural systems exhibit
the types of causal processes and multiple levels of
abstraction that characterize complex systems. We use
function as a lens through which to view complex biological

systems as well. For example, we may model a pond as being
able to regulate the chemicals inside its water to maintain a
livable environment for fish and plants. We may also specify
the invisible causal process that achieves this self-regulation
of the pond. In addition, we may state how this causal
process combines functional abstractions of other processes
and subsystems into the self-regulation function of the pond.
In this functional representation of the pond, functional
abstractions provide explanations for the relevance of
specific subsystems in the context of a causal process.
Since SBF models explicitly represent functions, they
differ fundamentally from causal models of complex systems
(e.g., Chi 2005). The interactive tool called Betty’s Brain
(Biswas et al. 2005) is a good representative of the use of
causal models in interactive learning because it too works in
the same general domain (ecology) and targets the same
general audience (middle school students). The innovation in
the system lies in transforming the role of students into
teachers of problem-solving software agents (Betty). This
role transformation is motivational and engaging to middle
school students. The models that students help Betty build,
however, are causal graphs, with no mention of function and
only implicit specification of structure. Although SBF
models also represent behaviors in the form of causal graphs,
the behavioral representations are grounded in the structure
and indexed by their functional abstractions.

ACT: Interactive Construction of SBF Models
Empirical studies in the SBF framework show that while
aquaria experts and hobbyists typically understand aquaria in
terms of their structure, behavior and function, novices such
as middle school students and pre-service teachers familiar
with aquaria focus on the visible structure, show minimal
understanding of function, and show little evidence of
understanding the invisible causal behaviors (e.g., HmeloSilver, Marathe & Liu 2007). Thus, we developed a suite of
interactive tools called RepTools that included SBF-inspired
function-centered hypermedia (Liu & Hmelo-Silver 2009) as
well as NetLogo simulations of aquaria generated by experts
(Hmelo-Silver et al. 2007). Using the SBF coding scheme to
analyze students’ work on pre- and post- tests and the metrics
for measuring SBF understanding of complex systems
developed earlier (Hmelo, Holton & Kolodner 2000), we
showed that the use of RepTools leads to deeper SBF
understanding of complex systems in middle school science
classrooms.
Although RepTools provided a useful learning
environment, it did not provide a knowledge construction
facility that allowed students to explicitly articulate their SBF
understanding of complex systems. However, we know that
scientists construct models of complex systems they seek to
understand (Clement 2008; Nersessian 2008). From a
constructivist perspective, much of learning entails active,
social construction of knowledge (Palincsar 1998), and
research on interactive learning increasingly emphasizes
collaborative construction of external representations (Kozma
2000; Lajoie et al. 2001; Suthers 2006).

2129

Figure 1: Model Graph of the nitrification process designed
by a 7th grade student using ACT3.
Thus, we developed an interactive learning environment
called ACT that provided a tool (called SBFAuthor) for
constructing SBF models of classroom aquaria in middle
school science (Vattam et al. 2010). In order to adapt the SBF
modeling language to serve as an effective modeling tool for
learners, we augmented it with a visual syntax to obtain
vSBF: a visual SBF modeling language. Creating an SBF
model of a particular complex system in vSBF now becomes
an exercise in drawing an annotated, flowchart-like diagram
of the system using the modeling primitives provided by the
language. ACT also integrated SBFAuthor with the Netlogo
simulation platform (Wilensky 1999; Wilensky & Resnick
1999). In addition, ACT provided access to extant RepTools.
The goal was to encourage middle school students to
understand complex systems in terms of functional
abstractions and casual behaviors. The intended method was
teacher-led SBF thinking supported by the use of ACT for
construction, simulation and revision of SBF models of
classroom aquaria.
In an initial study conducted in 2008, we introduced the
original ACT tool (ACT2) into three middle school
classrooms consisting of one hundred and fifty seven
students (Jordan et al. 2009). One example of SBF thinking
used by the three middle school teachers in the initial study
pertained to the nitrification process. The nitrification process
is the process by which an aquarium cleans itself of waste
that is poisonous to fish. Fish release ammonia in their waste,
a highly poisonous chemical; nitrosomonas consume this

ammonia and output nitrite, while nitrobacters eat this nitrite
and release nitrate. Nitrate, though still poisonous to fish in
large quantities, is much less dangerous than ammonia. In
this example, the structural components in the system are the
fish and bacteria. These components serve certain functions;
for example, one function of the nitrosomonas is to clean the
water of harmful ammonia and provide food for nitrobacters.
Of course, this function is merely our teleological
interpretation of this action of nitrosomonas, since (insofar as
we know) the bacteria do not intentionally set out to serve a
purpose to the fish. The behavior by which these
nitrosomonas accomplish cleaning is through a natural
ingestion/output behavior. In this example, it is also possible
to see how SBF models may examine systems at multiple
levels of abstraction. One could state that the aquarium as a
whole serves the function of cleaning itself, and the behavior
by which it accomplishes this is the nitrification process. One
can also imagine how a similar analysis could be applied to
how bacteria eats one chemical and outputs another.
Our initial study indicated that teacher-led SBF thinking,
supported in part by use of the ACT tool, led to statistically
significant improvement in understanding of classroom
aquaria as a complex system (Vattam et al. 2010). The
finding appeared robust in that it was independent of the
teaching styles of the three middle school teachers in the
initial study. We also found the middle school students in our
initial study did not use the ACT tool as we had intended.
Instead of using ACT to construct and simulate SBF models
of the nitrification process described above, middle school
students in our studies used the tool mainly to construct
simple SBF graphical models of the process (Jordan et al
2009). This may have been in part because the 1-week and 2week science units in which the ACT tool was used were too
short for students to become familiar enough with SBF
thinking as well as the ACT tool to construct and simulate
SBF models of the nitrification process. It may also partially
be due to difficulty in understanding the notions of states and
transitions between states. Detailed feedback from some
middle school teachers suggested the need for SBF tables that
list the structural components, causal behaviors, and their
functional abstractions.

The New ACT: Simplification of SBF Models
Given our observations of the practice of SBF thinking and
learning in the initial study, as well as the feedback from
middle school teachers and students in the study, we
redesigned the ACT interactive environment. The new ACT
environment (ACT3) supports two tools: SBFAuthor and
RepTools. Further, SBFAuthor enables the construction of
simple, partial, single-level SBF models through a Model
Graph tool and Model Table tool that work in conjunction
with each other. These can be seen in Figures 1 and 2.

Figure 2: The Model Table derived from the previously shown Model Graph.

2130

aquarium system (Liu & Hmelo-Silver 2009). It also includes
a micro and macro-level NetLogo-based simulations
(Wilensky 1999) developed by experts. The macro-level
simulation enables students to test ideas about fish spawning
and water quality, and the micro-level simulates the
nitrification process that occurs within an aquarium as part of
its biological filtration (Hmelo-Silver et al. 2007). In
combination, these digital tools allow students to not only
test ideas about the aquarium system but also gain insight
into the explanations behind the processes and outcomes that
occur at multiple levels within the aquarium.

Methods
Setting
Overall, two hundred and seventy three (273) students
participated in this 2009 study from four middle schools
classrooms in central New Jersey - three from seventh grade
and one from the eighth grade. Their science teachers
integrated this unit as a part of their regular science
instruction. Prior to beginning the study, none of the students
were taught to use SBF as a representational tool for complex
systems. All four teachers attended an evening workshop
where they were introduced to these digital tools prior to
implementation in the classroom. The curriculum unit lasted
from one to two weeks.
Besides the eighth grade classroom, none of the other
classes had a physical model of the aquatic ecosystem
(aquarium) as a part of their classroom environment. In order
to prepare for the unit, the researchers set up aquariums in the
remaining three seventh grade classrooms. Students used the
digital tools (ACT, SBFAuthor, RepTools) on laptops while
working in small groups, which varied from 2 to 6 students
per computer, to generate models for analysis in this study.

Figure 3: Dialog for adding details to
the structure in the model graph.
Note the specification of the function
of the component.

Model Graph: The Model Graph enables users to create the
structural portion of an SBF model in terms of its structures
(components and substances) and their associated
connections; Figure 1 depicts a Model Graph actually
constructed by a student in the classroom. The structure
model is presented as a graph. For each component or
substance in the structure, a corresponding node is created.
Nodes are linked together by behaviors, which are
represented by lines drawn between nodes. Functions of the
structures and behaviors are added using a dialog window
(see Figure 3), as well as the Model Table (see Figure 2). In
this way, students can define and connect structures,
behaviors and functions in an externalized view, which helps
guide them toward a more expert-like understanding. Most
importantly, this allows students to explicitly define the
functions of the system in order to better understand how
Classroom Instruction
larger processes emerge from underlying functions.
The four science teachers appropriated the curriculum and
Model Table: The Model Table is an organizational tool implemented it based on their individual scientific knowledge
intended to allow students to engage in their natural thought and learning styles of their students. While all the teachers
process when first encountering a complex system. An used the SBF as a representational tool to organize their
example can be seen in Figure 2. The Model Table features thinking about complex systems, there were variations within
three columns: one for Structure, one for Behavior, and one actual implementations of the curriculum.
for Function. Structures are linked to Behaviors in a one-tomany association, while Behaviors are linked to Functions in SBF Introduction: Two teachers decided to begin the
a one-to-one association. The Model Table is more than a instruction with a discussion on the aquarium and focus on
preliminary brainstorming tool, however. Adding structures SBF as an initial activity using the ACT Model Table. The
to the Model Table will automatically result in their creation other teachers adopted the reverse strategy. Their
on the Model Graph. Behaviors and Functions appear in the introduction to the unit began with description of the SBF
Model Graph after their addition to the Model Table, through while illustrating it from students’ immediate environment
the Structure's pop-up dialog menu. The control works both (for e.g. the classroom as a complex system). This top down
ways: new Structures, Behaviors and Functions added on the effect was intended for the students to think about the SBF
from a micro to macro level.
Model Graph automatically appear on the Model Table.
RepTools: ACT also links to the extant RepTools. RepTools
was designed to accompany a physical aquarium installed in
each classroom. It provides digital tools that feature functioncentered hypermedia from which students can read about the
structures, behaviors, and functions occurring within an

Modeling Aquatic Ecosystem: While some teachers
emphasized the importance of the models as a means to
represent ideas in summative fashion, other teachers chose to
use the modeling task throughout implementation as a means
to continually formulate and refine ideas. Additionally, some

2131

teachers chose to have students model the entire system,
while other teachers had students generate a model based on
a portion of the system that corresponded quite closely to one
of the NetLogo simulations.
Figure 1 illustrates a model graph created in ACT by a 7th
grade student as part of an SBF model construction activity
in one of the middle school classrooms. This figure shows the
one of the systems frequently modeled in the classrooms: the
nitrification process, described previously. Structures are
shown as nodes (purple for biotic structures, blue for abiotic
structures), while behaviors link together structures that
directly and relevantly influence one another. Although not
depicted in the figure, inside the structure boxes are
statements about a component’s function as indicated in the
dialog box of Figure 3; these functions can also be seen in the
Model Table in Figure 2. In this way again, students are
encouraged to recognize and explicitly state the functions of
the system, reinforcing a functional understanding.

Results
To assess the effectiveness of the SBF-driven curriculum
and technology, identical tests were administered before and
after engagement in the aquarium unit. These tests asked
about the structures, behaviors and functions of the aquaria,
and were also given problems to solve regarding aquarium
processes. To examine learning with respect to SBF, we
coded the pre- and post- tests using an SBF coding scheme
(Hmelo, Holton & Kolodner 2000). Structural components,
such as fish, plants, filter, was coded as structure. A reference
to the mechanisms of how the components worked was coded
as behavior. For example, a behavior of the plants could be
absorb some of the carbon dioxide in the fish tank and
produce oxygen through photosynthesis. Reference to the
outcome of a behavior was coded as function. For example, a
function of the filter could be to clean and circulate water.
All tests were coded blind to condition by one rater.
Table 1: Pre- Posttest Results
Structure
Behavior
Pretest
8.08 (2.624)
3.80 (2.107)
Mean (SD)
Posttest
9.33 (2.347)
6.20 (2.766)
Mean (SD)
t(273)
5.60*
11.65*
Effect size
0.24
0.44
*All p<.05

Function
4.78 (2.924)
8.12 (3.241)
12.55*
0.47

In this preliminary study, the objective was to ensure that
the SBF curriculum described here is successfully increasing
understanding of functions and behaviors. Since students
already are generally familiar with the structure of aquaria,
increases in understanding of structure are considered a
baseline for comparison of how the curriculum enhances
understanding of functions and behaviors. Table 1 shows
initial results from the pre- and post- tests collapsed across
the four middle school classrooms consisting of 273 students.
The first number in the first two rows refers to the Mean and

the second number in parentheses to the Standard Deviation.
As indicated by the effect sizes, gains in structural
understanding were modest, while we saw the greatest effect
size for increase in behavioral (or causal) and functional
understanding for all groups. These tests suggest that the
SBF-driven curriculum and the ACT technology effectively
increase understanding in terms of the deeper concepts of
functions and behaviors. Thus, these results replicate the
findings from our initial study. A sibling paper (Honwad et
al. 2010) that too appears in these proceedings focuses on the
use of RepTools in the ACT learning environment and
reports on more recent data collected in 2010.

Conclusions & Open Issues
Functional models use functions as abstractions to organize
knowledge of complex systems. We are pursuing a research
program that investigates the use of Structure-BehaviorFunction modeling for helping middle school children
understand complex systems such as classroom aquaria
(Hmelo-Silver et al. 2008; Jordan et al. 2009, Vattam et al.
2010). In this paper we described a new version of an
interactive tool called ACT that enables middle school
children to author simple SBF models of complex processes
such as the nitrification process that results in self-cleansing
in aquaria. We also described teacher-led SBF thinking in
multiple classrooms supported in part by use of the ACT tool
by small teams of middle school children. Preliminary results
from the SBF-driven science curriculum in this study indicate
significant improvement in understanding of the basic
structure, behaviors and functions of aquaria. These results
appear to confirm initial results from earlier studies.
Of course, there remain many open issues, including the
following three. Firstly, now that we have experimentally
affirmed that the SBF curriculum and ACT technology is
effective in learning about functions and behaviors of
aquaria, there is a need to conduct controlled experiments. In
particular, there is a need for finer analysis of the
effectiveness of SBF thinking and the ACT tool based
experiments featuring many conditions, such as curriculum
without software and software without curriculum. Secondly,
there is a need to determine whether the improved
understanding of the functions and behaviors of aquaria is
enabling improved reasoning about tasks such as
establishment and maintenance of aquaria. Thirdly, there is
growing evidence that middle school teachers on their own
are appropriating SBF meta-models and transferring them to
other complex systems such as the human digestive system
(Hmelo-Silver et al. 2010). There is a need to determine if
middle school children too are appropriating and transferring
SBF meta-models to other complex systems.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by NSF ALT Grant (#
0632519) on “Learning About Complex Systems in Middle
School by Constructing Structure-Behavior-Function
Models.” Vivek Menon contributed to the development of
ACT3.

2132

References
Biswas, G., Leelawong, K., Schwartz, D., & Vye, N. (2005)
Learning By Teaching: A New Agent Paradigm For
Educational Software. Applied Artificial Intelligence
19(3-4): 363-392.
Chandrasekaean, B. (1994a) Functional Representations and
Causal Processes. In M. Yovits (editor): Advances in
Computers, pp. 73-143.
Chandrasekaran, B. (1994b). Functional Representation: A
Brief Historical Perspective. Applied Artificial
Intelligence, 8(2): 173-197.
Chi, M. (2005) Commonsense Conceptions of Emergent
Processes: Why Some Misconceptions are Robust. Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 14: 161-199.
Clement, J. (2008). Creative Model Construction in Scientists
and Students: The Role of Imagery, Analogy, and Mental
Simulation. Dordrecht: Springer.
Erden, M., Komoto, H., van Beek, T., D'Amelio, V.,
Echavarria, E., & Tomiyama, T. (2008) A Review of
Function Modeling: Approaches and Applications, AI
for Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing,
22 (2): 147-169.
Forrester, J. (1968) Principles of Systems, Productivity Press,
2nd Edition.
Goel, A., Gomez, A., Grue, N., Murdock, W., Recker, M., &
Govindaraj, T. (1996) Towards Design Learning
Environments - Explaining How Devices Work. In
Proc. International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring
Systems, Montreal, Canada, June 1996.
Goel, A., Rugaber, S., & Vattam, S. (2009) Structure,
Behavior & Function of Complex Systems: The SBF
Modeling Language. AI for Engineering Design,
Analysis and Manufacturing, 23: 23-35.
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D., Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Designing
to learn about complex systems. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 9, 247–298.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. Liu, L., Gray, S., Finkelstein, H., &
Schwartz, R. (2007). Enacting things differently: Using
NetLogo models to learn about complex systems.
Presented to biennial meeting of European Association
for Research on Learning and Instruction. Budapest,
Hungary.
Hmelo-Silver, C., Jordan, R., Demeter, M., Gray, S., Liu, L.,
Vattam, S., Rugaber, S., & Goel, A. (2008). Focusing
on Function: Thinking Below the Surface of Complex
Natural Systems. Science Scope 31(9): 27-35, Summer
2008, NSTA.
Hmelo-Silver, C., Marathe, S., Liu, L. (2007) Fish Swim,
Rocks Sit and Lungs Breathe: Expert-Novice
Understanding of Complex Systems. Journal of the
Learning Sciences. Routledge.
Hmelo-Silver, C., Sinha, S., Gray, S., Jordan, R., Honwad,
S., Rugaber, S., Vattam, S., Goel, A., Ford, W., &
Schmidt, C. (2010) Appropriating Conceptual
Representations: A Case of Transfer of in Middle
School Science Teacher. Presented to the Annual
Conference of the National Association for Research in
Science Teaching, Philadelphia, March 2010.
Honwad, S., Hmelo-Silver, C., Jordan, R., Eberbach, C.,
Gray, S., Sinha, S., Goel, A., Vattam, S., Rugaber, S., &

Joyner, D. (2010) Connecting the Visible to the
Invisible: Helping Middle School Children Understand
Complex Ecosystem Processes. In Proc. 32nd Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Portland,
Oregon, August 2010.
Jordan, R., Hmelo-Silver, C., Gray, S., Goel, A., & Rugaber,
S. (2009) Modeling Practices as a Function of Task
Structure. Presented to Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, San Diego,
California, April 2009.
Kitamura, Y., Kashiwase, M., Fuse, M., & Mizoguchi, R.
(2004). Deployment of an Ontological Framework for
Functional Design Knowledge. Advanced Engineering
Informatics, 18(2).
Kozma, R. B. (2000). The use of multiple representations and
the social construction of understanding in chemistry. In
M. J. Jacobsen & R. B. Kozma (Eds.), Innovations in
Science and Mathematics Education (pp. 11-46).
Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Lajoie, S. P., Lavigne, N. C., Guerrera, C., & Munsie, S. D.
(2001). Constructing knowledge in the context of Bio
World. Instructional Science, 29, 155-186.
Liu, L., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2009). Promoting complex
systems learning through the use of conceptual
representations in hypermedia. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 46, 1023-1040.
Narayanan, N. H. (2007). The impact of cognitively based
design of expository multimedia. In D. Alamargot, P.
Terrier & J.M. Cellier (Eds.), Written Documents in the
Workplace, Elsevier Science Publishers, pp. 243-260.
National Research Council (NRC). 1996. National science
education standards. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Nersessian, N.J. (2008) Creating Scientific Concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
New Jersey Department of Education (2006). New Jersey
Core Curriculum Standards for Science. Retreived June
19, 2008.
Palincsar, A. (1998) Social constructivist perspectives on
teaching and learning. Annual Review of Psychology.
Prabhakar, S., & Goel, A. (1998) Functional Modeling for
Enabling Adaptive Design of Devices for New
Environments. Artificial Intelligence in Engineering,
12:417-444.
Rasmussen, J. (1986) Information Processing and HumanMachine Interaction. North-Holland.
Suthers, D. (2006). Technology affordances for
intersubjective meaning making. International Journal
of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 315337.
Vattam, S., Goel, A., Rugaber, S., Hmelo-Solver, C., Jordan,
R., Gray, S., Sinha, S. (2010). Understanding Complex
Natural Systems by Articulating Structure-BehaviorFunction Models. To appear in Educational Technology
& Society,
Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo.
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A
dynamic systems approach to making sense of the
world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8,
3-19.

2133

