UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linguistic and Non-Linguistic Influences on Learning Biases for Vowel Harmony

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40b4j6w3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Finley, Sara
Badecker, William

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linguistic and Non-Linguistic Influences on Learning Biases for Vowel Harmony
Sara Finley (sfinley@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

William Badecker (badecker@arizona.edu)
Cognitive Science, Communications Building
Tucson, AZ 85702 USA
Abstract

/– + +/. There are two possible harmonic outputs: [– – –],
which changes the feature value of two of the input vowels,
and [+++] which changes only one of the vowels in the
input. A left-to-right spreading language chooses [– – –]
even though two vowels change. Another possibility is to
have no intrinsic direction of spreading, but to choose the
harmonic output with the fewest changes from the input (in
this case [+++]). This type of spreading is termed ‘majority
rules’ because the direction of spreading is determined by
the majority feature value of the input (Bakovic, 2000). One
peculiarity is that while languages never use ‘majority rules’
to determine the direction of spreading, ‘majority rules’
grammars are extremely easy to produce in generative
phonology1. Generative linguistics assumes that the nonexistence of patterns in natural language implies that they
should not be generated by the grammar. However, it is
possible that the lack of ‘majority rules’ grammars is due to
an accidental gap. Under this assumption, ‘majority rules’
patterns are grammatically plausible, but the lack of such
languages is an accident of history and language sampling.
One way of distinguishing between a principled
restriction on the nature of vowel harmony languages and an
accidental gap account is through testing for learning biases.
If learners are biased against ‘majority rules’ languages and
biased towards a directional harmony pattern, it suggests
that the non-existence of ‘majority rules’ languages is a
valid restriction on grammar. Because it is impossible to test
learning biases for unattested languages in a naturalistic
setting, as there are no naturalistic settings where a
‘majority rules’ grammar might be present, the artificial
grammar learning paradigm is the best method for
addressing this question. In an artificial grammar learning
paradigm, it is possible to manipulate naturalness,
complexity and statistical regularities in a way that is
impossible with naturalistic studies of language learning.
The present experiments test whether learners make use
of the ‘majority rules’ strategy when making grammaticality
judgments between harmonic items. We present an
experimental paradigm in which learners are exposed to a
harmony language that is ambiguous between directionality
and ‘majority rules’. If learners are biased towards
directional patterns and against ‘majority rules’ patterns,

This paper addresses the question of the domain-specificity
of learning biases for phonological processes. In two
artificial grammar learning experiments we explore the
role of learning biases in shaping the distribution of
phonological patterns across the world’s languages. In
Experiment 1, we demonstrate that learners are biased
toward phonological patterns that occur in natural
language, as opposed to patterns that are not found across
the world’s languages. Specifically, learners are biased
towards directional vowel harmony spreading processes. In
Experiment 2, we exposed learners to a non-linguistic
analogue to vowel harmony. Learners processed spreading
such that learners favored the cross-linguistically valid
pattern only when the first item of the series underwent
spreading. This set of similarities and differences in
learning may provide some insight into the origin of
learning biases for spoken languages.
Keywords: artificial grammar learning; phonology.

Introduction
The experiments presented in this paper address the
hypothesis that typological restrictions on languages are due
to learning biases (Slobin, 1973). Specifically, we address
the distribution of vowel harmony across the world’s
languages. Vowel harmony is a phonological process that
induces statistical tendencies for words to share the same
vowel quality along a particular phonetic dimension. In
Turkish, which displays harmony for both backness and
rounding, if the first vowel of the word is front and unround
(with some exceptions), all following vowels must be both
front and unround as well (Clements & Sezer, 1982). Thus,
Turkish vowel harmony may be thought of as a directional
spreading process in which the leftmost vowel spreads its
feature (round, back) to the right.
Vowel harmony languages exhibit both left-to-right and
right-to-left spreading characteristics. The direction of
spreading can be decided by the morphology of the
language (stems are more likely to spread harmony than
affixes (Bakovic, 2000)) as well as the characteristics of the
input vowels (spreading [+Round] is more likely than
spreading [–Round] (Korn, 1969)). The direction of
spreading can also be set such that spreading always occurs
from right to left or from left to right. One way in which the
direction of spreading is never decided is by the number of
changes from the input to the output of the phonological
process. For example, consider the disharmonic input

1

In ‘majority rules’ grammars, “ties” (e.g., two round and two
unround vowels) are decided by a default strategy (lower-ranked
constraint).

706

and ‘majority rules’. In the Left-to-Right condition [pu],
[gu], [de] is concatenated as [pugudo], where the final
vowel changes to [+Round] to match the feature values of
the first two vowels (e.g., [+] [+] [–] 
[+ + +]). In the Right-to-Left condition [pi], [gu], [do] is
concatenated as [pugudo] ([–] [+] [+]  [+ + +]). There was
a 500ms pause between the trisyllabic forms and the
concatenated form. There were 24 alternations of
monosyllablic words and their harmonic trisyllabic
concatenations. All training items involved a single change
from the input to the output.
The compounding procedure is similar to the triad
procedure used to study phonological processes in infants
(Jusczyk, Smolensky, & Alloco, 2002) in which the infants
are given two forms followed by their concatenation. While
there is some concern that learners do not infer a
phonological process in this paradigm, adapting this
paradigm to adults makes it possible to alleviate some of
these concerns. First, participants were specifically
informed that the trisyllabic item was the ‘combined form’
of the first three monosyllabic items. Second, the forcedchoice task (described below) makes it possible to test for
preference for left-to-right versus right-to-left spreading.

they should infer a directional pattern given data ambiguous
between ‘majority rules’ and directionality. By pitting
‘majority rules’ and directional spreading against each
other, it will be possible to determine what kind of pattern
learners inferred. One reason testing for biases towards
directionality and against ‘majority rules’ (as opposed to
direct learnability) is that unnatural patterns may be learned
by a language learner given the proper cues (Anderson,
1981). Further, even if ‘majority rules’ grammars are
learnable, it still could be that learners are simply biased
against ‘majority rules’ given the fact that much of their
learning data will be ambiguous between other types of
harmony (e.g., directional spreading). The present
experiments capitalize on this hypothesis by exposing
learners to language data that is ambiguous between
‘majority rules’ and a directional pattern.

Experiment 1
Participants were exposed either to a left-to-right harmony
pattern or a right-to-left harmony pattern in which the
majority of the vowels in the input spread. If participants
learn a ‘majority rules’ pattern, they will reverse the
direction of spreading when the majority feature reverses,
but if participants learn a directional pattern, they will be
consistent with the direction of spreading.

Table 1: Training Items for Experiment 1
Left-to-Right
Right-to-Left
bo du ti bodutu
be du tu
bodutu
gi te ko giteke
gu te ke
giteke
mo bo di mobodu
me bo nu mobonu
pi ke to pikete
pu te ne
pitene

Methods
Participants All participants were adult native English
speakers with no knowledge of a vowel harmony language.
Twenty-four Johns Hopkins undergraduate students
participated for extra course credit. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of three training conditions:
Control, Right-to-Left and Left-to-Right.

All stimuli were recorded in a sound proof booth at
22,000kHz by a male speaker of American English with
basic phonetic training (had completed a graduate-level
phonetics course). While the speaker had no knowledge of
the specifics of the experimental design, he was aware that
the items would be used in an artificial language learning
task. All stimuli were phonetically transcribed, and
presented to the speaker in written format. The speaker was
instructed to produce all vowels as clearly and accurately as
possible, even in unstressed positions. Stress of the
concatenated forms was produced on the initial syllable. All
sound editing was done using Praat (Boersma & Weenink,
2005). All stimuli contained the same consonant inventory:
[p, b, t, d, k, g, m, n]. The vowel inventory for all conditions
consisted of [i, u, e, o]. The training stimuli were
counterbalanced to contain all possible combinations of
vowel sounds. Consonants were also counterbalanced such
all consonants appeared equally often in each position.
Concatenated words were produced semi-randomly with the
condition that any word too closely resembling an English
word was intentionally avoided (the final profile of the
stimuli contained consistent numbers of vowel and
consonant pairs).
Following training, participants were given a twoalternative forced-choice task. In this task participants were

Design Because ‘majority rules’ patterns involves choosing
the direction of spreading based on the proportion vowels
with a particular feature in the input, it is necessary to
provide clear evidence that the vowel harmony process
involves a change from input to output. Because inputs to
grammatical processes are abstract and not available on the
surface, we trained participants on a compounding process
where the underlying forms are available as separate lexical
entries. Participants were exposed to base forms (the inputs)
in addition to their concatenation as a compound
(participants in the Control condition were exposed to input
forms only). Training consisted of three single syllable
forms in isolation, followed by their harmonic
concatenations. The harmony rule paired back/round vowels
together such that a harmonic trisyllabic item contained all
front vowels ([i, e]) or all back vowels ([u, o]). The three
individual syllables were disharmonic such that their
faithful concatenation would be disharmonic. The
concatenated form always followed ‘majority rules’, in one
particular direction. Participants in the critical conditions
were trained on either right-to-left harmony (Right-to-Left
condition) or left-to-right harmony (Left-to-Right
condition). All items were ambiguous between directionality

707

given two pairs of three-syllable items. The first member of
each pair was the disharmonic form, and the second member
was a harmonic form with either spreading from right-to-left
or left-to-right (e.g., [pi] [de] [go] [pudogo] vs. [pi] [de] [go]
[pidege]). Participants were asked to choose which pair was
the one that best fit the language they were trained on. At
test, the critical items are reversed such that spreading the
majority feature value requires spreading in the opposite
direction. If learners infer a directional pattern, then they
will accept multiple items undergoing harmony from the
input to the output. If learners infer a ‘majority rules’
pattern, they will reverse the direction of spreading. Test
items included 12 Old Items, 12 New Items and 12 New
Direction Items. Old and New items have the majority
feature reflect direction of spreading that the participant was
trained on, but the New Direction items reflect a reversal of
the direction that the participants were trained on. Examples
of test items appear in Table 2.

‘majority rules’ pattern, this proportion should remain high
for all test items. However, if participants learned a
directional pattern, proportion of ‘majority rules’ responses
should be above chance for Old and New test items, but
below chance for New Direction Items.

Table 2: Examples of Test Items
(‘majority rules’ Items bold, Directional Items underlined)
Left-to-Right
Right-to-Left
Old
de mi ku demiki vs. pu mi te pumuto
de mi ku domuku
pu mi te pimite
New
nu pu ki nupuku
nu pi ki nupuku
nu pu ki nipiki
nu pi ki nipiki
New
Direction

pu mi te pumuto
pu mi te pimite

Figure 1: Experiment 1 Results
A 2 (Training) x 3 (Test Condition) mixed-design
ANOVA compared each critical condition with the Control
condition. There was a significant overall effect of Training
for the Left-to-Right condition (F(1, 14) = 8.90, p < 0.05).
There was an effect of Test Item (F(2, 28) = 5.70, p < 0.01),
reflecting greater proportions of ‘majority rules’ responses
in the performance in the Old (F(1, 14) = 9.67, p < 0.01) and
New Test Items (F(1,14) = 4.95, p < 0.05) compared to the
New Direction Test Items. There was a significant
interaction (F(2, 28) = 9.78, p < 0.01), reflecting the fact
that there were more ‘majority rules’ responses for Old
Items (t(14) = 5.29, p < 0.001) but a trend of fewer
‘majority rules’ responses in for New Direction Items (t(14)
= 2.11, p = 0.073).
There was also a significant overall effect of Training for
the Right-to-Left condition (F(1, 14) = 5.72; p < 0.05).
There was an effect of Test Item (F(2, 28) = 5.04, p < 0.05),
reflecting greater proportions of ‘majority rules’ responses
in the performance in the Old (F(1, 14) = 11.24, p < 0.01)
compared to the New Direction Test Items. There was a
significant interaction (F(2, 28) = 7.87, p < 0.01), reflecting
the fact that there were more ‘majority rules’ responses in
the Right-to-Left condition for Old Items (t(14) = 7.43, p <
0.001) but a trend of fewer ‘majority rules’ responses for
New Direction Items (t(14) = 2.11, p = 0.053).
To test whether participants inferred a directional rule
versus a ‘majority rules’ pattern, we performed contrasts
comparing the New Direction test condition to the Old and
New items respectively. In the Left-to-Right Condition,
there was a significant difference between the New
Direction and both the Old (F(1, 7) = 17.07, p < 0.01) and
New (F(1, 7) = 10.13, p < 0.05) test items. The Right-toLeft condition also showed a significant difference between
New Direction and Old items (F(1, 7) = 17.49; p < 0.01) and
a marginally significant difference between the New Items
(F(1, 7) = 5.20; p < 0.08) test conditions. The fact that

de mi ku demiki
de mi ku domuku

Procedure All phases of the experiment were run using
Psyscope X (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993).
All participants were given written and verbal instructions.
They were told that they would be listening to a language
they had never heard before, and that they would later be
asked about the language, but they need not try to memorize
any forms they heard. They were told that the language
would be presented in terms of three single syllable items
followed by their combined form. This was done to ensure
that participants inferred that the monosyllabic items were
in fact the input to the harmonic concatenation. Participants
heard all 24 concatenated forms in a random order, repeated
5 times. No information about vowel harmony was given.
No semantics accompanied the sound pairs.
Training was followed by a forced-choice test phase in
which participants heard the three mono-syllabic inputs
followed by a choice of harmonic concatenations: all round
or all unround. If the first concatenation of the syllables
belonged to the language, they must push the ‘a’ key on the
keyboard; if the second concatenation of the syllables
belonged to the language, they must press the ‘l’ key on the
keyboard. Participants were told to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible.

Results
Proportions of ‘majority rules’ responses were recorded for
each participant, shown in Figure 1. If participants learned a

708

participants chose the ‘majority rules’ items significantly
less often in the New Direction test condition (compared to
Old and New items) suggests that learners inferred a
directional pattern rather than a ‘majority rules’ pattern,
reflecting a bias against ‘majority rules’ 2.
Among the 16 participants in the Experiment 1, only three
chose the ‘majority rules’ item in the New Direction
Condition greater than 60% of the time, while three chose
the ‘majority rules’ item 50% of the time, and nine chose
the ‘majority rules’ item less than 50% of the time.

stimuli. If learners of a non-linguistic pattern follow the
same constraints on ‘majority rules’, then it is likely that the
bias found in these experiments is due to non-linguistic
factors, but if no bias is found in non-linguistic stimuli, it
suggests that there is something about the linguistic nature
of harmony that biases learners towards directional
spreading. Experiment 2 addresses this question with a
visual analogue of Experiment 1.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 addresses whether the bias against a ‘majority
rules’ found in Experiment 1 may be reflected in a nonlinguistic version of the vowel harmony learning task.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that participants
inferred a directional harmony pattern over a ‘majority
rules’ harmony pattern. When learners were exposed to a
spreading process that was ambiguous between a ‘majority
rules’ pattern and a directional spreading pattern, learners
inferred a directional pattern. This suggests that the nonexistence of ‘majority rules’ spreading processes across the
world’s languages is in part due to learning biases. Learners
do not postulate ‘majority rules’ languages because they are
biased towards directional spreading processes.
However, it is unclear whether this bias is shaped by
language-specific constraints or more general cognitive
principles, such as attention and memory. Learners may not
infer ‘majority rules’ because such languages require the
language user to keep track of the number of vowels of a
particular feature value in the input, inducing a greater
memory load. Further, there may be a bias in favor of
directional patterns, which are in line with attentional
biases. For example, in a left-to-right language, it is fully
predictable which vowel triggers harmony (the left-most
vowel) and which vowels undergo harmony (the right-most
vowels). Learners may be biased to infer a directional
pattern, given that the consistent cues for harmony are found
at the attention-heavy locations in the word (Beckman,
1998). Additionally, ‘majority rules’ patterns require the
learner to keep track of a wider range of conditioning
factors: how many vowels of each feature value are in the
input, and which direction of spreading to use when there is
a tie. A ‘majority rules’ pattern may require more episodic
memory because several different situations in the input
induce very different results. For example, two round
vowels and one unround vowel will yield round vowels, but
three round vowels and four unround vowels will yield
unround vowels. While complicated phonological patterns
are not uncommon cross-linguistically, if a learner has to
decide between a simpler directional pattern and a
complicated ‘majority rules’ pattern, they should choose the
directional pattern.
One way to determine whether the directionality
preference is due to non-linguistic factors against ‘majority
rules’ is to replicate Experiment 1 with non-linguistic

Methods
Participants All participants were adult native English
speakers with no knowledge of a vowel harmony language,
and did not participate in Experiment 1. Twenty-seven
University of Rochester undergraduates participated for $10.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three training
conditions: Control, Right-to-Left and Left-to-Right.
Design The optimal way to test for the effects of nonlinguistic constraints on pattern learning is to design a
pattern that makes use of known categories, but does not
make use of any linguistic strategies. For this reason, a
visual learning pattern using colors and shapes is optimal.
First, shapes and colors are categories that are readily
available to the adult learner, making it possible for the
participant to infer a spreading pattern based on the
experimenter-defined parameters. Second, the visual stimuli
are completely outside the range of linguistic input to the
learner, making the pattern learning task as non-linguistic as
possible. While non-linguistic auditory stimuli present a
closer match to the language learning task, there are two
potential problems with such a design. First, standard nonlinguistic auditory pattern learning makes use of tones or
uncommon sounds that are not clearly defined categories.
Thus, it is not clear whether learners of a tone-spreading
pattern would make use of the same experimenter-defined
categories. The visual stimuli that were chosen for this
experiment have definitive categories: shapes (circles and
squares) and colors (red, green, blue, yellow). In the present
experiment, squares and circles of various colors assimilated
based on a spread-right pattern or a spread-left pattern.
Second, non-linguistic auditory pattern learning may invoke
linguistic strategies to learning (e.g., acoustic properties of
the sounds), and therefore may not directly address the
questions posed in the present experiment.
It is important to note that the directional labels (left-toright) are figurative for both Experiments 1 and 2. Left
refers to the first item heard/seen; right refers to the final
item heard/seen. In the visual analogue, all items appeared
sequentially in the center of the monitor for 500ms.
Each input-output pair was presented as a series of three
shapes followed by the assimilated version of those three

2

We also found a significant effect when the alternations were
presented as changes from a disharmonic word (as opposed to a
concatenation of mono-syllabic words) (Finley & Badecker, 2008).

709

distinguish ‘majority rules’ and directional items. This is
confirmed by a significant effect of Test Item (F(2, 32 =
10.94, p < 0.001), as there was a significant difference
between the New Direction items and both the Old and New
Items combined (F(1,16)=16.57, p < 0.01), suggesting that
learners did not infer a ‘majority rules’ pattern.

shapes. Each shape was flashed on the screen for 500ms
followed by a 100ms pause in the center of the screen. A
500ms pause was placed between each series of 3 shapes.
For example, participants in the Left-to-Right condition,
saw /RED SQUARE, BLUE SQUARE, GREEN CIRCLE/
 [RED SQUARE, BLUE SQUARE, GREEN SQUARE].
Participants in the Right-to-Left condition, participants saw
/RED CIRCLE, BLUE SQUARE, GREEN SQUARE/ 
[RED SQUARE, BLUE SQUARE, GREEN SQUARE].
The training and test items were analogous to the items in
Experiment 1. There were 24 training pairs, repeated 5 times
each in a random order. There were 12 items each in three
test conditions: Old, New and New Direction.
Table 3: Training Items for Experiment 2
Left-to-Right
Right-to-Left
SQUARE SQUARE
CIRCLE
CIRCLE 
SQUARE SQUARE 
SQUARE SQUARE
SQUARE
SQUARE
SQUARE SQUARE
CIRCLE CIRCLE
SQUARE
SQUARE 
CIRCLE CIRCLE 
CIRCLE CIRCLE
CIRCLE
CIRCLE
CIRCLE CIRCLE

Figure 3: Experiment 2 Results
There was no significant effect of Training for the Rightto-Left condition (F(1, 16) = 1.63, p <0.05). This was
carried the interaction between condition and test item
(F(2,32) = 13.48, p <0.001). There were significantly more
‘majority rules’ responses compared to Controls for Old
(t(16) = 2.55, p < 0.05) and New (t(16) = 2.33, p < 0.05) but
there were significantly fewer ‘majority rules’ responses for
New Direction items compared to the Control condition
(t(16) = -4.41, p < 0.001). This difference reflects the fact
that participants in the Right-to-Left condition inferred a
directional pattern over a ‘majority rules’ pattern. The fact
that there was no overall significant difference between the
Right-to-Left condition and the controls is reflected in the
low ‘majority rules’ responses in the New Direction
condition, creating an overall average that was not different
from the overall average of the Control condition. There
was a significant effect of Test Item (F(2, 32) = 17.66, p <
0.001), due to the fact that there was a significant difference
between the New Direction items and both the Old and New
Items combined (F(1,16)=19.90, p < 0.001).
Participants in the Right-to-Left condition learned a
directional harmony pattern, while participants in the Leftto-Right condition had no preference. This difference is
reflected in the New Direction items, as participants in the
Left-to-Right condition chose the majority option
significantly more often than participants in the Right-toLeft condition (t(16) = 4.16, p < 0.01).
Among the nine participants in the Left-to-Right
condition, four participants chose the ‘majority rules’ item
in the New Direction Condition between 40 and 50% of the
time, while two chose the ‘majority rules’ item 25% of the
time, and three chose the ‘majority rules’ item greater than
60% of the time. This variation suggests that there is no
intrinsic strategy towards ‘majority rules’.

Stimuli Shape stimuli were produced using the standard
drawing tools for Microsoft Power Point. The shapes
consisted of a square and a circle each for four different
colors: red, green, blue and yellow, with a small amount of
grey shading around each shape. All shapes were
standardized to be the same size on the screen (occupying a
5in x 5in space in the center of the monitor).

Figure 2: Experiment 2 Stimuli (Left-to-Right) 3
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1
except that participants were told that they would be
watching a series of shapes, presented as a series of pairs of
three shapes.

Results
The proportions of ‘majority rules’ responses were recorded
for each participant, shown in Figure 3. A 2 (Training) x 3
(Test Condition) mixed-design ANOVA compared each
critical conditions with the Control condition. There was a
significant effect of Training for the Left-to-Right condition
(F(1, 14) = 9.83, p < 0.01). There was a significant
interaction (F(2,32) = 7.28, p <0.01), due to the fact that
there was a significant difference between the Controls for
New Items (t(16) = 2.59, p<0.05), but not New Direction
items (t(16) < 1). This suggests that learners did not
3

All items were presented in the center of the screen.

710

Discussion

is not. This continuity may make listeners more likely to
attend to both beginnings and ends of words.
The experiments presented in this paper support the
hypothesis that learners have biases that shape the
distribution of patterns cross-linguistically. While ‘majority
rules’ spreading patterns may be easily generated by rule
and constraint-based theories of phonology, such spreading
patterns violate constraints on attention, perception and
memory. These constraints bias the learner towards
directional spreading patterns over ‘majority rules’ patterns.
In many ways, these biases hold for both linguistic and nonlinguistic stimuli, suggesting that domain general
constraints may affect the distribution of linguistic patterns
across the world’s languages.

The difference between the Right-to-Left and Left-to-Right
conditions suggests that visual pattern stimuli are processed
differently depending on whether the change occurs first in
the sequence or last in the sequence. This difference may be
due to attentional constraints. If learners pay the most
attention to the first part of the sequence, learners in the
Left-to-Right condition will notice that there is a change in
the first shape, but learners in the Right-to-Left condition
will have to wait for the entire three shapes in order to see
what changes. Thus, their representation of the pattern may
be more holistic, and thus may be more amenable to both
‘majority rules’ and directional responses. Another
possibility is that learners in Experiment 2 were influenced
by their prior reading experience, which was left-to-right.
This predicts that the opposite pattern should emerge for
learners whose reading system is right-to-left. Future
research will address these questions.
Because we used namable categories (shapes and colors),
it is possible that participants engaged in naming the shape
patterns as they appeared on the screen (e.g., ‘GREEN
SQUARE’, ‘RED CIRCLE’, etc). However, this type of
naming is different from the grammatical process that
applies in a phonological pattern. First, phonological rule
processing is less likely to involve naming (e.g., ‘round
vowel’ or ‘u’). Second, if naming the non-linguistic objects
induced linguistic processing, we would expect an exact
replication of Experiment 1, but this did not occur. In order
to replicate a harmony process, it is necessary to use nonlinguistic stimuli that have clear categories. Because all
stimuli that are a priori categorical have a name, it is not
possible to use non-linguistic stimuli that are not namable.
Further, participants often create names for non-namable
stimuli (e.g., ‘the squiggly one’) making it unclear if nonnamable stimuli would remove naming strategies.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank audiences at 2008 WCCFL
Conference as well as: Iris Berent, Paul Smolensky, Colin
Wilson, Peter Graff, Neil Bardhan, Patricia Reeder, Luigi
Burzio, and our anonymous reviewers for their helpful
insights and suggestions. Funding was provided by NSF
IGERT and NIH Grant DC00167.

References
Anderson, S. (1981). Why phonology isn't "natural".
Linguistic Inquiry, 12, 493-547.
Bakovic, E. (2000). Harmony, dominance and control.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Rutgers University.
Beckman, J. M. (1998). Positional faithfulness. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, UMass Amherst.
Boersma, P., & Weenink. (2005). Praat: Doing phonetics by
computer.
Clements, G. N., & Sezer, E. (1982). Vowel and consonant
disharmony in Turkish. In v. d. H. a. Smith (Ed.), The
structure of Phonological Representations (Vol. II, pp.
213-255). Dordrecht: Foris.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25, 257271.
Finley, S., & Badecker, W. (2008). Analytic biases for
vowel harmony languages. WCCFL, 27, 168-176.
Jusczyk, P., Smolensky, P., & Alloco, T. (2002). How
English-learning infants respond to markedness and
faithfulness constraints. Language Acquisition, 10, 31-73.
Korn, D. (1969). Types of labial vowel harmony in the
Turkic languages. Anthropological Lingusitics, 11, 98106.
Slobin, D. I. (1973). Cognitive prerequisites from the
development of grammar. In C. A. Ferguson & D. I.
Slobin (Eds.), Studies of child language development.
New York: Holf, Rinehart & Winston.

General Discussion and Conclusions
The results of Experiment 1 provided evidence in favor of a
learning bias that favors directionality over ‘majority rules’
patterns. This bias towards directional harmony patterns
provides insight into why ‘majority rules’ patterns do not
exist in natural language. If learners are not biased to infer
‘majority rules’ from their language data, it is unlikely that
such a pattern would emerge.
Experiment 2 demonstrated that the attentional constraints
that may lead to a bias towards directional spreading pattern
must work differently for spoken language versus nonlinguistic visual stimuli. In this non-linguistic analogue of
Experiment 1, participants only inferred a directional pattern
when the spreading pattern occurred from right-to-left,
affecting the first image. These results suggest that the
source of the learning bias for directional patterns occur as
an interaction of the ways in which speakers attend to
auditory spoken language. One possibility is that linguistic
material is continuous in a way that non-linguistic material

711

