UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linking meaning to language: linguistic universals and variation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76m0t5rq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hartshorne, Joshua
O'Donnell, Tim
Sudo, Yasutada
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linking Meaning to Language: Linguistic Universals and Variation
Joshua K. Hartshorne (jharts@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, Harvard University
33 Kirkland St., Cambridge, MA 02138

Timothy J. O'Donnell (timo@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, Harvard University
33 Kirkland St., Cambridge, MA 02138

Yasutada Sudo (ysudo@mit.edu)
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Mass. Ave. 32-D808, Cambridge, MA 02139

Miki Uruwashi (mikiuruwashi@ruri.waseda.jp)
Graduate School of Human Sciences, Waseda University
33 Kirkland St., Cambridge, MA 02138

Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, Harvard University
33 Kirkland St., Cambridge, MA 02138

Abstract
To use natural language, speakers must map the participants
in events or states in the world onto grammatical roles. There
remains considerable disagreement about the nature of these
so-called linking rules (Levin & Rappaport Hovav, 2005). In
order to probe the nature of linking rules, we investigate verbs
of psychological state, which demonstrate complex linking
patterns both within and between languages. We find that the
typical duration of the psychological state guides the
application of linking rules to novel verbs in both English and
Japanese, consistent with a universal constraint. Nonetheless,
there are marked differences in the baseline preferences for
the individual linking rules across the two languages. We
discuss these findings both in terms of theories of
exceptionless linking rules and accounts on which linking
rules are governed by probabilistic biases as well as crosslinguistic variation.
Keywords: syntax; semantics; linking; UTAH; universal
grammar; over-hypotheses.

The Linking Problem
To interpret Mary broke the vase, one must minimally
identify the event described (breaking), the participants in
that event (Mary, vase), and identify which participant
played which role (Mary = breaker, not break-ee). This
linking problem has received considerable attention both by
theorists trying to correctly characterize the semanticssyntax links (see Levin & Rappaport Hovav, 2005, for
review), and by developmental psychologists interested in
how children discover these links (Bowerman, 1990; Pinker,
1984, 1989).
A key issue is identifying the right level of generalization
for the linking rules. Many data points suggest linking rules

are highly regular. Regularity is seen both within verbs and
across verbs. Not just Mary but all breakers are the subject
and not object of break (John/the baby/the wind broke the
vase/window/glass). Similarly, in English the object of a
transitive change-of-state verb is systematically the entity
that changes state while the subject effects that change
(Mary broke/cleaned/opened the box). These intuitions
generalize to novel words. If interpretable, The dax broke
the blicket must mean that the dax is the breaker and the
blicket is broken. Adults and children prefer an
interpretation on which The bear pilked the horse means the
bear did something to the horse, not vice versa (Marantz,
1982; see also Pinker, 1989). Moreover, these patterns are
sufficiently regular across languages to suggest that some
(Pinker, 1984) or all (Baker, 1988) linking rules are innate.
However, there are numerous examples of apparent
variation and exceptionality. An object moving from Mary’s
possession to John’s can be described by Mary
gave/lent/sent the package to John or John
received/took/obtained the package from Mary. The same
activity might be called Mary chasing John or John fleeing
Mary. Many emotion verbs put the experiencer in subject
position (John feared/hated/loved Mary), while others put
the
experiencer
in
object
position
(Mary
frightened/angered/delighted John). Moreover, a relatively
small number of languages appear to exhibit linking rules
quite distinct from what is seen in languages like English
(Dixon, 1994).
In the present study, we investigate linking rule regularity
and variation within and across two unrelated languages
with respect to one such problematic case: psych verbs.

1186

Psych Verbs
Unlike change-of-state verbs, verbs of psychological state
are highly variable in terms of their surface syntax. The
experiencer of the mental state may appear as the verb’s
subject (experiencer-subject verbs: Mary likes/hates/misses
John) or its object (experiencer-object verbs: Mary
surprises/confuses/angers John). Both classes are seen in a
wide variety of languages, though the subjects of
experiencer-subject (ES) verbs can appear as dative subjects
in languages that have such constructions (Levin, 1993).
Interestingly, there appears to be some variation across
languages in terms of which psychological states appear in
which form: for instance, the apparent French equivalent to
the ES psych verb miss is experiencer-object (EO; manquer;
see also Croft, 1993).
Most authors have assumed there is no systematic
semantic distinction between ES and EO verbs, and thus
each verb must be marked for taking one linking rule or the
other (e.g., Bowerman, 1990; Dowty, 1991; Jackendoff,
1990; Pinker, 1989). However, Pylkkanen (1999) finds that
in Finnish, ES psych verbs describe individual-level
predicates whereas EO psych verbs describe stage-level
predicates.1 Stage-level and individual-level predication
differ in several ways; one relevant difference is that stagelevel predicates can be narrowly bound temporally and
physically (1), whereas individual-level states typically
cannot be (2).
(1) a. John was sleepy yesterday in the kitchen.
b. John angered Mary yesterday in the kitchen.
(2) a. *John was tall yesterday in the kitchen.
b. *John hated Mary yesterday in the kitchen.
Thus, it may be that those psychological states which are
deemed more likely to be bound in time and space are also
more likely to be realized as EO verbs.
Interestingly, the psychological literature on emotional
states typically distinguishes between emotions and
dispositions (Ekman, 1999). The former are tied to specific
physiological states and are brief in duration, whereas the
latter are long-lived tendencies to feel or act in a particular
way. Commonly-given examples of emotions are surprise
and anger; frequent examples of dispositions are love and
hate. Note that the former are EO verbs and the latter ES
verbs.
Informal inspection of English psych verbs by the authors
suggested that in fact ES verbs do typically describe
dispositions thus defined while EO verbs typically describe
emotions. This was further confirmed in an unpublished
study in which naïve participants rated the states described
by ES verbs as typically lasting longer than those described
by EO verbs (Hartshorne, 2009).
In the present study, we investigate whether differences in
the nature of the psychological state influence whether
participants apply the EXPERIENCER→SUBJECT linking rule
or the EXPERIENCER→OBJECT linking rule to novel psych
verbs. We focus on the notion of duration: are long-lived
1

See also discussion of Pesetsky (1995) below.

psychological states (dispositions/individual-level states)
more likely to be realized as ES verbs relative to short-lived
psychological states (emotions/stage-level states)?
In order to investigate both linguistic universals and
variation, we investigated the degree to which this proposed
distinction guides generalization of linking rules in two
historically unrelated and linguistically distinct languages:
English and Japanese.

Experiment 1: English
Participants in Experiment 1 were introduced to novel
transitive verbs describing psychological states for which
there was no existing verb. To encourage participants to
take the task seriously, the novel verbs were introduced as
loanwords from Japanese. Half the verbs described longlived psychological states; half described short-lived
psychological states. For each verb, participants decided
whether an ES structure or an EO structure was more likely
to be “correct.”
In English there is a preference for simple present tense
verbs to be interpreted as generic statements (contrast Bats
frightened John vs. Bats frighten John; see Carlson, 1988).
As this may affect whether the novel psych verbs are seen to
describe short-lived (event-like) or long-lived states, we
tested separate groups of subjects using both simple present
and past tenses (Experiments 1a and 1b). As ES verbs
cannot be naturally used the progressive form (*John was
fearing bats), we used simple tense only.

Method
Participants
Forty native English-speakers participated in Experiment 1:
twenty in 1a (18-60yo, M=25.3, SE=2.2) and twenty in 1b
(18-39yo, M=23.1, SE=1.2). Participants, who were
recruited outdoors on Harvard's campus, gave informed
consent and were compensated with a small snack.
Materials
Sixteen Japanese nouns describing psychological states
without clear English verbal equivalents were selected and
turned into verbs, applying any necessary phonological
accommodations. Eight were judged by the authors to be
long-lived states (e.g. tekitaishin: the feeling of rivalry;
hankan: the feeling of being opposed to something or
someone) and eight to be short-lived states (e.g., wabi: a
sense of beauty of silence discovered in simplicity; tokimeki:
the feeling of a heart beating because of encountering an
attractive person or thing). For each verb, an appropriate
animate experiencer argument was chosen. The other
argument was an inanimate stimulus of the emotion. Two
sentences were constructed by placing the experiencer in
either subject or object position (3). To further bias
participants into conceiving of the long-lived states as longlived states and short-lived states as short-lived states, the
inanimate arguments for the former were themselves longlived (e.g., Harvard’s basketball team; his company’s

1187

policy) and the inanimate arguments for the latter were
short-lived (the unexpected rainbow; seeing the gorgeous
necklace). Four additional filler sentence pairs describing
non-psychological events (The ocean wave tsunamis the
village vs. The village tsunamis the ocean wave) were also
constructed. Experiments 1a and 1b differed only in the
tense of the verb: simple present in 1a and simple past in 1b.
Procedure
Participants were told that they would try to correctly use
new Japanese loanwords. For each verb, they were given a
definition and the two possible sentences. An example trial
is shown below:
(3) Tekitaishin
The feeling of rivalry
a. Richard tekitaishins Harvard’s basketball team.
b. Harvard’s basketball team tekitaishins Richard.
They were asked to choose the sentence they thought most
likely to be correct. Four test forms were constructed as
follows: the order of verbs was pseudorandomized such that
the same condition (emotion/disposition) did not occur more
than twice in a row. We counter-balanced whether the ES
sentence or EO sentence was displayed first within each
condition. The second form was made by switching the
order of the sentences for each verb. Forms 3 and 4 were
made by reversing the order of the verbs in Forms 1 and 2.

Results and Discussion
As predicted, participants were more likely to choose the ES
frame for long-lived verbs than for short-lived verbs, in both
Experiment 1a (M=62.5%, SE=4.3% vs. M=32.5%,
SE=4.2%) and 1b (M=58.7%, SE=5.5% vs. M=33.1%,
SE=5.0%).2 The main effect of short-lived/long-lived was
significant (F1(1,38)=60.8, p<.001; F2(1,14)=6.2, p=.03),3
and this effect did not interact with tense (Fs<1). Thus,
semantics guides the preferences of native English-speakers
for certain verbal syntactic forms. Interestingly, although the
past tense is more amenable to the description of events,
participants were not more likely to choose the objectexperiencer frame when the verb was presented in the past
tense (Fs<1), perhaps because the inanimate arguments used
for the short-lived verbs strongly implied events (e.g.,
Seeing the gorgeous necklace tokimekis Mary).
Thus, the underlying semantics of the sentence (the verb
and/or inanimate argument) biased participants to choose a
particular syntactic frame: ES for short-lived states and EO
for long-lived states. In Experiment 2, we test whether this
distinction is cross-linguistically relevant by turning to
Japanese, a language historically unrelated to English.

Experiment 2: Japanese
Japanese is widely considered to be a language isolate, and
its grammar is distinguished from that of English in a
number of important ways (Tsujimura, 2007). First,
Japanese is a scrambling language, allowing considerable
word-order variation, with the basic order being SubjectObject-Verb, while in English the word order is rigidly
Subject-Verb-Object. Second, unlike in English, the
grammatical roles of noun phrases are overtly marked by
particle suffixes: the subject is generally marked by -wa,
and the direct object is marked by -o. Third, in the verbal
domain, Japanese is a highly agglutinative language in
which a verbal stem must at least bear a tense suffix and
also may appear with a number of other suffixes expressing
various grammatical functions. One such verbal suffix that
is relevant for our purposes is the causative suffix (s)ase-.
For example, aruk-ase- is the causative form of the verbal
stem aruk- ‘walk’, meaning ‘to make somebody walk’. This
suffix is productive and can combine with almost all verbal
stems.
Interestingly,
while
English
contains
more
morphologically simple EO verbs (220) than ES verbs (44;
Levin, 1993), our survey of Japanese found only 5
morphologically simple EO verbs, with the vast majority
(74) ES.4 Additional, morphologically complex, EO verbs
can be formed in Japanese by adding the causative –(s)aseaffix to a ES verb:
(4) a. Taro-wa koomori-o kowagat-ta.
Taro-TOP bat-ACC fear-PAST
Taro feared bats
b. Koomori-wa Taro-o kowagar-ase-ta.
bat-TOP Taro-ACC fear-CAUS-PAST
Bats frightened Taro.
As in Experiment 1, we tested verbs in both the present
and past tense. However, since in Japanese ES verbs are
unnatural in simple tenses (*John-wa Mary-o nikum-u;
John-TOP Mary-ACC hate-PRES), we used the more
natural progressive form (John-wa Mary-o nikun-dei-ru;
John-TOP Mary-ACC hate-PROG-PRES; “John hates
Mary”) for both verb classes. Note that with certain stative
verbs the progressive morphology does not force a
progressive meaning (e.g. the previous example does not
mean “John is hating Mary”).
Method
Participants
Forty native Japanese-speakers participated in Experiment
2: twenty in 2a (20-35yo, M=22.3, SE=2.8) and twenty in
2b (19-65yo, M=31, SE=3.3). Participants, who were
recruited in public spaces around Tokyo, gave informed
consent and were compensated with a souvenir pencil.

2

Means and standard errors here and elsewhere calculated by
subject.
3
Items analyses consider a given verb in present or past tense to
be the same verb. Treating them as separate items does not affect
the pattern of results.

4
Throughout this paper we consider only transitive verbs that
take direct objects (John fears/frightens Sally). Future research will
investigate intranstive verbs that take oblique objects (John cares
about/matters to Sally).

1188

Materials and Procedure
Materials and procedure were modeled closely on
Experiment 1. Participants were introduced to novel
English-derived loanwords in Japanese (long-lived:
reverence, greed, phobia, envy, credence, affection,
loathing, pride; short-lived: déjà vu, anguish, grief, jolt,
nostalgia, trepidation, glee, chagrin). Loan words in
Japanese can be made using the semi-productive verbalizer r- (e.g., gugu-r-u: ‘to google’) or the light verb suru (e.g.,
enzyoi-suru: ‘to enjoy’). While the latter is more productive,
it often carries an explicitly causative meaning, particularly
when applied to states. Since our goal was to avoid explicit
morphosyntactic markers of meaning (with any concomitant
argument selection biases), we used the more neutral –r-.
Again, care was taken to ensure that the loanwords did
not approximate any extant Japanese monomorphemic
words (e.g. hatred was avoided, since Japanese already
contains nikum-u, which means to hate). As in Experiment
1, long-lived psychological states were paired with longlived inanimate arguments (e.g., the mountain; the theory of
evolution) and short-lived psychological states with shortlived inanimate arguments (e.g., news of her brother’s
accident; seeing the foreign town). The four filler verbs
were existing English-derived psych verbs.
Experiments 2a and 2b differed only in that the verbs
were in the present-progressive in 2a and in the pastprogressive in 2b. Two of the filler verbs in 2a were
problematic and were replaced in 2b. An example trial for a
short-lived verb from Experiment 2b are shown below:
guriifu (grief): deep sorrow (especially that caused by
someone's death)
a. Tooru-wa aiken-no shi-o guriifu-t-tei-ru
Toru-TOP pet.dog-GEN death-ACC grief-V-PROG-PAST
Toru grieves the pet dog's death.
b. Aiken-no shi-wa Tooru-o guriifu-t-tei-ru
pet.dog-GEN death-TOP Toru-ACC grief-V-PROG-PAST
The pet dog's death grieves Toru.
Results and Discussion
Like English speakers, Japanese participants were more
likely to select the ES interpretation for the long-lived verbs
than for the short-lived verbs in both Experiments 2a
(M=90.6%, SE=1.0% vs. 73.7%, M=0.9%) and 2b
(M=73.1%, SE=0.9% vs. M=55.6%, SE=0.9%). The overall
main effect of short-lived/long-lived was significant
(F1(1,38)=28.6, p<.001; F2(1,14)=16.8, p=.002) and did not
interact with tense (Fs<1). Unlike in English, there was a
significant main effect of tense, with ES interpretations
more likely in present tense than past (F1(1,38)=6.3, p=.02;
F2(1,14)=21.5, p<.001).
These results suggest that linking rules in Japanese, as in
English, are sensitive to the duration of the psychological
state. Interestingly, however, Japanese participants were
overall more likely than English speakers to choose the ES
frame (M=72.5%, SE=3.5% vs. M=46.7%, SE=2.8%;

t1(78)=5.8, p<.001; t2(30)=3.5, p=.001). This could show a
broad preference for the EXPERIENCER→SUBJECT linking
rule in Japanese. Alternatively or in addition, Japanese
participants may have been sensitive to the fact that the
novel verbs were all morphologically simple, and nearly all
morphologically simple psych verbs in Japanese are ES (see
above). EO verbs are typically formed with the addition of
the causative affix -(s)ase-. We tested whether participants
would be more likely to choose the EO form for –(s)aseaffixed verbs in Experiment 3.

Experiment 3: Causative Psych Verbs in
Japanese
In Experiment 3, we tested whether Japanese participants
would choose EO frames for –(s)ase affixed psych verbs.

Method
Participants
Twenty participants (19-34yo, M=22.5, SE=1.3), recruited
in public spaces around Tokyo, gave informed consent and
were compensated with a souvenir pencil.
Materials and Procedure
Materials and procedure were identical to Experiment 2b,
except all verbs were causativized by the addition of the
-(s)ase- affix and presented in the present progressive
(guriifu-r-ase-tei-ru).

Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 2, Japanese participants were more likely
to choose the ES interpretation for the long-lived verbs than
the short-lived verbs (M=33.1%, SE=5.2% vs. M=21.2%,
SE=3.5%; t1(19)=2.41, p=.03; t2(14)=2.83, p=.01). As
predicted, participants were overall much less likely to
choose the ES interpretation relative to Experiment 2a
(M=27.2%, SE=3.7% vs. M=80.6%, SE=3.6%; t1(38)=10.3,
p<.001; t2(15)=20.5, p<.001). Thus, the preference for the
ES interpretation in Experiment 2 was not due to a global
preference for EXPERIENCER→SUBJECT linking, but rather
was specific to the verb form used (monomorphemic).

General Discussion
In order to discuss events and states, speakers must map the
participants in the event or state onto grammatical roles.
There remains considerable disagreement about the nature
of these mappings or linking rules (Levin & Rappaport
Hovav, 2005). Linking rules are typically defined in terms
of features of the arguments such as agentivity or causativity
(Dowty, 1991; Pesetsky, 1995; Pinker, 1984; 1989) or
aspects of the predicate such as stativity and telicity (Hooper
& Thompson, 1980). In this paper, we present evidence that
in the case of psych verbs, linking rules are sensitive to
duration of the psychological state: if the state is short-lived,
the EXPERIENCER→OBJECT rule is more likely to apply; if
the state is long-lived, the EXPERIENCER→SUBJECT rule

1189

applies. This distinction appears in both English and
Japanese, historically unrelated and grammatically distinct
languages. Coupled with the fact that the this distinction
may also characterize existing verbs in Finnish (Pylkannen,
1999) and Mandarin (Hartshorne, 2009), which are
unrelated to each other or to English or Japanese, these
results suggest this distinction could be universal across
languages.

Causes, Stages and Emotions
The data in this paper demonstrate that the mapping from
semantics to syntax for psych verbs is governed at least in
part by the meaning of the verb. Although we discussed our
manipulation in terms of the expected duration of the
psychological state, that may not be the correct distinction.
Our experiments above were partly motivated by the
distinction in the psychological literature on emotion
between emotions and dispositions. Since one of the
defining distinctions between emotions and dispositions is
their duration, this distinction is fully confounded with our
short-lived/long-lived distinction.
Similarly, we noted that Pylkkanen (1999) argues that
Finnish ES verbs are individual-level predicates and Finnish
EO verbs are stage-level predicates. Stage-level and
individual-level predicates are usually defined in terms of
the genericity of predicates—typically formalized as
whether the predicate refers to a single event or quantifies
over many events (Carlson, 1988). Genericity can be
diagnosed by linguistic tests such as the permissibility of the
progressive (see Pylkkanen, 1999). As noted above, at least
one of the linguistic tests has apparent semantic
consequences. One distinguishing factor of EO predicates is
that they can be bounded by brief temporal durations,
making the notion of stage-level similar to our notion of
short-duration. Whether the two can be de-confounded is a
question for future research.
Note that while it may be that stage-level, short-lived and
emotion may simply be three ways of capturing the
fundamental distinction that influences the semanticsyntactic mapping, the same may not be true for the other
semantic distinction that has been suggested in the
literature: Pesetsky (1995) presents linguistic analyses
suggesting that EO verbs encode caused events, while ES
verbs do not. Intuitively, brief states like emotions seem
related to changes of state, which is a necessary component
of cause, perhaps suggesting a way of integrating the
notions.5 Relatedly, Pylkkanen (1999) argues causallyaffixed Finnish psych verbs either describe events or stagelevel (rather than individual-level) states, providing another
potential association. Nonetheless, the associations here are
tenuous. Whether cause is a factor in the semantics-syntax
5
Consistent with this possibility, an additional experiment using
novel Japanese psych verbs created with –suru, which typically
gives rise to a causative interpretation, found that Japanese
participants overwhelmingly chose the EO reading.

linking rules for psych verbs – and, if so, whether it is a
factor independent of the one(s) described above – remains
a question for future research.

Universals
There have been several proposals suggesting that linking
rules are universal, innate and exceptionless. Baker proposes
his Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypotheses (Baker,
1988), which posits a simple, exceptionless, many-to-one
rules linking semantics roles (AGENT, EXPERIENCER) to
syntactic position (SUBJECT, DIRECT OBJECT), at least at the
level of deep structure. Pinker (1984) argues that linking
rules may be innate. Such claims not only greatly simplify
linguistic theory, but they also simplify the job of the
language learner.
However, such theories have been challenged by apparent
variation in the application of linking rules in some
domains, such as psych verbs. The data presented here
suggest a solution to this problem compatible with
exceptionless linking rules: a rigid, innate linking rule that
maps EXPERIENCER→SUBJECT for long-lived psychological
states and EXPERIENCER→OBJECT for short-lived
psychological states. Whether such rules apply beyond
English and Japanese (and perhaps Finnish and Mandarin)
remains an empirical question. This may suggest that other
such cases of variation may similarly be resolved by closer
inspection of the semantics (see also Pesetsky, 1995, for
discussion). While this is an intriguing possibility, it is not
the only possible conclusion (see below).

Variation
Despite the potentially universal sensitivity of linking rules
to psychological state duration described above, Japanese
and English speaking participants showed a striking
difference in their baseline preference for the two argument
mappings: Japanese participants were over 50% more likely
than English-speakers to chose the ES form. At least three
explanations for this cross-linguistic variation are possible.
First, although stimuli for the English and Japanese
studies were constructed in an identical manner, the stimuli
were not identical (the different-stimuli hypothesis). It may
be that the semantics of the Japanese stimuli were biased in
favor of the ES mapping; perhaps the short-lived verbs were
less short-lived than those in the English study. Although
such a possibility is difficult to rule out with certainty, the
relative size of the effect limits the likelihood that poor
stimulus selection explains the effect. Moreover, the
discrepancy was highly consistent across stimuli: all but one
of the short-lived English verbs in Experiment 1a had more
EO attributions than any of the short-lived Japanese verbs in
Experiment 2a. Similarly, all but one of the long-lived
English verbs in 1a had more EO attributions than any of
the long-lived Japanese verbs in 2a (the comparison for 1b
and 2b is similar).
A second possibility is that linguistic differences between
Japanese and English led the participants to construe the

1190

meanings of the novel verbs differently (the differentconstrual hypothesis). There are a number of reasons this
might happen. For example, Pesetsky (1995) has argued that
only EO verbs describe caused events. Japanese can mark
verbs overtly as causal with the –(s)ase affix, and in fact
there are only a handful of EO verbs lacking the causal
affix. In Experiment 2, the verbs presented to the Japanese
participants lacked the causal affix. These participants may
then have made the inference that the verbs do not describe
caused events, leading them to choose the ES reading. Since
English does not explicitly mark verbs as causal or not, the
English-speaking participants faced a more ambiguous
inference problem.
Note that the different-stimuli hypothesis and the
different-construal hypothesis are both consistent with rigid,
exceptionless linking rules. The English and Japanese
participants apply the linking rules in the same way; they
simply disagree as to the meanings of the verbs. Another
possible conclusion is that linking rules are constrained by
universal biases but allow some cross-linguistic variation in
their exact formulation (the soft-universals hypothesis).
Imagine that based on the available cues Japanese and
English speakers arrive at the same guess about the
underlying semantics. They may still show different
baseline preferences if argument mappings are probabilistic.
Our data provide evidence for a universal bias in
argument mappings, however, they do not show that such
mappings have to be either exceptionless or deterministic.
Instead, semantics-to-syntax mappings for arguments could
themselves be probabilistic and influenced by both soft
universals and language-specific factors.
For example, as discussed above, unmarked psych verbs
in Japanese are overwhelmingly ES while the opposite is
true (to a lesser degree) in English (see above). Suppose that
in addition to universal (and presumably innate) biases,
mappings are also influenced by similarity to other verbs. In
such a scenario, the baseline statistics of psych verbs in the
two languages would predict the baseline difference in
performance.
Models that allow for within-language, across-item
generalizations of this form have a long history in both
generative linguistics (where they often take the form of
parameter-setting models) and non-generative approaches
such as construction grammar. Recent work in
computational modeling has shown how such systems can
be expressed by hierarchical Bayesian models. These
models encode the across-item generalizations as
overhypotheses—hypotheses about hypotheses (see e.g.
Perfors, et al., in press).
It remains for future work to determine whether crosslinguistic differences are better attributed to variation in
how speakers of various languages construe situations, to
probabilistic linking rules, or to some combination of both.

discussion and suggestions. This material is based on work
supported by a National Defense Science and Engineering
Graduate Fellowship to JH and a grant from the National
Science Foundation to JS (0623845).

References
Baker, M.C. (1988). Incorporation: A Theory of
Grammatical Function Changing. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Carlson, G. (1988). The semantic composition of English
generic sentences. In G. Chierchia, B. Partee, & R.
Turner (Eds.), Property Theory, Type Theory, and
Semantics. Boston, MA: D. Reidel Publishing.
Croft, W. (1993). Case marking and the semantics of mental
verbs, in J. Pustejovsky (Ed.), Semantics and the Lexicon.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Dixon, R. M. W. (1994). Ergativity. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Dowty, D. R. (1991). Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection, Language, 67, 547-619.
Ekman, P. (1999). Basic emotions. In T. Dalgleish & M.
Power (Eds.), Handbook of Cognition and Emotion.
Sussex, U.K.: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Hartshorne, J. K. (2009). The duration of psychological
states. Unpublished manuscript.
Hooper, P. J. & Thompson, S. A. (1980). Transitivity in
grammar and discourse, Language, 56, 251-95.
Levin, B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternations: A
Preliminary Investigation. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Levin, B., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (2005). Argument
Realization. Research Surveys in Linguistics Series.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Marantz, A.P. (1982). On the acquisition of grammatical
relations. Linguistische Berichte: Linguistik als Kognitive
Wissenschaft, 80/82, 32-69.
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J.B. & Wonnacot, E. (in press)
Variability, negative evidence, and the acquisition of
argument constructions, Journal of Child Language.
Pesetsky, D. (1995). Zero Syntax: Experiencers and
Cascades. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language Learnability and Language
Development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and Cognition. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Pylkkanen, L. (1999). On stativity and causation. In C.
Tenny & J. Pustejovsky (Eds.), Events and Grammatical
Objects. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usagebased theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Tsujimura, N. (1996). Introduction to Japanese Linguistics.
Malden, MA:Wiley-Blackwell.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the members of SnedLab for

1191

