UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Looking at Nothing Indicates Memory Search in Multiattribute Decision Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jb6r4f7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Renkewitz, Frank
Jahn, Georg

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Looking at Nothing Indicates Memory Search in Multiattribute Decision Making
Frank Renkewitz (frank.renkewitz@uni-erfurt.de)
University of Erfurt, Center for Empirical Research in Economics and Behavioral Sciences
Nordhäuser Str. 63, D-99089 Erfurt, Germany

Georg Jahn (georg.jahn@uni-greifswald.de)
University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology
Franz-Mehring-Str. 47, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany

Abstract
The common methods for studying heuristics in memorybased multiattribute decisions provide outcome and response
time data but leave the foregoing cognitive processes in the
dark. We demonstrate a novel process-tracing method that
uses the looking-at-nothing phenomenon to study memory
search and cue processing via eye tracking. Participants
learned cue information of decision alternatives in spatial
frames and later were presented with emptied displays of two
alternatives in binary choice trials. With freely chosen and
with instructed decision strategies, fixation patterns on former
cue locations were in line with memory search and cue
processing as postulated for lexicographic and compensatory
strategies.
Keywords: Multiattribute decision making, Probabilistic
inference, Eye tracking, Take-the-best heuristic, Spatial index

Introduction
Integrating multiple cues in decision making in a completely
rational manner that factors in all available information is
widely assumed to be cognitively too demanding. Therefore,
simple but efficient heuristics are suggested that are
applicable in specific task domains (e.g., Gigerenzer &
Todd, 1999). The domain we will deal with here consists of
simple probabilistic inference tasks with two alternatives
and binary cues (e.g. “Which of the cities A and B has more
inhabitants?”). Perhaps the best known heuristic for this
kind of tasks is Take-the-Best (Gigerenzer & Goldstein,
1996), which belongs to the class of lexicographic strategies
(LEX). In a first step, a person using this strategy selects the
(subjectively) most valid cue and looks up the cue values of
both alternatives. If one alternative has a positive cue value
(indicating a higher value on the target dimension) and the
other has not, information search is stopped, and the
alternative with the positive value is chosen. If the first cue
does not discriminate between the alternatives, the second
most valid cue is accessed, and so forth.
LEX is a non-compensatory strategy, because cues lower
in validity are disregarded. Thus, cues with a low validity
cannot compensate for a difference on a more valid cue
dimension. An example of a simple but compensatory
heuristic is the equal weight strategy (EQW), which ignores
cue validities. With this strategy, the positive cue values are
counted for each alternative and the alternative with the
higher number of positive cue values is chosen.

The third strategy we will consider here - the weighted
additive rule (WADD) - is also compensatory but uses
information about cue values and validities fully. Cue values
are weighed by cue validities and summed up. It has often
been claimed that this strategy is computationally too
demanding to be performed in a sequence of serial and
deliberate cognitive processes. However, WADD can be
conceived as a paramorphic model because the choices
expected from WADD could be brought about by intuitiveautomatic processes as well. Automatic processes that
approximate WADD predictions have been simulated as
parallel constraint satisfaction (see Glöckner & Betsch,
2008).
Methodologically, it poses a challenge to infer which
strategy an individual used in a probabilistic inference task.
One reason is that in tasks with a small number of
alternatives, several strategies predict the same choices.
More importantly, simple strategies are complete submodels of more complex ones. With appropriately chosen
weights, WADD could produce decisions that are
indistinguishable of the predictions of LEX or EQW
(Martignon & Hoffrage, 2002). Hence, an individual’s
choices may appear to be generated by LEX even if she is
using cognitive processes that are not assumed in this
heuristic.
Therefore, process-tracing methods are often used in
addition to outcome-based measures. The most prominent
process-tracing method is the computer-based information
board called Mouselab (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1993).
Mouselab records which pieces of information a participant
seeks, in which sequence the information is accessed, and
how much information is gathered. A central idea is that
different decision strategies should be accompanied by
different information search patterns. For non-compensatory
strategies like LEX a cue-wise information search is
expected. A LEX-user that has looked up a cue value of one
alternative should subsequently check the value of the other
alternative on the same cue dimension and then either
decide or, if the values do not differ, switch to the next cue
dimension. In contrast, compensatory strategies should be
associated with an alternative-wise information search.
Users of these strategies should search for all cue values of
one alternative before they turn to the other alternative.
Process-tracing methods like Mouselab necessitate that all
relevant information is provided by the experimenter and
accessible for the participant on the computer screen (or on

260

written information cards). However, in many real-life
situations decisions have to be made from information that
is stored in long-term memory. Additionally, proponents of
simple heuristics argue that particularly memory-based
decisions induce selective and heuristic processing to limit
the costs of memory retrieval (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999).
Hence, “inferences from memory” and not “inferences from
givens” should be studied to test these postulates. Thus,
there is a need for process-tracing methods that can be
applied in studies investigating memory-based decisions.
We propose a method that sticks closely to the basic idea
of Mouselab. It draws on results by Richardson and Spivey
(2000) demonstrating a close link between eye movements
and memory retrieval. In a series of experiments, these
authors found that participants recalling visually presented
information saccade more often to the (empty) region of
space where the information was originally presented than
to any other region (for an overview of studies on this
“looking at nothing” phenomenon, see Ferreira, Apel, &
Henderson, 2008). Thus, if specific cue dimensions are
associated with specific locations it might be possible to
reveal which cue information a person searches in memory
by tracking her eye movements.
In the experiment reported below, our participants worked
through a learning phase, in which each cue dimension was
presented in a different fixed location of a spatial frame. In
the decision phase, we presented two empty spatial frames
next to each other and recorded participants’ eye
movements on these empty frames while they recalled cue
information to decide between the two alternatives. Our
objective was to test whether participants who were
classified as LEX-users based on their decision outcomes
showed different gaze patterns than participants classified as
using compensatory strategies. More specifically, we report
tests of the following three hypotheses:
1. As soon as a cue value on one alternative is found,
LEX-users should look for the respective cue value of the
other alternative. In contrast, users of compensatory
strategies should search for complete cue information on
one alternative first. Hence, LEX-users should switch their
gaze more often between alternatives than users of
compensatory strategies, that is, there should be more
transitions between alternatives per second of a trial for
LEX-users than for users of compensatory strategies.
2. Because memory-retrieval of LEX-users is more
extensive when differentiating cues have lower relative
validity, the absolute frequency of transitions between
alternatives should increase linearly with the validity rank of
the first differentiating cue. In contrast, for users of
compensatory strategies the validity rank of the first
discriminating cue should not affect the frequency of
transitions.
3. LEX-users should disregard cues lower in validity as
soon as a higher cue differentiates between alternatives.
Hence, fixation durations on former locations of cue values
lower in validity should be shorter in trials, in which a cue
higher in validity differentiates. Again, users of

compensatory strategies should not be affected by the
validity rank of the first discriminating cue and the former
locations of all cue values should be fixated for about the
same amount of time.

Experiment
The experiment consisted of a learning phase, in which the
participants acquired cue knowledge about six objects,
followed by two decision phases. In the first decision phase,
pairs of objects were presented to the participants for binary
choice. In this phase, participants were not instructed with
regard to the strategy they should use. Thus, the first
decision phase followed a quasi-experimental logic. Here,
the aim was to identify groups of participants who
spontaneously employed different strategies and to test
whether these groups show different patterns of gaze
behavior as predicted in our hypotheses. We added a second
decision phase to gain better control over the strategies
participants used. In this phase, we presented the same
binary choice items as in the first phase, but we directly
instructed the participants to employ a certain strategy.
Thus, with the second phase we realized a simple onefactorial design with two experimental groups (LEX-,
EQW-instructions).

Method
Participants. Fifty-three students at the University of
Greifswald participated in the experiment (43 women, 10
men; mean age 21.9 years). They received partial course
credit for their participation. They were assigned randomly
to the different strategy conditions in the second decision
phase.
Materials. The participants learned cue descriptions of six
alternatives. These alternatives were mushrooms
characterized by the four cue dimensions consistency, cell
wall material, mineral, and spread. Each of the cue
dimensions could have three different values (consistency:
soft, elastic or firm; cell wall material: protein, cellulose or
lipid; mineral: magnesium, zinc or potassium; spread:
frequent, medium or rare). The critical cue values (elastic,
protein, magnesium and rare), which indicated a higher
value on the target dimension (toxicity of the mushrooms),
were not revealed to the participants until the learning phase
was completed. In the decision phase, we presented pairs of
the mushrooms for binary choice.
A complete paired comparison of the six cue patterns
yields 15 choice tasks. The six cue patterns were
constructed in a way that allowed for an individual strategy
classification of the participants based on the vector of their
choices in these 15 tasks (see Bröder & Schiffer, 2003a).
Among the 15 binary choice tasks was a sufficient number
of items for which each of the decision strategies considered
here yields a distinct prediction. (A more detailed
description of the cue patterns is given in Renkewitz & Jahn
(2010), where we report an earlier experiment in which we
used the same patterns.) To attain a more reliable strategy

261

classification, all 15 items were presented twice in both
decision phases. For the second presentation of each item,
the order of the alternatives was reversed. Thus, each
decision phase consisted of 30 binary choice items after two
practice trials.
Figure 1 exemplarily shows two alternatives and their cue
descriptions as they were presented in the learning phase.
Each mushroom was symbolized by a different geometrical
figure. Written descriptions of the cue values appeared in
four rectangular frames that were arranged along the borders
of the geometrical figures. The position of the frames was
constant across all alternatives. For a given participant,
values on the same cue dimension were always shown in the
same frame (e.g., the respective value of the cue
“consistency” was presented in the lower left frame for all
mushrooms learned by this participant). Thus, each cue
dimension was tied to specific spatial coordinates. We
counterbalanced the position of the cues across different
validity ranks. For half of the participants, the cues were
arranged clockwise in descending order of validity starting
from the upper left frame. Hence the two most valid cues
appeared in the two upper positions. For the remaining half
of participants, the cues were arranged counter-clockwise
starting from the lower left frame. Here, the two most valid
cues appeared in the two lower positions. Additionally, the
labels of the cues were counterbalanced across validity
ranks. We used the two validity orders “consistency, cell
wall material, mineral, spread” and “spread, mineral, cell
wall material, consistency”.

Renkewitz & Jahn, 2010, for more details on the learning
phase).
Before the decision phases, the participants were informed
about the validity ranks of the cues and the critical cue
values. For instance, when the corresponding order of cue
validities was used, participants were told that spread gave
the most important hint to toxicity and that only rare
mushrooms were likely to be toxic. The second most
important hint was the mineral and only mushrooms
predominantly containing the mineral magnesium were
likely to be toxic, and so on. Additionally, a list showing the
attributes of the ‘typical toxic mushroom’ was shown.
The 30 test trials of a decision phase were organized in
two blocks. Each block consisted of the 15 binary choice
items resulting from a complete paired comparison of the
six mushrooms. Within each block, choice items were
presented in random order. Participants responded with two
keys on a standard keyboard.
After the first decision phase was finished, participants
were given the strategy instructions for the second decision
phase. In the LEX-condition, participants were told to
consider attributes in descending order of importance and to
decide according to the first attribute indicating that one of
the two mushrooms was more toxic. All attributes of lower
importance should be ignored. In the EQW-condition,
participants were instructed to decide on the basis of the
number of attributes indicating that a mushroom was toxic.
If both mushrooms had the same number of ‘toxicity
attributes’ they should guess. Subsequent to these
explanations, an example of the application of the respective
decision rule was given. In this example two cue patterns
were used that were not part of the test set.
During both decision phases, eye movements were
recorded with a desk-mounted SMI RED eye tracker
sampling pupil position at 60 Hz.

Results

Figure 1: Two of the six alternatives as they were presented
in the learning phase. In the decision phases, the rectangular
frames containing the four cue values were empty.
In each trial of the decision phases, two of the geometrical
figures were presented side by side. The size of the figures
was the same as in the learning phase. The rectangular
frames that contained the cue values in the learning phase
were now empty. So, participants had to actively search
their memory for cue information to be able to decide which
of the two mushrooms was likely to be the more toxic one.
Procedure. At the beginning of the learning phase, the six
alternatives and their cue values were presented one by one.
Afterwards, the participants had to reproduce the cue values
repeatedly in several testing cycles. The learning phase
continued until the participants correctly reproduced at least
22 of the 24 cue values in a final memory test (see

Behavioral data. We classified the decision patterns of the
participants as most probably generated by LEX, EQW,
WADD or a guessing strategy with the maximum-likelihood
strategy classification method (Bröder & Schiffer, 2003a,
2003b). The strategy percentages in both decision phases are
shown in Table 1. In the first phase, when there were no
strategy instructions, 49% of the participants were classified
as using the LEX-heuristic. This frequency of LEX-users
corresponds closely to the findings of similar studies on
memory based decision making using verbal stimulus
material (Bröder & Schiffer, 2003b; Bröder & Schiffer,
2006; Bröder & Gaissmeier, 2007; Jahn, Renkewitz &
Kunze, 2007). The classification results in the second
decision phase suggest that the strategy instructions were
largely successful. Thus, 80% of the participants instructed
to employ the LEX-heuristic appeared to use this strategy
and 89% of the participants instructed to use EQW were
classified as using one of the compensatory strategies (EQW
or WADD).

262

Table 1: Frequencies (and percentages) of strategy classifications in decision phase 1 (free strategy selection) and decision
phase 2 (with LEX or EQW instructions)
Condition
Decision phase 1
Free
Decision phase 2
LEX
EQW

Strategy classification
WADD
Guessing

LEX

EQW

26 (49.1)

14 (26.4)

9 (17.0)

20 (80.0)
2 (7.1)

1 (4.0)
18 (64.3)

1 (4.0)
7 (25.0)

unclassified

N

1 (1.9)

3 (5.7)

53

2 (8.0)
1 (3.6)

1 (4.0)
0 (0.0)

25
28

Table 2: Mean absolute number of transitions between alternatives depending on the position of the first differentiating cue
for groups of participants with different strategy classifications in both decision phases
Strategy

1

M
95% CI
Decision Phase 1 (free)
LEX
4.64
3.57-5.71
COMP
6.11
4.93-7.29
Decision Phase 2 (instructed)
LEX
3.37
2.18-4.55
COMP
5.62
4.58-6.65

Validity rank of first discriminating cue
2
3
M
95% CI
M
95% CI

4
M

95% CI

7.00
6.58

5.72-8.28
5.17-7.99

10.45
5.79

7.07-12.93
3.05-8.52

8.07
5.70

6.52-9.61
4.01-7.40

5.80
5.30

4.31-7.28
3.99-6.60

7.35
4.67

5.94-8.76
3.38-5.85

9.32
5.10

7.39-11.25
3.41-6.79

Analyses of eye gaze data. In the analyses of gaze behavior
we did not consider participants who remained unclassified
or were classified as using a guessing strategy because we
held no hypotheses concerning these participants. In the first
decision phase, we excluded one additional participant
(classified as EQW-user) from further analyses because of
her unusually long decision times. In the second decision
phase, we restricted the analyses to those participants that
appeared to follow the instruction to employ the LEXheuristic and those participants who were classified as using
one of the compensatory strategies under EQW-instructions.
Finally, we discarded all trials (3.0% in the first phase and
4.4% in the second phase) from the analyses of gaze
behavior, in which the tracking data for more than 40% of
the trial duration were missing (due to blinks, looking off
the screen, or lost pupil or corneal reflectance).
In all of the following analyses, we merged the eye
tracking data of EQW- and WADD-users as the result
pattern for both compensatory strategies was generally the
same and no statistically significant differences occurred
between these two groups.
Transitions between alternatives per second. To
determine the number of transitions between alternatives,
we defined two areas of interest (AOIs), each of which
covered one alternative and, thus, almost one half of the
screen. A transition was defined as two successive fixations
in different AOIs. We counted the number of transitions per
trial and divided this number by the trial duration (in
seconds) to obtain an index of gaze transitions. The means
of this index corroborate our first hypothesis: With
instructed decision strategies, LEX-users (M = 0.68)
switched their gaze faster between alternatives than users of
a compensatory strategy (M = 0.46), 95% CIs [0.58, 0.78],

and [0.41, 0.51], respectively, t(43) = 3.52, p = .001, d =
1.08. In the first decision phase, when participants
spontaneously adopted a decision strategy, the same
difference between the LEX-heuristic (M = 0.60) and
compensatory strategies (M = 0.39) was found, 95% CIs
[0.54, 0.66], and [0.34, 0.44], respectively, t(46) = 4.90, p <
.001, d = 1.45.
Transitions between alternatives depending on the
validity rank of the first discriminating cue. According to
our second hypothesis, for LEX-users the absolute number
of transitions between alternatives should depend on the
validity rank of the first discriminating cue in a decision
item. The lower the validity of the first discriminating cue
the more transitions should occur. In contrast, the gaze
behavior of users of a compensatory strategy should be
unaffected by the validity rank of the first discriminating
cue.
To test this hypothesis, we split the 30 decision items into
four sets, according to the rank of the best discriminating
cue. Table 2 depicts the mean number of transitions in each
of the four sets for LEX-users and for users of a
compensatory strategy in both decision phases. Under
instructed strategy conditions, for LEX-users the mean
number of transitions increased monotonically with the
validity rank of the first discriminating cue, as expected. For
users of compensatory strategies no systematic effect was
associated with the validity of the best differentiating cue.
This interaction effect of strategy classification and validity
rank of the first discriminating cue was confirmed in a twoway mixed ANOVA, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected F(2.28,
98.13) = 22.71, p < .001, ηp2 = .35. When participants chose
freely between decision strategies, we found a similar result
pattern. For LEX users the number of transitions again

263

increased markedly (but not monotonically) with the
validity rank of the first discriminating cue. For users of a
compensatory strategy this factor had no impact. The cor-

responding interaction effect was again statistically
significant, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected F(1.79, 82.25) =
8.42, p = .001, ηp2 = .16.

Figure 2: Mean fixation durations at cues with different validities depending on the validity rank of the first discriminating
cue in decision phase 2 (instructed strategies). Data are presented separately by strategy classification.
Fixation durations at former locations of cue values. To
assess fixation durations at former locations of cue values,
we defined AOIs around the empty rectangular frames that
had contained the cue values in the learning phase. These
AOIs exceeded the original frames by 30 pixels in each
direction.
For each trial and each cue, we determined the summed
duration of all fixations in the two AOIs pertaining to the
respective cue (one AOI for each alternative). These
summed durations were averaged per participant across all
trials, in which the first discriminating cue had the same
validity rank. For participants of all strategy classifications,
fixation durations exhibited a gaze bias towards the cue
locations in the upper half of the stimuli. This bias was
independent of both the specific cues presented at these
locations and the validity rank of these cues. Hence, as we
were interested in the average fixation durations at locations
of cues with different validity ranks, we calculated weighted
means across the groups of participants for which the two
most valid cues appeared in the upper part of the stimuli and
the groups for which these cues appeared in the lower part.
In Figure 2, the weighted mean fixation durations at cues
with different validities are plotted against the validity rank
of the first discriminating cue for the second decision phase
with instructed strategies. As can be easily seen, we found
clearly different result patterns for LEX-users and users of
compensatory strategies.
Under instructed strategy conditions, users of
compensatory strategies looked approximately equally long
at all four cues and their fixation durations were unaffected
by the validity rank of the first discriminating cue in a
decision item. Consequently, in a three-way mixed ANOVA
the effects of Cue, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected F(2.21,
50.88) = 0.22, p = .83, ηp2 = .01, First Discriminating Cue,
F(2.33, 53.67) = 2.06, p = .13, ηp2 = .08, and their

interaction, F(5.00, 114.96) = 0,45, p = .81, ηp2 = .02, were
all not significant (the third factor Position of the Two Most
Valid Cues with the levels Upper Half or Lower Half was
introduced to control for the gaze bias towards the upper
half of the stimuli).
In contrast, in items in which the most valid cue
discriminated, instructed LEX-users fixated this cue
considerably longer than all other cues. When the second
most valid cue was the first to discriminate, the largest
increase in fixation durations occurred for this cue.
However, also the third cue and the fourth cue were fixated
longer than in items in which the first cue discriminated.
Similar changes in fixation durations emerged when cues
with a lower validity were the first discriminating ones.
Thus, the data reveal two trends: First, as expected, cues
with a low validity are fixated longer, when no cue higher in
validity discriminates. Second, there is a tendency towards
all cues being fixated longer when the validity rank of the
first discriminating cue is low. Correspondingly, the
interaction effect of Cue x First Discriminating Cue, F(4.18,
75.31) = 5.75, p < .001, ηp2 = .24, and the main effect of
First Discriminating Cue, F(1.77, 31.83) = 16.94, p < .001,
ηp2 = .49 were significant. The main effect of Cue was not
statistically reliable, F(1.55, 27.94) = 2.57, p = .11, ηp2 =
.13.
When the participants spontaneously adopted a decision
strategy in the first decision phase, the pattern of results was
similar but somewhat noisier. For users of compensatory
strategies, there were again no statistically significant
effects. For LEX-users, the effect of First Discriminating
Cue was confirmed, F(2.08, 49.85) = 6.51, p = .003, ηp2 =
.21, whereas the interaction effect of Cue x First
Discriminating Cue was no longer statistically significant,
F(4.83, 115.96) = 1.94, p = .09, ηp2 = .08.

264

Discussion
The observed fixation patterns on emptied displays of
decision alternatives differed markedly and in line with
predictions depending on the decision strategies employed.
If according to a lexicographic strategy more comparisons
between single cue values of alternatives were necessary,
more transitions between alternatives were recorded.
Furthermore, even the fixation durations on the former
locations of specific cues reflected the cues’ relative
importance according to a lexicographic or a compensatory
strategy.
Thus, tracking fixations on emptied information displays
provided indicators of information search in memory-based
multiattribute decisions similar to those provided by
Mouselab methods for “inferences from givens” (Payne,
Bettman, & Johnson, 1993). This proves a novel processtracing method applicable to memory-based decisions. The
present results corroborate the outcome-based strategy
classification method (Bröder & Schiffer, 2003a) and add to
previous response time data on strategies in memory-based
multiattribute decisions (Bröder & Gaissmaier, 2007). Now,
there is a way to analyze overt behavior that seems to
indicate which cognitive processes determine response
times and decision outcomes.
The looking-at-nothing phenomenon has been interpreted
as an attempt at memory retrieval that triggers an
involuntary gaze shift to the former location of the sought
information (Richardson & Spivey, 2000). The former
location is specified by a spatial index in an integrated
representation encompassing conceptual, linguistic, visual
and spatial information (Ferreira, Apel, & Henderson,
2008). In the present experiment, several instances of
memory retrieval were required in a single binary choice
trial. The more information had to be retrieved according to
a strategy, the more fixations occurred, however, locations
were frequently refixated. Based on the current data we
cannot decide whether these refixations are due to repeated
retrieval attempts or further processing of the already
retrieved information in working memory. We presume that
they indicate processing of retrieved information similar to
eye movements that occur while visuo-spatial imagery is
experienced during discourse processing (Johansson,
Holsanova, & Holmqvist, 2006). If this proves correct, the
exposition of the LEX strategy has to be modified. The
prolonged response times predicted and observed for LEXusers if cues lower in validity have to be processed seem to
be due not only to additional memory retrieval, but to
extended pondering that includes cue information that does
not affect the final decision.
In our attempt to exploit the looking-at-nothing
phenomenon for process tracing, we have shown that it
manifests itself rather robustly. Here, encoding and retrieval
were separated by multiple encoding and retrieval instances
with respect to overlapping physical locations. Furthermore,
spatial indexing operated relative to visual context that
varied in its physical location. Hence, we think that lookingat-nothing has wide applicability. Observing information

search on emptied displays opens up a window on the
cognitive processing of memorized information.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Sebastian Burchert for his help in
conducting the experiment.

References
Bröder, A. & Gaissmaier, W. (2007). Sequential processing
of cues in memory-based multiattribute decisions.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 895-900.
Bröder, A. & Schiffer, S. (2003a). Bayesian strategy
assessment in multi-attribute decision making. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 16, 193-213.
Bröder, A. & Schiffer, S. (2003b). Take the best versus
simultaneous feature matching: Probabilistic inferences
from memory and effects of representation format.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 277293.
Ferreira, F., Apel, J., & Henderson, J. M. (2008). Taking a
new look at looking at nothing. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 12, 405-410.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D. (1996). Reasoning the fast
and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Glöckner, A., & Betsch, T. (2008). Multiple-reason decision
making based on automatic processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34(5), 1055-1075.
Jahn, G., Renkewitz, F., & Kunze, S. (2007). Heuristics in
multi-attribute decision making: Effects of representation
format. In D. S. McNamara & G. Trafton (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 383-388). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Johansson, R., Holsanova, J., & Holmqvist, K. (2006).
Pictures and spoken descriptions elicit similar eye
movements during mental imagery, both in light and in
complete darkness. Cognitive Science, 30, 1053-1079.
Martignon, L. & Hoffrage, U. (2002). Fast, frugal, and fit:
Simple heuristics for paired comparison. Theory and
Decision, 52, 29-71.
Payne, J. W. Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The
adaptive decision maker. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Renkewitz, F. & Jahn, G. (2010). Tracking memory search
for cue information. In A. Glöckner & C. Witteman
(Eds.), Foundations for tracing intuition: Challenges and
Methods (pp. 199-218). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Richardson, D. C. & Spivey, M. J. (2000). Representation,
space and hollywood squares: Looking at things that
aren’t there anymore. Cognition, 76, 269–295.

265

