UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mapping number words to approximate magnitudes: associative learning or structure
mapping?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4t00z8kp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Sullivan, Jessica
Barner, David

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mapping number words to approximate magnitudes: associative learning or
structure mapping?
Jessica Sullivan (jsulliva@ucsd.edu)
David Barner (barner@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of California, San Diego
Abstract
How do we link number words to the magnitudes they
represent? We investigated the roles of associative learning and
structure mapping in linking the Approximate Number System
to number words. Four tasks demonstrated that individuals have
strong associative links between magnitudes and number words
for relatively small sets, but have weak associative links for
larger sets. These results point to multiple mechanisms for the
mapping of number words to magnitudes.
Keywords: Language acquisition, approximate magnitudes,
word learning, number words

Introduction
How does language represent human numerical knowledge?
Are the referents of numerals determined primarily by
inference and logical relations between words? Or do we
identify the referents of words like twelve and fifty-seven by
associating them, item-by-item, with sets in the world?
Humans can represent the approximate numerical
magnitude of a set nonverbally using the Approximate
Number System (ANS), and previous research has shown
that our system of number language is deeply linked to the
ANS: adults recruit the ANS when estimating the
cardinality of rapidly presented arrays, and judgments about
verbally presented numerals show many of the same biases
as nonverbal judgments about quantities (Barth, Kanwisher,
& Spelke, 2003; Whalen, Gallistel, & Gelman, 1999,
Piazza, Izard, Pinel, Le Bihan, & Dehaene, 2004; Holloway
& Ansari, 2008; Duncan & McFarland, 1980). We know
that mature mathematical thinkers can relate their verbal
number system to the nonverbal ANS—but we don’t know
how these systems are mapped onto each other.
By some accounts, number words gain their numerical
content in part via a mapping to the ANS (Verguts & Fias,
2006, Piazza, Pinel, Le Bihan, & Dehaene, 2007; Mundy &
Gilmore, 2009). However, surprisingly little is known about
the nature of this mapping, and descriptions of possible
mechanisms are rare in the literature. It is therefore not well
understood what roles associative and inferential processes
play in relating number words to ANS representations. One
possibility is that as humans accumulate experience with
number words, they form item-specific associations between
individual words (e.g., ten) and corresponding magnitudes
(e.g., approximately 10 objects). This view, which we will
call the associative mapping hypothesis (AM), predicts that
the strength of mappings should vary according to how
frequently words are used to refer to perceptually available

quantities. Also, it predicts that mappings should be
relatively independent of one another, such that a change in
one mapping does not automatically impact another
mapping. The AM hypothesis is supported by evidence
from children’s early mappings of small number words:
children learn the associations between their first number
words and the magnitudes they refer to one at a time, taking
nearly two full years to learn the associations between the
number words “one” through “four” and the magnitudes
they denote (Wynn, 1992).
A problem with the AM hypothesis is that humans may
get only limited experience with the denotations of some
number words, and no experience at all with others. It seems
implausible, for example, that experience with 1 million
things would be required to support estimates for sets of this
size. Instead, it appears that inferential abilities are required
to give meaning to unfamiliar quantities, perhaps on the
basis of more familiar amounts. One possibility, for
example, is that associative learning about small quantities
(e.g., 1 – 10) supports a structure mapping (SM): a linking
of representations in one domain to those in another on the
basis of their common structure (Izard & Dehaene, 2008;
Thompson & Opfer, in press).
One signature of structure mapping is that when a
subject’s response for a given quantity is changed via
feedback (i.e., calibrated), responses for other quantities
should shift accordingly. Evidence for this comes from Izard
& Dehaene (2008), who showed that mislabeling a visually
presented set (e.g., calling a set of 30 dots “twenty-five”) led
participants to shift their estimates not only for the
calibrated quantity, but for all quantities tested. However,
this study provided only small amounts of miscalibration,
resulting in tiny differences between conditions. For
example, even for the most extremely miscalibrated trials,
participants mapped the number word “thirty” onto arrays
with an average set size between 31.5 and 33.7 (neither of
which is perceptually discriminable from 30 for normal
adults). As a result, although it appears that SM plays some
role in estimation, it remains unclear how malleable
estimation behaviors are, and thus what the relative roles of
AM and SM are in the mapping of number words to the
ANS.
The present study explored the nature of the relationship
between the ANS and the count list, and the relative
contributions of associative and structural mapping. We
hypothesized that neither mechanism, in isolation, could
explain how number words are mapped to the ANS.

1246

Whereas AM is limited by the experiences that individuals
have with particular magnitudes, in order for a SM to have
content, it must be supported by reliable mappings between
small number words and magnitudes. Without associative
mappings for at least some number words, we submit, no
structure mapping could take place. To our knowledge, no
previous study has directly tested the contribution of these
two mechanisms, and as a result, little is known about their
relative contribution to number word mappings. To test our
hypothesis, we conducted an experiment with four withinsubjects measures that probed for evidence of associative
and structural mappings at different numerosities.
In the Calibrated Estimation task, we measured
participants’ accuracy at labeling sets after they were
provided misleading information about the range of set sizes
to be presented. We predicted that quantities that have
strong associative mappings should be less susceptible to
calibration than those with weaker mappings. As in previous
studies, we expected that participants’ estimates of
magnitudes would be influenced by the feedback they
received. However, in the present task, we made two critical
methodological changes. First, we provided only verbal
calibration. While in past studies participants were shown
an array and then told that it contained x dots (where x was
either an accurate or inaccurate number word label), in the
present study we did not mislabel arrays. Instead, we simply
stated that “the largest set you will see is x”. In this way, we
ensured that any influence of feedback was not because
participants constructed new associative mappings, but was
due purely to an inference about the structure mapping
relation. A second difference was that we provided much
more extreme calibration than in previous studies, in order
to test the strength of associative mappings throughout the
number line. We reasoned that misleading feedback should
not influence estimation performance for any magnitude
with a strong AM link to the number system, whereas
structurally linked magnitudes should be quite susceptible to
calibration.
An assumption in our analysis of the estimation task is
that a participant’s individual estimates act as inputs to a
structure mapping, and that each act of estimation therefore
constrains later estimates in an experiment. On this view, we
predicted that a very similar task in which participants were
asked to match a label to one of two visually presented sets
would disrupt the structure mapping process. We reasoned
that presenting two sets to participants would cause them to
experience uncertainty, and thus prevent them from
calibrating their mappings across trials. As such, we
predicted that performance on this task should suffer for
number words that have weak associative mappings to
magnitudes. Where stronger AMs exist (e.g., for smaller
numbers), performance should not suffer as much, since by
our hypothesis the forced choice task relies on the
associative strength between the number word and its
corresponding magnitude representation. Although past
studies have used a forced choice method to test mappings
in young children (Lipton & Spelke, 2005; Gilmore &

Mundy, 2009), these studies provided calibration before the
study in the form of a familiarization phase. Our study, in
contrast, sought to remove all forms of feedback, whether
from the experimenter or from trial-to-trial self-calibration,
in order to test the strength of associative mappings at
different magnitudes.
We conducted two additional tasks as within-subject
controls for the Calibrated Estimation and Number
Matching tasks. The first was an Uncalibrated Estimation
task, which served as a within-subject baseline for the
Calibrated Estimation task. The second, a Numerical
Discrimination task, used stimuli identical to those in the
Number Matching task but asked subjects to judge which of
the two sets on each trial was more numerous. This ensured
that participants were able to discriminate the quantities
used in the Number Matching task, and that any difficulties
with the forced choice task were due to their number word
mappings and not other stimulus properties.
For both the Number Matching task and the Calibrated
Estimation task, we predicted that participants would exhibit
strong associative mappings for some number words,
resulting in smaller effects of calibration and higher levels
of success on the forced choice task. In particular, we
predicted that the strength of associative mappings would be
strongest for the smallest number words, due to relatively
greater experience with these words and their corresponding
quantities. Corresponding to this, we also predicted that
larger magnitudes would be more susceptible to
miscalibration in estimation, and be more difficult to map to
number words in the forced choice task.

Materials and Methods
Participants
Thirty adults from the UCSD community participated for
course credit. One additional participant was excluded from
analyses for failure to complete all tasks.

Procedure
Participants were seated approximately 40 cm from a 27”
Mac OSX computer screen and completed 4 computerized
tasks. Half of the participants completed the Number
Matching task first, and half completed the Discrimination
task first. All participants then completed first the
Uncalibrated and then the Calibrated Estimation task.
Number Matching: This task evaluated participants’
ability to match number words with one of two visually
presented sets. Participants heard a number word, saw two
arrays of dots flash sequentially on a computer screen, and
judged which array best matched the word. Stimuli were
sets of red dots on a black screen, and were presented for
400 ms. Trials compared sets that differed in numerical
magnitude by either a 1:2 ratio or 3:4 ratio. Sets were
matched for density on half of the trials and for total surface
area on the other half, and comparisons ranged from small
(4 vs. 8) to large (370 vs. 740). For 1/3 of the trials, the
smaller of the two sets presented contained fewer than 30

1247

items (Small Number Trials), for 1/3 it contained more than
30 and fewer than 110 (Medium Number Trails), and for the
remaining 1/3, it more than 110 items (Large Number
Trials).
Numerical Discrimination: This task served as a
within-subjects control for the Number Matching task to
ensure that participants could discriminate the quantities
presented. The stimuli and procedure were identical to the
Number Matching task, except that participants indicated
which set contained more dots (instead of matching a word
with a set).
Calibrated Estimation: This task tested the
malleability of participants’ numerical estimates.
Participants saw sets of dots and estimated their
numerosities, recording their estimates using the numeric
keypad on a computer keyboard. Although the largest set
that participants saw was 350 in all conditions, participants
were told that the largest set they would see was either 75
(N=10), 375 (N=10), or 750 (N=10). Critically, this
misleading feedback could not be used to alter associative
mappings since, because unlike in previous calibration
studies, the incorrect number word anchor was not paired
with an array, and thus participants could not form new
associative mappings between magnitudes and number word
labels (e.g., Izard & Dehaene, 2008; Shuman, unpublished
thesis). Instead, this feedback could only have influenced
participants’ notions about the structure and range of
magnitudes.
Stimuli were sets of red dots on a black screen. Fifteen
numerosities ranging from 8-350 were presented 36 times
each. Each numerosity was matched for both density (15
trials) and total occupied area (15 trials) with each other
numerosity presented, and non-numerical properties of the
sets were otherwise varied for the remaining 6 trials.
Participants received 270 of the possible 540 trials in the
Calibrated condition, and 270 in the Uncalibrated condition.
Trials were presented in random order.
Uncalibrated Estimation: This task served as a withinsubjects control for the Calibrated Estimation task to
provide a baseline of the participant’s Uncalibrated
estimates. Stimuli and instructions were identical to those in
the Estimation task, except participants were given no
information about the largest set they would see.

Results
Number Matching and Discrimination
If participants have associative mappings between
individual number words and approximate magnitudes, then
they should be able to use these mappings to guide the
labeling of sets in the Number Matching task. For example,
if the number word twenty is associatively mapped to a
mental representation of ‘about 20 things’, then participants
should never match the word twenty to an array that is
discriminably different from ‘about 20’ (e.g., 40). In other
words, for all magnitudes that have associative mappings,
participants should perform equally well on the
Discrimination and Number Matching tasks, because

discriminably different magnitudes should be mapped to
unique number words.
We first explored whether performance differed on the
Number Matching task, as compared to the Discrimination
task. Qualitatively, every participant performed worse on
the Number Matching task than on the Discrimination task,
indicating that matching a number word to the correct array
is more difficult than judging which array is more
numerous. A paired-samples t-test revealed that this trend
reached significance (all p<.05) for 21/30 participants
(binomial probability p<.01). This effect was consistent
across the range of comparisons presented: participants were
significantly less accurate on the Number Matching task
than the Discrimination task for Small, Medium, and Large
Number Trials (all p<.01).
Table 1: Mean accuracy on the Discrimination and
Number Matching tasks by magnitude of smaller set
Set Size
Small (<30)
Medium
Large (>110)

Discrimination
92%
85%
82%

Number Matching
85%
63%
70%

To explore in greater detail whether magnitude influenced
accuracy on these two tasks, we compared accuracy on the
Number Matching task to accuracy on the Discrimination
task for each magnitude presented. Interestingly,
participants did not perform significantly worse on the
Number Matching Task than the Discrimination Task for
any of the comparisons containing magnitudes smaller than
15 (Dunnett’s mean comparison, all p>.05)1. This suggests
that participants may have associative mappings for
relatively small number words. Consistent with this,
accuracy on the Number Matching task was not constant for
all magnitudes tested: a regression of accuracy onto set
magnitude by ratio revealed an effect of ratio
(F(1,1954)=22.4, p<.01) and an effect of set magnitude
(F(1,1954)=70.5, p<.01), but no interaction (F(1,1954)=1.4,
ns). This pattern of performance indicates that participants
had greater difficult matching labels to larger sets relative to
smaller ones, and is consistent with the hypothesis that
small, but not large, magnitudes are associatively linked to
number words.
To explore this trend further, we compared accuracy on
the Number Matching task for Small, Medium, and Large
Number Trials. Accuracy was significantly different as a
function of set magnitude (F(2,987)=54.3, p<.01), and a
post-hoc comparison of mean accuracy revealed that
1

Accuracy also did not differ between the Number Matching
and Discrimination tasks for the four largest comparisons
presented. This effect appears to be driven by trials where the
larger set was also the correct set: participants may have developed
a simple response heuristic for these trials like “when I hear an
unusually large number word, I select the larger of the two sets”.
This is unlikely to be evidence of associative mapping for large
sets.

1248

participants performed significantly better on Small Number
Trials than either Medium or Large Number Trials (both
p<.01), but that accuracy on the Medium and Large Number
Trials did not differ significantly from each other (t=-.57,
ns). Participants did not struggle to match number words to
magnitudes when the words presented were relatively small,
yet accuracy declined rapidly as a function of set magnitude,
and remained low for the largest sets.

(F(1,15129)=3912.5, p<.01), a significant effect of
Calibration (F(1,15129)=605.3, p<.01), and a significant
interaction
of
Calibration
and
magnitude
(F(3,15129)=256.3, p<.01). Participants were influenced by
misleading feedback, and the influence of miscalibration
differed as a function of magnitude.
To explore the influence of feedback at an individual
level, we performed the identical regression on each
individual’s data. 24/30 participants showed an effect of
calibration: 9/10 participants who were calibrated to 75,
8/10 who were calibrated to 375, and 7/10 who were
calibrated to 750 (binomial p<.01 for each calibration type).
Of the 24 participants who were influenced by calibration,
21 demonstrated a significant interaction of Calibration and
magnitude of set (binomial p<.01), indicating that
calibration influenced estimation patterns differently as a
function of magnitude. Specifically, participants were less
influenced by misleading feedback for smaller magnitudes,
and were more influenced for larger magnitudes.

Figure 2: Estimation as a function of calibration
Next, we compared mean estimates for each presented
numerosity in the Calibrated vs. Uncalibrated conditions.
This isolated the magnitudes for which each participant3
demonstrated the effects of miscalibration (Dunnett’s mean,
all p<.05). Overall, participants were influenced by
calibration for relatively small magnitudes: one quarter of
all participants provided different estimates for sets
containing 8 items in the Calibrated vs. Uncalibrated
conditions, and all but four participants were influenced by
misleading feedback for at least one magnitude under 100.
Participants were more resilient to misleading feedback for
small magnitudes than large magnitudes, yet participants
incorporated misleading feedback into the full range of
estimates, and did not simply alter estimates for the largest
sets presented.

Figure 1: Accuracy on Number Matching task as a
function of magnitude of the smaller set being compared
Estimation and Calibrated Estimation
Before completing analyses, we excluded all responses
smaller than 2, and all responses more than a factor of 10
larger or smaller than the presented numerosity, as these
were likely to be typos. Additionally, we removed outliers
on a participant-by-participant basis by excluding all data
points more than 3 SD from the mean of each participant’s
estimate of each presented magnitude (total exclusions:
313/15,450 data points)2.
As a group, participants provided estimates that were
related to the presented magnitude, and that were influenced
by misleading feedback (miscalibration): a regression of
estimates onto magnitude by calibration type revealed a
significant relationship between set magnitude and estimate

Table 2: Smallest magnitude for which participants were
influenced by calibration
Calibration
75
375
750

2

We also analyzed our data both excluding and including
estimates of “75”, “375”, and “750” to ensure that any effect of
calibration was not due to participants’ repetition of the number
word they had been miscalibrated to. There was no difference at
either the group or individual level of analysis.

1249

3

Mean
35
36
20

Median
61
42
45

Of the 24 who were influenced by calibration

Discussion
This study provides evidence for at least two mechanisms
through which number words are mapped to approximate
magnitudes. For the smallest numbers we tested,
participants were accurate at matching arrays to number
words, and they were resilient to misleading feedback. This
suggests that, at least for relatively small and familiar
magnitudes, adults may form associative mappings between
number words and ANS representations. However, for
larger magnitudes, adults struggled to correctly match
number words with arrays, and were highly influenced by
misleading feedback when estimating, making it unlikely
that associative mappings play an important role in relating
larger number words to magnitudes.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate
that adults do not directly link each number word in their
count list to an ANS representation of approximately that
magnitude. While past studies have shown that adults’
estimates can be biased by misleading feedback (e.g., Izard
& Dehaene, 2008; Shuman, unpublished thesis), in this
previous research, the degree of miscalibration was
minimal, and the sets that participants labeled as “thirty”
before and after miscalibration were not discriminably
different from each other using the ANS: this pattern of
performance is consistent with either an associative
mapping or structure mapping account. However, in the
present study, participants failed to correctly match a
number word to one of two discriminably different sets, and
consistently provided different estimates of a set’s
magnitude when provided misleading information than
when allowed to estimate without constraints. This suggests
that adults do not possess associative mappings between
large number words and magnitudes.
We posit a structural mapping hypothesis to account for
the mappings adults make between large number words and
magnitudes. By this hypothesis, adults recruit associatively
mapped information about small numbers in order to map
larger number words to magnitudes. We know that even
large number words bear some relation to ANS
representations of magnitudes, because adults’ processing of
verbal number words exhibit signatures typical of those
found in perceptual judgments of numerosity using the ANS
(e.g., Duncan & McFarland, 1980). Because of this, we
suggest that structural mappings are constructed and
supported by knowledge of associatively mapped
magnitudes. This process may recruit more domain-general
analogical or comparative mechanisms previously linked to
the acquisition and extrapolation of spatial, numerical and
categorical information during development (e.g., Gentner
& Namy, 2006). As a result, structural links between
number words and magnitudes may be based on analogy,
proportional reasoning, or an understanding of the ordinality
of both the verbal and nonverbal number systems. While
each of these possible mechanisms for structure mapping is
theoretically plausible and consistent with the current data,
the present study cannot disambiguate between them.
However, future research manipulating the availability and

content of ‘anchor’ sets will allow us to construct a precise
model of how small-number information is incorporated
into structural mappings, by exploring how manipulating the
availability of information about small quantities influences
judgments about large quantities.
The present study also raises several developmental
questions about the acquisition of number language. While
much has been learned in recent years about the procedure
of number word learning, little is known of the mechanisms
that drive this learning. For example, we know that
immediately after learning how counting represents sets,
many children fail to map larger number words to larger sets
in estimation tasks—however, by age 5, most children
successfully provide larger estimates for larger magnitudes
(Le Corre & Carey, 2008, Barth, Starr, & Sullivan, 2009).
Clearly, 5-year olds have learned something about the count
system that the 4-year olds have not—but what? The
present study demonstrates that it is unlikely that these older
children have improved at estimation solely because they
have expanded their system of associative mappings
between number words and magnitudes: even adults showed
little to no evidence of any direct associative link between
words like “one hundred” and sets of 100 things. Instead,
children who are successful estimators must have learned
something about the structural mapping of the count
sequence onto magnitudes. What kind of structural
relationships have these children learned?
Additionally, if children’s structural mappings are
constructed early in life, how much of the count sequence
must be associatively mapped in order to support adult-like
structural mappings? While the present study suggests that
adults may have associative mappings for magnitudes as
large as 20, we do not know which of these associative
mappings are necessary to support a structure mapping. It
may be the case that children need only to associatively map
the smallest numbers (e.g., 1-10) in their count system in
order to have enough information about the number system
to develop a rich structural mapping between number words
and magnitudes— by this theory, any additional associative
mappings gained en route to adulthood (e.g., mappings
between 10-20) are simply the result of additional
experience with number words and magnitudes, and are not
necessary to support structure mappings. However, it is also
possible that children must have an adult-like system of
associative mappings in order to support a structure
mapping system. By this view, children would construct
associative mappings between words and magnitudes for the
numbers 1-20 prior to creating a structure mapping for
larger number words. A continuation of the present line of
research with children will help distinguish between these
two possibilities, and in doing so, shed light on the nature of
the inferences that children make about number words as
they construct mappings between number language and
magnitudes.
A better understanding of the roles of structural and
associative mapping in the development of number
knowledge may also help to illuminate other poorly

1250

understood developmental phenomena in numerical
cognition. For example, one signature of immature
estimation ability is a tendency of young children to provide
‘logarithmic’ looking estimates: overestimating small
numbers and underestimating large numbers. This tendency
largely disappears in the 0-100 range by age 7, and in the 01000 range by age 9 (Booth & Siegler, 2006). What new
information about the number system do these older
children have? Several researchers have posited that the
shift from immature-and-logarithmic to mature-and-linear
patterns of estimation stems from a change in these
children’s underlying numerical representation (Siegler &
Opfer, 2003; Booth & Siegler, 2006), or from an increased
ability to reason about proportions (Barth & Paladino,
2010). However, the present study leads to an additional
(though perhaps not mutually exclusive) hypothesis.
Perhaps the shift towards more adult-like estimation can be
best explained either by a realignment of structural
mappings or to a refinement in the accuracy of the
associative mappings that support these structure mappings.
These two possible sources of the log-to-linear shift in
estimation lead to distinct predictions of how both the
younger and older children will reason about small and large
numbers.
In conclusion, the present study failed to find evidence of
associative links between most number words and
magnitudes. Instead, the present study demonstrates that
number word meaning is constructed through multiple
mechanisms, and not necessarily through associations to
real-world exemplars of their referents. By emphasizing the
relative roles of associative and structure mappings, we
hope to provide a new lens through which to view many of
the developmental questions about number language
acquisition, and in doing so, to open up new avenues for
investigating the kinds of inferences we make about number
words.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Jennifer Audet, Amanda Chamberlain, David
Huang, Michael Sim, and Tony Wang for help with data
collection.

References
Barth, H., Kanwisher, N., & Spelke, E. (2003). The
construction of large number representation in adults.
Cognition, 86, 201-221.
Barth, H., Starr, A., & Sullivan, J. (2009). Children’s
mappings of large number words to numerosities.
Cognitive Development, 24, 248-264.
Barth, H., & Paladino, A. (in press). The development of
numerical estimation in children: evidence against a
representational shift. Developmental Science.
Booth, J., & Siegler, R. (2006). Developmental and
individual differences in pure numerical estimation.
Developmental Psychology, 41, 189-201.
Duncan, E. & McFarland, C. (1980). Isolating the effects of
symbolic distance and semantic congruity in comparative

judgments: an additive-factors analysis. Memory and
Cognition, 8, 612-622.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (2006). Analogical Processes in
Language Learning. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 15, 297-301.
Le Corre, M., & Carey, S. (2008). One, two, three, four,
nothing more: An investigation of the conceptual sources
of the verbal counting principles. Cognition, 105, 395438.
Lipton, J., & Spelke, E. (2005). Preschool children’s
mapping of number words to nonsymbolic numerosities.
Child Development, 76, 978-988.
Holloway, I., & Ansari, D. (2008). Mapping numerical
magnitudes onto symbols: The numerical distance effect
and individual differences in children’s mathematics
achievement. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
103, 17-29.
Izard, V., & Dehaene, S. (2008). Calibrating the mental
number line. Cognition, 106, 1221-1247.
Mundy, E., & Gilmore, C. (2009). Children’s mapping
between symbolic and nonsymbolic representation of
number. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 103,
490-502.
Piazza, M., Pinel, P., Le Bihan, D., & Dehaene, S. (2007). A
magnitude code common to numerosities and number
symbols in human intraparietal cortex. Neuron, 53, 293305.
Shuman, M. (unpublished thesis). Computational
characterization of numerosity perception and encoding.
Siegler, R., & Opfer, J. (2003). The development of
numerical
estimation:
Evidence
for
multiple
representations of numerical quantity. Psychological
Science, 14, 237-243.
Thompson, C., & Opfer, J. (in press). How 15 hundred is
like 15 cherries: Effect of progressive alignment on
representational changes in numerical cognition. Child
Development.
Verguts, T., & Fias, W. (2006). Priming reveals differential
coding of symbolic and non-symbolic quantities.
Cognition, 105, 380-394.
Whalen, J., Gallistel, C., & Gelman, R. (1999). Nonverbal
counting in humans: the psychophysics of number
representation. Psychological Science, 10, 130-137.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of number words
and the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 42, 220251.

1251

