UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mechanisms of Sustained Selective Attention in 3- to 5-year-old Children: Evidence from a
New Object Tracking Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4c35m86n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Fisher, Anna

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mechanisms of Sustained Selective Attention in 3- to 5-year-old Children:
Evidence from a New Object Tracking Task
Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
Sustained selective attention is a crucial component of many
higher-order cognitive processes; yet there is little research
into the mechanisms of this ability early in development. One
of the challenges in investigating mechanisms of sustained
selective attention in young children is lack of appropriate
experimental paradigms. This paper reports findings from a
novel paradigm designed to investigate mechanisms of
sustained selective attention in young children - the Object
Tracking task. Results of two experiments with 3- to 5-yearold children provided support to the notion that development
of the endogenous component of selective sustained attention
lags behind the development of the exogenous component of
this process. Importantly, the Object Tracking paradigm
allowed investigating both of these components within the
same task, thereby making it possible to attribute changes in
performance to different mechanisms of attentional control
rather than to differences in the level of motivation and
engagement in different tasks.
Keywords: Selective attention; Sustained attention; Focused
Attention; Cognitive Development.

Introduction
The ability to selectively sustain attention is crucially
important because it is an essential component of most
higher-order cognitive processes, such as categorization,
language comprehension, reasoning, and problem solving.
For example, it takes preverbal infants as little as 500 ms to
locate a target object among eight distracters (Adler &
Orprecio, 2006), whereas it takes them approximately
twenty times longer to categorize a single object (Quinn &
Eimas, 1996). Similar latency differences between simple
visual search tasks and higher-order categorization tasks are
also present in older children and adults (Fisher, in press;
Gerhardstein & Rovee-Collier, 2002; Trick & Enns, 1998).
However, development of the mechanisms of sustained
selective attention, also referred to as focused attention, has
been sparsely investigated. The goal of the research
presented below was to investigate mechanisms of sustained
selective attention in 3- to 5-year-old children.
When several objects are present in a scene and one needs
to focus attention on a single object, how is the competition
resolved? One of the paradigms that has been widely used to
explore this question in the domain if visual attention is the
visual search paradigm pioneered by Treisman and Gelade
(1980). The classic finding from this paradigm is that when
adults are asked to search a visual array for a target object
defined by a conjunction of features (e.g., color and shape),
their reaction time increases with the increase in the number

of distracter objects in the display. However, when displays
contain target objects defined by a single feature (e.g.,
color) visual search reaction times remain constant
regardless of the number of distracters, as the target object
seems to instantly “pop-out” from the display.
While there is no consensus on the mechanisms of visual
search, many theories distinguish between two broad ways
in which competition between multiple objects in a scene
can be resolved. One way has been characterized as
stimulus-driven, effortless, bottom-up, and passive, whereas
the other way has been characterized as participant-driven,
effortful, top-down, and active (Lavie, 2005; Lavie & Tsal,
1994; Kastner & Undergleider, 2000; Norman & Shallice,
1986; Schneider and Shiffrin, 1977; Schneider & Chein,
2003).
Research on the development of selective attention
indicates that even newborns are not indifferent to what they
attend to, and prefer to attend to some stimuli over others
(Colombo, 2001; Fantz, 1963). However, this selectivity has
been characterized as stimulus-driven or automatic (i.e.,
driven by exogenous factors), rather than participant-driven
or voluntary (i.e., driven by endogenous factors). In
particular, selective attention in newborns and young infants
is driven to a large degree by the properties of the stimulus,
such as its frequency and duration (for auditory stimuli) and
intensity and brightness (for visual stimuli), rather than by
infants’ intentions (Bornstein, 1990; Ruff & Rothbart,
1996).
By the time infants reach seven months of age, their
allocation of attention is driven by a complex interaction of
exogenous and endogenous factors (Oakes, Kannass, &
Shaddy, 2002). For instance, exogenous factors, such as
stimulus brightness and complexity still exert a strong pull
on attention allocation; however, reorientation to salient
distracters is less likely when infants are in a state of
focused attention (i.e., concentrating on a particular toy or
activity) than when infants are in a state of casual attention –
suggesting that internal state of an infant (an endogenous
factor) plays a role in how attention is allocated
(Tellinghuisen, Oakes, & Tjebkes, 1999).
Considerable evidence suggests that when several objects
compete for attention and one of these objects is defined by
a unique feature, similar to adults, infants as young as 3 ½months of age exhibit the “pop-out” effect (Adler &
Orprecio, 2006; Gerhardstein & Rovee-Collier, 2002;
Treisman & Gelade 1980). Search for objects defined by a
conjunction of features has not been studied with preverbal
infants, however findings with 12- to 36-month old toddlers

2488

indicate that their response latency increases with increased
number of distracters in the display – a pattern that is similar
to that in adults (Gerhardstein & Rovee-Collier, 2002;
Scerif, Cornish, Wilding, Driver, & Karmiloff-Smith, 2004;
Treisman & Gelade 1980). Despite considerable quantitative
differences in performance of children and adults persisting
until at least until ten years of age (Trick & Enns, 1998), the
qualitative pattern of results from the visual search tasks
with young children is similar to that of adults.
However, higher-order cognitive processes (such as
categorization, language comprehension, and reasoning
among many others) impose greater demands on attention
than simply selecting an object for processing. One of these
demands is sustaining attention to the selected object for at
least brief periods of time. Development of this ability has
been often examined in natural settings (such as free play)
in prior research as well as computerized vigilance-type
tasks (Oakes, Kannass, & Shaddy, 2002; Ruff & Lawson,
1990; Sarid & Breznitz, 1997; Tellinghuisen, Oakes, &
Tjebkes, 1999). These studies indicate dramatic
improvements in this ability between 12 months and six
years of age. For example, studies utilizing the context of
free play suggest that duration of focused free play increases
from approximately four minutes in 2- and 3-year-old
children to over nine minutes in 5- and 6-year-olds (Ruff &
Lawson, 1990; Sarid & Breznitz, 1997). Furthermore, these
studies indicate that older children are markedly less
distractible than younger children, and also more likely to
return to an interrupted activity.
Another kind of paradigm that has been successfully used
to investigate sustained selective attention in young children
is a Continuous Performance Test – a vigilance-type task
modeled after tests used with adults (Warm & Jerison,
1984). In this task participants are asked to attend to a
stream of visual stimuli and to respond to a target stimulus
while withholding response to non-target stimuli. For
example, participants might be presented with a series of
images depicting ducks and turtles, and instructed to press a
button every time they see a duck and avoid pressing the
button when they see turtles (Akshoomoff, 2002). The goal
of this task is to investigate whether participants can remain
alert for prolonged periods of time (e.g., 5- to 9-minute
intervals) and accurately detect infrequently appearing
target objects. A typical finding of such studies is that
approximately 50% of 3 ½-year-old children fail to
complete this task, indicating difficulty in sustaining their
attention (Akshoomoff, 2002; Corkum, Byrne, & Ellsworth,
1995). Those 3-year-olds who can complete the task (thus
demonstrating their ability to maintain attention for
prolonged periods of time) exhibit high rates of both misses
and false alarms, suggesting difficulty with the voluntary
control of selectivity. Marked improvement on this task (in
terms of proportion of children completing the task,
response time, and accuracy) is observed between four and
five years of age.
Studies of sustained selective attention in the context of
free play and vigilance-type tasks provide valuable insights

regarding the milestones in the development of this
important ability. However, these studies are limited in
their ability to assess the mechanisms of sustained selective
attention in young children and changes in these
mechanisms in the course of development. One of the
challenges in investigating this question stems from the lack
of appropriate experimental paradigms. For example, it has
been argued that differences in the level of performance on
existing tasks of focused attention between younger and
older children may arise as a result of differential levels of
motivation and engagement in the task rater than
developmental changes in mechanisms of attentional control
(Ruff & Rothbart, 1996). Furthermore, there is currently no
task that makes it possible to assess contribution of
exogenous and endogenous factors to selective sustained
attention within the same task, thus making it difficult to
uniquely attribute changes in performance to different
attentional mechanisms rather than to task-specific factors.
The goal of the present research was to develop a task
suitable for investigation of the mechanisms of sustained
selective attention in young children, and to use this task to
investigate the contribution of exogenous and endogenous
factors to sustained selective attention in 3- to 5-year-old
children.
The Object Tracking Task
The Object Tracking task is reminiscent of the Multiple
Object Tracking (MOT) task used with adults to study
properties of visual attention (Pylyshyn & Storm, 1988;
Yantis, 1992). In the MOT task participants are asked to
visually track several identical target objects moving along
random trajectories among a larger set of identical objects,
also moving along random trajectories. In this paradigm
target objects are distinct only at the beginning of each trial
(all target objects pulsate for a brief period of time at the
onset of each trial), however adult participants (often to
their own surprise) are capable of tracking four targets in the
field of eights distracters with accuracy approaching 90%
(Pylyshyn & Storm, 1988). While this paradigm has been
successfully used to investigate properties of object-based
attention in adults for over twenty years, our pilot testing
suggested that the task is prohibitively complex for young
children. Furthermore, the MOT paradigm does not allow
assessment of automatic and voluntary components of
sustained selective attention within the same task. The new
Object Tracking task was created specifically to investigate
mechanisms of sustained selective attention with young
children.
In the Object Tracking task participants are presented
with a three by three grid, with each of the nine grid
locations identified by a popular cartoon character, and a
target object moving on the grid along a random trajectory.
Participants are asked to visually track the target and
identify the grid location last visited by the target before it
disappears. The moving target in this task can be
accompanied by zero to eight distracters, also moving along
a random trajectory. Target and distracter objects are
randomly selected on each trial from a pool of nine different

2489

geometric shapes. At the beginning of each trial participants
are presented with still objects, and the object designated as
the target is clearly marked at the beginning of each trial by
being encircled in red (see Figure 1 for a schematic
depiction of the task).
There are no restrictions on the motion paths of distracter
objects, but there are two restrictions on the motion paths of
the target objects. First, the target object has to disappear in
the middle of one of the nine cells to reduce possible
confusion if the target diapers on the border of two or more
cells. Second, the target object must visit all nine screen
locations at least once before disappearing. In all the
experiments presented below, the speed of motion for all
target and distracter objects was set at 800 pixels per frame
at 30 frames per second (this speed was chosen during pilot
testing with a separate group of 3- to 5-year-old children).
Average trial duration was approximately 11 sec (a more
detailed description of trial duration is provides in the
Methods section).
When presented with the task, participants are explained
that (1) objects will start moving when the experimenter
pushes a button, (2) the goal of the task is to watch the
object encircled in red, (3) the red circle will disappear as
soon as objects start moving, and (4) once all objects
disappear from the screen participants will need to point to
the grid location last visited by the target object. Notice, that
participants are not asked to perform visual search since the
target is clearly marked at the beginning of each trial.

Figure 1. Schematic depiction of the Object Tracking task.
It has been demonstrated that salient objects engage
attention automatically, whereas less salient objects may
require voluntary processing (Koch & Ullman, 1985; Smith,
et. al., 1996; Trick & Enns, 1998; Underwood, et. al., 2006).
Therefore, distracter manipulations in the Object Tracking
task can allow assessment of the contribution of exogenous
and endogenous factors to selective sustained attention in
the visual domain. In particular, it is expected that target
objects will be more salient when distracters are identical to
each other and different from the target (All Same
Distracters condition) than when distracter objects are
different from the target and from each other (All Different
Distracters condition) (Treisman & Gelade, 1980). Thus,
tracking accuracy in the All Different Distracters condition
will reflect the contribution of predominantly endogenous

factors, whereas tracking accuracy in the All Same
Distracters condition will reflect the contribution of both
exogenous and endogenous factors. The difference in
performance between these conditions will be reflective of
the unique contribution of exogenous attention. Experiment
1 investigated mechanisms of sustained selective attention
in 3- to 5-year-old children using the Object Tracking task
in which target objects were accompanied by two
distracters, and Experiment 2 investigated performance with
six distracters.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Participants were 15 3-year-old children (M = 3.66 years,
SD = .28 years; 5 females and 10 males), 17 4-year-old
children (M = 4.49 years, SD = .25 years; 5 females and 12
males), and 18 5-year-old children (M = 5.23 years, SD =
.23 years; 7 females and 11 males).

Design and Procedure
There were two within-subject conditions in Experiment 1:
All Same Distracters and All Different Distracters
condition. The order of these two conditions was
counterbalanced across participants; both conditions were
completed on two separate testing sessions that were spaced
one to two weeks apart.
As described in the introduction, the Object Tracking task
is designed such that the target objects have to appear at
least once in each of the nine on-screen locations and
disappear in the middle of one of these locations. Due to
these restrictions, trial duration is not fixed but varies
slightly from trial to trial. In Experiment 1, minimum trial
duration was set to 10 s and mean trial duration was 11.00 s
(SD = 0.95 s) in the All Same condition and 10.98 s (SD =
1.03 s) in the All Different condition.
To control for the possibility that any observed
differences in tracking accuracy may stem from children
being more likely to remember what object they were
supposed to track in the All Same Distracters condition than
in the All Different Distracters condition, at the end of each
trial participants were asked to identify which object served
as target on the trial they had just completed. Children were
presented with a card depicting all nine shapes that could
serve as target objects in this task, and asked to point to the
shape they had been tracking.
All participants were tested by hypothesis-blind
experimenters in quiet rooms in their day care centers.
Participants completed 11 trials of the Object Tracking task
in each condition. The first trial was completed with
assistance from the experimenter who traced the moving
target with their index finger. Participants were then
explained that they needed to complete the rest of the task
by themselves, tracking the target objects only with their

2490

eyes. Data from the first experimenter-assisted trial were
discarded from the analyses.

Results
Memory Accuracy
Accuracy with which children recognized the target object
(among 9 possible objects) at the conclusion of each trial is
presented in Table 1. Memory scores were submitted to a
mixed ANOVA with age as a between-subject factor and
condition (All Same vs. All Different) as a within-subject
factor. This analysis indicated a main effect of age, F (2, 47)
= 5.77, p < .01, η2 = .20. Post-hoc Tukey HSD tests
indicated that overall memory accuracy was lower in 3year-old children (M = .67) than in both older age groups (p
< .05), and statistically equivalent in 4- and 5-year-old
children (M = .83 and M = .86, respectively). Most
importantly however, there was no effect of condition and
no age-by-condition interaction, both Fs < 1, ns. Therefore,
results of the memory check indicate that if any significant
differences in object tracking accuracy are observed
between the All Same and the All Different Distracters
conditions, these differences are unlikely to stem from
differential demands on working memory.
Table 1: Memory accuracy in Experiments 1-2 (standard
deviations in parentheses).

3-y.o.
4-y.o.
5-y.o.
3-y.o.
4-y.o.
5-y.o.

All Same
All Different
Distracters
Distracters
Experiment 1 (2 Distracters)
.69 (.22)
.65 (.22)
.83 (.17)
.83 (.17)
.86 (.13)
.86 (.22)
Experiment 2 (6 Distracters)
.47 (.31)
.44 (.39)
.75 (.29)
.73 (.29)
.79 (.19)
.85 (.2)

t-test
p-values
p > .53
p > .83
p > .95
p > .75
p > .83
p > .44

Object Tracking Accuracy
Tracking accuracy scores were averaged across 10 trials for
each participant and submitted to a mixed ANOVA with
experimental condition (All Same and All Different
Distracters) as a within-subject factor and age (3-, 4-, and 5years of age) as a between-subject factor. Results of this
analysis revealed a main effect of experimental condition,
F(1, 47) = 11.46, p < .002, η2 = .19 and age F (2, 47) =
8.04, p < .002, η2 = .25. These main effects were qualified
by an age by condition interaction, F (2, 47) = 3.43, p < .05,
η2 = .13.
Planned comparisons indicated that participants in all
conditions in all age groups identified the final location of
the target object at above chance level (chance = 11% given
nine response options), all one-sample ts > 5.85, ps < .0001.
Five-year-old children were equally accurate in both
conditions (83% and 84% of correct in the All Same and All
Different condition, respectively) paired-sample t (17) < 1,

ns. However, younger children exhibited higher tracking
accuracy in the All Same than in the All Different condition
(see Figure 2): 4-year-olds averaged 76% and 65% of
correct responses, respectively, paired-sample t (16) = 2.26,
p < .05, Cohen’s d = .57; and 3-year-olds averaged 67% and
48% of correct responses, respectively, paired-sample t (14)
= 2.63, p < .05, Cohen’s d = .77.

Figure 2. Tracking accuracy scores in Experiment 1.
Overall, results of Experiment 1 suggest that the ability to
accurately track an object amidst heterogeneous distracters
shows more protracted development than the ability to
accurately track an object amidst homogenous distracters.
Notice however, that 5 year-old children in Experiment 1
exhibited no effect of condition on tracking accuracy. At the
same time, it has been shown that voluntary control of
attention continues to mature well beyond the preschool
years (Casey, Tottenham, & Fossella, 202; Trick & Enns,
1998). It is possible therefore, that condition differences in
tracking accuracy will emerge in 5-year-old children if the
task difficulty is increased (e.g., by increasing the number of
distracters in the task). This possibility was investigated in
Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Participants were 15 3-year-old children (M = 3.33 years,
SD = .27 years; 6 females and 9 males), 16 4-year-old
children (M = 4.41 years, SD = .32 years; 8 females and 8
males), and 20 5-year-old children (M = 5.33 years, SD =
.37 years; 11 females and 9 males).

Design and Procedure
Design and procedure of Experiment 2 were identical to that
of Experiment 1 with one important exception: the number
of distracter objects was increased to six (compared to two
distracters in Experiment 1). Mean trial duration was 11.00s

2491

(SD = .94s) in the All Same condition and 10.92s (SD =
.86s) in the All Different condition.

Results
Memory Accuracy
Memory accuracy data are presented in Table 1. Memory
scores were submitted to a mixed ANOVA with age as a
between-subject factor and condition (All Same vs. All
Different) as a within-subject factor. The analysis indicated
a main effect of age, F (2, 48) = 11.08, p < .0001, η2 = .33.
Post-hoc Tukey HSD tests indicated that overall memory
accuracy in 3-year-old children (M = .45) was lower than in
older children (p < .05), and statistically equivalent in 4- and
5-year-old children (M = .74 and M = .82, respectively).
Similar to Experiment 1, there was no effect of condition
and no age-by-condition interaction, both Fs < 1, ns.
Object Tracking Accuracy
Tracking accuracy scores were submitted to a mixed
ANOVA with experimental condition (All Same and All
Different) as a within-subject factor and age (3-, 4-, and 5years of age) as a between-subject factor. Results of this
analysis revealed a main effect of experimental condition F
(1, 48) = 23.40, p < .0001, η2 = .32, and a main effect of age
F (2, 48) = 8.93, p < .005, η2 = .27. Unlike Experiment 1,
the age by condition interaction did not reach significance,
F (2, 48) < 1, ns.

Figure 2. Tracking accuracy in Experiment 2.
Similar to Experiment 1, participants in all conditions in
all three age groups identified the final location of the target
object at above chance level (chance = 11%), all one-sample
ts > 2.44, ps < .03. However, unlike Experiment 1, 5-yearold children exhibited the effect of condition with higher
accuracy in the All Same condition (66%) than in the All
Different condition (55%), paired-sample t (19)= 2.52, p <
.05, Cohen’s d=.35. Similarly, 4-year old children exhibited
higher accuracy in the All Same condition compared to the
All Different condition (60% and 39%, respectively),
paired-sample t (15)= 3.71, p < .005, Cohen’s d=.97, as did
3-year-old children (34% and 20%, respectively), pairedsample t (14)= 2.07, p = .05, Cohen’s d =.69.

Across the two experiments, it is appears that overall level
of performance in all three age groups was lower in
Experiment 2, when six distracters were present, than in
Experiment 1, when two distracters were present. Indeed,
when the data from both experiments were submitted to a
mixed ANOVA with age and number of distracters (two vs.
six) as between-subject factors and type of distracters (All
Same vs. All Different) as a within-subject factor, the
analysis revealed a main effect of the number of distracters,
F (1, 95) = 34.09, p < .0001. This main effect was qualified
by the distracter number by distracter type interaction, F (1,
95) = 33.88, p < .0001, suggesting that decrease in accuracy
with the increase in the number of distracters was greater in
the All Different condition than in the All Same condition
(mean decrease in accuracy across all age group was 27%
and 22%, respectively).

General Discussion
This paper presents findings from a novel task in which
children were asked to track a moving target object
accompanied by distracters that varied in type (all same
versus all different) and number (two versus six). The
results pointed to several novel findings. First, tracking
accuracy improved with age. Second, tracking accuracy was
higher in the All Same Distracters condition than in the All
Different Distracters condition for all age groups when
target objects were accompanied by six distracters; a similar
difference between conditions was observed in 3- and 4year-old children when targets were accompanied by two
distracters. Third, unlike the visual search tasks, increase in
the number of homogenous distracters resulted in lower
accuracy for all three age groups tested in this study.
Finally, there was no effect distracter type on children’s
ability to remember which object they were supposed to
track; therefore, effects reported in this paper can not be
attributed to differences in memory demands in different
conditions.
The central finding reported in this paper is that
preschool-age children are more successful at tracking
targets moving among homogeneous than among
heterogeneous distracters. This pattern of performance may
arise for two different reasons. Consistent with the notion
that the speed of engaging attention (or attention-getting)
and speed of releasing attention (or attention-holding) are
separate factors (Cohen, 1972), one possibility is that
homogeneous distracters provide less competition for
attentional resources and therefore children are less likely to
glance away from the target moving amidst identical
distracters. In other words, low competition for attentional
resources may enhance attention-holding properties of the
target. Alternatively, it is possible that children are equally
likely to glance away from the target regardless of the type
of distracters; however children are more successful in
locating the target after glancing away in the homogeneous
than in the heterogeneous distracter condition. In other
words, low competition for attentional resources may

2492

enhance attention-getting properties of the target. These
possibilities remain to be addressed in future research.
Overall, findings presented above support the notion that
development of endogenous attention (probed by the All
Different Distracters condition) lags behind the
development of exogenous attention (probed by the All
Same Distracters condition). Importantly, the Object
Tracking task makes it possible to assess both mechanisms
within the same paradigm and quantify this lag in terms of
the differences in tracking accuracy. Therefore, this new
paradigm allows attributing changes in performance to
different mechanisms of attentional control rather than to
differences in the level of motivation and engagement in
different tasks.

Acknowledgments
I thank children, parents, teachers, and administrators for
their participation. This research was supported by NICHD
though Grant 1RO3HD060086-01A1.

References
Adler, S.A., & Orprecio, J. (2006). The eyes have it: Visual
pop-out in infants and adults. Developmental Science, 9,
189-206.
Akshoomoff, N. A. (2002). Selective attention and active
engagement in young children. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 22, 625-642.
Bornstein, M. H. (1990). Attention in infancy and the
prediction of cognitive capacities in childhood. In J. Enns
(Ed.) Development of Attention: Research and Theory.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Casey, B.J., Tottenham, N., & Fossella, J. (2002). Clinical,
imaging, lesions, and genetic approaches toward a model
of cognitive control. Developmental Psychobiology, 40,
237-.254.
Cohen, L. B. (1972). Attention-getting and attention-holding
processes of infant visual preferences. Child
Development, 43, 869–879.
Colombo, J. (2001). The development of visual attention in
infancy. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 337-367.
Corkum, V., Byrne, J. & Ellsworth, C. (1995) Clinical
Assessment of Sustained Attention in Preschoolers. Child
Neuropsychology, 1(1), 3-18.
Culham, J. (2003). Attention-grabbing motion in the human
brain. Neuron, 40, 451-452.
Fantz, R.L. & Miranda, S. B. (1975). Newborn infant
attention to form and contour. Child Development, 46,
224-228.
Fisher, A.V. (in press). Mechanisms of Induction Early in
Development. In M. Banich & D. Caccamise (Eds.)
Generalization
of
Knowledge:
Multidisciplinary
Perspectives. New York: Psychology Press.
Gerhardstein, P., & Rovee-Collier, C. (2002). Visual search
in infants and very young children. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 81, 194-215.
Kannass, K.N., Oakes, L.M., & Shaddy, D.J. (2006). A
longitudinal investigation of the development of attention

and distractibility. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 7, 381-409.
Kastner S. & Ungerleider L.G. (2000). Mechanisms of
visual attention in the human cortex. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 23, 315-341.
Koch, C. & Ullman, S. (1985). Shifts in selective visual
attention: Towards the underlying neural circuitry.
Human Neurobiology, 4, 219-227.
Lavie, N. (2005). Distracted and confused? Selective
attention under load. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 7582
Lavie, N. & Tsal, Y. (1994). Perceptual load as a major
determinant of the locus of selection in visual attention.
Perception and Psychophysics, 56, 183-197.
Norman, D. A. & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action:
Willed and automatic control of behaviour. In R.J.
Davidson, G.E. Schwartz, & D. Shapiro (Eds.),
Consciousness and self-regulation, Plenum Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. W., & Storm, R. W. (1988). Tracking multiple
independent targets: Evidence for a parallel tracking
mechanism. Spatial Vision, 3, 179-197.
Quinn, P. C. & Eimas, P. D. (1996). Perceptual cues that
permit categorical differentiation of animal species by
infants, Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 63,
189–211.
Ruff, A.H., & Lawson, K.R. (1990). Development of
sustained, focused attention in young children during free
play. Developmental Psychology, 26, 85-93.
Ruff, H., & Rothbart, M. K. (1996). Attention in early
development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sarid, M., & Breznitz, Z. (1997). Developmental aspects of
sustained attention among 2- to 6-year-old children.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 21,
303-312.
Scerif, G., Cornish, K., Wilding, J., Driver, J., & KarmiloffSmith, A. (2004). Visual search in typically developing
toddlers and toddlers with Fragile X or Williams
Syndrome. Developmental Science, 7, 116-130.
Schneider, W. & Chein, J.M. (2003). Controlled and
automatic processing: Behavior, theory, & biology.
Cognitive Science, 27, 525-559.
Schneider, W. and Shiffrin, R.M. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: Detection,
search, and attention. Psychological Review, 84, 1-66.
Stechler, G., & Latz, E. (1966). Some observations on
attention and arousal in the human infant. Journal of the
American Academy of Child Psychology, 5, 517-525.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A Featureintegration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12,
97-136.
Trick, L.M. & Enns, J.T. (1998) Lifispan changes in
attention: The visual search task. Cognitive Development,
13, 369-386.
Warm, J.S., & Jerison, H. J. (1984). The psychophysics of
vigilance. In J.S. Warm (Ed.) Sustained attention in
human performance (pp. 15-59). Chichester, UK: Wiley.

2493

