UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Personality and Individual Differences: The Approach-Avoid-Conflict Triad

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3k6892sf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Fua, Karl
Revelle, William
Ortony, Andrew

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Personality and Individual Differences:
The Approach-Avoid-Conflict Triad
Karl Fua1,2 , William Revelle1 and Andrew Ortony1,2
(karl.fua@gmail.com, {revelle,ortony}@northwestern.edu)
1 Northwestern

University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Cognition for Social Systems, Institute of High Performance Computing,
Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

2 Computational

Abstract

prone to indecisiveness, are likely to spend time ruminating
about the pros and cons of approaching and avoiding. We
believe that this patterning of affect, behavior, cognition and
motivation occurs across all three information processing levels proposed by Ortony et al. (2005) in their (ONR) model,
from the reactive (lowest) to the reflective (highest). For instance, chronically goal/reward oriented individuals tend to
exhibit more pro-social behavior (e.g., attending lively parties, dating more often; Paunonen, 2003), and are biased toward speed (maximizing hits) rather than accuracy (avoiding
misses) when completing simple reactive tasks (Higgins &
Spiegel, 2004).

Personality is the unique patterning of affect, behavior, cognition and desires in individuals across time and situations.
This patterning can occur on different information processing levels, specifically, the Reactive, Routine, and Reflective
levels (Ortony et al., 2005), across these four domains. Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory (RST; Gray & McNaughton,
2000) provides a biological account of the functional subdivision of the reactive level into the approach, avoidance, and
conflict systems. These systems differ in their sensitivities to
different classes of cues, giving rise to personality differences.
But, individuals also differ at the routine and reflective levels
in terms of how they respond (cognitively, affectively, behaviorally and motivationally) to approach situations, avoidance
situations, and internal conflicts. In this paper, we discuss how
the approach-avoidance-conflict (AAC) triad can be used as a
broad framework for incorporating personality and individual
differences into theories of human cognitive architectures. We
also present work in progress on a computer implementation
of the AAC triad at the reactive level.
Keywords: Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory, Personality,
Behavior, Affect, Motivation.

Many models of the human cognitive architecture have
been proposed, for example in cognitive psychology (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998; Ortony et al., 2005; Broadbent, 1971),
personality psychology (Carver et al., 2009; Revelle, 1993),
and artificial intelligence (Sloman & Chrisley, 2005; Newell,
1990). Many of these architectures, such as H-CogAff, ACTR, and Soar, are highly elaborated and have been studied in
great detail. However, although personality is a key moderator of individuals’ affect, behavior, cognition and motivations,
there has been little effort to include an account of personality and individual differences in these architectures. On the
other hand, computational models of personality focus on describing specific aspects (e.g., the motivational aspect; Read
et al., 2010) of personality but not the systematic integration
of personality in the broader framework of cognitive, affective, motivational, and behavioral processes.

Introduction
A trolley is hurtling along a track toward five children, all of
whom are tied to the track. Should you flip a switch to divert
the trolley onto another track on which only one child is tied
so that only one life is sacrificed instead of five?
The moral dilemma posed by this well-known “trolley
problem” illustrates the presence of high level motivational
conflicts that arise when incompatible goals and values are
coactivated. In this case, one would want to save the five
lives but at the same time avoid taking the life of another.
The recognition that the conflict exists results in rumination
and reasoning as an individual seeks to resolve the conflict.
Internal conflicts of this kind often occur in social situations,
as for example, when a person wants to approach a potential date while also wanting to avoid rejection. Such conflicts lead to indecisive behavior such as dithering between
approach and shyly looking away, and paying greater attention to hints that might inform the individual if approach (or
shying away) would be a more suitable course of action.
Important in the present context is the fact that individuals differ in how they perceive and weigh alternatives (taking
a life versus not saving a life), and how they handle different (approach or avoidance) goals and conflicts. Reward oriented individuals are prone to engage in riskier behavior, such
as brazenly approaching a potential date. In the same situation, punishment oriented (averse) individuals will be more
likely to shy away for fear of rejection. Yet others, who are

In this paper, we argue that there are three main classes
of sensitivities (sensitivity to cues for reward, cues for punishment, and internal conflict), related to approach, avoidance, and conflict resolution (AAC) respectively, and that the
AAC framework has implications for how different cognitive processes interact with each other and how the mechanisms driving personality and individual differences can be
modeled systematically. Behavioral/motivational processes
are commonly studied in terms of approach and avoidance
(e.g., Carver et al., 2009; Elliot & Thrash, 2002). An individual’s sensitivities to cues for reward and for punishment refer to how that individual’s approach and avoidance systems
react to and learn from such cues. Inspired by RST, we propose that conflict resolution is a third component that should
be considered in conjunction with the approach-avoidance
pair, and that it is associated with the sensitivity to conflicts.
We define sensitivity to conflicts as the threshold beyond

25

which incompatible behavioral tendencies activate the conflict system–a system that we take to be distinct from the approach and avoidance systems and that is responsible for triggering conflict resolution processes (e.g., information gathering and rumination). Differences in the three kinds of sensitivities underlie broad personality dimensions such as the
Giant 3 (Extraversion-Neuroticism-Psychoticism; Eysenck et
al., 1985) or the Big 5 (Openness, Neuroticism, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness; Costa & McCrae,
1992; Goldberg, 1990). The AAC triad allows us to study
how personality arises in individuals and how it influences
cognitive processes like strategizing or resolving dilemmas,
enabling us to address questions such as why, in the same situation, the plans an extravert makes differ from those of an
introvert?
We believe that a theory of human cognitive architecture
should be capable of accommodating differences in the ways
in which different individuals feel, want, think, and act. To
this end, our current work examines the structure of the reactive, routine and reflective levels (in the ONR model) in terms
of the AAC triad, and looks at how these structures influence
the organization of different parameters in systems. Our goal
here is to propose a general framework that augments existing architectures to help in thinking about personality, and to
elucidate how high and low level processes interact with each
other.

Similarly, the avoidance system (FFFS) handles cues for
punishment. The FFFS is primarily associated with fear,
panic and avoidance behaviors, resulting from the activation
of the periaqueductal grey, medial hypothalamus and amygdala regions of the neural system. The avoidance system is
specifically modulated by panicolytic (suppression) and panicogenic (stimulating) drugs; individuals with a high sensitivity to cues for punishment are susceptible to phobias and
panic attacks.
A major part of RST focuses on the functions of the conflict system (BIS). This system is associated with the septohippocampal system (SHS) and its major role is to detect conflicts and trigger appropriate conflict resolution behavior. The
BIS handles two forms of conflicts: conflicts in motivations,
and conflicts in expectations. Motivation conflicts occur between or within the approach and avoidance systems. An example of an approach-avoid conflict is the desire to escape
from a burning building conflicting with the desire to save a
trapped loved one. Expectation conflicts occur either when
a stimulus is detected but not expected (novelty) or when an
expected stimulus is absent. Examples would be suddenly
seeing a furtive shadow in your house at night (novelty), or
turning on the lights expecting to see a burglar but seeing
an empty room instead (absent expected stimulus). The BIS
detects such expectation violations with a comparator (the
CA3-comparator in the SHS) that compares the signal (presence or absence of an expectation) from the entorhinal cortex
stream and the signal (presence or absence of an actual stimulus) from the medial septum. When conflicts are detected,
the BIS sends inhibiting signals to the conflicting systems to
inhibit prepotent responses, and triggers behaviors such as
information gathering. Importantly, the BIS does not actually resolve conflicts but rather triggers potentially appropriate higher-level cognitive processes and behaviors to do the
resolution. Unlike the FFFS, the BIS has been shown to be
insensitive to panicolytics/panicogenics but instead responds
to anxiolytic/anxiogenic drugs. The BIS is therefore a separate system that is specifically associated with anxiety (as
opposed to fear that is associated with the FFFS) and is implicated in Generalized Anxiety Disorders. The BIS is also
highly correlated with trait anxiety and neuroticism. At least
from a functional standpoint, different individuals must possess different thresholds (sensitivities to conflict) for the activation of the conflict system, and these thresholds are independent of and exist in parallel with the sensitivities to cues
for reward and punishment that reside in the approach and
avoidance systems respectively.

The Approach-Avoidance-Conflict (AAC)
Triad: From the Reactive to the Reflective
Level
The Reactive Level
According to the ONR model, at the lowest level, behavioral responses to environmental cues are immediate and reactive. Automatic responses like the instinctive flight at the
sight of a predator belong to this level. Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory (RST; Gray & McNaughton, 2000) was originally developed as an animal model of fear and anxiety, and
has also been extensively studied in personality psychology
(Corr, 2008; Smillie et al., 2010). RST proposes three functionally distinct subsystems–the Behavioral Approach System (BAS), the Fight-Flight-Freeze System (FFFS) and the
Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS), each responding to different classes of cues with different sensitivities. RST offers
neurobiological evidence that low-level, rapid behavioral responses, which we think of as the reactive level, have, at least
functionally, the approach-avoid-conflict triadic structure.

The Routine Level

The Approach-Avoid-Conflict Triad in RST The BAS,
FFFS and BIS handle approach, avoidance, and conflict respectively. The approach system (BAS) is associated with the
dopamine system and reacts to cues for reward, and is implicated in the learning of reinforcing signals of reward. The
reactivity of BAS is highly correlated with trait extraversion
and an individual who has an overactive BAS is prone to exhibit impulsive approach behaviors toward hedonic rewards.

The routine level resides between the reactive and reflective
levels and deals with habitual, routinized behaviors. It deals
with expectations over a longer time span than the momentto-moment activities in the reactive level. While the reactive level is concerned with cues and their immediate implications, such as hearing a gunshot close by and instinctively
taking cover, the routine level deals with more sophisticated

26

expectations and implications of cues. For example, the series of actions one executes after making the decision to drive
home–getting into one’s car, putting the key into the ignition,
and turning the key with a foot on the brake.
As in the reactive level, individual differences can be analyzed at the routine level in terms of approach, avoidance
and conflicts. Consider individuals at a party. In this case,
a conceivable routinized behavior is the act of approaching
and talking to a stranger. Extraverts, having a high sensitivity to cues for reward, may have learned that a stimulating
conversation is rewarding, and so tend to engage in such approach behaviors. On the other hand, individuals who are
highly sensitive to punishing cues tend to be afraid of approaching others at parties (Costa & McCrae, 1980) and so
tend to engage in routine avoidance behaviors such as staying
away from large groups. Individuals who are sensitive to conflicts (who can also, independently, differ in their sensitivities
to cues for reward and punishment) easily feel frustration or
annoyance if a conversation turns out to be less stimulating
than expected, or feel anxious and unsure when the conversation partner shows signs of boredom, prompting the individual to try even harder to make the conversation work. This
latter case should be differentiated from ones in which an individual is very sensitive to cues for punishment, in which
case the individual will likely back off and try to avoid conversation altogether.

The behaviors that correspond to such items obviously involve very reflective processes. Similarly, Regulatory Focus
theory (Higgins, 1997) shows that there are chronic individual
differences in motivation. A promotion-focused individual is
concerned with nurturance-related motivations and is therefore sensitive to cues for reward. In contrast, a preventionfocused individual focuses more on security related needs,
resulting in a bias toward cues for punishment. Regulatory
Focus theory has been studied in a wide variety of contexts
including goal pursuit and moral judgments, indicating that
at least the approach-avoidance structure and individual differences in sensitivities to different classes of cues do exist on
the reflective level.
However, the conflict system and individual differences in
sensitivity to conflicts have received much less attention than
the approach-avoidance pair, even though it is just as important an aspect of the motivation system. As already mentioned, conflicts arise within and between the approach and
avoidance systems, but an individual’s sensitivity to conflicts
is independent of the sensitivities to cues for reward and punishment. It might be tempting to equate sensitivity to conflict
with sensitivity to cues for punishment, but as the sample item
from the SPSR questionnaire about complaining in a restaurant indicates, there is a difference between experiencing the
conflicting desires of seeking redress and avoiding potential
unpleasantness with the restaurant staff, on the one hand, and
simply having a high desire to avoid unpleasantness, on the
other. The experience of conflict triggers rumination about
the choice that the individual faces, whereas the desire to
avoid the unpleasantness of a confrontation could have been
avoided by the person just leaving when the service was bad.
Functionally, sensitivity to conflicts is the threshold that determines when a conflict is experienced and produces a separate class of affective states and behaviors from those that
result from simple approach or avoidance. The rumination,
anxiety, and heart-wrenching despair that arise when one is
forced to make choices are the products of internal conflicts
and are not mere amalgams of behavior or affect produced
in the approach-avoid systems. If one thinks of approach
and avoidance tendencies as having different activation levels, then the sensitivity to conflicts is the threshold above
which activation levels of incompatible motivations are experienced as internal conflict, while sensitivities to cues for
reward and punishment influence how fast the respective activation levels change.

The Reflective Level
Often known also as the deliberative level, the reflective level
is the home of high-level cognitive processes such as planning and conscious reasoning. The reflective level functions
as the overall executive control that ‘oversees’ the operation
of the lower levels. However, we want to suggest that the reflective level also embodies the same triadic AAC structure
with individual differences in the corresponding sensitivities.
Of course, appeal to the approach-avoidance dyad in studies of motivation is anything but a new idea. It can be found
in numerous theories (see Elliot 1999 for review), and it is
widely recognized that individuals differ in their sensitivities
to reward and punishment on the reflective level (Carver &
White, 1994; Torrubia et al., 2001). Although most such studies have been designed to assess aspects of RST (which is reactive) in humans, the items in instruments used to do this in
fact tap into routine and mainly reflective level processes. For
example, the Sensitivity to Punishment, Sensitivity to Reward
questionnaire (SPSR; Torrubia et al., 2001), includes items
such as

Connecting the Levels
The structure described in the previous sections provides
a general framework for organizing personality parameters and for suggesting how these parameters might influence processes on the reactive, routine, and reflective levels. In appealing to the AAC structure we, of course,
do not mean that, for example, a reflective level module
should be split into three; we are certainly not proposing
an approach-planning module, an avoidance-planning mod-

• Does the good prospect of obtaining money motivate you
strongly to do some things?
• Do you often renounce your rights when you know you can
avoid a quarrel with a person or an organization?
• Do you think a lot before complaining in a restaurant if
your meal is not well prepared?

27

Implementing the AAC triad on the Reactive
Level

ule and a conflict-planning module, each associated with a
distinct brain region. Rather, we are suggesting that there exist at least three broad classes of parameters which influence
an individual’s selection of and access to different classes of
strategies, or memories, or knowledge. We argue that broad
personality dimensions arise from systematic differences in
the set points of these parameters and should be modeled as
such in cognitive architectures.

Our prototype implementation of the AAC structure on the
reactive level is inspired by RST and is combined with the
Cues-Tendency-Action (CTA) re-parameterization of the Dynamics of Action model (Revelle, 1986; Atkinson & Birch,
1970). CTA models the dynamic interaction between cues
and tendencies within and between the approach, avoidance
and conflict systems. In particular, it models the interaction
between conflicting tendencies and actions. It also includes
the feedback mechanism for the interaction of consummatory
actions with the behavioral tendencies. The hybrid RST-CTA
architecture is shown in Figure 1.
The model is implemented on a set of virtual characters
using the Twig animation system (Horswill, 2009). Screenshots from the simulation are shown in Figure 2. The focus of
our simulation is the yellow child, who interacts with the red
child, the ball, and the yellow adult–his parent. The yellow
child perceives the other “objects” (i.e., the red child, ball,
and adult) in the environment as stimuli. An input stimulus
perceived by the agent (yellow child) is a tuple comprising the
object, the object’s action and the object’s distance from the
agent, in the form I = (name,action,distance). For example, I
= (red child,play,2.3) indicates that the yellow child sees the
red child playing 2.3 distance units away.
The expectation module (Figure 1a) uses the input I to form
an expectation about what type of cue the stimulus is along
four dimensions–reward (R+), non-reward (R-), punishment
(P+) and non-punishment (P-). For instance, the red child is
a cue for both reward (R+, playmate) and punishment (P+,
aggressive child), the degree of which is scaled by his action
(R+ is higher if the red child is being friendly) and distance
(an aggressive child is less threatening if he is further away).
The agent also uses the current stimulus (I) and information
he has about its current action (A) to generate an expectation
of what he should expect at the next moment. For example,
a hostile red child is expected to approach the agent aggressively after issuing a threat (see Figure 2b) and the expected
action will be flagged as highly punishing (P+), and if the
agent runs back to the adult, he will expect to attain a certain
amount of safety when he is close to the adult (P-).
The behavioral tendencies (Figure 1b) react to the input
stimulus based on how the stimulus is evaluated along the
four dimensions (R+, R-, P+, P-) with different sensitivities.
A stimulus can cause changes to more than one behavioral
tendency. In the case of the red child who is both a R+ and
P+ to the yellow child, the presence of the red child activates
the yellow child’s tendencies to both approach and avoid. The
module also responds to consummatory actions taken by the
agent at a rate defined by the sensitivity Scons (Figure 1h). For
example, the act of playing with a ball is a consummatory
action that reduces the tendency to continue playing.
The BIS module (Figure 1c) detects conflicts in behavioral tendencies and expectations, and responds by activating
information-gathering behavior and inhibiting the conflicting

The patterning of a person’s sensitivities is consistent
across the different levels of processing. So, for example,
a person who is highly sensitive to cues for reward reacts and
learns faster to cues for reward, engages more readily in habitual behaviors that he or she associates with reward, and
values high level achievement goals. The consistency also
implies that the relative relationships between the different
sensitivities are preserved across levels. Therefore, a person who has a relatively higher sensitivity to cues for punishment than rewards will exhibit this difference in sensitivities
across the three processing levels. The absolute magnitude
of the sensitivities on each level can differ, but the relationships should remain consistent. Inconsistencies in the biases
could explain behaviors that might be viewed as uncharacteristic of a person, as for example, when a person who typically
values safety and security indulges in a spur-of-the-moment
risky behavior such as reckless gambling.
Another consequence of the AAC structure is that similar
systems on the three levels might be more tightly coupled
than they are to others. That is, other things being equal,
an activated approach system on the reactive level is more
likely to cause responses in the approach systems on the routine and reflective levels, acting as a mechanism for the endogenous generation of related higher level goals and actions
(e.g., Cacioppo et al., 1993). Consider the case of being the
target of a scathing remark. The immediate reactive response
might be to lash out and perhaps even to retaliate physically.
However, because of the fear of reprisal and possible physical harm to oneself, the immediate response is suppressed.
The reaction to the stimulus (insult) can trigger higher level
processes, for example, to devise an elaborate plan for exacting revenge that acts to suppress the reactive level urge. The
reverse also holds, where higher level goals and values, being more persistent, bias the perception of and sensitivity to
different cues at the reactive and routine levels. An example
is the cognitive bias that results from different task framing
which influences actual task performance. Anxious students
who want to do well, but are afraid of being seen as incompetent, perform better when the task is reframed to emphasize
its difficulty (Born et al., 2002; Weiner & Schneider, 1971).
In the case of the reframed task, the system that deals with
wanting to avoid appearing incompetent is less activated because the task is perceived as being highly difficult anyway,
and therefore reduces conflict with the approach system, resulting in lower state anxiety and allowing approach system
behaviors (e.g., persisting in performing the task) to manifest
themselves.

28

Figure 1: The RST-CTA model on the reactive level
tendencies (Figure 1g). In Figure 2a, the yellow child wants
to approach the red child but is also afraid that the red child
might hurt him, causing the yellow child to inhibit his actions
and look nervously at the red child. A child with high sensitivity to conflict (trait anxiety) will pause more often. On the
other hand, if the yellow child has low sensitivity to conflict
and high sensitivity to reward (extraversion), he will engage
in “riskier” behavior and approach the red child with less hesitation. The BIS module also sends learning signals to adapt
expectations and actions (Figure 1e and 1f). For example,
if the red child threatens the yellow child, the yellow child
will expect physical aggression from the red child to follow.
An expectation violation occurs when the red child does not
follow up his threat with physical violence. This causes the
yellow child to eventually learn that a vocal threat from the
red child is less of a cue for punishment. If the red child is
friendly instead of aggressive, a yellow child who is highly
sensitive to reward will react more strongly to the R+ component of the stimulus and learn more quickly that the red child
is much more of a cue for reward (Figure 2c).
The action selection module (Figure 1d) receives the activation levels of the behavioral tendencies and activates the actions corresponding to the behavioral tendency with the maximum activation level. The appropriate commands associated
with the selected action, A, is passed to the Twig animation
system.

Inspired by RST, we have proposed that personality can be
organized and investigated in terms of approach, avoidance,
and, importantly, conflict on the reactive, routine, and reflective levels, where an individual is consistent in his/her sensitivity to different types of cues on all three levels. We believe
that this organization is useful for examining the influence of
personality on other cognitive processes such as planning and
moral deliberation. We also hope that the proposed structure
might be informative for applications that require integrating
personality into AI systems, such as in interactive games and
drama, and various kinds of simulations of, for example, interpersonal interactions.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Atkinson, J. W., & Birch, D. (1970). The dynamics of action.
New York: John Wiley.
Born, W. K., Revelle, W., & Pinto, L. H. (2002). Improving
biology performance with workshop groups. Journal of
Science Education and Technology, 11, 347-365.
Broadbent, D. E. (1971). Decision and stress. London: Academic Press.
Cacioppo, J. T., Priester, J. R., & Berntson, G. G. (1993).
Rudimentary determinants of attitudes. II: Arm flexion and
extension have differential effects on attitudes. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 5-17.
Carver, C. S., Johnson, S. L., & Joorman, J. (2009). Twomode models of self-regulation as a tool for conceptualizing effects of the serotonergic system in normal behavior

Conclusion
Personality and individual differences are coherent patterns of
thoughts, feelings, desires and behaviors within individuals.

29

(a) A highly anxious yellow child (trait anx- (b) The yellow child running away from the ag- (c) The reward sensitive yellow child interiety).
gressive red child (fearfulness, panic).
acting with the friendly red child (trait extraversion).

Figure 2: Screenshots from Twig showing some of the behaviors the yellow child can exhibit with different biases in his
sensitivities to different environmental cues.
and diverse disorders. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 18, 195-199.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition,
behavioral activation, and affective responses to impending
reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 319-333.
Corr, P. J. (2008). The reinforcement sensitivity theory of
personality. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1980). Influence of extraversion and neuroticism on subjective well-being: Happy and
unhappy people. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38(4), 668-678.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Four ways five factors
are basic. Personality and Individual Differences, 13(6),
653-665.
Elliot, A. J. (1999). Approach and avoidance motivation
and achievement goals. Educational Psychologist, 34, 149169.
Elliot, A. J., & Thrash, T. M. (2002). Approach-Avoidance
motivation in personality: approach avoidance temperaments and goals. Journal of Personality and Social
Pyschology, 82, 804-818.
Eysenck, S. B. G., Eysenck, H. J., & Barrett, P. (1985). A
revised version of the pyschoticism scale. Personality and
Individual Differences, 6(1), 21-29.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative “description of personality”: The big-five factor structure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(6), 1216-1229.
Gray, J., & McNaughton, N. (2000). The neuropsychology of
anxiety. New York: Oxford University Press.
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American
Psychologist, 52(12), 1280-1300.
Higgins, E. T., & Spiegel, S. (2004). Promotion and prevention strategies for self regulation. In R. F. Baumeister
& K. D. Vohs (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (p. 171187). New York: The Guilford Press.
Horswill, I. (2009). Lightweight Procedural Animation With
Believable Physical Interactions. IEEE Transactions on
Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, 1(1), 39-49.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Ortony, A., Norman, D. A., & Revelle, W. (2005). Affect
and proto-affect in effective functioning. In J. M. Fellous
& M. A. Arbib (Eds.), Who Needs Emotions? The Brain
Meets the Machine (p. 173-202). New York: Oxford University Press.
Paunonen, S. V. (2003). Big five factors of personality and
replicated predictions of behavior. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 84(2), 411-422.
Read, S., Monroe, B., Brownstein, A., Yang, Y., Chopra, G.,
& Miller, L. (2010). A neural network model of the structure and dynamics of human personality. Psychological
Review, 117(1), 61-92.
Revelle, W. (1986). Motivation and efficiency of cognitive
performance. In D. R. Brown & J. Veroff (Eds.), Frontiers of Motivational Psychology: Essays in honor of J. W.
Atkinson (p. 107-131). Berlin: Springer.
Revelle, W. (1993). Individual differences in personality and
motivation: Non-cognitive determinants of cognitive performance. In A. Baddeley & L. Weiskrantz (Eds.), Attention: Selection, awareness and control: A tribute to Donald Broadbent (p. 346-373). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Sloman, A., & Chrisley, R. L. (2005). More things than
are dreamt of in your biology: Information-processing in
biologically-inspired robots. Cognitive Systems Research,
6(2), 145-174.
Smillie, L. D., Loxton, N. J., & Avery, R. E. (2010). Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory, Research, Applications and
Future. In T. Chamorro-Premuzic, A. F. Furnham, & S. von
Stumm (Eds.), Handbook of Individual Differences. London,UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Torrubia, R., Ávila, C., Moltó, J., & Caseras, X. (2001). The
sensitivity to punishment and sensitivity to reward questionnaire (SPSRQ) as a measure of Grays anxiety and impulsivity dimensions. Personality and Individual Differences, 31, 837-862.
Weiner, B., & Schneider, K. (1971). Drive versus Cognitive
Theory: A Reply to Boor and Harmon. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 18(2), 258-262.

30

