UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Change in Recognition Bias with the Progression of Alzheimer’s

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6343897h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Pooley, James P
Lee, Michael D
Shankle, William R

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Change in Recognition Bias with the Progression of Alzheimer’s
James P. Pooley (jpooley@uci.edu)
Michael D. Lee (mdlee@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697-5100

William R. Shankle (rshankle@mccare.com)
Medical Care Corporation, 19782 MacArthur Boulevard
Irvine, CA 92612
Abstract

& Waring, 2006; Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). This is a
very important capability, because there is considerable
evidence that AD patients do have different decisionmaking strategies in tasks like recognition memory.
The recent review by Budson et al. (2006) notes that
the application of SDT models to clinical data has repeatedly shown that patients with AD use a more liberal
criterion in identifying previously studied words. This
strategy is usually interpreted as a response to awareness of diminishing memory capabilities. Additionally,
Budson et al. (2006) report the results of an experiment
which addressed several potential confounds in the existing experiments, including unequal numbers of old and
new words and semantic and/or perceptual relatedness of
the old and new words. Again, AD patients were found
to have abnormally liberal response biases compared to
non-AD patients.
In this paper, we extend the application of SDT models to clinical recognition memory data. We do this
in a number of ways. First, we use a large new clinical database, which has the advantage of measuring the
progression of AD in some detail. This lets us conduct a finer-grained analysis of how recognition memory
changes as AD progresses. Second, we use a simple variant of the standard SDT model that builds in an unequalvariance assumption. This is theoretically preferable,
given empirical evidence that there is more variability
in people’s memory for studied than non-studied words.
Third, we embed our SDT analyses with a hierarchical
Bayesian framework for statistical inference. This lets
us provide a coherent model-based account of variation,
at both the level of individual patients, and the level of
clinical sub-populations.
The plan of the paper is as follows. We begin by describing the clinical data, and then the unequal-variance
SDT model we use. We show that the model provides a
good account of the data, and show how inference about
the model’s parameters gives an interpretable account of
changes in recognition memory with the progression of
AD. We then extend the modeling to account explicitly
for changes in decision bias, and conclude by discussing
how our findings relate to the existing literature.

One of the key memory tests in the clinical assessment
and diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the
recognition memory task. Models developed in cognitive psychology have previously been applied to help
understand clinical data. In particular, Signal Detection
Theory (SDT) models have been used, to separate
people’s memory capabilities from their decision-making
strategies. An important finding in this literature is
that people with AD change their decision strategy in
response to memory impairment, applying a more liberal
criterion than people without AD. In this paper, we
analyze clinical data that measures the progression of
AD in a detailed way, using a theoretically motivated
version of SDT, and applying hierarchical Bayesian
methods to model individual differences. Our results
corroborate many of the previous findings, but provide a
more detailed focus on recognition performance with AD
progression.
Keywords:
Alzheimer’s disease; Cognitive psychometrics; Hierarchical Bayesian modeling; Human
recognition memory; Signal detection theory

Introduction
The clinical assessment and diagnosis of Alzhiemer’s
disease (AD) routinely involves the administration of
memory tests that are familiar to cognitive scientists who
study human memory. In particular, recognition, immediate free recall, and delayed free recall are large subcomponents of assessment tools such as the MCIS and
the ADAS-Cog (e.g., Morris, Heyman, & Mohs, 1989).
This link means there is an important role for theories
and models of memory, as developed in the cognitive
sciences (for an overview, see Norman Detre, & Polyn,
2008), in helping understand AD. In particular, memory models can provide quantitative measurement tools
that allow for patient behavior to be interpreted in terms
of psychologically meaningful latent parameters (e.g.,
Riefer, Knapp, Batchelder, Bamber, & Manifold, 2002).
A good example of the potential for applying memory models to clinical data is provided by a literature
that uses equal-variance Signal Detection Theory (SDT)
models (e.g., MacMillan & Creelman, 2004). SDT is
widely-used as a basic model of the recognition memory task, and has the theoretical attraction of separating
memory capabilities from decision processes when explaining people’s behavior (e.g., Budson Wolk, Chong,

Clinical Data
Our data come from two neurology clinics where 1350
patients completed a standard old/new recognition mem-

103

ory test. The patient was shown a study list of 10 words
to memorize, and was then tested on their ability to recognize the 10 studied old words from 10 unstudied new
words. This means there are 20 test trials, on each of
which the patient was shown a word and simply asked
to decide whether or not the word was on the study list.
Consequently, the patient’s behavior on each trial naturally falls into one of the standard SDT classes of hits,
misses, false alarms, and correct rejections. The words
themselves were selected from the CERAD (Consortium
to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease) word list
(Shankle, Mangrola, Chan, & Hara, 2009).
Independent of patient performance on the recognition
memory tests, a trained neurologist used the Functional
Assessment Staging Test (FAST) to assess the severity
of each patient’s AD. The FAST (Reisberg, 1988) is a
well-validated diagnostic tool used by clinicians to classify patients into one of the seven stages of AD, each of
which corresponds to a level of functional impairment.
Specifically, stage 1 corresponds to ‘normal aging’, stage
2 to ‘possible mild cognitive impairment’, stage 3 to
‘mild cognitive impairment’, stage 4 to ‘mild dementia’,
stage 5 to ‘moderate dementia’, stage 6 to ‘moderately
severe dementia’ and stage 7 to ‘severe dementia’. We
focus on only FAST Stages 1–5, because patients diagnosed into Stages 6 and 7 have very limited functional
capabilities, and cannot necessarily understand and complete memory tasks. In our sample of 1350 patients, 288
were classified as Stage 1, 308 as Stage 2, 129 as Stage
3, 436 as Stage 4, and 189 at Stage 5.

new

old

τ

h

f

c
0

k d’

Memory Strength

Figure 1: The unequal-variance SDT model and parameters.

The distance c between this criterion and unbiased responding is commonly used as a measure of response
bias due to its purported independence from d0 (Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). The response bias measures the
tendency of an individual to give one response rather than
another.

Extension for Unequal Variance

Hierarchical SDT Model

Most SDT modeling in psychology assumes that the
standard deviations of the old and new distributions are
equal, with σold = σnew = 1 for convenience. Results of
recognition memory experiments (e.g., Mickes, Wixted,
& Wais, 2007), however, support a version of SDT in
which the standard deviation of the old distribution is
25% larger than the standard deviation of the new distribution, so that σnew /σold = 0.8. This finding is usually
interpreted as coming from variability in the encoding
of studied words. Our SDT model adopts an unequalvariance assumption, using the approach developed by
Dennis, Lee, & Kinnell (2008).

In this section, we describe the hierarchical SDT model
we use to analyze the clinical data. We start with a standard SDT model, and then describe how our hierarchical
extensions add the capability to model individual differences and changes in bias. We then implement the model
as a graphical model to allow Bayesian inference.

Signal Detection Theory
The basic SDT model shown in Figure 1 assumes that,
on each trial, the presented word evokes some memory
strength. The memory strengths of both old and new
words are assumed to have Gaussian distributions, with
the mean of the new distribution separated from the mean
of the old distribution by a distance d0 > 0. In this way,
d0 measures the discriminability of the old from the new
words, and so represents the acuity of memory for the
words.
Due to the assumed overlap of the old and new distributions, an individual needs a decision strategy for relating memory strength to responses in a recognition test.
SDT models assume this is done using a criterion level
of memory strength k below which the individual will
respond studied and above which the individual will respond non-studied. The area h under the old distribution
above the criterion corresponds to the hit rate, and the
area f under the new distribution above the criterion corresponds to the false-alarm rate.

Extension for Individual Differences
Most previous applications of SDT models to the recognition memory data of Alzheimer’s patients have also
ignored the issue of individual differences. To address
this shortcoming, we apply hierarchical methods to extend the standard SDT model (e.g., Dennis, Lee, & Kinnell, 2008; Rouder & Lu, 2005). The basic idea is to
introduce sub-populations at a group-level that allow for
different parameter values for different levels of severity in AD. An individual patient’s discriminability and
response bias parameters are then drawn from the appropriate group-level distribution for their level of severity.
In this way, the model allows freedom for different individuals to have different parameters, but still maintain a

104

show how unobserved variables (i.e., parameters) generate observed variables (i.e., data). Details and tutorials are aimed at cognitive scientists are provided by Lee
(2008) and Shiffrin, Lee, Kim, and Wagenmakers (2008).
The practical advantage of graphical models is that sophisticated and relatively general-purpose Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms exist that can sample
from the full joint posterior distribution of the parameters
conditional on the observed data.
It is easiest to understand the graphical model in Figure 2 by starting with the d0j and cj nodes, which are the
discriminability and bias parameters for the jth patient.
These parameters can be used to generate the hit and
false-alarm rates for that patient, according to the SDT
model. The hit rate is hj = Φ(d0j /2 − cj ) and the false
alarm rate is fj = Φ(−(d0j /2 + cj )/τ ), where τ = 0.8
gives the unequal-variance model advocated by Mickes,
Wixted, and Wais (2007). Based on these hit and false
alarm rates and the O = 10 old and N = 10 new words
presented to all patients during the recognition tests, the
jth patient produces Hj ∼ Binomial(hj , T ) hits and
Fj ∼ Binomial(fj , D) false-alarms.
The distributions of discriminability and bias for different AD diagnoses, at the group or sub-population
level, are controlled by the mean µ and precision λ
variables. There is a Gaussian group distribution for
each group. If, for example, we use FAST stage diagnoses to define groups, and the jth patient belongs
to stage zj , then d0j ∼ Gaussian(µd0 ,zj , λd0 ,zj ) and
cj ∼ Gaussian(µc,zj , λc,zj ).
Finally, the graphical model in Figure 2 implements
a basic model of change for response bias. Following
previous analyses (e.g., Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988), we
just consider the change from non-AD to AD patients.
The parameter µc,0 measures the non-AD response bias,
and a quantifies the change, so that µc,1 , µc,2 = µc,0 and
µc,3 , . . . , µc,5 = µc,0 + a.

i diagnoses

µc,0
µc,i

λc,i

λd′ ,i

cj

d′j

hj

fj

Hj

Fj

µd′ ,i

a

zj

τ

j patients

T

D

Figure 2: Graphical model implementation of the hierarchical SDT model.

similarity to other patients with a similar level of cognitive impairment.

Extension for Modeling Change
Most previous analyses focusing on changes in response
bias with AD progression have taken a purely statistical
approach. Typically, they have tested for significant differences in bias or criterion parameters, as inferred separately from AD and non-AD patients. We adopt a different approach based on cognitive modeling, building assumptions about how bias changes into the model itself.
This is consistent with the basic idea of generative models, which try to provide formal accounts of how latent
parameters produce and co-vary with observed behavior,
and can be contrasted with the discriminative philosophy
of post-hoc statistical tests. In the generative approach,
a model of change is incorporated into the SDT model,
with the goal of providing a complete and integrated account of how the criterion changes with the progression
of AD.

Modeling Results
In order to perform Bayesian inference, we implemented the graphical models in WinBUGS (Spiegelhalter, Thomas, & Best, 2004. This software uses a range
of MCMC computational methods to obtain samples
from the posterior distributions of the relevant parameters (e.g., Mackay, 2003). All of our analyses are based
on 10,000 posterior samples collected following a burnin of 1000 samples, using multiple chains to check convergence.

Assessing Model Fit
Posterior predictive distributions provide an intuitive and
principled to assessing the descriptive adequacy of a
Bayesian model (Gelman, Carlin, Stern, & Rubin, 2004,
pp. 165–172). A posterior prediction corresponds to the
data the model expects, based on the parameter values it
has inferred, and naturally takes into account uncertainty
in those parameter estimates.
Figure 3 shows a posterior predictive analysis for the

Graphical Model Implementation
We implemented our hierarchical SDT model in the form
of a Bayesian graphical model, a formalism widely used
statistics and computer science (e.g., Jordan, 2004). In
graphical models, nodes correspond to variables, and
their interdependencies show the causal relationships between the variables. In particular, graphical models

105

Stage 1

Stage 2

Stage 3

Stage 4

Stage 5

Data

Group

10

Individual

Hits
0
0
10
False Alarms

Figure 3: Posterior predictive assessment of the fit of the hierarchical SDT model. The first row shows the hit and
false-alarm counts for each patient, according to their FAST stage, with the counts for a randomly selected patient
shown in bold. The second and third rows show the corresponding posterior predictive distributions for hit and false
alarm counts for the group data and for the individual patient data. In the posterior predictive panels, the box sizes are
proportional to the mass of the posterior predictive distribution for that combination of hits and false alarms.

hierarchical SDT model. The first row corresponds to the
behavioral data, the second row to the group-level inferences of the model, and the third-level to the individuallevel inferences of the model. The columns correspond
to the five FAST stages. Each panel shows the distribution of data or predicted data in terms of hit and falsealarm counts, as in standard Receiver Operation Characteristic (ROC) analysis (e.g., MacMillan Creelman,
2004).

multaneously describing group-level performance, highlights the advantages of the hierarchical approach we
have taken to modeling individual differences.

Assessing Discriminability and Bias
Figure 4 shows the joint and marginal posterior distributions for both discriminability and bias, at the level of the
FAST stage groups. The main panel shows samples from
the joint distribution for each of the five FAST stages.
The side panels show the marginal distributions for both
discriminability and bias.
As would be expected, discriminability decreases as
AD severity progresses, starting around d0 = 4 for nonAD patients in the first two stages, and decreasing to
d0 < 1 for patients in stage 5. The pattern change in
recognition bias across the stages is more revealing. Patients in the non-AD stages start with a conservative bias,
with c > 0, meaning they are more likely to fail to recognize studied words than to false-alarm to non-studied
words. This bias changes significantly for the AD patients, and becomes much more liberal, shifting to a position almost consistent with unbiased responding at c = 0.

The observed data for all patients are shown as gray
crosses, except for one highlighted individual—selected
out to test the individual-level predictions of the model—
shown by a black cross. For the group level, the model’s
posterior predictions are shown by squares, with areas
proportional to predictive mass. It is clear that the grouplevel predictions match the data, and show a degradation
in performance, with fewer hits and more false-alarms,
as the severity of AD progresses. In this sense, the
model provides an accurate description of the similarities and differences between clinical sub-populations. In
the individual-level model predictions, the area of the
squares again correspond to predictive mass, and provide
accurate fits to the observed data. We note that several
of the individuals were deliberately chosen to be outliers within their clinical sub-population. The ability of
the model for describe these individuals well, while si-

Assessing Change in Recognition Criterion
Figure 4 shows that the change in criterion is sudden
and sustained. At FAST stage 3—which is the first AD

106

0.5

0

Group Bias

0.25

Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
Stage 5

−0.25

−0.5

Group Discriminability

0

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 4: Joint and marginal posterior distributions for the group-level discriminability and bias parameters, for each
of the five FAST stages.

stage—the distribution of individual response bias moves
to a smaller value, and it sustains approximately the same
distribution over subsequent progression through stages
4 and 5.
Our generative model of change allows an immediate
inference about the significance of these apparent change
in response bias, via the posterior distribution of the a
parameter. This is the parameter that control the stepchange in response bias between AD and non-AD diagnoses. Its posterior distribution is shown in Figure 5, and
is clearly negative, and does not include zero, confirming
the liberal change in bias at the onset of AD.

making in the AD patients. There are many possible
reasons for this difference, which are worth further investigation. One possibility involves methodological issues, including details of the assessment tasks, such as
differences in the word lists used. Another possibility relates to more fundamental theoretical and modeling differences in our analysis. We have introduced a number of
innovations, any (or all) of which might lead to different
findings from more standard analyses.
We think the modeling approach we have used has
some clear advantages over previous work. As AD
progresses, memory capabilities and decision strategies
change in important and interpretable ways. But there
remains variability in the characteristics of individual patients, even though they can appropriately be classified
within groups like FAST stages. Our hierarchical approach naturally incorporates this interplay between clinical sub-populations and individual patients, making it
suitable for both broad characterization of AD progression and for individual diagnosis.
Throughout our modeling, we used a simple extension of the standard SDT model to allow for unequalvariances between studied and non-studied words. We
think this theoretically preferable, although we did not
observe very different results when we repeated the current analyses with equal-variance SDT. Perhaps the most
striking difference was that the posterior for the response
bias parameter in Figure 5 showed a much stronger
change in bias for the non-AD versus AD comparison.

Discussion
Our results are largely consistent with previous findings,
but are not identical. We have corroborated the most important existing finding, which is that the onset of AD
leads to a liberalization in response bias in recognition
memory tasks. Our results, however, extend the previous
understanding of the change in response bias, through using a clinical data set with more FAST stage information
about AD progression. Using this more detailed measure we found, perhaps surprisingly, that the change in
response bias seems to involve a sudden shift at the onset
of AD, rather than gradual change over its progression.
Unlike most previous studies, we found non-AD patients starting from a conservative criterion setting—
being more likely to miss than to false-alarm—and so the
liberalization actually leads to more unbiased decision-

107

Density

Gelman, A., Carlin, J. B., Stern, H. S., & Rubin, D. B.
(2004). Bayesian data analysis (2nd ed.). Boca
Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Jordan, M. I. (2004). Graphical models. Statistical Science, 19, 140-155.
Lee, M. D. (2008). Three case studies in the Bayesian
analysis of cognitive models. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 15, 1-15.
MacKay, D. J. C. (2003). Information Theory, Inference,
and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
MacMillan, N., & Creelman, C. D. (2004). Detection
theory: A users guide (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Mickes, L., Wixted, J. T., & Wais, P. E. (2007). A direct test of the unequal-variance signal-detection
model of recognition memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 858-865.
Morris, J. C., Heyman, A., & Mohs, R. C. (1989). The
Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s
Disease (CERAD) Part I. Clinical and neuropsychological assessment of Alzheimers disease.
Neurology, 39, 1159-1165.
Norman, K. A., Detre, G. J., & Polyn, S. M. (2008).
Computational models of episodic memory. In
R. Sun (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of computational psychology (pp. 189-224). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Reisberg, B. (1988). Functional assessment staging
(FAST).
Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 24,
653–659.
Riefer, D. M., Knapp, B. R., Batchelder, W. H., Bamber,
D., & Manifold, V. (2002). Cognitive psychometrics: Assessing storage and retrieval deficits
in special populations with multinomial processing tree models. Psychological Assessment, 14,
184-201.
Rouder, J. N., & Lu, J. (2005). An introduction to
Bayesian hierarchical models with an application
in the theory of signal detection. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 12, 573–604.
Shankle, W. R., Mangrola, T., Chan, T., & Hara,
J. (2009). The CERAD wordlist memory performance index: Development and validation.
Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 5, 295-306.
Shiffrin, R. M., Lee, M. D., Kim, W., & Wagenmakers,
E.-J. (2008). A survey of model evaluation approaches with a tutorial on hierarchical Bayesian
methods. Cognitive Science, 32, 1248-1284.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to
dementia and amnesia. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 117, 34–50.
Spiegelhalter, D. J., Thomas, A., & Best, N. G. (2004).
WinBUGS Version 1.4 User Manual. Cambridge,
UK: Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit.

−0.35

−0.3

−0.25

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

Change in Recognition Bias

Figure 5: Posterior distribution for the a parameter,
which controls the change in response bias from non-AD
to AD patients.

It may be that equal-variance SDT overstates the change
in decision strategies.
We believe the framework for modeling change we
have introduced also has great potential, but realize we
have only taken the smallest first step. The key idea
is that group-level parameters like discriminability and
bias can now be inter-related across diagnoses or classifications like FAST stages. We used a simple step function between non-AD and AD patients, but much more
sophisticated functional relationships could be modeled,
expressing a theory of how key psychological variables
change throughout AD progression. Even more generally, graphical models provide a natural vehicle for modeling and evaluating changes in these variables due to external factors like treatments in clinical trials, or for expressing these variables in terms of causal or co-variate
information like demographic or other properties of people. These sorts of extended possibilities highlight the
potential of using cognitive models like SDT and hierarchical Bayesian analysis to understand Alzheimer’s Disease.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by award NIRG-08-90460
from the Alzheimer’s Association.

References
Budson, A. E., Wolk, D. A., Chong, H., & Waring, J. D.
(2006). Episodic memory deficits in Alzheimer’s
disease: Separating response bias from discrimination. Neuropsychologia, 44, 2222–2232.
Dennis, S., Lee, M., & Kinnell, A. (2008). Bayesian
analysis of recognition memory: The case of the
list-length effect. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 361-376.

108

