UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Models of Information Integration in Perceptual Decision Making
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30d744mt
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Hotaling, Jared
Cohen, Andrew
Busemeyer, Jerome
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

     Models of Information Integration in Perceptual Decision Making
                                                   Jared Hotaling
                                                    Indiana University
                                                   Andrew Cohen
                                               University of Massachusetts
                                                Jerome Busemeyer
                                                    Indiana University
                                                  Richard Shiffrin
                                                    Indiana University
Abstract: In cognitive science there is a seeming paradox: On the one hand researchers studying judgment and
decision making (JDM) have repeatedly shown that people employ simple and often sub-optimal strategies when
integrating information from multiple sources. On the other hand another set of researchers has had great success
using Bayesian optimal models to explain information integration in fields such as categorization, perception, and
memory. One impediment to reconciling this paradox lies in the different experimental methods each group has
used. Recently, Hotaling, Cohen, Busemeyer, & Shiffrin (submitted) conducted a perceptual decision making study
designed to bridge this methodological divide and test whether the sub-optimal integration found in verbal problems
stated in terms of probabilities may also appear in perceptual tasks. Their results indicate that a classic JDM finding,
the dilution effect, does arise in perceptual decision making. Observers were given strong evidence X favoring A over
B, and weak evidence Y also favoring A over B. According to Bayesian analysis, the odds in favor of A should be
multiplied, resulting in an increased likelihood of A. Instead, Hotaling et al. found that the weak evidence diluted
the strong evidence, producing decreased judgments and choice probabilities favoring A, given X & Y, than given X
alone. I review these empirical findings and test both rational and cognitive models of the integration process.
                                                           2416

