UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modelling the Correlation Between Two Putative Inhibition Tasks: An Analytic Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/54d3z20g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Davelaar, Eddy
Cooper, Richard

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modelling the Correlation Between Two Putative Inhibition Tasks:
An Analytic Approach
Eddy J. Davelaar (E.Davelaar) and Richard P. Cooper (R.Cooper@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Science, Birkbeck, University of London
Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, UK

Abstract
A process of response inhibition is often held to be recruited
in situations where it is necessary to withhold or inhibit a
prepotent response. Individual differences in the efficacy of
this function have been held to underlie individual differences
in behaviour on tasks such as the Stroop colour-naming task
and the stop-signal task. These claims, however, have been
supported only with correlational analyses and informal
argument. This paper considers the operationalisation of
response inhibition by exploring existing mathematical and
process models of both the Stroop and stop-signal tasks. We
identify parameters that might underlie individual differences
in the performance of the tasks and consider potential
relations between those parameters. It is shown that (a) at
least three potential inter-relations between parameters of the
task models may lead to inter-task correlations, and (b) the
observed correlations arise when attentional bias parameters
in the models are equated but not when inhibition parameters
are equated. We conclude that the ascription of such
correlations to a process of response inhibition is premature.
Keywords: Cognitive control; Response inhibition; Stroop
task; Stop signal task; Individual differences.

Introduction
In much everyday behaviour, and in many psychological
tasks, it is necessary to resist temptation or to avoid
producing a prepotent response. Consider the well-known
Stroop colour-naming task, where the subject is required to
name the colour of the ink in which a word is printed. If the
word is itself the name of a colour (e.g., RED printed in
green ink) then the subject must actively or deliberately
resist the temptation to read the word if they are to
successfully name the ink colour.
It is commonly argued that the ability to inhibit a
prepotent response is facilitated by a cognitive control
process referred to as response inhibition. Critically,
response inhibition is not a task-specific construct, limited
to (e.g.) the Stroop task. Rather, it is held to be one of
several general “executive” processes that are invoked
across a range of tasks. Moreover, individual differences in
the ability to inhibit a prepotent response are held to reflect
individual differences in the efficacy of response inhibition.
For example, in a well-known study of cognitive control by
Miyake, Friedman and colleagues (2000), 137 subjects
completed a battery of tasks, three of which were assumed
specifically to tap response inhibition. Miyake and
colleagues found significant pair-wise correlations in
performance on the response inhibition tasks, and

confirmatory factor analysis supported their model of
executive function as comprising at least three separable
components, one of which was response inhibition.
The three tasks held by Miyake et al. to tap the latent
construct were the Stroop task (as discussed above), the
stop-signal task of Logan (1994), and an antisaccade task
(Roberts et al, 1994). In the stop-signal task subjects
complete a series of trials in which they must normally
respond as quickly as possible to a stimulus (e.g., by
indicating whether an auditorily presented noun denotes a
type of animal). On a small proportion of trials the stimulus
is followed by a second “stop” stimulus (e.g., a beep),
indicating that on this particular trial a response should be
withheld. In the antisaccade task trials involved visual
presentation of a fixation point at the centre of a monitor
screen. This was followed by a brief cue appearing to the
left/right of the screen and then an even briefer target
appearing on the opposite side of the screen. Subjects were
required to make a choice decision based on a feature of the
target. To do so, they needed to avoid making a saccade to
the cue, as this would prevent them from being able to make
a saccade back to the target before it was replaced by a
mask. Response inhibition was indexed by Miyake et al.
(2000) in the Stroop task by the difference in response times
between incongruent and neutral trials. In the stop-signal
task it was indexed by the number of stop trials on which a
response was (incorrectly) produced. In the antisaccade task
it was indexed by the proportion of correct target decisions.
As noted above, significant pair-wise correlations were
found between these measures. This result was effectively
replicated in a subsequent study with 220 subjects which
used the same tasks but slightly different dependent
measures (Friedman & Miyake, 2004).
The studies of Miyake, Friedman and colleagues appear
to provide strong support for the response inhibition
construct and for its variability across individuals. However
in both cases the evidence is purely correlational. Neither
study attempts to provide a mechanistic account of response
inhibition as it might be manifest in the various tasks.
Clearly, if response inhibition is a cognitive control process
that plays a causal role in the performance of the Stroop,
stop-signal and antisaccade tasks (amongst others), then that
process should be shared by computational accounts of the
three tasks. Moreover, if the efficacy of that construct can
vary across individuals, then that process should be
parameterised in the computational accounts. Lastly, if pairwise correlations in performance of the tasks are to be
attributed at least in part to the efficacy of response

937

namely the stop-signal task, for which a relatively welldeveloped “off-the-shelf” computational account is also
available (Boucher et al., 2007). We analyse potential
sources of correlations in performance across the two tasks
by couching both models within a common architecture. In
so doing we question the standard concept of response
inhibition and propose instead that correlations between
performance on the Stroop and stop-signal tasks might be
due to a somewhat different factor related to the strength or
potency of the currently selected goal.

The Task Models

Figure 1: The architecture of the Cohen & Huston (1994)
model of the Stroop task. The response function for each
node is a sigmoid. Relative line thickness indicates
connection strength. Lateral inhibition (shown by arrows
with circular end points) operates between nodes in each
group.
inhibition, then varying the response inhibition parameter in
the computational accounts should also result in pair-wise
correlations.
The difficulty, however, is that a cursory analysis of
existing process models of the tasks used by Miyake,
Friedman and colleagues suggests that their dependent
measures are not obviously related to a common mechanism
of response inhibition. Consider the widely accepted
interactive activation model of the Stroop task of Cohen and
colleagues (e.g., Cohen & Huston 1994; see Figure 1). In
the model, interference on incongruent trials arises from
competition between two response pathways – a wordreading pathway which is highly practiced and hence strong,
and a colour-naming pathway which is less practiced and
hence somewhat weaker. In order to generate a colornaming response on an incongruent trial it is necessary to
selectively amplify the inputs to the color-naming pathway
via task-demand units. This process, often referred to as
attentional biasing, allows activation from the colournaming pathway to dominate activation from the wordreading pathway. While individual differences in
interference are not generally the focus of this model, they
may be captured by assuming that individuals who show
relatively little interference are better able to maintain
strong excitation of the color-naming task-demand unit.
This in turn might result either from greater input to the
color-naming task demand unit from external sources (e.g.,
attentional processes) or conceivably from stronger lateral
inhibition between task-demand units. Therefore in this
model at least the dependent measure of Miyake et al (2000)
indexes an aspect of task-demand, and not response
inhibition.
The goal of this paper is to formalise this analysis and
extend it to a second putative response inhibition task,

In order to address the correlation between the Stroop and
stop-signal tasks, we converged on an interactive activation
architecture based on the existing published models. This
architecture was then simplified to extract a small set of
equations that relate the relevant parameters of cognitive
control in these two tasks to the dependent measures used
by Miyake et al. These equations were then used to generate
distributions of the dependent measures by varying the
critical parameters and calculating the resulting correlations.

Stop-signal task
The version of the stop-signal task used by Miyake et al.
consisted of two blocks. The principal task was an animacycategorisation task. The first block only had categorisation
trials and was intended to ensure that generating a response
was indeed the prepotent response. The second block
included 25% stop-trials. For our analytic modelling efforts
the following components are relevant. First, the first block
produced a mean response time. This was used on a subjectby-subject basis to adjust the onset of the stop-signal on
stop-signal trials in the second block. For each subject this
onset was their mean response time less 225ms. The stopsignal was therefore presented at (RT–225) ms poststimulus. We assume a similar approach in the model.
Second, the dependent variable was the proportion of
categorisation responses generated on stop trials. This value
represents errors due to failure to inhibit.
The architecture for our model is inspired by several
preceding models. First, Boucher et al. (2007) used a simple
interactive race model in which a “go” and a “stop” unit
compete through lateral inhibition. Critical for their
simulations is that the inhibition from stop unit to go unit is
much larger than the reverse connection. This makes the
model interactive for only a brief time. Second, the location
of the units is downstream in the basal ganglia. This is also
assumed in a related go/nogo-model of Frank and
colleagues (2004). Third, in the go/nogo-model the nogosignal comes through the subthalamic nucleus. This nucleus
has been shown to form part of a response inhibition
pathway that included the inferior frontal gyrus (Aron et al,
2004). It has been postulated that choice responses can be
optimised through this pathway (Davelaar, 2009; Frank,
2006). This leaves us with the architecture shown in Figure
2a. It is assumed that the two units are located in the
striatum and receive input from earlier processing levels

938

Figure 2: a) Basic architecture of the stop-signal model.
b) Basic architecture of the Stroop model.
regarding the animacy of the stimulus. The two units are
forward connected to two output units that are connected via
lateral inhibition. These are assumed to be localised in the
globus pallidus interna and substantia nigra. This is a
straightforward model of response selection. The stop-signal
is assumed to inhibit the final responses via the IFG → STN
→ SN/GPi-pathway. The strength of the response inhibition
parameter βR is one source of individual differences in stopsignal performance.

Stroop task
The Stroop task used by Miyake et al. involved naming the
colour of a word of which the ink could be in one of six
colours. Relevant for the current analytic modelling effort is
that the dependent measure is the difference in voice key
response time between the mean RT on incongruent trials
and neutral trials (which consisted of coloured asterisks).
The architecture for the Stroop model follows the
incarnations of Cohen and colleagues discussed above. In
particular, compared to the neutral trial, an incorrect unit
gets activated in response to reading the colour-word. The
lateral inhibition between the response units slows down the
responses in incongruent trials. Some extension to this
model is needed, however. Recent analyses have shown that
the Cohen models are unable to produce the correct relation
between the stimulus-onset asynchrony in versions of the
Stroop task when the word and its ink colour are presented
asynchronously (Stafford & Gurney, 2007). The solution to
this problem was to treat the output units of the Cohen
model as the input units to the basal ganglia, i.e., the
striatum (see Figure 2b). This automatically leads to a
consistent architecture for both the Stroop task and the stopsignal task.

Simplifying the Overarching Model
Some simplifications are necessary in order to provide an
analysis of the correlation between the two tasks and the
relevant parameters. First, we focus only on the abstracted
basal ganglia pathway shown in Figure 2. Second, we
assume no lateral inhibition in the input level and lateral
inhibition of strength βL at the output level. For the stopsignal model, an extra inhibitory connection of strength βR

to both units is assumed. Whereas in the stop-signal task,
the animacy judgement is unambiguous (and prepotent),
there is overlap in the Stroop task. This means that in the
stop-signal task the only components doing the work are a
single response unit and the βR. In the Stroop task, there are
two critical trial types. In the neutral condition the neutral
response unit is activated in absence of any inhibition. In the
incongruent condition the response unit receives input from
the target channel and inhibition from the distractor channel
via lateral inhibition. The amount of activation that goes
through the target channel is under attentional control.
Whereas earlier models of the Stroop task implemented a
tradeoff in attention to both channels, recent functional
imaging work did not find any support for a deactivation of
the distractor channel (Egner & Hirsch, 2005). Instead, only
a positive enhancing effect of attention was found in a
Stroop-like task. Thus we assume an attentional parameter,
α, which enhances the target channel. We assume that the
prepotent inputs for both tasks are identical and that the
weaker target channel propagates a weaker signal.
This leads to the following equations that govern the input
activation of the target unit in all tasks and conditions:
Stop-signal task

 I (t )
X (t ) =  P
 I P (t ) − β R

when t < RT − 225ms

(1)

when t > RT − 225ms

Stroop task
(1 + α ).I W (t )
X (t ) = 
(1 + α ).I W (t ) − β L .I P (t )

neutral condition
(2)
incongruent condition

In order to obtain response time, we assume a linear output
activation function:
d
F ( x) = X (t )
(3)
dt
This choice is justified by the observation that simple and
choice reaction time models operate optimally when they
are in the linear part of a sigmoidal output function (Bogacz,
et al., 2006). By assuming linear output activation functions,
we thus assume optimal responding.
Finally, we assume that the response threshold, θ, is the
same for both tasks. For the stop-signal task, a response
deadline is included of 1500ms (as used in Miyake et al.,
2000).
Given the above assumptions, the response time in the
stop-signal task is:
θ − I P .225
for I p > β R
+ 225

RTSS =  I P − β R
(4)
∞
otherwise

This is tested against the response deadline. An erroneous
response is produced if the response time is less than this
deadline. The difference in RTs between incongruent and
neutral trials in the Stroop task is:

939



1
1
∆RTStroop = θ .
−
 (5)
 (1 + α ).I W (t ) − β L .I P (1 + α ).I W (t ) 
For both equations θ was fixed at one and noise was added.
One immediate observation of interest is that
architecturally, the mechanisms producing incorrect stoptrials and slowed down Stroop trials are not identical. In
fact, Stroop performance is determined by the lateral
inhibition between two information channels, whereas stoperrors are due to a pathway that inhibits both competing
channels.
Our focus is on four parameters: the prepotent response
parameter, IP, the response inhibition parameter, βR, the
attention parameter, α, and the lateral inhibition parameter,
βL. There are a number of constraints on the parameters and
points to note. First, note that IP is shared between the
models and moreover that this is the only parameter that is
shared. Thus, it is expected that this parameter will be the
locus of (at least some of) the correlation between the two
tasks. Second, the following constraints hold:
• (1 + α).IW > βL.IP in order to ensure that response
accuracy in the Stroop task is above 50%
• βL < βR. This is justified based on the findings of
Boucher et al. (2007)
• IW < IP, by definition
We focus on the following three potential sources of
correlation between the proportion of stop-errors and the
size of the Stroop interference effect:
1. Pre-potency of input. The pre-potency of the input, IP, is
an obvious choice from the architectural viewpoint, as it is
the only parameter that features in both models. Therefore
varying IP across subjects should produce the positive
correlation between the two tasks. The pre-potency,
however, is not a factor that is mentioned as an executive
function by Miyake et al (2000) and in fact would in most
accounts be categorised as the parameter that has to be
overcome via executive control.
2. Correlated executive functions. To overcome the prepotency in the stop-signal task, response inhibition, βR, is
the relevant parameter, while for the Stroop task, the
attentional control, α, is the relevant parameter. Obviously,
varying these parameters across subjects should not produce
a correlation in performance measures. However, one could
argue that executive functions are themselves partly
correlated (as is done by many authors including Miyake et
al., 2000). If this is the case, then a correlation between the
two tasks may not be due to shared variance in inhibition
parameters, but due to a correlation between the executive
functions of inhibition and attentional focus. One possibility
that we will come back to in the discussion is that both of
these concepts might be subsumed under a more general
notion of the strength or potency of the goal, as both tasks
require the need to exert control based on the recognition of
a stimulus (stop-signal or colour-word).
3. Correlated inhibition. Perhaps the most natural way of
addressing the correlation is to assume that response
inhibition in the stop-signal model, βR, and lateral inhibition

in the Stroop model, βL, are correlated. However, note that
the dependent variables are such that greater (response)
inhibition in the stop-signal task leads to fewer errors and
hence lower levels of the dependent measure, whereas
greater (lateral) inhibition in the Stroop task leads (perhaps
counter-intuitively) to slower responses in the incongruent
condition and higher levels of the dependent measure. Thus,
correlated inhibition will lead to a correlation in the
dependent measures, but this will be a negative correlation –
not a positive one! Thus correlated inhibition can only result
in the observed positive correlation between dependent
measures on the stop-signal and Stroop tasks if the
inhibition parameters are negatively correlated.

Sampling Studies: Methods and Results
Several sampling studies were conducted based on the
above analysis. The aim of these studies was to assess
effects of the three potential sources of correlation identified
above on the cross-task correlation in dependent measures.
To this end, equations 4 and 5 were used to obtain
dependent measures for each task as all parameters except
IW were varied uniformly using boundaries that (a) were
found to be adequate to produce values for the dependent
measures that were within the range of the actual empirical
results and (b) adhered to the set of constraints above. Iw
was fixed to 0.6. The choices of uniform distributions and
the precise value of Iw are arbitrary and do not impact on the
conclusions drawn from this work.
We imposed associations among parameters as follows:
1. To address the pre-potency view, only the IP
distribution was varied between-subjects and each subjects’
IP value was used in both task models. For each virtual
subject, the other three parameters were randomly sampled
100 times corresponding to 100 trials within a task. The
proportion of stop-errors was calculated as the mean number
of times that a response time in the stop-signal task was
shorter than 1500 ms. The Stroop mean interference was
calculated over the 100 3-parameter combinations (together
with the subject’s IP). One hundred subjects were simulated
and a Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient was
calculated over the resulting set of 100 data pairs.
2. To address the correlated executive function view, βR
and α were used as between-subjects parameters (IP and βL
varied within-subjects). There were two versions:
uncorrelated and correlated βR and α.
3. Finally to address the correlated inhibition view, we
correlated βR and βL between-subjects (IP and α varied
within-subjects).
In all cases additional noise was added to the correlated
parameter in order to lower the resulting correlation in
dependent measures and obtain a value of approximately
0.18 as found in the behavioural studies of Miyake et al.
(2000).
Scatter plots showing the correlation between dependent
measures for four situations are shown in Figure 3. Positive
correlations can be obtained between the dependent
measures either when IP is fixed within-subjects (exploring

940

Figure 3: Scatter plots of dependent measures under different conditions. a) When IP is fixed within-subjects (the prepotency view) the correlation is positive. b) If βR and α vary within-subjects but are uncorrelated, then there is no
correlation. c) The correlation is positive when βR is correlated with α (the correlated executive functions view). d) When
βR and βL are positively correlated the correlation between dependent measures is negative.
the pre-potency view; Figure 3a), or when βR is correlated
with α (exploring the correlated executive functions view;
Figure 3c). If βR and α vary within-subjects but are
uncorrelated, then there is no correlation between the
dependent measures (Figure 3b). When βR and βL are
correlated, then as anticipated the correlation between
dependent measures is negative (Figure 3d).

Discussion
We set out to address the correlation between two wellknown tasks that have been discussed as tapping executive
inhibition. Correlations between performance on the stopsignal and the Stroop tasks have been found in several
behavioural studies and both tasks have been the subject of
detailed computational modelling. The modelling has been
at the same architectural level, thus allowing the integration
of those models into a larger more general model. As the
parameters in the models are tied to specific mechanisms,
we can address the source of the correlation between the
tasks at a parameter level without having to make imprecise
verbal assumptions about the relation between mechanisms
operating in the two tasks. The general model itself can be
simplified without loss of argument and applied to the
complex enterprise of not only modelling individual
differences in task performance, but also the correlations
among tasks.
If the argument is that co-variability in the stop-signal and
Stroop task is due to shared variability of a single executive
function referred to as response inhibition, then our results
question this strong statement. First, the only mechanism
that is truly shared between the tasks is the strength of the

pre-potent response channel. Given that this channel is the
one that is the target of executive control and thus cannot be
considered to be an executive control function itself, we see
no basis to assume that a shared inhibition-type of executive
function underlies the behavioural correlation. Second, the
mechanisms that have been assumed and shown in
modelling to be critical in overcoming the pre-potency are
different between the tasks, thus a single inhibition-type of
executive function is not an appropriate label. Instead, if
these mechanisms are correlated, then a more appropriate
label might be “goal potency”. We elaborate on this view
below. Third, if the shared inhibition function is taken
literally and the inhibition mechanisms are correlated, then
the simulation suggests that a negative correlation should be
found between the tasks. However, the behavioural studies
show a positive correlation between the tasks. This is in the
context of literature that claims a positive correlation
between each task and a latent inhibition factor. These
points together argue against the use of a response inhibition
construct in the individual differences literature as a
mechanistic explanation for the behavioural correlation.
We suggested that the correlation between the tasks is due
to the potency or strength of the current goal. More
specifically, the computational studies are consistent with
either a unitary mechanism that affects the rate of activation
accumulation or one that relates to the level of the
maximum possible activation. Both of these are emergent
from an activation-based framework in which perceptual or
cognitive information is actively maintained through selfexcitatory loops (Davelaar, et al., 2005). Whether they can
be distinguished remains to be demonstrated. However we

941

note that in a further part Miyake et al.’s (2000) study, it
was shown that the common factor underlying performance
on the stop-signal and Stroop tasks dissociated from a factor
common to performance on several other tasks that were
held to require a further executive function, referred to as
task-shifting. A full account must therefore relate, in
computational terms, the function isolated in this study and
a task-shifting function. This is particularly important as
Gilbert and Shallice (2002) consider task-shifting in the
context of the Stroop task, and account for it in a model
closely related to the Cohen and Huston model that forms
the basis for part of this work.
The idea of goal potency has some support from other
areas of cognitive neuroscience. Thus, Duncan et al. (2008)
refer to the inability to execute a goal on presentation of a
stimulus, even though knowledge about the rules regarding
stimulus and response is present, as goal-neglect.
Individuals differ in the degree to which they exhibit goalneglect. If goal-neglect (or a factor underlying it) lies behind
our factor, then one would expect that the proportion of
stop-errors and the size of the Stroop interference effect
should both be positively correlated with measures of goalneglect. We know of no study that has investigated the
correlation between stop-errors and goal-neglect.
We have focused only on the stop-signal and the Stroop
task. As noted in the introduction, Miyake et al. (2000) also
considered the antisaccade task. This task requires an eyemovement away from a distractor stimulus when this
stimulus appears. In the Miyake et al. study the dependent
measure for this task was the proportion of correct trials.
Thus, overcoming pre-potency increases the score. This is
important, as for the stop-signal and Stroop tasks,
overcoming the pre-potency decreases the corresponding
dependent measure. Consequently one might expect a
negative correlation between the measures. Instead a
positive correlation was found between the antisaccade task
and both tasks. This is inconsistent within the response
inhibition view. However, processes of active maintenance
or activation accumulation can account for positive
correlation where overcoming prepotent responses would
expect negative correlations. In all but the antisaccade task,
the stimulus conveys information that is used in activation
of the relevant goal. In the antisaccade task, the first
stimulus is a distractor and does not convey positive
information, while the second is the target. Therefore being
able to quickly activate information will produce less
accurate responses. This leads to more activation producing
lower levels of the dependent measure (accuracy) in the
antisaccade task, together with more activation leading to
lower levels of the dependent measures in the stop-signal
(proportion stop-errors) and Stroop (interference effect)
tasks. Our argument therefore is that the latent factor in the
Miyake et al. studies reflects an activation-based function,
and not an inhibition function.
This work also demonstrates more generally the
importance of using explicit formal analyses to uncover the
mechanisms underlying latent cognitive constructs.

References
Aron, A. R., Robbins, T. W., & Poldrack, R. A. (2004).
Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 8(4), 170-177.
Boucher, L., Palmeri, T. J., Logan, G. D., & Schall, J. D.
(2007). Inhibitory control in mind and brain: An
interactive race model of countermanding saccades.
Psychological Review, 114(2), 376-397.
Cohen, J. D. & Huston, T. A. (1994). Progress in the use of
interactive models for understanding attention and
performance. In Attention and performance 15:
Conscious and nonconscious information processing. C.
Umiltà & M. Moscovitch (Eds) (pp. 453-476).
Cambridge, MA, US: The MIT Press.
Davelaar, E. J. (2009). Conflict-monitoring and
(meta)cognitive control. In J. Mayor, N. Ruh, & K.
Plunkett (Eds.), Connectionist models of behaviour and
cognition II. (pp. 241-252). Singapore: World
Scientific.
Davelaar, E. J., Goshen-Gottstein, Y., Ashkenazi, A.,
Haarmann, H. J., & Usher, M. (2005). The demise of
short-term
memory
revisited:
empirical
and
computational investigations of recency effects.
Psychological Review, 112, 3-42.
Duncan, J., Parr, A., Woolgar, A., Thompson, R., Bright, P.,
Cox, S., et al. (2008). Goal neglect and Spearman's g:
Competing parts of a complex task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 137(1), 131-148.
Egner, T., & Hirsch, J. (2005). Cognitive control
mechanisms resolve conflict through cortical
amplification of task-relevant information. Nature
Neuroscience, 8(12), 1784-1790.
Frank, M. J. (2006). Hold your horses: A dynamic
computational role for the subthalamic nucleus in
decision making. Neural Networks, 19(8), 1120-1136.
Frank, M. J., Seeberger, L. C., & O'Reilly, R. C. (2004). By
carrot or by stick: Cognitive reinforcement learning in
Parkinsonism. Science, 306(5703), 1940-1943
Friedman, N. P., & Miyake, A. (2004). The relations among
inhibition and interference control functions: A latentvariable analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 133(1), 101-135.
Gilbert, S. J., & Shallice, T. (2002). Task Switching: A PDP
Model. Cognitive Psychology, 44(3), 297-337.
Logan, G. D., & Cowan, W. B. (1984). On the ability to
inhibit thought and action: A theory of an act of control.
Psychological Review, 91(3), 295-327.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H.,
Howerter, A., & Wager T. D. (2000). The unity and
diversity of Executive Functions and their contributions
to complex “Frontal Lobe” tasks: A latent variable
analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), 49-100.
Stafford, T. & Gurney, K.N. (2007). Biologically
constrained action selection improves cognitive control
in a model of the Stroop task. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 362 (1485), 1671-1684.

942

